* 9309615
* Universities' Research Conference, Cambridge, MA; Spring and Fall of 1994, 1995 and 1996
* SBE,SES
* 01/15/1994,06/30/1997
* Martin Feldstein, National Bureau of Economic Research Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 06/30/1997
* USD 179,490.00

This grant provides renewed support for the semi-annual Universities' Research
Conference (URC) in Cambridge, Massachusetts. This conference series provides
the occasion for formal and informal discussions for researchers who otherwise
might have little opportunity to interact with other specialists in their
fields. A special emphasis is placed on involving less established scholars,
women and minorities. Conference topics are chosen for their relevance to
current economic policy discussions as well as their interest to academic
economists. Recent conferences have focused on economics of the environment,
labor markets and financial institutions and instability. The spring 1993
meeting will focus on cooperation, coordination and collusion among firms.
Papers for presentation at the conferences are solicited from over 70 economics
departments and 50 business schools. Conference organizers are careful to select
a mix of established and less well known researchers. Special emphasis is also
placed on including women and minorities. Discussants and other conference
participants are also chosen to encourage interaction among economists with
similar interests at different universities. A typical conference includes 7 to
10 papers and about 80 participants from 40 different universities.