* 9309502
* Regulation of Retinal Regeneration
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/1993,02/28/1997
* Thomas Reh, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Dr. Susan F. Volman
* 02/28/1997
* USD 238,839.00

9309502 Reh The development of the eye involves several different interactions
to organize the neural network of the retina and the related non-neural pigment
epithelium. During early developmental stages, cells called blastomeres have the
potential to later differentiate into progeny cells that can become a variety of
different types. Later, the type of cell which can arise from further cell
divisions becomes more restricted. Work on transplanted cells from various
stages has shown that both intrinsic genetic factors and extrinsic factors in
the developing environment apparently influence these cell fates to some degree.
This project uses an innovative model of "transdifferentiation" and techniques
of immunocytochemistry and molecular biology. The molecular factors will be
examined that determine the differences arising during development between
retinal neurons and retinal pigment epithelial cells. These studies involve the
roles of fibroblast growth factors (FGF) and their receptor molecules as
important extrinsic factors, and the role of a gene known as CASH-1 which is
expressed in retinal neural but not retinal pigment epithelial cells, as an
intrinsic factor in developmental determination. The results will have an impact
beyond developmental neuroscience alone, to understanding formation of the
visual system, and will have likely health-related applications. ***