* 9309207
* Research Initiation Award:  Task-Level Programming for      Manipulation of Multiple Robots
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/1993,05/31/1997
* Harry Cheng, University of California-Davis
* Continuing Grant
* george hazelrigg
* 05/31/1997
* USD 100,000.00

The task-level robot programming with computations of language processing,
kinematics, dynamics, path planning, control, collision avoidance, and sensory
fusion for multiple robot manipulators will be achieved in real time via coarse-
grain vectorization and parallelization using an industrial standard VMEbus-
based distributed computing system consisting of multiple scalar and vector
processors. This computer system is assembled with off- the-shelf commercial VME
boards. The results of the project can, therefore, be easily transferred for
practical industrial applications and should thus make a meaningful and
significant contribution towards the development of task-level multi-robot
manipulation systems. Since the programming environment is C/Unix compatible,
the robot programming can draw on the large existing body of skilled C
programmers and Unix users. This research investigates task-level programming
for manipulation of multiple robots, and studies its underlying principles and
algorithms for force and motion coordinations, collision detection and collision
avoidance, and sensor fusion. The research developes a theory for sensor-based
multi-robot manipulation and force coordination with extensive information
sharing among different robots, algorithms for collision detection and collision
avoidance of moving objects, and techniques for force and vision sensor
integration with robot motions. A set of standard task-level functions are
developed. Through these task- level functions, a complicated robot task can be
conveniently accomplished. The theory, algorithms, and task-level robot
programming are validated through computer simulations as well as physical
experimentations.