* 9309317
* Research Initiation Award:  Nonisothermal Modeling of Resin Transfer Molding
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/15/1993,07/31/1997
* Renata Engel, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Kramer
* 07/31/1997
* USD 89,966.00

9309317 Engel This research concerns the development and verification of a
method which will reduce the cycle time when manufacturing thick composites
using resin transfer molding. The resin transfer molding (RTM) process is a low
pressure, low temperature method of transferring a thermoset resin into a mold
which contains a fiber preform. While it has been used predominately for
manufacturing thin laminates, RTM is ideally suited for manufacturing thick
composites, as a mold can easily accommodate three dimensional preforms.
However, manufacturing thick section composites is more involved than that of
thin sections because of the difficulty with precise process control and the
increased time required to infiltrate the fiber preform and cure the resin. A
numerical model will be developed to describe the nonisothermal infiltration of
thermoset resins into thick fiber preforms. The resin flow will be simulated at
the micro scale level by considering the flow or resin around and through heated
fiber bundles. Direct heating will temporarily reduce viscosities for increased
infiltration rates. Furthermore, the resulting elevated temperature through the
mold will reduce curing cycles. This research will be verified experimentally
with resin transfer molding equipment and various combinations of conduction
heating and resistance heating of the fiber preform, mold and resin. Such a
model can be used to decrease the cycle time, such a intra resin transfer
molding process. This should reduce cost, while maintaining high quality.