* 9309948
* Neural Bases for Olfactory Redundancy
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/1993,01/31/1996
* Thomas Baker, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Platt
* 01/31/1996
* USD 114,435.00

Baker 9309948 Pheromones are chemical compounds secreted for the purpose of
chemical communication, with a well-known example being the airborne odorants
secreted by female moths to attract males from great distances. Insects detect
pheromones by specialized receptor cells in the antenna that are considered to
be among the most specific chemosensory receptors known. But in some moth
species, the female emits extra compounds considered redundant components along
the with active pheromone itself, and males have some receptors sensitive to
pheromones that also are sensitive to compounds not emitted by their own
females. This project combines neurophysiology, anatomy and behavior to pinpoint
the neuronal basis for the behaviorally expressed olfactory redundancy, and to
explore how specific attractant odors from plants also may modify the response
to attractant pheromones at both the cellular and the behavioral level. This
system provides a unique opportunity to clarify how odor blends of different
compounds can apparently smell similar to an animal, and how the chemical
context of an odor affects the response to that odor. Further, the presence of
mutant strains with changed pheromone blends allows considering how the
reduncancy allows an evolutionarily important flexibility to the communication
system. This work will clarify how the olfactory connections within the brain
are organized to handle mixtures, and so will have an impact on chemosensory
studies in general. The work also will clarify aspects of the evolution of
chemical communication, and because this species is a significant crop pest,
will have impact on agricultural use of insect control. ***