* 9309823
* RIA:  Control Sliding and Dextrous Manipulation for Roboticsand Automation
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/1993,02/28/1997
* Imin Kao, San Jose State University Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Howard Moraff
* 02/28/1997
* USD 99,921.00

9309823 Kao The goal of this research is to investigate and apply dextrous
manipulation in sliding and rolling using compliant end-effectors, and to
control sliding. The results are important for assembly of compliant parts,
fixturing, and tasks involving pushing and sliding. Dextrous sliding
manipulation is useful in motion planning, slip prediction and recovery, object
re-orienting, and regrasping in robotics. Recent work in dextrous sliding
manipulation has either focused on planar, quasistatic motions or employed
simplified contact models such as point contact. To accomplish this goal, the
first step is to develop three- dimensional dynamic dextrous manipulation with
various contact models. The second step is to incorporate the results of this
research with existing research in the areas of rolling and nonholonomic
manipulation. Finally, the control algorithms will be implemented using
compliant hands with sliding and dextrous manipulation. The results of this
proposed research can be used to control fingers to follow prescribed motion
trajectories via sliding manipulation involving external and internal forces,
stiffness, and motion control. The outcome, when it is incorporated with
nonholonomic manipulation, can formulate a complete solution to dextrous robotic
manipulation that involves shifting of contact locations. The control schemes
developed using the theoretical foundation of sliding and dextrous manipulation
can be applied in autonomous tele-manipulation and manufacturing automation such
as fixturing planning, tasks involving pushing and sliding, and assembly.