* 9309513
* The Impact of Forced Relocation on Manatali Social          Organization
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/1993,01/31/1996
* Dolores Koenig, American University
* Standard Grant
* Stuart Plattner
* 01/31/1996
* USD 99,333.00

This project will study the effects involuntary resettlement on agricultural
production in the Manatali region of western Mali where approximately 10,000
people were relocated in 1986-87. Now, 5-10 years afterwards, the people have
passed through the early transition phase of adaptation to relocation and can
use new resources for social an economic development. The researchers
hypothesize that the interplay of the process of involuntary relocation with the
system of socio-economic stratification will affect the social division of
labor, the major strategies of agricultural production, and hence levels of
production. The project will use intensive interview and participant observation
to follow a sample of approximately 120 households to determine patterns of
productive activities, access to productive resources, household division of
labor, and levels of production. It will be carried out by a team of four social
scientists pairing the American principal investigator with social scientists
from the Institut des Sciences Humanies (ISH) in Mali. This team worked on the
initial studies of this area in the late 1980s and by working together again on
this re-study the team will provide an optimal way to gather information on
changes over time. At a theoretical level, this project will deepen our
understanding of how rural stratification systems work in a territory where
access to the major resource of land remains embedded in social and political
control. At an applied level, this greater understanding of rural stratification
systems and their effects on agricultural production will allow planners to
design more equitable programs which allow people to produce in a more
economically and environmental sustainable fashion. This project will also
increase the scientific capability of the ISH social scientists of Mali. *** d
as to whether the proposed research would be as successful as anticipated. Of
greatest concern to the panelists was the relatively vague specification of
methods and the absence of clear descriptions regarding how the methods related
to the hypotheses that would be tested. At the conclusion of its meeting, th t !
! ! F F F ( Times New Roman Symbol & Arial B B B " h 2 E 2 E = a koenig abstract
senior abstract abstract senior koenig Raymond Hames Raymond Hames