* 9309917
* RIA:  An Active Physics-Based Approach to Shape &amp; Motion    Estimation
* CSE,IIS
* 01/01/1994,06/30/1997
* Dimitris Metaxas, University of Pennsylvania
* Continuing Grant
* Howard Moraff
* 06/30/1997
* USD 100,000.00

9309917 Metaxes This is the first year of a three year continuing grant. This
research addresses the problem of shape and nonrigid motion estimation using
physics-based techniques and a general active vision approach. Almost all prior
model-based shape and norigid motion estimation techniques assume prior data
segmentation, simple parameterized models, fixed model size grids and a single
viewpoint under orthographic projection. Real world images require far more
sophisticated algorithms and models than the currently existing ones in order to
robustly recover the shape and motions of the underlying objects. This research
project will first explore new physics-based techniques for the fitting of
models to image data in case of general orthographic, perspective, and stereo
projections. Such data will include projections of complex objects with surface
discontinuities appearing on the image as internal edges. Then, adaptive finite
element techniques will be developed to improve the efficiency and accuracy of
shape estimation through automatic local adjustment of the model's initial grid
size. These efforts will be facilitated by the experience gained from the PI's
previously developed physics-based modeling system for shape and nonrigid motion
estimation.