* 9309669
* Research Initiation Award:  Development of Diamond Growth   Techniques Using Oxyacetylene Combustion Flame Method
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/15/1993,01/31/1998
* Bi Zhang, University of Connecticut
* Continuing Grant
* Delcie R. Durham
* 01/31/1998
* USD 89,953.00

9309669 Zhang This research concerns development of diamond growth techniques in
which the oxyacetylene combustion synthesis method is employed. The project
involves design and construction of a diamond growth apparatus consisting of an
oxyacetylene welding torch, fitted with a brazing or cutting nozzle, two mass
flow controllers and a mass flow programmer, etc., and growth of diamond films
on a variety of cutting tool materials. The ultimate goal is to apply the
research findings to an industrial situation, namely to produce viable,
inexpensive techniques of diamond coating on various cutting tools for
manufacturing applications. Currently, the mechanisms for nucleation of the
diamond phase and for adherent bonding of diamond film to the substrate are not
will understood, making the application of this technology very limited. The
research will investigate the nucleation mechanisms of diamond phase involved in
the diamond growth processes. The investigation will include pretreatment of
substrate surfaces in various conditions, detection of dangling bond densities
on the pre-treated substrate using the electron paramagnetic resonance (EPR)
technique, and analysis of the precursor gas within and beyond stagnation zone
of the acetylene flame using the residual gas analysis technique. Nucleation
mechanisms of diamond phase will be researched by incorporating studies of
chemical species of precursor gas and dangling bond densities of the substrate.
Parametric studies will be towards enhancing nucleation density of diamond phase
and improving quality of diamond films. The researcher will seek to develop a
fundamental understanding of these mechanisms which will facilitate the
application of oxyacetylene combustion synthesis of diamond films to industrial
applications.