* 9309699
* Continuous Time Stochastic Processes in Economics and       Finance
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/1993,07/31/1997
* Jose Scheinkman, University of Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 07/31/1997
* USD 160,147.00

9309699 Scheinkman This project consists of two parts: (1) the study of dynamic
problems with irreversibilities similar to the dynamic decision making problems
encountered in negotiating international agreements to avoid future
environmental catastrophes, and (2) the development of methods to evaluate and
estimate nonlinear continuous time models using discrete time data from
financial markets. The two parts of the project are related in that the methods
used to study environmental irreversibilities are extensions and applications of
the models developed for financial markets. Much of the research on
biodiversity, ozone depletion and other aspects of environmental policy focuses
on the irreversibility of certain actions that alter the environment. Part of
this project develops new mathematical tools to study the effects of
irreversibilities like those present in many environmental questions, on dynamic
problems. This research should provide theoretical insights as well as numerical
methods that could be helpful in evaluating the value of environmental
preservation. Continuous time formulations been used to produce theoretical
insights in a variety of questions in finance and economics and are also used,
in practice, to yield pricing and hedging strategies in financial markets. Much
less has been done to develop methods to evaluate and estimate these models when
only discrete time observations are available, as is the case in economic
applications. Part of this project aims at filling this gap by developing a
series of methods to evaluate nonlinear continuous time models using discrete
time data. The research will provide theoretical justification for the proposed
methods, and also use them to evaluate alternative models of the determination
of securities prices. The objective is to increase our understanding of several
of the determinants of securities prices and their volatility. ***