* 9309914
* RIA: Cost Effective CAD for Robust Design of                Integrated Circuits using Artificial Neural Networks
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/1993,08/31/1997
* Abiodun Ilumoka, University of Hartford
* Standard Grant
* Paul T. Hulina
* 08/31/1997
* USD 89,874.00

Ilumoka A high proportion of future integrated systems will contain mixed
analog/digital subsystems required to meet demanding quality specifications. CAD
(computer-aided design) tools currently available for integrated circuit (IC)
quality enhancement (or robust design) although effective are plagued by the
problem of high simulation cost, the greatest part of which is due to circuit
simulation and extraction of performance. This problem arises due to the fact
that accurate prediction of circuit performance requires that ICs be modeled at
a number of different levels of abstraction including process, layout, device
and circuit levels. Furthermore, since current methodologies simulate several
instances of the IC in order to investigate quality, the cost problem is
compounded. To date, research efforts to reduce simulation costs have produced a
number of approximation techniques which sacrifice accuracy for reduction in
computational cost. Thus, although the cost problem is ameliorated, simulator
output has significant error. Artificial neural networks (ANNs) provide a non-
parametric method for mapping one set of data to another based on information
established during an adjustment procedure called "training". Research is
focused on the study of improved robust design techniques for MOSFET ICs which
exploit the versatile mapping capability of ANNs.