* 9309679
* Research Initiation Award:  A Problem Solving Environment   for Mechanical System Simulation
* CSE,CCF
* 07/15/1993,12/31/1996
* James Cremer, University of Iowa
* Continuing Grant
* S. Kamal Abdali
* 12/31/1996
* USD 95,683.00

This project involves experimental research to develop problem solving
environment for mechanical system simulation. Specifically, the research
develops software tools that facilitate rapid, high-level creation of mechanical
system simulators. These tools are used to generate simulators for a variety of
applications, including real-time vehicle simulation, legged locomotion and
robotics, and investigation of collision and contact problems. There is a great
interest in the development of problem solving environments (PSEs) for
engineering and science problems. One of the key challenges lies in developing
computer science techniques that enable integration of supporting technologies
such as computer algebra systems, numerical analysis libraries, geometric
modeling systems, and object-oriented programming systems. This research attacks
the problem by concentrating on one well-defined but rich domain, rigid-body
dynamics simulation. The project has two specific goals: (1) advance the state
of the art in mechanical system simulation by making it easier create and modify
dynamics simulators, and (2) develop a software architecture and software tools
that extend from this domain to more general problem solving environments. of
the software tools to generate dynamics simulators for a number of different
applications demonstrate the power of the approach.