* 9309631
* Research Initiation Award:  Flexibility in Manufacturing    Systems:  Models, Measurement, and Evaluation
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/1993,08/31/1998
* Saif Benjaafar, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Lawrence M. Seiford
* 08/31/1998
* USD 116,640.00

9309631 Benjaafar Although the issue of flexibility has become increasingly
important to the design and operation of manufacturing systems, it has remained
to a large degree ambiguous and poorly understood. The objective of the research
is to address some of these limitations. In particular, the focus of efforts
will be on (1) developing a generic modeling framework capable of capturing the
various dimensions of flexibility in manufacturing, (2) providing robust and
useful measure(s) of flexibility that reflect these various dimensions, and (3)
establishing clear relationships between the degree of flexibility in a
manufacturing system and the system's level of performance. More specifically
they will address the following questions: (1) What constitutes flexibility and
to which physical and logical characteristics in a manufacturing system can it
be traced? (2) How can these characteristics be modeled so that flexibility can
be easily measured and analyzed? (3) Which system performances measures, if any,
are positively correlated to flexibility and what are the characteristics of
such correlations? (4) What are the conditions under which flexibility may be of
value and what are the operation requirements necessary for realizing this
value? (5) How can the costs and benefits of flexibility be traded-off and
optimal, and/or affordable, levels of flexibility be determined? The impact of
the research results will be in increased useability of modeling and analysis
tools and better measures of industrial system flexibility and performance.