* 9309525
* The Economics and Econometrics of Self-Selection with       Applications to the Evaluation of Government Training       Programs and to Understanding Sectoral Wage Inequality
* SBE,SES
* 11/15/1993,04/30/1995
* James Heckman, National Opinion Research Center
* Standard Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 04/30/1995
* USD 90,000.00

9309525 Heckman This grant supplements the budget of a grant (SES-9111455) to
explore both analytical and empirical issues that arise in evaluating the impact
of government training programs on trainees. The original study is based on
unique data from an ongoing evaluation of the Job Training Partnership Act
(JTPA). Supplemental funding would permit acquisition of data from several new
sources and completion of new tasks that would greatly enhance the research
outlined in the original proposal. More specifically, funds are requested to
collect data on state- determined performance standards that affect training
center incentives to enroll certain categories of trainees. These financial
incentive schedules are in the public domain but are not available in any
central location. Knowledge of these incentives permits construction of a model
of bureaucratic decision making and response to incentives that is of interest
in its own right. Funds are requested to collate and utilize a rich new body of
data on subcontracting by training centers. These centers use subcontracts with
their vendors to shift the risk of noncompliance with state performance
standards. Access has been gained to a valuable source of data on contracts let
by training centers and bids submitted by vendors. The analysis of these data
will greatly aid in the development of a behavioral model of training center
behavior. It will, also provide valuable new evidence on central propositions in
the economics of contracting. ***