* 9309284
* US-Former Soviet Union:  Support of Astrophysical Research  in the Countries of the Former Soviet Union
* O/D,OISE
* 07/01/1993,12/31/1994
* Peter Boyce, American Astronomical Society
* Standard Grant
* Cassandra Turczak
* 12/31/1994
* USD 60,000.00

This proposal, from the American Astronomical Society ıAAS!, for "Astrophysical
Research in the Countries of the Former Soviet Union ıFSU!, led by principal
investigators Dr. S.E. Woosley, Dr. S. Wolff, Dr. J. Bahcall, and Dr. P. Boyce,
follows up on a collaborative program of support for the beleaguered astronomy
community in the FSU which began in 1991. This program consisted of small, $100
grants which eventually were awarded to 377 individuals, and astronomical
journal subscriptions sent to 30 institutions. The 1992 program was supported
entirely by AAS member contributions of $55,000. During 1993, the AAS proposes
to continue this program -- and possibly for several years thereafter -- at an
expanded level. Approximately the same number of journal subscriptions would be
provided, but grants would be, on the average, four times larger. The AAS would
also provide 25 to 30 personal computers of the PC-486 class. Donations from AAS
members alone would be inadequate to support such a program in 1993. The goal of
this AAS program is to keep a core of young, productive research astronomers and
astrophysicists functioning within the FSU, and fulfills the NSF program
objectives of advancing science by preserving the opportunity for leading
experts in the U.S. and Russia to combine complementary talents and pool
research resources in areas of strong mutual interest and competence.