* 9309515
* Revising Knowledge:  A Hierarchical Approach
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/1993,02/29/1996
* Stephen Morris, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Vincy Fon
* 02/29/1996
* USD 57,112.00

9309515 Morris In the last twenty years, economists have made tremendous strides
in understanding the role of uncertainty and imperfect information in the
economy. Applied fields as diverse as macroeconomics, labor economics and
industrial organization are increasingly focussed on the superior information
which some economic participants have relative to others. This progress has been
possible because of the existence of a standard, well understood model of how
economic decision makers make choices under uncertainty. It is assumed that
economic decision makers can imagine every possible relevant event which may
have occurred in the past and may occur in the future. Their lack of complete
information is reflected in the fact that - while they can imagine all relevant
circumstances - they do not in fact know which circumstances have transpired or
will transpire in the future. An implication of this standard approach is that
whenever an economic decision maker does not know something, he or she knows
that he or she does not know it. This model provides a useful starting point.
But a series of recent work, by the principal investigator and others, has
focussed on models of incomplete information which reflect the fact that
economic decision makers not only do not know which circumstances have
transpired or will transpire, but also they do not necessarily understand what
all the relevant circumstances are. Thus we allow for the possibility that a
decision maker may not know something, and may not know that he or she does not
know it. Thus the first objective of this research project is to complete the
principal investigator's development of a more realistic model of choice under
uncertainty. But there is a critical conceptual problem which arises in this
construction. Economists seek to explain choices, including choices under
uncertainty, as a reflection of the decision makers' preferences. But in
constructing a model of uncertainty, decision makers' preferences are part of
the description of the relevant circumstances in the world. The second objective
of the project is to provide a hierarchical description of preferences which
gets around this circularity. This will provide a solid analytic foundation for
a more realistic understanding of how economic decision makers cope with
uncertainty. ***