* 9309342
* Research Initiation Award:  Computer-Aided Fixturing in     Computer-Integrated Manufacturing Systems
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/1993,12/31/1996
* Yiming Rong, Southern Illinois University at Carbondale
* Continuing Grant
* george hazelrigg
* 12/31/1996
* USD 89,978.00

This research stresses the flexible fixturing problem with a main goal of
developing a computer-aided fixturing system for modular fixture applications in
CIMS. The research includes three aspects: computer-aided fixture design,
computer-aided fixture design evaluation and computer-aided fixturing
management. Methods used are unique and practical. In fixture design, this
research studies how to acquire and utilize previous design experience and how
to practically generate a fixture design. A locating method dominated fixuring
requirement analysis and fixture structure analysis are performed as the basis
of the fixture design. In fixture design evaluation, criteria are explored for
automated fixture design verification. In fixturing management, fixture station
management and communication with other manufacturing departments are studied.
Therefore, fixturing activity can be integrated with CAD/CAPP/CAM and production
control systems. This project provides an engineering tool for using computer
technology to design, verify, and manage modular fixtures. The application of
the research results may contribute to: (1) making FMS truly flexible and CIMS
practically feasible; (2) significantly reducing fixture design and fabrication
time and cost in small and batch production; (3) improving quality of fixture
design with the utilization of previous design experience, fixturing analysis,
and fixture design evaluations; and (4) providing a practical tool for industry
to deal with complex fixturing problems by using computer technology.