* 9309294
* Heavy Quark Physics at the Fermilab/D0 Collider Experiment, University of Delhi Participation
* O/D,OISE
* 08/15/1994,01/31/1997
* John Peoples, Universities Research Association Inc
* Standard Grant
* Marjorie Lueck
* 01/31/1997
* USD 50,000.00

9309294 Peoples Description: This project provides funds, for one year, to allow
three Indian graduate students and an Indian professor, Dr. Ram Shivpuri from
Delhi University, to participate in a joint project at Fermi National
Accelerator Laboratory. The U.S. Team is headed by Dr. John Peoples, Director of
Fermilab, and Dr. Paul D. Grannis from the University of Rochester, Rochester,
NY. The scientist and graduate students from Delhi University will participate
in the D0 research program at Fermilab. This will consist in part in running the
experiment during the data- taking periods, taking responsibility for operation
of specific detector systems during the run, analyzing data from the run and
preparing physics results. The Delhi group is expected to provide needed
expertise to the design of software systems needed for offline computer analysis
of data, design and maintenance of the databases characterizing the detector
elements, run conditions and analysis parameters, sorting these data into the
requisite 'streams', and serving them to individual physicist users. They also
will be responsible for specific projects directed at the upgrade phase of the
D0 experiment. Scope: This collaborative project brings technical man-power
capabilities from India, as well as equipment provided from Indian sources, to
participate with American scientists in the particle physics studies carried out
at Fermilab. It meets the objectives of INT by supporting cooperative
activities. ***