* 9309054
* Research Initiation Award:  Compilation of Data-Parallel    Programs for Scalable Shared-Address Space Multiprocessors
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/1993,02/28/1997
* David Hudak, Ohio Northern University
* Standard Grant
* Forbes D. Lewis
* 02/28/1997
* USD 50,811.00

9309054 Hudak Shared-address distributed-memory massively parallel processing
(MPP) system offer the simplicity of a single address space while maintaining
the potential for teraflops performance. However, to obtain reasonable
efficiency on these systems, the programmer or compiler must specify and
appropriate distribution of work and data among the processors and the
physically distributed memories. This project will address the problem of
determining the optimal distributions for a given parallel application. Ongoing
research in compilation for MPP's has yielded a collection of techniques for the
specification of work and data distributions for individual data-parallel loops.
This project will combine those techniques with flow-graph representations of
data-parallel programs to generate code which specifics the creation and
alteration of work and data distributions. The distributions will be designed
maximum efficiency across program constructs for altering the flow of control of
a program, such as conditional statements (e.g., if statements) and procedure
calls. The research will lead to the development of a software system named
DPF+, a new system that will analyze an partition data- parallel programs as
well as provide an efficient environment for object-oriented data-parallel
programming. Data parallel program can be built from user-defined objects, with
the DFT+ compiler automatically tuning each object's procedures for high
performance on an existing shared-address spaced multiprocessor system. This
research will greatly increase the usability of MPPs, the portability of
parallel programs and the performance level achieved by users. ***