* 9309607
* RIA:  Design and Simulation of Ultrafast Optoelectronic      Devices and Circuits
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/1993,02/28/1997
* M. Selim Unlu, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* Athena C. Harvey
* 02/28/1997
* USD 125,000.00

WPCf 2 B J d | x MACNormal p 5 X ` h p x (# % '0* , .81 3 5@8 : &lt; : } D 4 P
T I. A. 1. a.(1)(a) i) a) T 0 * * . , US X ` h p x (# % '0* , .81 3 5@8 : &lt; :
} D 4 P 0 * * . , US , 3 ' 1 MACNormal Unlu 9309607 In this research proposal,
the PI has described a method for transient simulation of optoelectronic devices
and circuits. The semiconductor equations will be represented as equivalent
circuit components and solved using a public domain circuit simulator. Besides
the inherent advantage of providing mixed mode device and circuit simulation
capability embedded in a circuit simulator, this technique can also be used for
extracting the device and circuit level model parameters to match measured data
through optimization. The PI will utilize this simulation tool to develop
ultrafast photodetectors and monolithic receivers. There exists a growing
consensus that the process, device, and circuit simulation tools used as
separate entities need to be integrated into a combined simulation environment
for efficient design and optimization of semiconductor devices and integrated
circuits. The proposed research will incorporate the transient device simulation
into a public domain circuit simulator providing the researchers with an
integrated simulation tool. Such integration will shorten the development cycle
for new technologies by providing accurate predictions of various physical
phenomena on the device and circuit level and by allowing the investigation of
detailed device behavior within the circuit environment. Optoelectronic devices
are usually monolithically integrated with electronic circuits such as
amplifiers, especially for high speed applications. For better understanding of
OEICs, a simulation tool capable of transient analysis at device level which can
be directly interfaced with circuit level components will be invaluable. Besides
its inherent advantages, mixed mode simulation technique can also be used for
extracting circuit level model parameters for new electronic and optoelectronic
devices. This extraction technique will yield a very fast method for model
development for new devices.Using the capability of ac curately representing
optoelectronic components we will design novel structures. The design efforts
will result in new optoelectronic devices and circuits with operation bandwidths
approaching 100 GHz. ***