* 9309597
* Serotonin and Development of the Superior Colliculus
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/1993,02/28/1998
* Robert Rhoades, University of Toledo Health Science Campus
* Continuing grant
* Christopher Platt
* 02/28/1998
* USD 184,877.00

9309597 Mooney Molecules that transfer information between nerve cells in the
mature brain are called neurotransmitters. They may also influence the
development of connections between nerve cells. One neurotransmitter that may
have such dual functions is serotonin. Preliminary experiments have shown that
increasing serotonin in the superior colliculus, a part of the brain involved in
vision and attention, stops the normal maturation of the projections from the
eye to this structure. In contrast, reducing serotonin during development
appears to lead to an abnormally well-focused projection from the eye to the
superior colliculus. The proposed research will determine the mechanism(s)
underlying these phenomena. The hypothesis guiding this work is that serotonin
influences development by altering levels of nerve cell activity in the young
brain. It is already known that reducing activity impedes normal maturation of
connections between nerve cells, and high levels of serotonin may actually block
communication between such cells in the eye and those in the superior
colliculus. Conversely, reduced serotonin levels increase communication between
the eye and the brain and enhance normal developmental processes. Whether or not
these proposals are correct will be determined by: 1) testing whether or not
serotonin affects communication between the eye and the developing superior
colliculus; 2) providing a complete description of the effects of altered
serotonin levels on the pattern of connections between the eye and the brain; 3)
asking whether there are effects of serotonin on the development of nerve cell
connec tions whose activity is not influenced by this neurotransmitter; 4)
determining whether the enhanced focusing of nerve cell connections that occurs
when serotonin levels are reduced still occurs when all activity is blocked by a
nonspecific agent, tetrodotoxin. *** 9309597 Mooney Molecules that transfer
information between nerve cells in the mature brain are called
neurotransmitters. Th ! ! ! F } } ( Times New Roman Symbol & Arial { { { " h _ E
E & w A mooney William Proctor, IBN William Proctor, IBN