* 9309315
* RIA: Output-Based Objective Estimation of Speech            Quality and Intelligibility
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/1993,02/28/1997
* Robert Kubichek, University of Wyoming
* Standard Grant
* John Cozzens
* 02/28/1997
* USD 89,334.00

Kubichek Developing effective automatic, or objective techniques for assessing
speech quality to replace human listener scores (i.e., subjective quality) has
been the object of much research. Current algorithms base quality estimates on
input-to-output distortion measures. A related, yet almost unexplored problem,
is estimation of transmission quality using only received speech without access
to the transmitted speech record (Output-Based Quality or OBQ). A second problem
is objectively measuring intelligibility using only received speech (Output-
Based Intelligibility or OBI). This research addresses both of these difficult
problems, and is based on recently developed technologies that utilize models of
hearing perception to provide speaker-independent speech recognition. OBQ and
OBI estimates are being determined from carefully designed distance measures
between Perceptual Linear Prediction (PLP) coefficients of output speech and
cluster centroids derived from training data. A PLP analysis system is being
implemented. Methods for estimating OBQ and OBI estimates are being developed.
Finally, the algorithms are being tested on a variety of speech databases.
Statistical analyses will characterize their performance in terms of their
correlation with subjective results and robustness to speaker and distortion
variation.