* 9309018
* Political Economy and the Dynamics of Party Support in      Contemporary Britain
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/1993,12/31/1997
* Marianne Stewart, University of Texas at Dallas
* Standard Grant
* Frank P. Scioli  Jr.
* 12/31/1997
* USD 9,734.00

During the past two decades, shifting intellectual currents and real-world
developments have stimulated strong interest in the impact of objective economic
conditions, such as unemployment and inflation, and subjective economic
perceptions on public support for political parties and their leaders in
representative democracies. To date, however, fundamental questions remain
unanswered, and theoretical controversies and empirical disagreements continue
over economic influences on party support. This project addresses important
debates by testing multivariate models using monthly time series data to be
gathered in Great Britain in the 1992-1997 period. Principal theoretical
controversies involve whether citizens' party-support decisions are based on: 1)
evaluations of personal or national economic conditions and, relatedly,
attributions of government responsibility for such conditions; 2) past or
future- oriented economic judgments and, relatedly, willingness to reward or
punish governing parties for good/improving or bad/deteriorating economic
performance, respectively, or to support a party based on perceptions of
different issue priorities; 3) "cold calculations" or emotional reactions to
economic information. Also important is the extent to which party identification
as a component of party support is driven by ongoing economic performance
evaluations. This project addresses such theoretical concerns and data
limitations. Regarding the former, the advantages of studying British party
support during a five-year period are: 1) economic effects on party support
should be substantial - the economy is a matter of longstanding public concern;
2) social-class differences may characterize responses to economic conditions
and their impact on party support; 3) the multiparty system facilitates studying
how party-system context influences the political economy and dynamics of
support for opposition as well as governing parties; 4) economics is not all a
changing mix of political events, some being part of the ongoing political
process and others being unanticipated by politicians and public alike, should
influence short-term movements in party support, including party identification.
The research uses data from existing questions about relevant economic and
political variables, together with data from new questions added to monthly
surveys (May 1992-April 1997) conducted by the British Gallup organization. By
adding questions to existing ones in 60 surveys, this cost-effective project can
produce the key variables and sufficient time point needed for aggregate-time
series analyses of party support during the maximum constitutional term of the
current British parliament. The research promises to substantially enhance our
understanding of the key issues of the research.