* 9309230
* RIA:  Formalization, Inference, and Query Processing of     Spatial Relations in Geographic Databases
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/1993,02/28/1998
* Max Egenhofer, University of Maine
* Continuing Grant
* Maria Zemankova
* 02/28/1998
* USD 101,495.00

RIA: Formalization, Inference, and Query Processing of Spatial Relations in
Geographic Space Scientists and engineers using geographic databases need query
languages with powerful spatial selection methods and capabilities to infer
spatial information in a manner similar to a human expert. Crucial for
geographic databases and geographic information systems (GISs), containing very
large amounts of spatial data, are appropriate operators to access and
manipulate spatial data in large-scale, geographic space, far beyond what is
currently being offered by traditional database management systems. The
objective of the investigations is to construct a coherent reasoning system that
integrates spatial concepts about topology, cardinal directions, and approximate
distances so that they can serve as a spatial extension to geographic databases
and query languages. The reasoning system focuses on large-scale, geographic
space. The hypothesis is that powerful and complex spatial reasoning can be
formalized as the product of the interaction between relatively simple spatial
relations with specific inference rules. Individual spatial relations about
topology, distance, and direction are formalized and integrated into a
comprehensive system, adding more power through the coexistence of the different
relationships in a single system. The major result will be a set of primitives,
with rules describing their combinations, for the design of domain specific
query languages for GISs.