* 9309870
* Cellular Mechanisms of Neuromodulation
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/1993,08/31/1994
* Joseph Freschi, Emory University
* Continuing Grant
* None
* 08/31/1994
* USD 100,000.00

WPCÃ• 2 B P Z Courier 10cpi #| x l x 6 X @ 8 ; X @ Canon LBP-8III (Letterhead)
CALB8IAD.PRS x @ 0 jFX @Courier 10cpi Dutch es 12pt 2 N X Y " m ^2CRdd
$CCdq2q28dddddddddd88qqqY zo CN z o oz zC8C^dCYdYdYCdd88d8 ddddCN8dd ddY`(`l
C2CCq8CCC 2 CCCCCC Cd8 Y Y Y Y Y YzYzYzYzYC8C8C8C8 d d d d d d d d d dxx d dxx d
dod Y Y Y Y Y Y Y dzYzYzYzY d d d d d d d dC8C8C8C8 kN dz8z8z8zEz8 d d d d d C C
CoNoNoNoNz8z8z8 d d d d d d dzYzYzY dz8 d CoNz8 d d d d d/ N dB dCYdddd d7&gt;
d&lt;G d &lt; YYd CC dd oo Y &lt; {{ j q y pp r cccc cccc MMM MMM MMM MMM
xxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxLLLLLLL x. ? x x x , l x 6 X @ 8 ; X @ 7 m C 2 , 4: m \ P ; X
P @ X @ 2 X # X p P rk ; 4X P# 9309870 Freschi The purpose of Dr. Freschi's
research is to learn how the brain produces simple forms of behavior. In these
studies, a simplified "brain" or ganglion, which controls the heartbeat in
invertebrates will be used. This cardiac ganglion contains only 9 nerve cells
(or neurons), so it is relatively easy to study. The cardiac ganglion must
receive input from other parts of the nervous system, from circulating hormones,
and from the heart muscle its elf, and then integrate this information to
finally produce an output that regulates the heartbeat in a way appropriate to
the animal's needs. How can such a simple neural network produce a behavioral
output that is capable of changing to suit the animal's needs? Even though the
wiring of the circuit is fixed, its output is not. One of the ways output from
the network can be changed is by altering the properties of one of the component
cells in the network. A chemical that changes the properties of a part of the
network is called a neuromodulator. In this research, Dr. Freschi will learn how
certain neuromodulators (acetylcholine and proctolin) cause changes in component
neurons of the cardiac ganglion. He will study how the electrical properties of
neurons are changed and what biochemical processes are responsible for those
changes. He will use electrophysiological techniques to measure the electrical
changes in nerve cells, biochemical techniques to measure intracellular chemical
changes caused by neuromodulators, and histochemical techniques to measure the
location of various neuromodulators or neurotransmitter chemicals that are
affected by neuromodulators. ***