* 9309275
* Gender and Industrial Restructuring:  An Analysis of Women's Home-Based Work
* SBE,BCS
* 09/15/1993,02/28/1997
* Ann Oberhauser, West Virginia University Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Brian Holly
* 02/28/1997
* USD 74,607.00

9309275 OBERHAUSER In areas like the Appalachian states where manufacturing and
mining employment has declined in recent decades, households have placed greater
reliance on women to generate income. Increasing numbers of women have become
active members of the workforce, although many continue to engage in income-
generating activities like telephone solicitation, child care, computer-related
work, and housecleaning while based at their homes. Because of the informal
character of women's housework, relatively little attention has been devoted by
scholars to its nature and its role in both social and economic spheres. This
research project will constitute a case study of household economic strategies
during economic restructuring over the last few decades by examining the nature
and role of women's housework in three economically diverse regions of West
Virginia. The study will consist of two related parts. In the first part,
aggregate data on socio- economic variables like employment, labor-force
participation, household composition, and income will be gathered and analyzed
to identify general trends and to distinguish among patterns in the different
regions. In the second part of the project, 75 women houseworkers will be
interviewed at length to provide information about gender relations in the
household and women's home-based economic strategies. This project will provide
valuable new information about this understudied form of work, and it will
expand general understandings of the complex interactions between social and
economic requirements and the ways that women simultaneously respond to both
sets of requirements. In addition to its contributions to basic knowledge, the
results of this project will benefit regional development efforts and community
development programs by making them more aware of the potentials for and needs
of women working at home. ***