* 9309765
* A Survey of the Variability in Atmospheric 02 in Relation   to the Global Carbon Cycle
* GEO,AGS
* 09/15/1993,02/28/1997
* Ralph Keeling, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Continuing Grant
* Anne-Marie Schmoltner
* 02/28/1997
* USD 930,000.00

9309765 Keeling The abundance of oxygen in the atmosphere is sensitive at the
parts-per-million level to biological and anthropogenic activities over a wide
range of space and time scales. Measurements of variations in atmospheric
oxygen, detected through changes in the oxygen to nitrogen ratio, can address
several important issues pertaining to the global carbon cycle: (1) the
magnitude of new production of organic matter in surface waters over expanses of
the ocean where direct, in situ, observations are lacking, (2) the magnitude of
any terrestrial carbon sink at northern latitudes, and (3) the relative
importance of terrestrial ecosystems versus the oceans as a sink for
anthropogenic carbon dioxide. An improved understanding of these issues will be
valuable for making more accurate forecasts of global climatic and
biogeochemical changes in the decades ahead. The PIs have recently made
measurements of the oxygen in air samples collected at several locations around
the world. This project continues these measurements in order to carry out a
systematic global survey of the variability in the oxygen to nitrogen ratio.
Measurements will be carried out using a newly developed interferometric
technique for oxygen to nitrogen analysis and using gas handling methods that
obtain a precision of one part in 200,000 in the oxygen measurement. ***