* 9309189
* RIA:  Developing Reflexes for Robots:  Recovery from        Mechanical Errors
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/1993,02/28/1997
* Jessica Hodgins, Georgia Tech Research Corporation - GA Tech Research Institute
* Standard Grant
* Howard Moraff
* 02/28/1997
* USD 99,909.00

9309189 Hodgins This is the first year of a three-year continuing award. Humans
are excellent at recovering from physical failures: we can often catch ourselves
when we slip on ice, trip over an electric cord, or miss a step. We can
sometimes catch a dropped object and prevent it from breaking. We are not always
successful in recovering from errors but present-day robots rarely even attempt
such behavior. An ability to recover from errors would allow robots to operate
more robustly in unpredictable and unstructured environments. This research aims
to provide robots with a few simple reflexes: a tripping reflex that will allow
a legged robot to recover from a stumble, a slipping reflex that will allow it
to cross a slippery floor without falling, and a catching reflex that will allow
it to interrupt the fall of a dropped object and prevent it from breaking. The
reflexes will be designed and tested in simulation and on experimental hardware.
Reflex responses are unlike most robot control algorithms because of the time
constraints of a rapidly evolving dynamic system and because of the need to
respond to discontinuous events. These properties make this an ideal domain for
exploring questions of parameterization and choice of strategies for control.
This work will help to provide a scientific foundation upon which useful
transportation and manipulation systems for unstructured environments may be
constructed, and perhaps to explain some behaviors observed in biological
systems.