* 9309997
* RPG:  Disruption of Equivalence Classes
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/1993,01/31/1996
* Carol Pilgrim, University of North Carolina at Wilmington
* Standard Grant
* Jasmine Young
* 01/31/1996
* USD 17,493.00

9309997 PILGRIM One fundamental feature of language is that seemingly arbitrary
stimuli, such as spoken or written words, are treated as if they are equivalent
to environmental referents. Similarly, responses to both a written word (e.g., a
newspaper's forecast of rain) and a spoken word (e.g., a weatherman's "Rain")
may closely resemble responses to the actual event (e.g., the rain itself).
These sorts of relations seem to be implied whenever we speak of symbolic
function. Despite their arbitrary nature, however, the particular symbolic
relations that comprise any given language are relatively standardized and
unchanging. Furthermore, preliminary data suggest that some dimensions of
symbolic relations may be particularly resistant to change. An interesting
question to be asked of basic symbolic (or equivalence) relations, then,
concerns their flexibility. Under what conditions will symbolic relations be
changed, disrupted, or abandoned? The present research will investigate the
nature of symbolic relations by focusing on their stability, once established.
The primary objective of this research is to discover the conditions under which
symbolic relations are likely to change. In a series of four experiments,
college-student subjects seated in front of a computer display will be taught a
"mini-language" or symbol system by training relations between abstract figures.
Once symbolic relations are demonstrated (as determined by a specified pattern
of responding on standardized test-trial arrangements known as stimulus
equivalence), experiences that contrast with or disconfirm the originally
established relations will be arranged. For example, in one experiment subjects
will be penalized for showing one of the originally-trained relations.
Subsequent tests will reveal whether the programmed challenges have altered the
original symbolic relations. Attempting to disrupt established symbolic
relations will increase our understanding of the conditions under which natural
language classes are able to accommodate change, as well as the conditions under
which modification of established relations is unlikely. Not only may such
information be of value in understanding basic language processes, but efforts
to teach language skills may be strengthened by findings related to potential
sources of disruption. ***