* 9309977
* RUI:  Central Projections of the Octavolateralis System
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/1993,01/31/1997
* Catherine McCormick, Oberlin College
* Continuing Grant
* Christopher Platt
* 01/31/1997
* USD 300,000.00

9309977 McCormick The diverse and very large vertebrate group of bony fishes
have an inner ear used for hearing. Behavioral studies show that species have
different capabilities for hearing underwater sound, sometimes correlated with
peripheral structural specializations such as an acoustic connection from the
swimbladder. Recent work in neuroanatomy has shown that there also are
specializations in the cellular populations, called nuclei, in auditory centers
in the brains of some fish species that hear very well; brains of some fish
considered to have more primitive auditory systems lack these specializations.
This project uses neuroanatomical techniques to trace the pathways of nerve
fibers from the individual inner ear sensory organs to these central nuclei, and
to clarify the detailed structure of these nuclei, in species chosen to
represent particular generalized versus specialized features of anatomy or
behavior. The results will determine how the central nervous system components
for hearing are organized differently between specialists and generalists. This
work provides important groundwork influencing future physiological, behavioral,
and theoretical work on hearing in fish and on underwater sound reception. It
has educational impact in strongly involving undergraduate students directly in
research. In addition, it will have impact on studies of biodiversity by
directly addressing the variation of vertebrate hearing mechanisms, and on
studies of evolution of hearing in the vertebrates. ***