* 9309055
* A Study of Chemical and Photo-Chemical Reactions in         Microdroplets
* ENG,CBET
* 07/15/1993,12/31/1996
* Asit Ray, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Maria Burka
* 12/31/1996
* USD 291,743.00

Abstract - Ray/9309055 Tailored particles are finding increasing applications in
the manufacturing of advanced ceramic materials, electronic and photonic
devices, catalysts, microencapsulated polymer particles for control release and
thin film coating. Some of these processes require monodisperse particles of
specific size and composition or composite particles (for example layered
particles), and recent electronic devices based on quantum dots require nano-
size particles. Of the current techniques for the production of small particles,
reactions with aerosols is one of the simplest for the production of high purity
particles of a desired size. Homogeneous, composite, hollow and layered
particles of desired size can be generated by such techniques where composition
and structure (along with the size) dictate the possible applications of the
particles. The objectives of this research are to understand the physical and
chemical processes involved in the chemical and photochemical reactions in small
particles, factors that control the morphology and mechanical strength of the
final particles, and to develop techniques for the generation of tailored
particles. Experiments will be conducted on single droplets suspended in an
electrodynamic balance and on highly monodisperse droplets generated by a
vibrating orifice aerosol generator. An elastic scattering technique, based on
optical resonance, will be applied for the precise determination of the size and
the refractive index of a homogeneous or a layered droplet during a reaction
with the surrounding vapor. This technique, in conjunction with Raman scattering
a nd graviometric techniques, will provide information on the mass, composition,
and porosity of a particle. The pore size distribution in a final solid particle
will be analyzed by adsorption and desorption of vapors. To estimate the
mechanical strength of an inorganic or a polymeric shell covering a core droplet
generated by a reaction, a technique, based on the relations between the stress
and strain for the shell and between the osmotic pressure and core composition
for a surrounding vapor soluble in the core, will be used. The theory of
interaction of light with small droplets suggests an efficient way for the
utilization of microdroplets as photochemical reaction media. Photochemical
reactions requiring high power light sources will be examined in microdroplets
with low power sources. Whether a photochemical reaction can be limited to
region to form a shell of desired thickness will also be tested. The formation
of surfactant-free emulsions in microdroplets and their use for the generation
of nano-size particles will also be examined. / / / / / / / / / / / / / / / / /
/ /!/"/#/$/%/&amp;/'/(/