* 9309076
* RIA:  An Object-Oriented Extensible View System for Computer-Aided Design Applications
* CSE,IIS
* 07/15/1993,06/30/1997
* Elke Rundensteiner, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Maria Zemankova
* 06/30/1997
* USD 100,002.00

RIA: An Object-Oriented Extensible View System for Computer- Aided Design
Applications Computer-Aided Design (CAD) systems typically use an object-
oriented database (OODB) to integrate diverse design data into one repository
accessed by all design tools. Such a central database is a critical bottleneck
preventing the extensibility of the CAD system over time, and forcing all design
tools to work on the same (comprehensive and hence extremely complex) data
model. Clearly, there is a conflict between supplying design tools with
customized design representations and integrating design data into one uniform
model. This research effort addresses this problem by extending OODB technology
by two advanced features: (1) design views and (2) schema change support. To
support customized design representations, mechanisms to manage individualized
tool interfaces of the CAD database are being implemented (which free individual
design tools from having to maintain mappings between the global data model and
local design views). To support the extensibility of the CAD system, the view
system will be augmented with schema change functionality. It is this unique
integration of both capabilities that makes the Object-Oriented Extensible View
System (OOEVS) a radically new tool for supporting CAD applications. Extensive
experiments will be performed to evaluate OOEVS and its application for building
complex software systems (in particular, CAD systems). The proposed research is
significant in that it provides a solution to the important problem of CAD tool
integration and extends state-of-the-art databases with powerful
functionalities.