* 9309856
* The Site of Androgen Action on Synapse Elimination
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/1993,02/28/1999
* Cynthia Jordan, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* Roy L. White
* 02/28/1999
* USD 512,000.00

9309856 Jordan During normal development, adult patterns of synaptic connections
are established through an elimination of excess neural connections. For
example, in newborns, muscle fibers receive innervation from several different
motoneurons. By the time the mammal has matured into adulthood, muscle fibers
are each typically innervated by only a single motoneuron. Dr. Jordan's research
program seeks to understand the cellular and molecular bases of synapse
elimination. Her model is a a relatively simple neuromuscular system, namely the
perineal levator ani muscle and its innervating motoneurons located in the
spinal nucleus of the bulbocavernosus. Studying synapse elimination in this
system offers the significant advantage that this mechanism can be regulated by
steroid hormones. Androgen treatment during a specified period of development
permanently prevents some synapse elimination in this system. Thus, androgens
are a naturally occurring factor that influences the development of the central
nervous system. Dr. Jordan will use steroid hormones as a tool for the control
and manipulation of synapse elimination. Information about where androgen acts
to prevent this loss is necessary for directing further experiments aimed at
identifying the underlying mechanisms. In addition, she will examine the
mechanisms that initiate the onset of synapse elimination. Dr. Jordan will
explore the possibility that it is the electrical uncoupling of the neurons that
underlie the selective stabilization and maintenance of synapses. Information
gained about the factors controlling this crucial developmental event in the
neuromuscular system could be applied to neuronal populations in the brain that
undergo similar synaptic alternations due to either normal or pathological
processes. ***