* 9309428
* What is a World Worth?  Value Elicitation for Global        Environmental Problems
* SBE,SES
* 02/01/1994,10/31/1995
* Lester Lave, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Robin A. Cantor
* 10/31/1995
* USD 99,999.00

9309428 Fischhoff Global environmental problems pose difficult and far reaching
decisions for societies. As with other visible and important societal problems,
attempts to elicit and incorporate views of the public in the decision making
process are often frustrated by available survey techniques. If the public is to
be involved meaningfully in these decisions, then several conditions need to be
met: (a) the views of representative members of the public need to be elicited;
(b) participants in the elicitation process need to understand the impacts of
different policies on their households, societies, and the world; (c)
participants need to articulate the implications of their basic values for
particular policies; (d) participants must express their opinions in a way that
captures their complexity, intensity, and uncertainty; and (e) opinions must be
aggregated in a way that derives their implications for societal decision
making. This research advances an approach to meeting these conditions.
Implementing the approach requires focused investigations of the different steps
in the elicitation process including: formulating a coherent policy issue;
explicating the implications of different options; designing and standardizing
the response mode; and evaluating the procedure. The research will provide
fundamental methods and tests to develop a new tool in preference and valuation
elicitation. Later phases of the research will demonstrate the tool and test it
more formally with larger numbers of participants. ***