* 9309480
* Interaction of the Goldfish Kainate Receptor with G Proteins
* BIO,IOS
* 08/15/1993,11/30/1996
* Robert Oswald, Cornell Univ - State: AWDS MADE PRIOR MAY 2010
* Standard Grant
* Raymon Glantz
* 11/30/1996
* USD 169,970.00

WPC? 2 B P Z Courier 10cpi #| p Sj x 6 X @ 8 ; X @ HP DeskJet 500 HPDES500.PRS
x @ x X , , 0 FX @ #| p 2 B V P Z CG Times 12pt 8 p C < , W X p P rk ; X P HP
DeskJet 500 HPDES500.PRS X p P rk ; x X , , 0 FX P " m o 8 ; ^<D\dd DDDd
DDDDddddddddddDD X | |x DL | t l| DDDddDXdXdXDdd88d8 ddddHL8dd ddXXdXd d ddDDddd
D d d d X X X X X X|X|X|X|XD8D8D8D8 d d d d d d d d d d X d d d d dtd X X X X X
X X d|X|X|X|X d d d d d d d dD D D8D L d|8|8|8|8|8 d t d d d d H H
HlLlLlLlL|8|8|8 d d d d d d d X X X d|8 d HlL|8 d d d d d D/ N d ddDXPPdd ddd
dHdddd H d x H d h 1D DD x dp d x d x X L p x xdx X x x xL
xxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxLLLLLLL x 2 = 9309480 Oswald The kainate receptor is a
subtype of glutamate receptor and is one of the most prevalent neurotransmitter
receptors in the vertebrate central nervous system. A novel class of kainate
receptors from nonmammalian vertebrate brain that has structural homologies to
ion channels activated by glutamate and kainate but which interacts with GTP
binding proteins (G proteins) is being studied. Dr. Oswald's working hypothesis
is that this receptor or class of receptors has a dual function. That is, the
signal transduction mechanism consists of both a rapid opening of an ion channel
and a slower response mediated by G proteins. The cDNAs coding for several
kainate recept ors have been cloned and several additional partial sequences
have been obtained using the polymerase chain reaction. The purposes of the
studies described in this proposal are to determine which kainate receptors and
combination of kainate receptors can form functional ion channels and to
investigate the structural basis of ion channel activity, kainate binding, and
possibly G protein activation. The results of these experiments should provide
important information on the function and diversity of this abundant excitatory
amino acid receptor family. ***