* 9309414
* Collaborative Research on Trade Unions, Employers'          Organizations and Collective Bargaining:  Data Collection   and Analysis for Nineteen Countries
* SBE,SES
* 02/01/1994,07/31/1997
* Peter Lange, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* JEANETTE CAMPBELL
* 07/31/1997
* USD 54,664.00

9309414 Lange The organizational structure of trade unions, employers'
associations and the process of wage bargaining in advanced industrial
democracies has been the subject of considerable research in recent years. Since
1974, the striking cross-national differences in macroeconomic performance has
led scholars to study the ways that wage-setting institutions affect how well
the labor market functions. The majority of the literature argues that
centralized bargaining systems produce superior macroeconomic outcomes,
expecially lower unemployment, by preventing individual unions from seeking to
improve their own members' wages at the expense of workers who belong to other
unions or to no union at all. Yet many studies argue the opposite, that
decentralized wage setting offers the greatest flexibility and sensitivity of
wages to conditions in the local labor market. Most recently, the intermediate
position that both highly centralized and highly decentralized systems work
better than systems with intermediate levels of centralization has gained wide
acceptance. All of the research to date has proceeded on a weak empirical base.
The basic problem is that no one has developed adequate measures of the
different attributes of wage-setting institutions that might matter for economic
performance. In this research, the investigators continue their work of
compiling a sustematic cross- national and longitudinal data base coverning the
most important institutional characteristics of the wage setting process. In
collecting the data, the investigators put together information from secondary
sources, data supplied by the major labor market actors in each of the
countries, and expert surveys. Their data will be constructed to allow reliable
comparisons over time and between countries. On the basis of the data, which
will be made publicly available for use by other scholars, the investigators
propose to construct indicators of critical aspects of the organization o f
unions, employers and collective bargaining. Finally, they intend to use the
indicators to test the relationship between bargaining institutions, wage
formation, and various aspects of aggregate economic performance. ***