* 9309394
* Dynamic Pricing and Allocation Models for Revenue           Management in the Airline and Retail Industries
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/1993,07/31/1995
* Guillermo Gallego, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Robin A. Cantor
* 07/31/1995
* USD 89,427.00

9309394 Gallego Many important U.S. industries incur high fixed costs to provide
goods or services. These include the transportation (airlines, cruise ships),
lodging (hotels, resorts), fashion, and seasonal manufacturing and retailing
industries. Because of long lead times capacity can be considered fixed, at
least in the short run, and its cost sunk. The relatively low marginal costs of
providing goods or services within capacity makes revenue maximization a main
concern for these industries. Effective temporal pricing and allocation
decisions can significantly increase revenues in these industries and hence
strengthen their competitive positions. At present there is a wealth of
reservation and point-of-sale data which can be used to make temporal pricing
and allocation decisions. The goal of this research is to develop theoretical
and practical temporal pricing and allocation methods that take full advantage
of these data. This research develops modeling techniques and algorithms that
capture realistic and complex multiple product problems. The framework will
ultimately be capable of handling extremely complicated problems such as pricing
and allocating the capacity of an entire airline carrier network over multiple
markets. Also planned is a study of joint pricing, allocation, and demand
estimation, an essential building block for the future implementation of the
research. Toward this end, an initial program of empirical studies in
conjunction with a major fashion retailer is also proposed to secure financial
and in-kind support from both the retail and airline industry for continued
funding of the research. ***