* 9309422
* A Model System for the Development of Behavior
* BIO,IOS
* 09/15/1993,02/28/1998
* Barbara Fadem, Rutgers, The State University of New Jersey-RBHS-New Jersey Med
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Platt
* 02/28/1998
* USD 176,514.00

9309422 Fadem Sex differences in reproductive behavior in mammals are determined
not only by the genes and by hormones produced in adulthood, but also by steroid
hormones secreted by the gonads during perinatal development. Although it is
known that testicular androgens play an important role during perinatal
development, androgens are metabolized into estrogens within CNS target cells.
Determining whether an androgen or its estrogenic metabolite is the
differentiating hormone is complicated since placental mammalian fetuses have
systems which actually "protect" them from maternal estrogen. Thus, getting
estrogen to the fetus and quantifying the amount of estrogen acting on the fetus
is extremely important yet almost impossible to achieve. Dr. Fadem has developed
a marsupial model to examine the role of estrogen. The newborns are born at a
developmental stage equivalent to that of a 13-day fetal rat or 8-week human
embryo. Hence, much of the fetal development occurs outside the body of the
mother, making the fetal environment accessible in these mammals. Dr. Fadem will
manipulate the hormonal environment of the newborn marsupials. She will assess
the effects of these early manipulations on reproductive and aggressive
behavior, morphology and physiology in adulthood. The results from these studies
will contribute to a better understanding of various human disorders that result
from insufficient or excess hormone exposure during sexual differentiation. ***