* 9309176
* RIA: A Memory-Based Architecture for High-Performance       Distributed File Systems
* CSE,CCF
* 08/15/1993,07/31/1997
* James Griffioen, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* None
* 07/31/1997
* USD 104,999.00

9309176 Griffioen This research project to address the issues involved in the
design of scalable high-performance distributed file systems based on volatile
storage. The flexibility of such system combined with recent technology trends
provides an opportunity for exceptional performance and superior resource
utilization. The research has four components. First, a new distributed file
system abstraction that incorporates both volatile and stable storage into a
single abstraction will be investigated. The abstraction allows users to adjust
the persistence guarantees of a file to match the requirements of the
application, thereby optimizing performance. Second, a novel memory architecture
called loosely-coupled memory that provides a massive aggregate memory space for
use by the proposed file system will be introduced. The architecture also
incorporates asymmetric compression techniques to make effective use of memory
and underutilized processing power, and to improve file system access time.
Third, a new abstraction and file system architecture into the BM Xinu operating
system to verify our design. VM Xinu provides a high-performance, low-latency
communication protocol ideal for support of a loosely-coupled memory system.
Finally, the file system will be incorporated into the Mach operating system to
demonstrate and evaluate our ideas in the context of a large user population.
***