* 9309591
* Engineering Research Deployment Teaching Initiative: Tools  for the Deployment Integrated Process Operations Research toChemical Engineering Curriculum and Industrial Practice
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/1993,02/28/1995
* Joseph Pekny, Purdue Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Frank A. Settle
* 02/28/1995
* USD 25,000.00

9309591 Doyle Computer-aided process operations management includes tasks such
as process monitoring, regulatory control, data reconciliation, unit and plant-
wide optimization, process fault diagnosis, supervisory control, planning and
scheduling. Due to the inter-dependencies of these tasks, operations management
involves coordination of these tasks in an integrated manner. The proliferation
of disparate tools and techniques to carry out these different tasks imposes
barriers to problem integration by fragmenting the system implementation and the
solution process. Dealing with integration requires a careful choice of problem-
solving paradigms, knowledge representation, search and reasoning techniques so
as not burden the individual tasks and at the same time providing a unified
framework. In this research, the researchers will develop a new course on
computer integrated process operations that will address the nature of these
operational tasks, the character of integration, the use of artificial
intelligence, math programming and nonlinear modeling techniques that are
necessary and inevitable for achieving this automation. This course will bring
state-of-the-art tools and techniques and industrial case studies to the class
room to educate and prepare undergraduate and graduate students in current
trends in computer-integrated manufacturing in the chemical process industries.