* 9309283
* AIT (U.S) - CCNAA (Taiwan) Cooperative Research:            Biomarkers in Fish from Contaminated Rivers and Ponds in    Taiwan
* O/D,OISE
* 08/01/1994,07/31/1998
* William Hawkins, Gulf Coast Research Laboratories
* Standard Grant
* W. Y. B. Chang
* 07/31/1998
* USD 39,789.00

9309283 Overstreet This is a three-year cooperative research project proposed by
Drs. Robin Overstreet and William Hawkins, Gulf Coast Research Laboratory, and
Professor Peter Lin Sun, Taiwan National Pingtung Institute of Agriculture. This
proposal requests funds for travel and graduate student support to carry out
cooperative research to determine if there are identifiable biomarkers in
tilapia for indication different levels of pollution. If successful and reliable
biomarkers in fish for pollution monitoring are found, they can be a quick
indication of the condition of aquatic environments. The study plans to test a
new technique by adapting parasitological methods to the field of biomonitoring.
Taiwan is important for this research since there are relatively abundant
accessible warmwater fish (tilapia) living in the different levels of polluted
environments. Dr. Peter Sun has noted that the tilapia in the grossly affected
area are showing pathological alterations. The project can contribute
significantly in human resource development by inclusion of graduate student
work in systems which are very different from those in the U.S. This project is
jointly supported by the NSF and the Taiwan National Science Council (NSC).