* 9309526
* Tyrosine Phosphorylation and Axonal Growth
* BIO,IOS
* 08/15/1993,07/31/1997
* John Bixby, University of Miami
* Continuing Grant
* Jim Edwards
* 07/31/1997
* USD 322,620.00

9309526 Bixby A critical feature of the development of the nervous system is the
ability of individual nerve cells to grow cellular processes, or axons. These
axons often must grow over long distances over complicated pathways to contact
their target cells. This research is aimed at an understanding of the molecular
signals underlying axon growth. In the previous grant period, it was found that
one important mechanism regulating axon growth involves the modification of
proteins in the axons by enzymes. In particular, a rare class of enzyme that
phosphorylates proteins on tyrosine residues appears to be involved. Several
distinct members of this class of enzyme are localized to the exact region of
the growing axon that must make "pathfinding" decisions further pointing to the
importance of this class of enzyme. At this point, it is unclear which enzyme
performs which function in axonal growth and guidance. The present study is
aimed at understanding this issue. This study will test the role of individual
kinases and phosphatases in axonal growth and other aspects of development. Both
known and novel enzymes have been identified in the early developing nervous
system. Several of these kinases and phosphatases will be tested functionally,
using the techniques of molecular biology. Finally, the interaction of these
intracellular signaling molecules with neuronal receptors mediating cell-cell
recognition will be examined biochemically. The results of these experiments
should allow a more precise knowledge of the molecular basis of cell-cell
communication in the developing nervous system, and an elucidation of the
intracellular signals that regulate the ability of nerve cells to extend long
process to reach their target cells. *** : ; &lt; &gt; ? A B C D E F G H I J L M
N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z \ ^ ` a b c d e f g h i j k l m n o p q r s t u v w x
y z { | } ~ 9309526 Bixby A critical feature of the development of the nervous
system is the ability of individual nerve cells to grow c o q j o q ! ! F q q (
Times New Roman Symbol &amp; Arial " h e C @ bixby William Proctor, IBN William
Proctor, IBN