* 9309316
* RESEARCH INITIATION AWARD:  Design and Performance          Characterization of a Multipurpose Decentralized Group      Membership Service
* CSE,CCF
* 08/01/1993,07/31/1996
* Shridhar Shukla, Naval Postgraduate School
* Interagency Agreement
* Forbes D. Lewis
* 07/31/1996
* USD 73,883.00

9309316 Shukla This project focuses on the structure of a group membership
service, a basic building block for group-oriented distributed applications. The
objectives of this project are development and performance characterization of a
membership service with multiple classes of service. The emphasis is on
categorical definition of service classes to support a wide spectrum of
applications, adaptive status monitoring to minimize wrongly perceived status
changes, a completely decentralized and hierarchical protocol requiring an
overhead proportional to the quality of the service rendered, and support of a
spectrum of membership semantics in spite of transient network partitioning.
Techniques will be developed to support seamless distribution of large groups
across a set of heterogeneous networks by exploiting the attributes of local
communication environments and using topology-based optimizations. Formal
techniques will be used for specification and verification implementation of the
protocol. A performance metric will be developed for characterization of the
performance of membership protocols. Performance will be studied with
simulations based on stochastic modeling of applications, membership protocols,
and underlying networks. The simulations will be built using commercial network
engineering tools. The main contributions expected from this research are a
single multipurpose membership protocol instead of the current application-
specific variety and quantitative performance characterization which is
currently lacking. ***