* 9309684
* The Location of Invention and Technical Change:  Industrial Development in the U.S.
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/1993,01/31/1996
* Kenneth Sokoloff, National Bureau of Economic Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Lynn A. Pollnow
* 01/31/1996
* USD 103,774.00

The purpose of this project is to develop a deeper understanding of technical
change by examining the patterns in the location of invention in the U.S.
manufacturing sector between 1870 and 1929, a period of integration of national
product markets as well as of radical changes in technology and in industrial
structure. The issue of the location of invention will be explored in two
different senses of the term. First, the basic quantitative record of the
geographic distribution of patenting over the period, as well as a better
understanding of the basis for, and prevalence of, the phenomenon of geographic
clustering in inventive activity will be established. Although there has been
much interest by scholars and policy makers in the importance of local
externalities in invention, and many anecdotal references to cases such as
Silicon Valley, there has to date been only limited systematic empirical
investigation of the subject. Second, the study will analyze the extent to which
inventive activity was located within the firms that actually used the
technology. It is conventional to think of invention as an activity that occurs
within the boundaries of the firms, but at various times firms have bought or
licensed much of their technology from outside suppliers. This research is
important because it will shed new light on the processes of innovation and the
diffusion of new technology.