* 9309960
* RIA:  Computational Methods for the Design of Optimal       Intelligent Control Systems
* CSE,IIS
* 01/01/1994,06/30/1997
* Samuel Smith, Florida Atlantic University
* Continuing Grant
* Howard Moraff
* 06/30/1997
* USD 89,958.00

9309960 Smith This is the first-year funding of a three-year continuing award.
This research addresses the task of finding the optimal control policy for
complex, nonlinear, and uncertain systems, given a set of control objectives.
The majority of effort so far in intelligent control systems has been focused on
implementation or function approximation for complex, nonlinear, and uncertain
systems. It is assumed a priori that the given training information best
satisfies the control objectives without a direct attempt to find the optimal
system control policy with respect to the control objectives. Conventional
optimal control methods are either limited to systems that are amenable to
mathematical analysis or else involve enormous amounts of computation in the
form of dynamic programming. Intelligent control approaches that address the
task of determining the optimal control policy use the same basic strategy as
dynamic programming, only in less structured form. This includes Back-
propagation Through Time (BTT) methods and systems that employ reinforcement
learning or adaptive critics. This research project uses a computationally
efficient means of dynamic programming based on a cell state space approach that
makes it possible to do multiple iterations of the algorithm in realistic time
scales. These methods will be applied to the six-degree-of-freedom flight
control of Autonomous Underwater Vehicles under development at Florida Atlantic
University. One application of these AUVs is a joint effort between the
University of South Florida's Marine Science Department and FAU to perform a set
of long range oceanographic surveys in the Gulf of Mexico to determine bottom
composition and water quality. Because underwater vehicles can move freely in
three dimensions in relatively uncluttered environments, the immediate potential
for valuable contributions by autonomous robotic systems may be even greater in
the ocean than on land.