* 9309504
* RIA: VLSI Architectures and Algorithms for Motion           Estimation Using Hough Transform
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/1993,12/31/1997
* Chaitali Chakrabarti, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Michael Foster
* 12/31/1997
* USD 99,000.00

Chakrabarti In the past, real-time image processing has been restricted to low-
level tasks such as filtering; the more complex medium and high-level tasks have
been left to general-purpose computers which are unable to handle the large
computation rates of these tasks. Real-time computation of these tasks thus
necessitates development of task-specific algorithms and architectures. This
project is developing efficient algorithms and architectures for an important
and representative medium-level task: motion estimation of 2-dimensional and
3-dimensional objects. The approach reduces the number of computations in motion
estimation by implementing it in the Hough space. Specifically, the objects are
represented by peaks in the Hough space, and motion parameters are extracted
from shifts of these peaks. To facilitate real-time computation of Hough
transforms, efficient algorithms that reduce the size of the Hough transform
parameter space are being developed. To keep the design costs low, these
algorithms are targeted to customized versions of a "base" architecture: a
highly pipelined linear array of processors, which has access to an array of
memory banks. Apart from developing an efficient scheme for real-time motion
estimation, this research will also provide design guidelines for algorithm and
architecture development of other medium- and high-level image processing tasks.