* 9309820
* Efficiency of Heading Perception
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/1993,07/31/1997
* Martin Banks, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* Jasmine Young
* 07/31/1997
* USD 225,081.00

9309820 BANKS Humans are able to move rapidly through complex environments while
avoiding stationary and moving obstacles; clearly the sensory modality most
important for this skill is vision. The ease with which people use visual motion
information to guide navigation belies the underlying complexity of the task.
Self-motion through an environment produces a pattern of movement on the retina
called the optic flow field. An influential early proposal was to identify the
direction of self-motion with respect to obstacles by locating the source of
flow, i.e., the focus of expansion, but the task is actually much more
complicated. First, since the sensing of 2D motion (which is required to derive
the optic flow field in the first place) is a difficult problem in its own
right, one cannot assume that a noise-free vector field is available for
calculation of observer motion. Second, since people commonly move their eyes
and head while locomoting, these movements obliterate the focus of expansion.
Third, since visual scenes often contain moving objects besides the observer,
those objects do not produce a consistent focus. Despite these complications,
people use the optic flow field very effectively to judge heading relative to
landmarks and other moving objects. This research is mainly concerned with how
efficiently human observers use the information contained in the optic flow
field to determine the parameters of their self-motion. A measure of efficiency
derives from the comparison of the performance of an ideal observer for heading
tasks to that of human observers in the same tasks. Because the ideal observer
uses all of the information in the flow field, its performance provides a
rigorous benchmark against which to compare human performance. Specific
comparisons will not only allow the measurement of human efficiency but also the
identification of some of the causes of inefficiency. The research will
demonstrate how variables such as number of elemen ts in the display, type of
flow field displayed, sharpness and size of the display, position of stimulation
on the retina, presence of rotational flow due to eye/head movements, and
knowledge of the scene geometry affect human efficiency in determining the
direction of self-motion. While the products of this research will enhance our
understanding of space and motion perception, they may also have important
practical consequences. For one thing, since biological systems have evolved
robust mechanisms to subserve visually-guided navigation, a better understanding
of how this is accomplished should lead to better algorithms for mobile robotic
systems. Second, the development of an ideal observer for heading tasks will
provide a benchmark against which to compare the performance of computer
algorithms. Third, since perception of heading with respect to stationary and
moving objects is crucial for driving and flying, a better understanding could
lead to improved procedures for screening and training drivers and pilots and
for designing instruments, cockpits, and roadway and runway markings. ***