* 9309545
* Neuropeptide Y and the Regulation of Metabolic              Homeostasis
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/1993,08/31/1994
* Jeffrey White, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Continuing Grant
* Kathie L. Olsen
* 08/31/1994
* USD 95,000.00

9309545 White One of the most basic needs of a complex organism is the
maintenance of nutrient and energy homeostasis, a process which requires
coordination of nutrient, hormonal, and neuronal signals to integrate metabolism
with behavior. Food intake, appetite and body weight are controlled by the brain
through an interaction with peripheral signals. This interaction is complex and
poorly understood even though it is of obvious importance. Recently, it has been
discovered that a peptide in the brain, neuropeptide Y, induces feeding when
injected into specific nuclei of the hypothalamus. Indeed neuropeptide Y is one
of the most abundant peptides and is one of the most potent stimulants of food
intake in satiated mammals. During his previous NSF support, Dr. White
demonstrated that neuropeptide Y is an integral link in the communication
between the periphery and the brain for regulating energy homeostasis and food
intake. He will now determine the means by which neuropeptide Y gene expression
in the hypothalamus and pituitary is directly responsive to peripheral hormones
regulating metabolism, i.e. insulin, glucocorticoids and thyroid hormone. Dr.
White will examine how much neuropeptide Y is formed under various experimental
conditions that manipulate peripheral hormone levels. These studies of
neuropeptide Y gene regulation by the peripheral hormones will provide valuable
information about the physiological role of this peptide in integrating
metabolic signals important in energy homeostasis, food intake and body weight
regulation with neuroendocrine function of the hypothalamus. These studies can
serve as a basis for understanding how such regulatory systems become disturbed
in physiologies such as obesity and anorexia nervosa and may lead to development
of therapies for controlling human eating disorders. Indeed, Dr. White in
collaboration with others in the Division of Endocrinology, submitted New
Technology Disclosures for the use of specifi c diet formulations for the
treatment of morbid obesity and for the stimulation of growth hormone secretion
in growth hormone- suppressed individuals through the manipulations of specific
brain neuropeptide systems. ***