* 9309994
* Energetics of Mammalian Reproduction and Life History
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/1993,01/31/1999
* George Kenagy, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Zoe Eppley
* 01/31/1999
* USD 185,200.00

9309994 Kenagy The relationship between reproductive energy expenditures, body
condition and reproductive success will be investigated in a population of
golden-mantled ground squirrels that has been under study since 1984. The
physiological dimension of the proposed research focuses on intensive
physiological performances under natural conditions -- maximal production and
maximal work load, and the accompanying demand for energy. Two model cases of
this are the peak parental production expenditures that occur in lactating
females and the peak behavior expenditures that occur in males associated with
mating, aggression and defense. In each aspect of the study, performances are
quantified in terms of proximal energy balance and its phenotypic variation, and
then the ultimate success will be evaluated in terms of demography, i.e.,
survival and future reproduction. The direct relationship of daily energy
expenditure, and the intermediary relationship of body mass and condition to
survival will be examined, recognizing that reproductive performances may
operate at similar peak levels for all members of a population and that the
resulting reproductive output is individually optimized. In freeliving animals
we measure energy expenditure using stable isotopes, and body condition (fat vs.
lean components) by total body electrical conductivity. The upper limits of
female reproduction, intake and expenditure will be investigated by
experimentally manipulating maternal food supply. Overwinter energy balance will
be evaluated by radiotelemetry of torpor patterns in hibernating squirrels.
Flexibility and variable reproductive maturity in yearling males will be
evaluated in terms of energy balance and an experimental manipulation of energy
supply. This research should contribute to an integrated understanding of how
variation in the physiology and behavior of individuals in a population
translates into the expression of survival and reproductive success over the cou
rse of life history. ***