* 9309804
* Mechanisms Mediating Motor Pattern Selection by Peptidergic Neurons
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/1993,01/31/1996
* Michael Nusbaum, University of Alabama at Birmingham
* Continuing Grant
* Karen Sigvardt
* 01/31/1996
* USD 141,401.00

9309804 Nusbaum The goal of this proposed work is to understand how peptidergic
neurons modulate the activity of rhythmically active neural networks that
mediate behaviors. Rhythmically active neural networks are strongly influenced
by modulatory inputs from other regions of the nervous system, in both
vertebrates and invertebrates. The largest class of modulatory transmitters is
the neuropeptides, yet thus far most of our knowledge about how neuropeptides
modulate neural network activity has come from bath- application studies. Little
information is available regarding the ways in which neural networks respond to
individual peptidergic neurons. Moreover, there are several reasons why bath-
application and neural-release of a neuropeptide will not necessarily produce
the same response in a neural network. These reasons include the observations
that (1) peptidergic neurons often co-release other transmitters, (2)
neuropeptides often reach more receptors when bath-applied than when neurally-
released, and (3) different concentrations of a peptide can cause qualitatively
different neural network responses. The specific goals of this proposal are to
(1) provide a more realistic assessment of the utility of bath-application
studies as a model for peptidergic neurotransmission, and (2) understand how and
why a set of neurons that have the same peptide transmitter elicit different
responses from the same rhythmically active neural networks. The specific aims
of the proposal are to determine whether these differences are the result of
these proctolin neurons having different co-transmitters, being differentially
influenced by extracellularly- located peptidases, releasing different amount of
proctolin, and/or releasing proctolin into different domains within the
neuropil. These aims will be attained by using a multidisciplinary approach,
including intra- and extracellular electrophysiology, HPLC- and bioassay-
focussed biochemistry, and laser scanning confocal mi croscopy, to study the
ways that three identified proctolin neurons influence the pyloric and gastric
mill neural networks. This proposed study will provide novel physiological,
biochemical and anatomical information about the means by which neurally-
released peptides influence neural network activity. This study will also
provide the first in-depth understanding of the limitations of using bath-
application of neuropeptides to study neural network responses to neurally-
released peptides.***