* 9309927
* Inference About Predictive Accuracy; Exchange Rate          Volatility:  Inventory Models
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/1993,07/31/1998
* Kenneth West, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 07/31/1998
* USD 135,020.00

9309927 West Data-mining or over-fitting, perhaps as a result of repeated
profession-wide use of a limited body of data, leads at times to spuriously good
in sample fits. Some economists have argued that out of sample predictive
accuracy is the critical measure of model quality. Unfortunately most empirical
work in economics relies mainly on in-sample evidence. Many of the out of sample
tests of predictions and predictive accuracy are informal and qualitative in
part because applied researchers find procedures developed to date inadequate.
Procedures that have worked well in sample also do not appear to work well out
of sample. One contribution of this project comes from developing new procedures
for econometric inference about out of sample predictions and prediction errors
general enough to be useful in a wide range of applications, including
eventually models of the socioeconomic impacts of global environmental change.
An earlier study found that complicated models of exchange rates with good in-
sample fit do no better than a random walk model in out of sample predictions.
This project uses these procedures to study the predictive ability of competing
models of exchange rate volatility and develops alternative models, including
one that links exchange rates to interest rates. The final area of research for
this project is on empirical inventory models. In one part of the research,
asymptotic theory and simulation methods will be used to evaluate alternative
methods for estimating inventory models. Issues include sensitivity to
normalization, finite sample behavior of efficient GMM estimators, and the
tradeoff between what has been called "exogeneity" and "relevance" in choice of
instruments. The results will be relevant in estimation of not just inventory
but other time series models as well. In a second part, inventory models will be
estimated on two digit U.S., U.K., Canadian and Japanese data, using the results
of the first part. Questi ons to be studied include convexity of cost functions,
dynamic responses to shocks, and the importance of idiosyncratic versus
aggregate shocks.