* 9309357
* Producer Services Growth and the Development of Corporate   Complex Networks in U.S. Metropolitan Regions
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/1993,07/31/1997
* W Goe, Kansas State University
* Standard Grant
* Bernard O. Bauer
* 07/31/1997
* USD 26,876.00

One of the most important dimensions of the recent transformation to a service
economy within the United States has been the growth of producer-service
industries, firms that provide products and services to business firms and other
organizations, such as government agencies. From 1980 to 1988, these firms
accounted for roughly one-third of all new jobs established in the nation. The
growth of these firms has substantially altered the ways that American
businesses organize production. Most producer-services firms locate in
metropolitan areas and become parts of complex corporate networks, which usually
consist of headquarters hubs linked to producer-service firms. This project will
expand knowledge about the spatial and social structures of these complex
corporate networks in metropolitan areas of the U.S. through in-depth case
studies of four networks, two in manufacturing and two in services. Personal
interviews will be conducted with officials in both contracting companies and
producer-service contractors in the Akron, Cleveland, Kansas City, and San
Francisco metropolitan areas. Special attention will focus on identification of
the reasons why U.S. corporations have turned to outside contractors for the
provision of producer services, how externalization of producer services has
been related to broader forms of industrial organization, what social relations
underlie market relationships between firms and producer-service providers, how
forms of producer-service externalization vary among different types of
industries, how corporate complexes have been spatially restructured, and what
factors contribute to these spatial shifts. Data from these interviews will be
used to form and test hypotheses about the spatial and social structure of
industrial organization. They also will facilitate the development of a
theoretical model of producer-service externalization, which will be tested in
subsequent studies. This project will help fill important gaps in knowledge
about the dramatic restructuring of American industry, especially the growth of
producer-service firms and their operation within complex corporate networks.
The data collected in interviews with both suppliers and users of producer
services will test a number of important hypotheses, and they will assist in
development of more general models of industrial organization.