* 9309706
* Research Initiation Award:  System Reduction Strategies for Efficient Design Synthesis
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/1993,07/31/1996
* Christina Bloebaum, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* Frank A. Settle
* 07/31/1996
* USD 94,797.00

The CE design approach requires the interaction of all engineering, production,
and manufacturing groups simultaneously so as to reduce cost and bring higher
quality products to market faster. One dilemma that makes CE difficult to
practically implement in an industrial setting is the excessive computational
requirements due to the inordinate number of participating groups. The number of
'communication paths' amongst these groups (which can be considered as
'couplings') is so large that formal optimization methods are impossible to
apply. Sensitivity-based strategies that reduce the number of required
communication paths amongst participating design groups, without sacrificing
solution accuracy, are researched. These strategies are augmented by AI
techniques to allow for human interface capabilities. A redesign of the design
process itself is so as to facilitate concurrent engineering implementation.
Some of the research issues addressed include: quantification of coupling
strengths between subsystems, identification of candidate couplings for
suspension or elimination, and optimal convergence schemes. United States
automotive, aerospace, computer and electronics industries, among others, have
been forced to respond to competitive pressures that have resulted in crippling
losses of market share due to extensive product development times and inordinate
costs. These industries have recognized the necessity of adopting the Concurrent
Engineering (CE) design approach in order to create higher quality products that
can be brought to market for significantly lower cost and time. The objective of
this research is to develop AI-augmented strategies for increasing the
efficiency of the design process for large scale, complex engineering systems,
such as are encountered in Concurrent Engineering (CE) applications. Complex
engineering systems are characterized by inherent couplings amongst the
participating design groups, which makes traditional design and optimization
approaches impractical.