* 9309691
* Neural Networks for Adaptive Behavior
* BIO,IOS
* 08/15/1993,07/31/1996
* Hillel Chiel, Case Western Reserve University
* Standard Grant
* Raymon Glantz
* 07/31/1996
* USD 149,093.00

9309691 Chiel In order to survive and reproduce, animals must pursue specific
goals while continuously modifying their behavior in response to changing
internal and environmental conditions. Over periods of hours or days, animals
must choose among different mutually exclusive behaviors, such as feeding or
mating. As they engage in a particular behavior over minutes or hours, they must
select among different behavioral responses in order to continue to perform that
behavior (e.g., rejecting an inedible piece of food in order to continue
feeding). They must also rapidly alter their behavioral responses within seconds
to cope with changes in the environment (e.g., biting harder on tough food).
What are the neural mechanisms underlying the ability of animals to generate
adaptive behavior? In order to address this question, the principal investigator
proposes to study a behavioral switch in the marine mollusc Aplysia californica.
Preliminary results indicate that Aplysia is capable of switching among
different behavioral responses as environmental conditions change. Specifically,
the animal can switch from ingestive to rejection responses if it attempts to
ingest inedible material. The investigator proposes to use intracellular
recording from nerve cells in vivo and in vitro (1) to identify and characterize
the properties of premotor neurons and interneurons that cause the switch in the
timing of the activity of these motor neurons, as well as (2) to identify and
characterize the properties of sensory neurons that trigger these different
patterns of activity. Using these data, he will (3) simulate and analyze the
neural network responsible for the behavioral switch. These three specific aims
will allow him to test different hypotheses about the neural organization of a
behavioral switch: is it due to dedicated neural circuits, to a distributed
neural circuit, or to circuits that have some shared and some distinct neural
elements? It will also allow him to develop a more abstract description of
behavioral switching, based on concepts from dynamical systems theory.***