* 9309258
* Collaborative Research:  Studies of Binaural Processing
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/1993,08/31/1998
* Chiyeko Tsuchitani, The University of Texas Health Science Center at Houston
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Platt
* 08/31/1998
* USD 174,736.00

9309258 Tsuchitani Hearing with two ears (binaural) is much better than with
just one (monaural) for detecting and locating sound sources, and understanding
speech in a noisy background. Within the mammalian brain, in the brainstem,
there is a structure called the superior olivary complex that is the first place
in the auditory pathway directly involved in the neural processing that
underlies binaural hearing. This complex contains nerve cells formed into groups
called nuclei. Two of these are the lateral superior olive nucleus (LSO), and
the medial nucleus of the trapezoid body. Both are part of a neural network, the
LSO network, that is specifically involved in binaural processing of mid- to
high-frequency sounds, those above 1.5kHz. This work is a collaboration between
a sensory neurophysiologist and a signal-processing theorist using an
interdisciplinary approach. Responses of neurons in the LSO network are recorded
for controlled acoustic stimuli which approximate normal "free-field" binaural
conditions, and computational models describe how these responses devleop the
neural representation of binaural signals. Signal array processing techniques
also will be used to determine the consequent contributions of the LSO network
to binaural perception. This work will have impact beyond auditory neuroscience
to sensory processing in general, to computational modelling of networks, and to
devices for aiding or enhancing hearing capabilities. ***