* 9309613
* Computational Economics with Applications to Taxation,      Industrial Organization, and Finance
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/1993,02/28/1998
* Kenneth Judd, National Bureau of Economic Research Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 02/28/1998
* USD 210,794.00

9309613 Judd The primary goal of economic policy-making is to improve the
economic well-being of all. To facilitate this, good analyses of the economic
growth process are needed. With this in mind, the investigator proposes to
continue his work on computational methods in economics with a focus on problems
of taxation, imperfect competition, and finance, and their importance in
fostering economic growth. New methods for analyzing problems in finance will be
applied, and the effects of insider trading and appropriate government policies
will be studied. In particular, the research will focus on how insider trading
affects capital accumulation and economic growth, and on how vigorously insider
trading laws should be enforced. New methods will also be used to analyze the
effects of new securities on financial markets. These methods will then be used
to study which securities should be introduced, and the results will be compared
to the securities and contracts which exchanges have incentives to introduce.
The study of imperfect competition will focus on assessing the likely importance
of tacit collusion and on evaluating various tests which have been used to
detect collusion. Different government policies such as merger and antitrust
rules will be evaluated to determine which rules are best for consumers, and
which are best for economic growth. The optimal taxation part of the research
will combine earlier work on innovation with work on factor taxation to begin a
dynamic theory of optimal taxation with public goods, patents, innovation, and
endogenous economic growth. The appropriate sharing of the tax burden between
labor and capital will be examined in light of interactions between profits,
innovation, job creation, and wages. ***