* 9309225
* RIA:  Efficient Processing of Queries in Heterogeneous      Database Systems
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/1993,08/31/1996
* Weiyi Meng, SUNY at Binghamton
* Continuing Grant
* Program Director
* 08/31/1996
* USD 98,208.00

RIA: Efficient Processing of Queries in Heterogeneous Database Systems Users
not familiar with different types of database systems (including textual
database systems) often have difficulty retrieving data stored in these
databases. One popular method is to create a global schema from the schemas of
existing databases and to allow the global schema to be queried. Each query
against the global schema needs to be decomposed into subqueries which are then
translated to queries acceptable by the corresponding underlying database
systems for data retrieval. The objective of this project is to improve the
processing speed of the global queries when using an object-oriented global
schema. The speedup is achieved by two types of optimization mechanisms. One is
built into the process of query decomposition and the other into query
translation. The optimization in query decomposition evaluates different
decomposition strategies and chooses the best strategy. The optimization in
query translation similarly evaluates different translation plans. The existence
of different types of databases requires that several translators be developed.
Relational, object-oriented and textual database systems are used as the
underlying database systems in the project. The proposed optimizations of
queries against the global schema are expected to significantly improve the
overall performance of heterogeneous database systems.