* 9309609
* RIA:  Scalable Technologies for Highly Parallel Database    Management System Implementation
* CSE,IIS
* 07/01/1993,06/30/1996
* Kien Hua, The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Continuing Grant
* Y. T. Chien
* 06/30/1996
* USD 90,000.00

RIA: Scalable Technologies for Highly Parallel Database Management System
Implementation The Federal HPCC Initiative calls for the development of scalable
parallel computing systems capable of sustaining trillions of operations per
second on very large datasets. In meeting this challenge, analytic and
experimental investigations of scalable parallel processing techniques required
for data management systems have been identified as critical needs for many
grand challenge studies. This research is aimed at studying these issues, in
particular, to investigate scalable storage structures and efficient query
processing techniques. The work involves both theoretical analysis and system
implementation. The expected results of this project include: (1) a
multidimensional distributed file structure that facilitates an efficient
environment for handling very large data sets; (2) an efficient join strategy
with dynamic load balancing capabilities for the multidimensional data
declustering environment; and (3) an effective query optimization technique that
takes the costs of load balancing into consideration. Products of this
investigation include an advanced query optimizer that serves both as a vehicle
for feasibility demonstrations, and a platform for future database machine
development. The significance of this research is in advancing the scalable
software technologies required for the implementation of large parallel database
systems. The results will have an impact on providing efficient solutions to the
grand challenge problems.