* 9309101
* Mathematical Sciences:  Model Building for Linear and Non-  linear Mixed Effects Models
* MPS,DMS
* 07/15/1993,06/30/1997
* Douglas Bates, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* James E. Gentle
* 06/30/1997
* USD 69,929.00

Mixed effects models are used with data where several observations are made on
each of several different subjects and the observations are assumed to be
generated by a model function. Some of the parameters in the model function are
assumed to be common to all subjects (fixed effects) and some vary between
subjects (random effects). The purpose of the analysis is to estimate the fixed
effects and characterize the distribution of the random effects. Linear mixed
effects models, in which all the parameters occur linearly in the model
function, provide an explicit objective function to define maximum likelihood or
restricted maximum likelihood estimates. We will investigate properties of these
estimates including the asymptotic uncorrelation of the fixed effects and the
variance-covariance of the random effects. This work includes determining
effective parameterizations of the variance-covariance of the random effects.
Using this we can assess the effectiveness of the two-stage algorithm for
nonlinear mixed effects models proposed by Lindstrom and Bates. The type of
mathematical modelling which statisticians call "mixed effects" has been widely
applied in pharmacokinetics, the study of the rate at which the body absorbs and
eliminates drugs. This statistical tool allows, a pharmacologist to build a
mathematical model of the pharmacokinetics of a drug in the "average" person,
then update that model with a few concentration measurements on a particular
person. In this way, we augment limited information on the individual with
general information about the population to establish more accurate dosage
schedules. This saves both time and money. We will be developing statistical
techniques to make the development of mixed effects models easier and more
accurate.