* 9309460
* Control of Neuronal Growth in Living Xenopus Embryos:       An In Vivo Confocal Microscopic Study
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/1993,01/31/1995
* Hollis Cline, University of Iowa
* Continuing Grant
* Christopher Platt
* 01/31/1995
* USD 74,085.00

9309460 Cline Nerve cells communicate with one another via a slender cellular
process called an axon. Each nerve cell, or neuron, has a very specific pattern
of axonal connections, and normal function of the nervous system depends on this
specific pattern of connections. Development of the proper pattern of
connections in the brain requires a precise regulation of axonal branching in
the vicinity of a neuron's target cells. The long-term goal of this project is
to identify the mechanisms that regulate axonal branching in the developing
nervous system. Recent studies show that neurons grow by the continuous addition
and retraction of branches. An increase in axonal branching, such as that
observed after activity is blocked, might occur through a decrease in the amount
of branch retraction or an increase in the amount of branch addition. To resolve
this issue, it is necessary to continuously monitor the a living axon over time.
This can now be accomplished using laser scanning confocal microscopy. This
project will determine the temporal limits for modifications of axonal structure
and test the hypothesis that blocking synaptic activity increases the rate of
branch initiation. These results will provide important new insights into the
mechanisms responsible for nerve cell form and function. *** Z \ ^ _ ` a b c d e
f g h i j k l m n o p q r s t u v w x y z { | } ~ 9309460 Cline Nerve cells
communicate with one another via a slender cellular process called an axon. Eac
h nerve cell, or n !. !. F 1 1 ( Times New Roman Symbol &amp; Arial ( ( = = ( "
h , " @ cline William Proctor, IBN William Proctor, IBN