* 9309451
* RUI:  Hormones Neurotransmitters and Behavior
* BIO,IOS
* 08/15/1993,01/31/1997
* Kenneth Renner, Missouri State University
* Standard Grant
* Kathie L. Olsen
* 01/31/1997
* USD 101,270.00

9309451 Renner Serotonin, or 5-hydroxytryptamine (5HT) is a central
neurotransmitter. This neurotransmitter has been implicated in the control of an
extremely diverse group of physiological and behavior functions including
aggression, sleep, renal regulation, pain perception, hormone secretion,
thermoregulation, motor activity, food intake, cardiovascular function and
reproduction. For example, serotonin is shown to influence female estrous
behavior possibly through its interaction with the gonadal steroids. Indeed, Dr.
Renner has demonstrated that sequential administration of estrogen and
progesterone reduce serotonin turnover in several brain regions known to be
important for the expression of reproductive behavior. He will now extend these
findings by determining the physiological relevance of ovarian effects on
serotonergic functioning. Dr. Renner will use a novel technique, in vivo
microdialysis, to pinpoint the alterations in serotonin neurotransmission that
may contribute to the regulation of reproductive behavior. Using this technique,
he will examine the relationship between estrogen and progesterone, serotonin
release, and reproductive behavior in several different brain regions in freely
moving animals. This work will help define the functional linkage between sites
within the neural network controlling reproductive behavior. Dr. Renner will
also monitor the neurochemical and behavioral effects of various pharmacological
interventions in animals primed with different regimes of ovarian hormones.
These results are likely to help unlock some of the secrets underlying the
integration of the neurochemical events by which gonadal steroid hormones induce
a behavioral response. ***