* 9309015
* RIA:  Haptic Display of Graphical Features of A Computer    Interface
* CSE,IIS
* 07/15/1993,12/31/1996
* Silvio Eberhardt, Swarthmore College
* Standard Grant
* Gary W Strong
* 12/31/1996
* USD 99,468.00

9309015 Eberhardt This is a standard award for Research Initiation to
investigate several mechanisms for haptic transmission of graphical computer
interface features, using four specially modified pointing devices. The haptic
sensory channel, which includes tactile and kinesthetic components, is capable
of receiving high information rates, as demonstrated by skills such as haptic
only speech reception and fine textural discrimination. Studies are determining
whether four haptic displays conveying (selectable) object position are capable
of improving computer productivity (such as overcoming limitations in
positioning the cursor) as measured with metrics for object acquisition and text
manipulation speeds, as well as with subjective measures. The first pointing
device considered is a mouse with onset or offset of vibro tactile stimulation
signaling whether the cursor is or not over a selected object. The second is
also a mouse but in this case its surface may be raised or not by the computer
for display of the contour of the object to which we point. The third is a
trackball with force feedback implemented via x and y directional friction
brakes, for haptic guidance towards selectable features. Finally, the fourth
device is a contour display mouse mounted on an x y table allowing user
controlled movements and force feedback via servo motors. This research sheds
light on whether force feedback aids or hinders manipulation speed, haptic
receptive capabilities, and effects of bimodal perception. The devices may be
useful also to facilitate the use of computers by individuals with impaired
vision and with neuro muscular disorders.