* 9310456
* I/UCRC Cooperative Training and Education for Life-Long     Learning
* ENG,EEC
* 05/15/1993,10/31/1994
* Charles Backus, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* alexander schwarzkopf
* 10/31/1994
* USD 25,000.00

This is a planning grant to provide support to Arizona State University to
study the feasibility of developing a new concept for bringing colleges and
universities together with industry to significantly improve on their current
separate lifelong learning efforts. This will be done through a two-pronged
approach. The first involves the co-location, perhaps at ASU Research Park, of
several industrial universities, Mesa Community College (MCC) and ASU
engineering/business professional development, and training activities in a
campus-like environment. This co-location concept has been strongly endorsed by
Motorola University and Intel University, and a steering committee has been
formed to formulate a detailed plan in physical planning, programming,
organizational structure and cost for further actions by the joint venture
partners. The second part of this two-pronged approach involves the
establishment of a Cooperative Training and Education Center for Life-Long
Learning using the NSF/IUCRC model. The purpose of this Center is to establish
an educational research and development arm to the jointly operated
infrastructure. Some specific examples of what the Center will be involved in
are: developing short-courses and training sessions to meet the industry demand;
producing new course material including software; and experimenting with new
teaching paradigms and methodologies specific to life-long learning. Faculty of
the Center will consist of faculty members of the industrial universities, a
selected group of faculty at MCC and ASU and outside contracted experts. The
Program Director recommends Arizona State University be awarded $25,000 ($12,500
co-funded by Engineering Education) for six months for this planning grant.