* 9310983
* Dissertation Research: Phylogenetic Analysis of the Snake   Family Boidae Using mtDNA Sequence Data
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/1993,07/31/1995
* Scott Davis, Texas A&M Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* B. Jane Harrington
* 07/31/1995
* USD 9,500.00

9310983 Davis The relationships among genera comprising the family Boidae (Class
Reptilia, Order Squamata, Suborder Serpentes) are not known. This is
understandable in view of the uncertainties about relationships among snake
families and even about the origins of the suborder itself. The family Boidae
contains the subfamilies Boinae, Calabariinae, Erycinae, Pythoninae and
Xenopeltinae and is defined as a monophyletic group based upon the presence of a
supraorbital bone (Underwood 1967). Several classifications of the Boidae have
been proposed, but there is no agreement on member genera, generic assignments
or relationships. Some of the difficulties arise from enigmatic taxa such as
Loxocemus and Calabaria , which present morphological characters that are
subject to multiple interpretations. This study will ameliorate some of these
problems by utilizing mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) sequence data collected by
polymerase chain reaction (PCR) amplification and nucleotide sequencing of the
ND4 subunit of the NADH dehydrogenase gene. The sequences will provide molecular
data crucial to elucidating the evolutionary history of this major vertebrate
group. Available specimens allow coverage of 95% of all genera (18 of 19) in the
family Boidae, including the problematic taxa Calabaria and Loxocemus .
Phylogenetic relationships will be inferred from the sequences using the
Phylogenetic Analysis Using Parsimony (PAUP)version 3.0, computer program
(Swofford 1991). The ND4 gene from Leptotyphlops (Family Leptotyphlopidae), the
putative sister group of the Boidae, has been sequenced for this proposal.
Additional outgroups include the moni tor lizard genus Varanus and the snake
genera Heterodon (Colubridae), Lampropeltis (Colubridae), Micrurus (Elapidae),
Ungaliophis (Tropidophidae), and Crotalus (Viperidae). Data from members of the
family Colubridae have been included in this proposal. The sequences obtained
from this study will provide a robust molecular data set whose framework will
allow construction of a classification that can be contrasted with other schemes
which are based upon more traditional characters. The molecular evaluation of
the relationships within the Boidae will contribute to the conceptual
understanding of this very successful evolutionary lineage and provide
information necessary to understanding Squamate evolution. %%% This project will
use DNA sequencing methods to obtain data that will allow the investigators to
address higher level relationships among members of the snake family Boidae.
Knowledge of these relationships will be of broader relevance or importance
because the origins and relationships of snakes, in general, are unresolved and
the subject of some controversy. ***