* 9310171
* Dissertation Research:  Systematics and Phylogeny of        Dracontium (Araceae)
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/1993,12/31/1995
* Thomas Croat, Missouri Botanical Garden
* Standard Grant
* James E. Rodman
* 12/31/1995
* USD 9,936.00

9310171 Croat and Zhu Graduate student Zhu under the supervision of Dr. Croat is
undertaking a taxonomic study of tropical aroids of the genus Dracontium, of
which there are an estimated 20 species in the New World tropics. Materials for
study include preserved herbarium specimens borrowed from various national and
international museums and supplemented with new field collections to be made in
Costa Rica, Venezuela, and Ecuador with the help of host country colleagues. New
features of morphology and anatomy including pollen and chromosomes are being
analyzed, to acquire reliable characters for taxonomic discrimination and for
construction of a stable classification of the species. Field observations on
pollination will help understand the differences in floral form among the
species. %%% Numerous groups of tropical plants are poorly known, often from
single or few collections made decades ago by various natural history
expeditions. This doctoral thesis project will focus on the New World species of
a group of tuberous aroids related to philodendrons and anthuriums, and will
result in greatly increased collections available for morphological and
biochemical studies, as well as improved methods of species recognition, a more
stable classification, and the first analysis of phylogenetic relationships
among these species and with putatively related genera.