* 9310890
* Dissertation Research: Development of a Model of Wetland    Community Structure: Experimental Testing and Evaluation
* BIO,DEB
* 07/15/1993,12/31/1995
* James Grace, Louisiana State University
* Standard Grant
* Scott L. Collins
* 12/31/1995
* USD 6,330.00

9310890 Grace The ability to predict changes over time and in response to
altered environmental conditions has become a priority in ecology. By
strengthening the link between basic and applied research, ecologists can use
information to predict future impacts of habitat alterations on biodiversity and
community structure. The research in this Dissertation Improvement grant has two
main objectives: (1) to elucidate causal processes in coastal marsh communities,
and (2) test a structural equation model that will predict several attributes of
community structure from biotic and abiotic variables. The research involves
experimental manipulations of salinity, water level, soil fertility, and
herbivory in a Louisiana coastal marsh system. Examining the responses of
communities to experimental alterations over three growing seasons will provide
evidence of the effects of different variables on community structure and
provide estimates on potential rates of change in these systems. %%% In order to
protect marshes from erosion and damage due to salt water intrusion and sea
level rise, resource managers must first know how these variables affect marsh
communities. The development and testing of a model to predict marsh community
structure will not only help preserve these threatened systems, but will move
the field of ecology closer to being a more predictive science. ***