* 9310969
* Collaborative Research: Drought in the Australian Outback:  Milankovitch and Anthropogenic Forcing of the               Australian Monsoon
* GEO,AGS
* 12/15/1993,05/31/1997
* Marilyn Fogel, Carnegie Institution of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Herman Zimmerman
* 05/31/1997
* USD 64,717.00

WPC 2 B P Z Courier 10cpi #| x w x 6 X @ 8 ; X @ HP LaserJet III HPLASIII.PRS x
@ , \ , J KX @ #| x 2 Z B " X HP LaserJet III HPLASIII.PRS x @ , \ , J KX
@Courier 10cpi CG Times (Scalable) " m + O 6 ^$(8&lt;&lt;k (((&lt;k((((&lt;&lt;&
lt;&lt;&lt;&lt;&lt;&lt;&lt;&lt;((xkx5kWLRYLGWY(/TLmYWEWP@LYWqWWN(((&lt;&lt;(5&lt
;5&lt;5(&lt;&lt;!!&lt;! &lt;&lt;&lt;&lt;,/!&lt;&lt;W&lt;&lt;55&lt;5x &lt;
&lt;&lt; &lt;&lt;&lt; ( &lt;&lt;&lt;&lt;&lt;&lt; &lt;&lt;&lt;! W5W5W5W5W5kPR5L5L
5L5L5(!(!(!(!Y&lt;W&lt;W&lt;W&lt;W&lt;Y&lt;Y&lt;Y&lt;Y&lt;W&lt;W5Y&lt;W&lt;W&lt;
W&lt;Y&lt;E&lt;W5W5W5R5R5R5R5Y&lt;L5L5L5L5W&lt;W&lt;W&lt;W&lt;W&lt;W&lt;Y&lt;Y&l
t;(!(!(!(!XC/ T&lt;L!L!L!L!L!Y&lt;YGY&lt;Y&lt;W&lt;W&lt;kWP,P,P,@/@/@/@/L!L!L!Y&
lt;Y&lt;Y&lt;Y&lt;Y&lt;Y&lt;qWW&lt;N5N5N5
Y&lt;L!Y&lt;P,@/L!W&lt;W&lt;Y&lt;W&lt;Y&lt; ( &lt;&lt; ( ((Wxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxx
xxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxNWWW&lt;
&lt;&lt;(511&lt;&lt;i&lt;&lt;&lt;kk&lt;*&lt;&lt;&lt;&lt;k* (( &gt;&gt;&lt;k
xx&lt;&lt;II x&lt;x&lt;W&lt; GddCCk (&gt; &lt; q *"xxxxWWxxx&lt;Wxx&gt;WWkkxxx
&lt;Ã•kkxxx k&lt;((xxxxxWIxkWWWWWWWWWWx(x&lt;W&lt;C&lt;kxWxP&lt;(&lt;W5&lt;EW
NxxWWWWWWWWWWxxxxx8xWWWWxxxxxxxxxxxxx xxxxxxWWxxxxxxdPI xWx xx 3G WWWW xx x xx x
WWW&lt;WWxWWxxx WW W5 WWWW5 WWWWW WWW WWW WWW WWWWWWWWWWWWWW W WWWWWW WWWWWWWW(
WWW( WWW( WWW( WWWW W W WWWW WWW WILC
ICP5L/N5Y&lt;W5(!T5PCmCY5P&lt;W5WIE&lt;I&lt; &lt;L5W5PIWC IIII/&lt;!!555I5I I II
((&lt;&lt;&lt;&lt;&lt; &lt;&lt; IIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIII///////&lt;&lt;&lt;&lt;&lt;&l
t;&lt;&lt;&lt;&lt;&lt;&lt;&lt;&lt;&lt;&lt;&lt;&lt;&lt;&lt;!!!!!!!!!!!!5555555555
555555555IIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIII( E WLY(WWI(W&lt; &lt;5( x ? x x x , x 6 X @ 8 ; X
@ g V " G ( $ , h G P 7 h P {3rC t t; F # r f3r. r F 4 N3r &lt; t &lt; t &lt; u
F 3^Y X PS2 ? 2r &lt; t u t j3 X u PL P P @ X 4rS&lt; t&gt;&lt; u 4&lt; t3 u
VF&lt; t% 2 ATM 9310969 Fogel Carnegie Institution of Washington Title: ` `
Collaborative Research: Drought in the Australian Outback: Milankovitch and
Anthropogenic Forcing of the Australian Monsoon The Lake Eyre Basin, an interior
basin covering one sixth of the Australian continent, receives the vast majority
of its precipitation from cyclonic disturbances associated with the summer
monsoon. The Australian summer monsoon is strongly influenced by the Asian
winter monsoon, the intensity of which is controlled by changes in solar
radiation caused by variations in the Earth's orbit around the sun (Milankovitch
effect). This award supports research designed 10 to develop an improved
geochronology of lake full events as a first order test of the proposition that
January insolation over the Tibetan Plateau can be as a proxy for the intensity
of the Australian monsoon; 2) to produce an independent reconstruction of
aridity for the last 150 ka across the basin, and reconstruct vegetation during
the last lake full interval (60 70 ka), using the isotopic composition of
organic and inorganic molecules preserved in ratite eggshells C (reflecting the
proportion of C 3 and C 4 plants), and 3) to test the potential impact of
vegetation change on climate by modeling the penetration of monsoonal
precipitation into the Lake Eyre Basin C T with a high resolution (3 o grid)
Global Circulation Model incorporating two different vegetation regimes.