* 9310965
* Targeted Disruption of L-Proline Transporter Gene by        Homolgous Recombination
* BIO,IOS
* 05/01/1993,10/31/1994
* Robert Fremeau, Jr., Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Comer
* 10/31/1994
* USD 48,555.00

Many of the most exciting technical advances in neurobiology have come from the
field of genetic engineering. It is now possible to selectively "knock out"
single genes and examine their effect on behavior. Knock-out mice, as they are
called, have been used to probe the circuits underlying learning and memory,
temperature adaptation, and many other behaviors. They provide highly selective
probes for elucidating the long mysterious connection between genes and
behavior. Dr. Fremeau has recently cloned the gene for a high-affinity membrane
transporter for proline. The fact that these uptake systems for proline are
found in selective populations of glutaminergic nerve terminals suggests that
proline is a novel neurotransmitter which modifies glutaminergic transmission in
some way. Since glutamate is a major transmitter in cerebral cortex and involved
in mechanisms of neuroplasticity, it is obviously of great interest to determine
proline's role in glutaminergic function. This NSF small grant for exploratory
research (SGER) will give Dr. Fremeau the chance to use genetic engineering
techniques to solve this problem. He will attempt the high-risk/high gain task
of producing a knock out mouse that lacks this membrane component. If he
succeeds it will be possible to determine the role that proline
neurotransmission plays in the development of behavior. This is the kind of
research for which the SGER was designed for there are few other funding
mechanisms for supporting research that does not have a fairly assured
payoff.***//