* 9310333
* Neurons and Neuronal Networks in the Motor System, at       Herbrew University, Jersalem, Israel, March 14-25, 1993
* BIO,IOS
* 03/15/1993,08/31/1994
* Avis Cohen, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Karen Sigvardt
* 08/31/1994
* USD 7,000.00

This is a request for support for seven students and postdocs to attend the Bat
Sheva Seminar on "Neurons and Neuronal Networks in the Motor System" at Hebrew
University, Jerusalem, Israel, from March 14-15, 1993. The motor system controls
the position of organisms and their movement in the external world by a complex
assembly of neuronal networks. Intricate motor paradigms of movements and
postural adjustments constitute almost all the behavioral patterns expressed in
our daily life. Understanding of the motor system and its neural control
mechanisms are therefore one of the most important aspects of modern
neurobiology. This seminar is aimed at studying the motor system using an
interdisciplinary research approach, starting from structural and functional
aspects of single cells in the motor system, continuing with central neuronal
networks, and ending with combined physiological and artificial intelligence
studies. This approach will provide us better understanding of mechanisms
involved in the execution of motor behavior. This seminar is an outstanding
opportunity to facilitate advances in interdisciplinary training in basic
neuroscience and motor control, and to bring together students and top-
scientists from all over the world for a period of two weeks. Previous
experience with Bat-Sheva seminars shows that it was very fruitful with good
interactions among the participants and students, and this coming seminar seems
to be more popular than the previous ones.***//