* 9310137
* Dissertation Research:  Prehistoric Subsistence and         Settlement Change in the Ohio Valley
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/1993,07/31/1995
* Robert Dunnell, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 07/31/1995
* USD 12,000.00

9310137 Dunnell Under the direction of Dr. Robert Dunnell, Ms. Diana Greenlee
will collect data for her doctoral dissertation. Her research focusses on the
period between AD 400 - 1650 in the central and upper Ohio River Valley and she
will analyze skeletal material from a series of relevant sites. During this
interval settlement in the region changed from dispersed to nucleated with the
establishment of clearly defined villages. Ms. Greenlee wishes to understand the
reasons for this and postulates that a shift to maize cultivation and a reliance
on this staple resulted in a subsistence adaptation which permitted population
aggregation. She will examine this hypothesis through utilization of bone
chemistry. Foods vary in composition and some leave chemical signatures in the
bones of consumers. Extensive research has shown that maize has a ratio of
carbon isotopes which is different from almost all naturally occurring plant
foods in the Midwest region. Through analysis therefore of this ratio in a
series of skeletal remains which span the AD 400 - 1650 time interval it will be
possible to determine if, when, and to what degree reliance on this cultigen
increased. Through analysis of elements such as strongium it is also possible to
estimate the amount of meat in the diet. Many archaeologists have noted the
pattern towards nucleated settlement which developed over time both in the
Midwest as well as in other parts of the world. This change is associated with
the development of social complexity and extensive and centrally organized
political systems. However the processes responsible for this change are still
not well understood. Archaeologists believe that changes in diet and subsistence
strategy may, in large part be responsible and Ms. Greenlee will focus directly
on this question. This research is important for several reasons. It will shed
new light on the prehistory of the United States and Native Americans. It will
increase our understanding of how soci al complexity developed and will assist
in the training of a promising young scientist. ***