* 9310503
* Dissertation Research:  Architectural Patterns and          Political Organization in the Prehistoric Southwest
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/1993,06/30/1995
* NONE NONE, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 06/30/1995
* USD 4,363.00

Under the direction of Dr. Stephen Plog, Ms. Mary Metcalf will collect data for
her doctoral dissertation. She will visit a number of archaeological
repositories in the United States and study the notes and drawings of
archaeologists who excavated prehistoric Anasazi sites in the U.S. Southwest.
The goal of this work is to understand the political and social organization of
these prehistoric peoples and the extent to which their society was organized
along egalitarian or hierarchical lines. To do this, Ms. Metcalf will work
primarily with site plans and descriptions of site architecture. She will
calculate the areal extent and number of buildings devoted to public as opposed
to family activities. She will also look at methods of construction and amount
of labor which were devoted to each. Finally she will examine the location of
public areas to determine the extent their access was restricted. A large number
of sites covering three geographical areas and spanning several hundred years
will be examined and by means of comparison Ms. Metcalf will determine how
political organization changed over time. Without writing and with a relatively
simple technology the prehistoric Anasazi peoples of the U.S. Southwest
constructed large multistory stone and adobe structures consisting of hundreds
of rooms. Their society integrated thousands of peoples and constructed roads to
move goods over long distances. They accomplished this in arid and unpredictable
environmental conditions. Archaeologists wish to understand the political and
social system which made this achievement possible. To date they do not know the
extent to which centralized political organization existed. While some
reseachers believe that this level of development can take place in a relatively
"egalitarian" context, others believe that accomplishments of this kind are not
possible in such a situation. Ms. Metcalf's research should help to answer this
question. This research is important for several reasons. It will increase our
understanding of how complex societies arise. It will provide data of interest
to many archaeologists and shed new light on one of the highpoints of Native
American culture. It will also assist in the training of a promising young
scientist.