* 9310049
* Deforestation and Carbon Cycling in Oligotrophic            Ecosystems:  The Role of Heterogeneity, Succession, and     Patchiness
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/1993,02/28/1997
* Emilio Moran, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Stuart Plattner
* 02/28/1997
* USD 190,567.00

9310049 MORAN Clearance of large tracts of tropical forests like those in the
Amazon Basin has potential impacts on many processes ranging from loss of
biological diversity to changes in atmospheric chemistry that affect global
temperature and precipitation patterns. Considerable attention has been devoted
to identifying rates and patterns of deforestation, but much less scholarly
inquiry has been given to assessing the degree to which native tree species
reestablish themselves in cleared areas. The investigative team undertaking this
research project have engaged in research on regeneration rates in two parts of
the Amazon Basin where soils are relatively rich in nutrients. This project will
expand the comparative framework for this line of research by using similar
methods to investigate three sites with soils containing fewer nutrients. Two of
the sites are in the Zona Bragantina of Brazil; the other is in the Rio Negro
Basin in Colombia. Thematic Mapper digital data from Landsat satellites will be
analyzed in concert with field-based investigations of land-use change and
management practices in the study sites to identify spatial and temporal
patterns of clearance and regeneration. This project will make contributions to
general knowledge from both substantive and methodological perspectives. It will
add to understandings about the processes of forest clearance and regeneration
in different environments, thereby providing the basis for making more accurate
regional adjustments in models of carbon exchange. It also will continue
exploration of new ways to integrate remotely sensed and ground-based data for
large areas, a methodological thrust that will enhance and expand capabilities
for data acquisition across large areas. ***