* 9310667
* Classicism, Constructivism, and Scientific                  Indispensability Arguments in Mathematics
* SBE,SES
* 07/15/1993,12/31/1996
* Geoffrey Hellman, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Edward J. Hackett
* 12/31/1996
* USD 45,000.00

9310667 Hellman How much of the apparatus of modern mathematics is really needed
for its applications in contemporary science, especially physics? Could some
smaller subset of contemporary mathematics (some of these alternatives are
finitism, constructivism, intuitionism, or predicativism). This is the central
question which Professor Hellman is addressing. He is further developing and
extending his ongoing work on the question of the scientific indispensability of
classical infinitistic (i.e. "non-constructive") mathematics and on the question
of the significance of such indispensability for the philosophy of mathematics.
The first part of his project focuses on constructivist programs, one of the
groups of alternatives to classical mathematics, and their capacity to recover
empirically significant portions of mathematics employed in the physical
sciences that appear to pose special challenges, especially the calculus of
variations and the singularity theorems (Hawking and Penrose) of space-time
physics. The second part concerns philosophically interesting intermediary
systems falling "between" (in special senses) constructivist and full classical
systems, especially the quasi-constructivism known as predicativism (originating
with Poincare and Weyl) and certain nominalistic systems. He is examining both
scientific and mathematical- philosophical challenges to predicativism with the
aim of assessing predicativism's viability as a foundational framework for
mathematics. Finally, in the third part of his study, Professor Hellman is
beginning to assess the overall scope and force of "indispensability" arguments
(as justification for abstract mathematics) in light of results of his earlier
work and also in light of recent challenges to the effectiveness and cogency of
such arguments. ***