* 9310159
* Laboratory Investigation of the Interaction of Filamentary  Currents in Space Plasmas
* GEO,AGS
* 09/15/1993,02/28/1998
* Hans Pfister, Dickinson College
* Continuing Grant
* kile baker
* 02/28/1998
* USD 49,913.00

9310159 Pfister Based on astronomical observations and the laws of physics it is
a well accepted fact that more than 99% of our universe is in the plasma state,
the fourth state of matter. Furthermore, it is believed that most of these
plasmas carry electric currents. In- situ measurements of plasmas in the earth's
ionosphere, cometary tails, and planetary magnetospheres have confirmed these
plasma currents. The recent discoveries of helical and filamentary plasma
structures in the galaxy and double-radio sources are indicative of magnetic
configurations which result from plasma currents. Also, the great majority of
laboratory plasmas (e.g. fusion research experiments such as Tokamaks, Reversed
Field Pinches, Spheromaks, etc.) are current-carrying plasma. The frequent
occurrence of plasma currents and the fact that the interaction of two current
filaments is a basic plasma physics process warrants a thorough investigation of
this mechanism, because recent experiments show that the physics of the merging
of two plasma current channels is not well understood. However, a new theory has
been proposed which challenges and extends the existing magnetohydrodynamic
(MHD) description, and therefore deserves an experimental test. This proposal is
a request for funds to do laboratory research at Dickinson College to help
clarify the physical processes occurring during plasma current merging using a
novel diagnostic method in a new plasma chamber. The technique of correlating
the probe data of localized magnetic and electric fields with the computer
controlled placement of the probe tip within the plasma volume will result in a
set of three-dimensional data that should be able to advance our knowledge of
current merging and also distinguish between theoretical predicitions of MHD
phenomena. We plan to use our experimental vacuum chamber equipped with our nw
computer-controlled probe drive diagnostic and data acquisition system to
perform a detailed investigation of plasma current channel interaction. The
initial experiment will involve the generation of a pulsed current that will
interact with the fisex axial current rod and the uniform external magnetic
field. We will observe the complex interaction of the current in this field
configuration to learn how these simplified structures behave. The next step
will be to introduce two or more pulsed current beams without any fixed current.
Finally, pulsed current beams will be injected into a pre-existing magnetoplasma
environment and we will relate all these plasma current results to both MHD and
the Salingaros fiber theory. With our new experimental apparatus, the previously
observed complexity of the interaction will be controlled and then diagnosed in
greater detail than heretofore possible, a necessary condition for a better
understanding of the physics of this universal phenomena. ***