* 9310267
* The LHRH System and Reproductive Function
* BIO,IOS
* 08/15/1993,01/31/1997
* Joan King, Tufts University
* Continuing Grant
* Kathie L. Olsen
* 01/31/1997
* USD 328,429.00

9310267 King Unlocking the mysteries of infertility will require a better
understanding of luteinizing hormone releasing hormone (LHRH), a decapeptide
responsible for the activation of the pituitary-gonadal function. Neurons in the
brain that synthesize and release LHRH are dispersed as individual cells or
small clusters of cells across broad region of the base of the brain which
includes the preoptic area and hypothalamus. Dr. King believes that the
positioning of LHRH neurons, although diffuse, are exquisitely regulated to
facilitate integration of multiple internal and external factors to synchronize
secretion and optimize reproductive success. Using a combination of anatomical,
histochemical and molecular tools, she will continue to examine the
heterogeneity of LHRH neuronal subpopulations. She will identify the specific
groups of neurons that are synthesizing LHRH at time when it is important for
the induction of ovulation. These neurons will then be reconstructed and studied
in three dimensions using computer assisted analyses. The results from these
studies will determine if a certain group of brain cells are critical to
ovulation and reproduction. Dr. King will also examine a dynamic model whereby
non-neural or glial elements influence the secretion of LHRH from ends of the
nerve cells into the blood capillaries to enhances its transport to the
pituitary gland. She will evaluate LHRH neurons/glial interactions in response
to various hormone treatments that are known to influence ovulation. This work
will significantly expand our understanding of the fine-tuning mechanism
involved in LHRH release occurring under physiological conditions. The outcome
of these studies should have critical impact on the understanding of infertility
and will serve as an impetus for its treatment. ***