* 9310479
* Dissertation Research:  Human Activity and Wildlife         Movement in the Maasai Steppe, Tanzania
* SBE,BCS
* 12/01/1993,05/31/1995
* Michael Little, SUNY at Binghamton
* Standard Grant
* Stuart Plattner
* 05/31/1995
* USD 7,502.00



Proposal Title: Dissertation Research: Human Activity and Wildlife Movement in
the Maasai Steppe, Tanzania Institution: SUNY at Binghamton PI Little / Lama
________________________________________________________________

This project supports the dissertation research of a student from the State
University of New York at Binghamton, exploring the causes behind changing land
use activities among herders and farmers in a wildlife area of Tanzania, Africa.
The project will try to understand how human activities in the wildlife area
impact on the wildlife movements (wildebeest, zebra, buffalo, elephant, giraffe,
and others), blocking them out of some areas and channeling them into others.
Using aerial photography, data from remote sensing, and ethnographic survey and
interview methods, the student will document the changes in land use in the wild
life area over time, identify the people using new land use practices, and
predict the impact of land use restrictions on human behavior and through that,
onto the area wildlife. This research is important because Africa is one of the
last areas of major wildlife forms. The shrinking areas devoted to wildlife must
be protected, but the local populations' needs for subsistence must be
understood and dealt with; otherwise any conservation plans will be frustrated.
This sort of project will produce valuable information to help planners manage
these unique and valuable resources.