* 9310151
* Structure and Chemical Interactions at Model Polymer        Interfaces
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/1993,12/31/1997
* David Allara, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 12/31/1997
* USD 309,875.00

9310151 Allara Correlations of structure and chemistry at molecular and polymer
interfaces will be generated for two types of materials systems: 1) flexible
chain molecules and polymers adsorbed as thin films at solid surfaces and 2)
inorganic films, specifically metals, deposited (in vacuo) onto molecular and
polymer surfaces. All correlations will be driven to be as quantitative as
possible by the use of well-defined substrates prepared from self-assembled
monolayers with precisely controlled arrays of selected functional groups and by
the application of advanced, quantitative characterization tools, sensitive to
molecular features at the monolayer-submonolayer level. The key concept of a
pinning lattice, defined as the specific array of sites upon which adsorption or
nucleation takes place when an interface is formed, interrelates the experiments
with the above two systems and will guide the course of this work. In the case
of flexible chain molecule adsorption, correlations will be developed which
relate the in-plane arrangements, dictated by the pinning lattice, with the
chemical bonding (potential well depth) and the associated dynamics of mobility
of the adsorption (pinning) sites with the out-of-plane structures which develop
in the adsorbed (self- assembled) chain assembly phases. These correlations will
be unified by the development of a simple theoretical framework which will focus
on attempts to describe the distribution of free volume (defect configurations).
In the case of the metal atom deposition (in-vacuo), correlations will be
developed which relate the nucleation (pinning) site (functional groups)
distributions and their chemistry (metal-organic) to the morphology of the metal
films. This particular effort will focus on experimental in-vacuo deposition
studies, monitored by insitu infrared spectroscopy, x- ray photoemission and
spectroscopic ellipsometry, but also will include limited theoretical studies in
collaboration with others. The expected outcome of the above efforts is the
development of a coherent framework, both theoretical and experimental, for
designing widely varying, precisely defined functionalized monolayers and for
understanding the adsorption/chemisorption properties over a wide range of
adsorbates from near-equilibrium molecular adsorption to highly exothermic metal
atom chemisorption. The research will be designed to efficiently relate these
results to practical materials science issues involving polymer surface and
interface properties such as adhesion and wetting and to metallization of
polymers. ***