* 9310198
* The Catalytic, Selective Partial Oxidation of Alkanes by    Transition Metals that Activate Carbon-Hydrigen Bonds
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/1993,01/31/1997
* Lawrence Kool, Boston College
* Standard Grant
* RAUL MIRANDA
* 01/31/1997
* USD 241,998.00

Lawrence Kool 9310198 This is an attempt to develop a method to convert alkanes
directly to partially oxidized products using a platinum catalyst and an aqueous
transition-metal oxidant. The approach differs from currently available methods
in that it does not require molecular oxygen. This effort includes a critical
evaluation of the platinum/aqueous ferric system covering experimental
variables, selectivity at high conversion, and elucidation of the mechanism,
which is thought to involve an alkylplatinum hydride intermediate; catalyst
support effects; substitution of palladium for platinum; the use of various
aqueous transition-metal oxidants; and the design, synthesis, and evaluation of
soluble organoplatinum complexes that may model the carbon-hydrogen bond
cleavage on the platinum surface. Direct partial oxidation of light alkanes
(methane, propane, natural gas, etc.) is an important objective of catalytic
technology; current methods are either very limited in scope or are cumbersome
multistep processes. The products of such processes, such as methanol, ethanol,
formaldehyde, acetic acid, etc., have many uses as chemical feedstocks, fuels,
or monomers, or they can be further processed to improve existing fuels.
Although there is much work toward this objective, the approach in this work is
a radical departure from conventional efforts. This is a collaboration with A.
E. Shilov at the Institute of Chemical Physics in Chernogolovka, Russia.