* 9310000
* Engineering Research Deployment Teaching Initiative:        Use of Finite Element Modeling for Undergraduate            Instruction in Manufacturing Processes
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/1993,02/28/1995
* Imtiaz Haque, Clemson University
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Kramer
* 02/28/1995
* USD 25,023.00

9310000 Haque Materials courses introduced into curricula such as Mechanical
Engineering necessarily constitute a small fraction of the total number of
topics covered and face the danger of being considered fringe courses that have
to be tolerated but not necessarily mastered by students. It is therefore
necessary to provide tools for students learning that make the contents
interesting but also involve the students in their own learning. Experiments in
materials and manufacturing are a very necessary part of this attempt but by
their very nature excludes manipulation and redesign by students. They are
typically set up by faculty and students whose understanding of the material far
exceeds the maturity and knowledge of the undergraduate student. They require
significant lead time to set up and are costly to implement. The advent of high
powered computer technologies and the development of computer simulation methods
of manufacturing processes offer great potential as tools for teaching of
undergraduates. The objective is to incorporate a finite element based
simulation package for forming processes into a senior level undergraduate
materials laboratory for enhancing undergraduate student learning of materials
and manufacturing processes. This necessitates the development of course
materials and careful design of numerical experiments that will encourage
student exploration and enhance understanding of material behavior during
forming.