* 9310702
* Particle Export Fields in the Arabian Sea Derived from      234TH: 238U Disequilibria
* GEO,OCE
* 11/01/1994,01/31/1998
* Michael Bacon, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Continuing Grant
* Donald L. Rice
* 01/31/1998
* USD 475,804.00

9310702 Buesseler One of the major research objectives of the U.S.JGOFS Arabian
Sea Process Study is measurement of the vertical and horizontal transport rates
of particulate material, especially particulate organic carbon, in the Arabian
Sea. Particle export from the surface layers of the ocean is of particular
interest because that is the zone where new biological particles are formed,
grazed, and physically altered, and then enter the decomposition cycle that
regenerates dissolved nutrients. Although some investigators will be making such
estimates by setting out open canisters at different depths and measuring the
amount of material that collects in them over time, such efforts have a number
of built-in uncertainties. The principal investigator of the present project,
will approach the problem of estimating particle export from the surface ocean
in a radically different way, on that will serve as an independent check on the
sediment trap estimates. His approach takes advantage of the fact that the
dissolved uranium in seawater decays to produce a radioactive daughter,
thoraium- 234 (half-life-24 days), which (unlike the uranium) strongly attaches
to particles. By sampling particles within and below the mixed upper water layer
and measuring their TH-234 content and using some simple mathematical models,
the investigator will be able to estimate particle from the mixed layer to
depth. By measuring carbon and nitrogen contents of these materials, he will
also be able to estimate fluxes of those two elements. A regional particulate
carbon flux picture for the Arabian Sea region will be built up by using the
data from some 25 stations collected during two monsoonal seasons (summer and
winter) and two intermonsoonal periods. ***