* 9310352
* Angiotensin II-Induced Water Absorption Behavior
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/1993,07/31/1997
* Catherine Propper, Northern Arizona University
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Platt
* 07/31/1997
* USD 183,300.00

9310352 Propper Angiotensin II is a peptide antidiuretic hormone involved in
maintaining water balance by acting both on peripheral targets to enhance water
uptake across tissues and on the central nervous system to induce drinking
behavior. Since water is essential for survival, understanding how this hormone
enhances water-absorption is of utmost importance. The mechanism, however, by
which angiotensin II acts in the brain is not well understood. While most
vertebrates have a regular and predictable water supply, desert animals live in
harsh conditions in which survival is dependent upon the ability to find, obtain
and conserve water. These species have evolved mechanisms of water retention
which allows them to survive under these uncharitable conditions. Dr. Propper
has selected two species that differ in genetic background but live within the
same austere environment. She will employ a combination of behavioral,
neuroanatomical and endocrine techniques to determine the underlying mechanisms
of Angiotensin 11 action. Dr. Propper will determine whether centrally
administering this peptide induces water absorption behavior, and whether the
behavior is blocked by antagonists to the receptor. Moreover, Dr. Propper will
localize and characterize these angiotensin II receptors in the brain. Finally,
she will determine the effects that dehydration has on central and peripheral
receptor concentrations and correlate these changes with behavior in the natural
environment. The results from this integrative work will provide new insights
into the neural mechanisms underlying angiotensin action. Furthermore, since Dr.
Propper is comparing species that differ in their genetic background, she will
discover whether similar neuroendocrine mechanisms are employed to manage water
balance in vertebrates in general. These findings may lead to a better
understanding of how the neuroendocrine basis of adaptive behavior has evolved.
***