* 9310972
* NSF-CGP Science Fellowship Program:  Parallelization and    Implementation of Production Systems on the EM-4 Data-Flow  Multiprocessor
* O/D,OISE
* 08/15/1993,11/30/1993
* Andrew Sohn, New Jersey Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Patricia Jones Tsuchitani
* 11/30/1993
* USD 12,270.00

9310972 Sohn Japan CGP Program: Parallelization and Implementation of Production
Systems on the EM 4 Data Flow Multiprocessor This award will enable Dr. Andrew
Sohn of the New Jersey Institute of Technology to conduct collaborative research
with Dr. Kenji Nishida for three months at the Computer Science Division of the
Electrotechnical Laboratory in Tsukuba, Japan. The team will investigate
parallelism in production systems and implement a parallelized system on the EM
4 data flow multiprocessor. The Japanese Ministry of Industrial Trade and
Industry currently funds a large multi institute project to develop a parallel
processing computer system. As part of this project, the Electrotechnical
Laboratory has designed and constructed four generations of experimental data
flow multiprocessing machines. The fourth generation machine, EM 4, is comprised
of 80 processors and is currently being tested by Dr. Nishida to determine
whether it can effectively and quickly execute large and realistic problems.
Utilizing Dr. Sohn's expertise in non numeric problems such as production system
interpreters, Nishida and Sohn will parallelize two types of production systems,
partition and assign the functions and data of those production systems to the
mulitprocessor, and execute the systems. The team will evaluate the performance
of the EM 4 and determine any improvements which would be needed to perform full
scale real problems on the multiprocessor.