* 9310771
* Professional Development to Promote Discovery and           Cooperative Learning
* TIP,TI
* 10/01/1993,09/30/1996
* Steven Rasmussen, Key Curriculum Press
* Standard Grant
* Sara B. Nerlove
* 09/30/1996
* USD 249,886.00

Mathematics curriculum reform has no significant effect on what and how
students learn unless classroom teachers learn about newly developed ideas and
methods and get support for integrating them into their teaching. Results of the
Phase I Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) study establish the technical
basis for a model of teacher inservice offering not only training and follow-up
but ongoing support. The results also demonstrate that there is an important
opportunity for publishers of educational materials to play a key role in
providing inservice support for their innovative materials which in turn support
adherence to the National Council of Teachers of Mathematics (NCTM) Curriculum
and Evaluation Standards for School Mathematics. The objectives of the Phase II
research focus on (1) continuing to develop and test a professional development
model; (2) extending the range of professional development workshops and
institutes both geographically and beyond its Phase I substantive focus on
geometry; (3) creating a series of videos that can be used to provide or
supplement professional development workshops; (4) starting professional
development leadership workshops cum associated materials; (5) publishing a
newsletter on professional development in secondary mathematics for workshop
leaders, teachers, and mathematics supervisors; and (6) disseminating findings
from Phases I and II. The project aims to prepare large numbers of teachers to
use innovative materials effectively; to apply its inservice mode in more
schools in a variety of settings (urban, suburban, rural); to propagate the
successful professional development mode to other areas of mathematics
education: problem solving, calculus, the core mathematics curriculum, and
probability and statistics; to disseminate inservice economically and
profitably, to research ways technology can be employed; and to promote
effective integration of innovative technology tools such as computer software
and graphing calculators into mathematics teaching. The project will contribute
to the facilitation of sound curriculum change based on the premise that
teachers are the key to producing change in the classroom and professional
development is the key to reaching teachers with new ideas, content, methods and
materials.