* 9310731
* Structure and Function of Binding Regions in Ng-CAM
* BIO,IOS
* 09/15/1993,02/28/1997
* Martin Grumet, New York University Medical Center
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Platt
* 02/28/1997
* USD 150,342.00

9310731 Grumet Ng-CAM is a neuronal cell adhesion molecule (CAM) that is a
potent promoter of cell adhesion and axon growth. An Ng-CAM molecule on one cell
can bind to another Ng-CAM molecule on an adjacent cell (homophilic binding).
Ng-CAM can also bind to other cell surface proteins. The goal of this project is
to identify regions in the Ng-CAM molecule that mediate homophilic binding. To
identify regions in Ng-CAM that mediate homophilic binding, established assays
will be used to test the properties of Ng-CAM polypeptides representing
different regions of the molecule. Different regions of Ng-CAM will be generated
either by genetic engineering or by cleaving the native protein into small
subunits. Various regions within the molecule will be tested for their ability
to bind to intact Ng-CAM and eventually for binding to fragments of the
molecule. Neuronal adhesion and axon growth to surfaces coated with the various
forms of Ng-CAM will then be measured. Identification of homophilic binding
region(s) in Ng-CAM is an essential foundation for analyzing molecular
interactions that mediate or control neuronal adhesion and axon growth. These
studies will therefore allow a better understanding of the types of molecular
interactions that control key aspects of brain development. *** %T%U%V%W%X%Y%Z%
%\% %^%_%`%a% c% f%g%h%i%j%k%l%m%n%o%p%q%r%s%t%u%v%w%x%y%z%{%|%}%~% % % % % % %
% % % % % % % % % % % % % % % % % % % % % % % % % % % % % % % % % % % % % % % %
% % % % % % % % % % % % % % % %9310731 Grumet Ng-CAM is a neuronal cell adhesion
molecule (CAM) that is a potent promoter of cell adhesi on and axon growth ! ! !
F % % ( Times New Roman Symbol & Arial # # # " h A grumet William Proctor, IBN
William Proctor, IBN