* 9310544
* Experimental and Numerical Investigation of Diamond-Like    Carbon Film Deposition Processes
* ENG,CMMI
* 04/01/1994,09/30/1998
* Young Lee, Drexel University
* Continuing Grant
* Delcie R. Durham
* 09/30/1998
* USD 280,003.00

Farouk 9310544 The study addresses the fundamental mechanisms affecting the
deposition of diamond-like carbon (DLC) films by the plasma assisted chemical
vapor (PACVD) process. The study will combine state-of-the-art experimental
techniques and detailed numerical modeling of the process. Successful completion
of the research will lead to the development of effective synthesis and
characterization of DLC films produced by the PACVD process. A primary objective
of the project is to develop a commercially viable coating process for
depositing stress-free diamond-like thin films with a high process
reproducibility on various substrates. Experimental investigations will include
in-situ monitoring and control of the PACVD processes in a reactor. An advanced
in-situ monitoring instrumentation package will be used to measure the key
physico-chemical parameters of the plasma and the properties, stoichiometry and
the stress in the film. Comprehensive numerical modeling of the process will
include the consideration and interaction of the electron kinetics in the
reactor, plasma chemistry of a methane based deposition system and surface
reactions that affect the deposition process. The extensive measurement
capabilities will provide an adequate data base for the validation and
improvement of the model. Using the diagnostic capabilities and the detailed
numerical model, a set of robust process parameters will be developed for scaled
up industrial reactors for DLC film deposition.