* 9310494
* RUI: The Origins of Children's Spatial Semantic Categories; A Cross-Linguistic Study of English, Korean, and Dutch
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/1993,08/31/1996
* Soonja Choi, San Diego State University Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Paul G. Chapin
* 08/31/1996
* USD 160,737.00

9310494 Choi According to a widespread view, children initially map spatial
words onto spatial concepts established through nonlinguistic sensorimotor
development--for example, IN to a notion of containment and ON to notions of
contact and support. If this cognitivist view is correct, the meanings children
initially associate with spatial words should be similar regardless of input
language. The project will evaluate this hypothesis by comparing the meanings
associated with spatial words by one- to three-and-a-half-year old children
learning English, Dutch, and Korean, three languages that classify spatial
relations in strikingly different ways. Two cross-sectional studies are
proposed. In a production experiment, topological spatial action descriptions
are elicited in a naturalistic setting with familiar objects. In a comprehension
study, sensitivity to language-specific topological distinctions are assessed
with the "preferential looking paradigm", a technique that is minimally
demanding and hence ideal for young children. The data will be analyzed (1) to
determine how early children develop language-specific principles of
categorizing spatial actions, and (2) to assess, through analysis of correct and
incorrect patterns of generalization, the relative difficulty for children of
alternative principles of spatial classification. The results will contribute
toward a clearer picture of the interaction in early language development
between children's nonlinguistic grasp of spatial relations and their
sensitivity to the semantic categories of the input language. 5p0 6hC 6fC3 P d
;4 3 P 6hC | & 7 6h CP &+p0 P x ! ! F D D ( Times New Roman Symbol & Arial " h H
EP E A abstract Deidre Renee Burton Deidre Renee Burton