* 9310715
* Collaborative Research:  Climate Diagnostics and            Predictions Using Nonlinear Empirical Models
* GEO,AGS
* 12/01/1993,11/30/1996
* James Elsner, Florida State University
* Continuing Grant
* Jay S. Fein
* 11/30/1996
* USD 99,500.00

ATM-9310715 Elnser, James B. Florida State University Title: Climate Diagnostics
and Predictions Using Nonlinear Empirical Models ABSTRACT This project's main
objectives are to develop and test nonlinear statistical models for climate
diagnostics and for climate predictions. The methodologies to be applied, based
on artificial neural networks and local-approximation models, have been
developed recently in the emerging fields of deterministic chaos and parallel
distributed processing. The goal is to achieve skillful models of sea surface
temperature (SST) anomalies on seasonal to interannual time scales for both the
Pacific and Atlantic basins and, through prediction, to enhance understanding of
the processes involved. Climate variability on the seasonal to interannual time
scale is strongly related to ENSO. Recent research suggests that ENSO, primarily
a Pacific signal, can be considered as a low-dimensional chaotic system. In
addition, the Atlantic region also has major climate variations shown in
atmospheric and oceanic data. Predictions of both ENSO and Atlantic oscillations
will be attempted by applying the nonlinear statistical modeling techniques
developed for the prediction of chaotic system behavior. The performance of
several nonlinear statistical models will be validated and optimized through
hindcast experiments with data sets from as early as 1950. The absolute
verification experiments will be hindcasts of ENSO SST events in the period of
1985-1990, as established by the Working Group of the TOGA Program on Seasonal
to Interannual Prediction (T-POP). The algorithms developed, particularly those
for the Connection Machine, are based on new modeling techniques and will be
made readily available to the meteorological and oceanographic communities.