* 9310431
* Hydrothermal Synthesis of Novel Solid-State Ternary and     Quaternary Metal Telluride Compounds
* MPS,DMR
* 12/15/1993,05/31/1996
* Jing Li, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* David Nelson
* 05/31/1996
* USD 42,000.00

9310431 Li The proposed work is a Research Planning Grant for Women Scientists
and Engineers. It is concerned with plans and approaches in the preparation,
crystallization and structure characterization of novel solid-state ternary and
quaternary metal telluride compounds employing hydrothermal synthesis. Initial
studies will focus on the preparation of precursors, largely the binary alkali-
metal polytellurides that are to be used both as reactants and mineralizers. In
subsequent hydrothermal reactions, additional metals or metal complexes will be
selected for reaction with the precursors, leading to the desired ternary or
quaternary phases. Recent work on the solid-state ternary transition metal
tellurides has revealed a number of unusual structural features leading to
interesting magnetic and electric behaviors exhibited by these compounds. Most
of them adopt unique low dimensional (chain or layer) structures. Many contain
extended metal networks with strong metal-metal bonding. An increasing interest
in the studies of the tellurides has been exhibited in the last few years, and a
great potential exists for synthesis of novel telluride materials with useful
properties and applications. Most known solid-state telluride compounds have
been prepared at high temperatures, and little has been explored in the lower
temperature regime. The need to develop low temperature synthetic techniques is
apparent. Hydrothermal synthesis has been proved to be an important and
promising method of relatively low-temperature synthesis and crystal growth. It
has been widely used and is finding increasing applications in solid state
chemistry and material science. While numerous novel molecular and extended
systems, such as zeolites, quartz, transition metal phosphates, oxides, and main
group sulfides, have been synthesized or crystallized utilizing this
technique,including the recent success in the synthesis of several early and
late transition metal polyselenides, vi rtually no work has been conducted on
the solid- state telluride compounds. ***