* 9310033
* Network Analysis of Kinship, Social Transmission and        Exchange:  Cooperative Research at UCI/UNI Cologne/Paris    CNRS
* SBE,BCS
* 09/15/1993,12/31/1995
* Douglas White, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Raymond B. Hames
* 12/31/1995
* USD 47,793.00

WPC 2 B P V ` Courier 10cpi | x ? x x x , k x 6 X @ 8 ; X @ senior abstract
Raymond Hames Raymond Hames white abstract networks white # 2 3 ' 3 ' 3 ' 3 ' 4
&lt; D L ! 3 ' 3 ' 3 ' 3 ' 3 ' 3 ' 3 ' 3 ' 3 ' 3 ' 3 ' 3 ' ! # x \ P C X P#
Kinship and marriage networks are of central concern to American, British,
French, and German anthropology since these networks are involved in the
formation of basic social, political, and economic institutions. With the
collaborative development of mathematical anthropology here and on the continent
the invesitgators will be able to: (1) complete of a set of user friendly c
omputer programs for data entry and dynamic and static analyses of kinship and
marriage networks; (2) start a crosscultural data base of kinship networks; and
(3) participate in series of colloborative workshops, funded, in part by the
German Humboldt Foundation, where major European and US researchers will solve
basic methodological and theoretical issues in network analysis applied to
kinship problems. The approach is comprehensive in its potential for
representing and analyzing a great variety of kinship structures and related
processes, and focuses on scientific studies of social order and change,
involving new methods of discrete structural analysis and graphic techniques of
resenting data and findings. *** # x \ P C X P#