* 9310056
* The Dynamics of Representation:  The Public, Politics, and  Budgetary Policy
* SBE,SES
* 07/15/1993,06/30/1995
* Christopher Wlezien, University of Houston
* Standard Grant
* Frank P. Scioli  Jr.
* 06/30/1995
* USD 21,331.00

This research investigation focuses on the interrelationship between public
opinion and policy over time. While a lot is known about whether public opinion
influences policy, little is known about whether the public is itself responsive
to policy behavior, adjusting its preferences for policy activity in response to
what policymakers acutally do. A responsive public would effectively behave like
a thermostat, where a deaprture from the favored policy temperature produces a
signal to adjust policy accordingly and, once sufficiently adjusted, the signal
stops. This research investigation considers whether the public behaves
thermostatically, and relies primarily on statistical analyses of budgetary
policy and public preferences for spending over time, across a range of budget
opinion domains. The research addresses both the influence of public preferences
for more spending on budgetary policy and the influence of those decisions, in
turn, on public preferences. Preliminary analysis suggests that there are strong
reciprocal connections between public inputs into the policymaking process and
the outputs the process generates. In its simplest sense, when the public wants
more spending it gets more, and when it gets more it doesn't want as much more.
This research produces important insights in the public policy/public opinion
interrelationship.