* 9310083
* Problems in Gravitation (Physics)
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/1993,07/31/1999
* Richard Matzner, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* Richard Isaacson
* 07/31/1999
* USD 736,000.00

9310083 Matzner A study will be performed of relativistic systems, especially as
applied to the interaction of black holes, cosmology and the formation of the
elements in cosmology, and to tests of General Relativity in near Earth
experiments. The black hole and cosmological studies will be primarily
numerical. In order to predict the expected gravitational wave signals in the
LIGO detector, the orbital dynamics and merger of astrophysical black holes will
be numerically simulated. A number of techniques, including adaptive multigrid
finite differencing will be employed (Adaptive multigrid permits arbitrarily
fine resolution at important points in the simulation). Obtaining useful signal
predictions from black hole evolution requires extremely high accuracy in the
numerical development. The codes will be implemented on massively parallel
computers (such as the Thinking Machine CM 5) which have the memory and the
computing power to handle these large scale simulations. The end product will be
a catalog of wave forms, relevant to producing appropriate detection algorithms
for LIGO. This waveform catalog in particular will allow extraction of binary
orbital information as well as of the black hole characteristics before and
after merger of the two holes. Cosmological studies will concentrate on the
formation of elements in the early universe, particularly in maintaining and
upgrading existing computer codes at Texas. Areas to be emphasized will be newly
measured nuclear reaction rates, the extension of nuclear reaction chains to
include heavier elements, the refinement of numerical techniques in these codes,
and the porti ng of the nucleosynthesis codes to large parallel machines. Other
aspects of cosmology to be studied include the formation of structure in the
early universe and the implementation of computer codes accurately describing
it; and the statistics of gravitational lensing, (multiple images of distant
QSOs caused by an intervening cluster of galaxies), and models of gravitational
lenses. ***