* 9310787
* Carnegie-Rochester Conference on Public Policy to be held   at Carnegie Mellon University at the University of          Rochester
* SBE,SES
* 12/15/1993,05/31/1998
* Charles Plosser, University of Rochester
* Continuing Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 05/31/1998
* USD 225,000.00

9310787 Plosser The Carnegie-Rochester Conference on Public Policy is designed
to foster research and discussion of major policy issues by economists from
academia and policy making institutions. Economists in universities are often
unfamiliar with the constraining effect of institutional arrangements in the
shaping of policy issues and policies and economists in government are often
less aware of current research and its implications. A central purpose of the
conference is to provide the interaction between these groups in order to
improve the economic analysis of policy issues and policy. The specific aims of
the conference are to: 1) develop the implications of recent research for
policy; 2) bring together economists with different approaches or conclusions to
narrow the differences; and 3) to uncover the analysis used by institutions that
set policies. The conferences are held semi-annually at the University of
Rochester and Carnegie Mellon University. About 40 participants plus faculty and
graduate students from the host institutions are invited to each conference.
Participants from U.S. and foreign central banks and U.S. and international
agencies attend regularly. Special care is taken to involve promising younger
scholars. The paper and formal discussions are edited and prepared for
publication to broaden the impact of the conference. ***