* 9310277
* Modulation of Ion Channel Expression and Ion Channel        Activity in Astrocytes
* BIO,IOS
* 08/15/1993,01/31/1995
* Harald Sontheimer, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* None
* 01/31/1995
* USD 60,770.00

WPCZ 2 B P Z Courier 10cpi #| p Sj x 6 X @ 8 ; X @ HP DeskJet 500 HPDES500.PRS
x @ x X , , 0 FX @ #| p 2 B Z ^ CG Times 12pt CG Times 6pt HP DeskJet 500
HPDES500.PRS X p P rk ; x X , , 0 FX P " m o 8 ; ^&lt;D\dd DDDd DDDDddddddddddDD
X | |x DL | t l| DDDddDXdXdXDdd88d8 ddddHL8dd ddXXdXd d ddDDddd D d d d X X X X
X X|X|X|X|XD8D8D8D8 d d d d d d d d d d X d d d d dtd X X X X X X X d|X|X|X|X d
d d d d d d dD D D8D L d|8|8|8|8|8 d t d d d d H H HlLlLlLlL|8|8|8 d d d d d d d
X X X d|8 d HlL|8 d d d d d D/ N d ddDXPPdd ddd dHdddd H d x H d h 1D DD x dp d
x d x X L p x xdx X x x xL xxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxLLLLLLL x " m o 8 ; ^
$040XP$$$0X$$$$4444440444$$dXd,XH@DL@&lt;HH (H@XHH&lt;HD8&lt;HH`HH@
$$44$,4,0,$04 4 P4044$$ 40H40,,4,4 4 04$$044 $ 4 4 4 H,H,H,H,H,XDD,@,@,@,@,
H4H0H0H0H0H4H4H4H4H0H,L0H4H0H0L084H,H,H,D,D,D,D,L0@,@,@,@,H0H0H0H0H0H0H4H4 ( H4@
@ @ @ @ H4H&lt;H4H4H0H0 D$D$D$8$8$8$8$&lt; &lt; &lt; H4H4H4H4H4H4`HH0@,@,@, L0@
H4D$8$&lt; H0H0L0H0H4 $/ddddddddddddddddddddddddddddddddddddddddddddddddN d0
44$,((40X444XX4$0440X$ d d 4 &lt; $ ddddHHddd4Hd 4LHXXdd1$Xdd $$X dd dd d
&lt;dXHHHHHHHHHH H48 X 0 HH &lt; 4 &lt; , ( H 8 &lt; &lt;4&lt; 0 D&lt; &lt;
&lt;( &lt;&lt;&lt;&lt;&lt;&lt;&lt;&lt;&lt;&lt;&lt;&lt;&lt;&lt;&lt;&lt;&lt;&lt;&l
t;((((((( &lt; 2 X F ` X c 8 p C &lt; , W X p P rk ; X P H 8 ! , , 8 P k ; , P D
D D D X D 6 Ã• _^ZY X ') P ') = s j tS : X P u ~ X PSQVU tA *. IP : C~ s ~ OS :s
^ } C~ K~ 9310277 Sontheimer Early physiological studies of glial cells did not
detect voltage and time-activated ion channels in glial cells; however, more
recent cell culture studies demonstrate that astrocytes can express Y a variety
of ion channels, including voltage activated Na + , K + , and Ca 2+ channels,
previously thought to be restricted to neurons. In contrast to neurons, these
channels are not involved in cell-cell signaling but are important in
maintaining ion homeostasis in the brain. Voltage-activated channels have been
described in astrocytes from numerous CNS regions and those studies revealed a
significant degree of heterogeneity. However, in all those previous studies
little attention has been paid to the question of whether the cells'
microenvironment influences the expression and/or activity of astrocyte ion
channels. Since astrocytes in the intact CNS are always surrounded by other
cells, particularly neurons, and are exposed to different extracellular milieus,
it is important to understand how such factors influence astrocyte physiology.
The proposed project is designed to study factors that modulate ion channel
activity in astrocytes. It has been widely reported that ion channels expressed
in excitable cells contain kinase phosphorylation sites, and that activation of
protein kinases can directly modulate channel activity. It is proposed to study
whether protein kinase mediated phosphorylation can also influence ion channel
activity in astrocytes. The two most prominent protein kinases known to Y K
modulate ion channels, cAMP-dependent protein kinase (PKA) and Ca 2+ -depen dent
protein kinase (PKC), can be selectively stimulated by neuroactive compounds,
such as the activation of beta-adrenergic receptors by epinephrine which
stimulates PKA activity. Dr. Sontheimer will utilize a number of well-
characterized activators and inhibitors of PKA and PKC, as well as specific
neuroligands known to stimulate these second messenger pathways. These studies
will pay particular attention to the effects of these agents on astrocyte ion
channels that have been Y demonstrated to play key roles in maintaining K +
homeostasis in the CNS, such as K + channels Y and Na + channels, which serve as
a vital return pathway for Na + /K + ATPase. ***