* 9310165
* The Preservation and Accumulation of Biogenic Silica and    Organic Carbon in an High-Latitude Environment:  The Ross   Sea
* O/D,OPP
* 06/01/1993,05/31/1995
* Charles Nittrouer, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Bernhard Lettau
* 05/31/1995
* USD 108,098.00

This project is the renewal of a study of the rates of deposition, seabed
regeneration, and sediment accumulation of biogenic silica and organic carbon in
the Ross Sea, and is part of a coordinated study of the biogenic silica and
organic carbon cycling in the water column and the sediments of the Ross Sea.
The antarctic deep sea and continental shelf environment is the major repository
for silica accumulation in the global ocean, and dominates the global silica
budget. The Ross Sea is a particularly anomalous area in which large amounts of
biogenic silica are accumulating in modern sediments, while the surface
production rates are generally below the global average. Moreover the usual
similarity between the oceanic silicon and carbon cycle does not appear to hold
around Antarctica, and the two cycles are decoupled in that the rate of
particulate carbon deposition in the modern sediment is very low. The overall
project is an integrated study of the production, vertical transport,
dissolution, and deposition processes, using moored instrumentation and direct
observations in a series of transects in the Ross Sea by R/V POLAR DUKE, carried
out between 1989 and 1991. In this project, box cores, piston cores, and kasten
cores were collected along specific transects in the Ross Sea that included both
silica-rich and silica-poor sediments. Based on carbon-14 chronologies and
seabed analyses of biogenic silica and organic carbon content, three sites with
accumulation rates differing by several orders of magnitude have been
identified. At these sites large differences in seabed preservation efficiency
exist for both biogenic silica and organic carbon. This renewed effort will be
concerned with further analysis of data from the two cruises, including seabed
regeneration rates, carbon-14 sediment chronologies, and horizontal
transportation rates for biogenic material in the water column, and to integrate
these results with production and vertical transport studies being completed by
other cooperating investigators.