* 9310932
* Engineering Research Equipment:  A Photon Counting          Spectrofluorometer for Studies in Materials Processing and  Bioscience
* ENG,CBET
* 09/15/1993,05/31/1997
* Maria Santore, Lehigh University
* Standard Grant
* Charles Alexander Garris, Jr.
* 05/31/1997
* USD 48,780.00

9310932 Santore This research equipment grant (REG) project provides in part for
the purchase of a high resolution photon counting spectrofluorometer (Spex FL
112) and for the materials for home- built accessories are requested. The
instrument's main role will be in the development of novel probes and
experimental techniques for advanced materials processing and biosciences;
however, it will also facilitate workhorse fluorescence assays for students in
Chemical Engineering, Molecular Biology, Emulsion Polymers Institute, Polymer
Interfaces Center, and the Center for Molecular Biology and Biosciences. Novel
probe development requires an internal sample cell, the construction of a total
internal reflection shear cell, and an optical interface to external
experiments. These configurations have been designed for rapid interchange,
facilitating several projects in the immediate future: (1) Development of non-
radiative energy transfer (NET) to probe the evolution of segment-surface
contacts and provide insight into the molecular mechanisms for adsorption and
desorption of polymers. (2) Development of a spectroscopic pH-ruler to monitor
slow relaxations of adsorbed polymers. (3) Development of a homogeneous
immunoassay relying on a quenching mechanism and comparison of this assay to one
exploiting polarization. (4) Studies of enzyme adsorption and activity changes
on hydrophobic surfaces. (5) Solution structures of hydrophobically-modified
comb polymers and their impact on rheology and (6) The effect of swelling, ion
and water transport, and physical aging on the mechanical properties of films on
rigid substrates.