* 9310506
* Electric Field Induced Phase Transitions of Polymer         Solutions and Mixtures
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/1993,07/31/1997
* Gerald Fuller, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* Robert M. Wellek
* 07/31/1997
* USD 197,507.00

9310506 Fuller The morphology and phase behavior of polymer mixtures can be
influenced by the application of external fields. This research examines the
manipulation of polymer mixture morphology by the use of electric fields.
Preliminary results on polymer solutions are offered that demonstrate a variety
of new phenomena, such as electric field-induced de-mixing and re- mixing of
polymer mixtures. These results suggest the possibility of systematically
controlling the interfacial properties of polymer blends, and the manipulation
of their domain structure. Such control could be used in the processing of
polymer mixtures to arrive at specific bulk material properties and improve
interfacial mixing. The research extends these preliminary results to include
polymer blends and polymer gels. In addition, both upper and lower critical
solution temperature systems will be examined, since the specific shape of the
phase boundary is predicted to determine whether application of an electric
field will cause either de-mixing (UCST systems) or re-mixing (LCST systems).
Finally, the project considers the simultaneous application of electric and
hydrodynamic fields, since real processes normally include the presence of flow.
Since hydrodynamic forces are also known to affect the phase behavior of polymer
liquids, a nonlinear coupling of the effects of electric and flow fields would
be expected. The research combines experimentation and theory. Small angle light
scattering and scattering dichroism are used to measure the structure of polymer
mixtures subject to external flow fields Both experiments methods provide
measures of anisotropy in concentration fluctuations and can be used in situ.
The theoretical analysis utilizes current mean field approaches whereby the
dynamics of concentration fluctuations can be expressed in terms of the relative
importance of fluxes due to the external fields and relaxation mechanisms
arising from osmotic forces. ***