* 9310459
* Workshop on Geographic Contributions to Global Change       Research:  Atlanta, Georgia; April 1993
* SBE,BCS
* 03/15/1993,08/31/1994
* Ronald Abler, Association of American Geographers
* Standard Grant
* Daniel B. Hodge
* 08/31/1994
* USD 25,324.00

As research on global change has evolved in recent years, the need for greater
understanding of the complex interactions among human and natural systems has
become increasingly apparent. Because of long-standing interests and expertise
in the analysis of human-environmental interactions at a variety of scales,
geographers have been especially well suited to play central roles in the
development and conduct of research on the human and other dimensions of global
change. While a significant number of geographers have stepped forward and
turned their scholarly attention to this important topic, many other geographers
have not recognized the potential for using their conceptual frameworks and
research approaches to address these important problems. This award will provide
support for a workshop on geographic contributions to global change research.
The workshop will be held in Atlanta, Georgia, in early April 1993, immediately
prior to the start of the Annual Meeting of the Association of American
Geographers (AAG), the largest professional society of research-oriented
geographers in the U.S. This workshop marks a critical stage in joint work that
has been conducted by AAG leaders together with NSF Geography and Regional
Science Program officers. Geographers who have been leading researchers on
topics related to the human dimensions of global environmental change will
assist AAG leaders and NSF program officers in the selection of roughly 50
participants and in the conduct of the conference. The workshop will consist of
a series of working-group discussions interspersed among plenary sessions at
which all participants will meet to consider salient points raised in their
group discussions. The outcome of the conference will be a number of articles in
widely disseminated publications of the AAG and its specialty groups. These
articles should help identify important lines of inquiry to be pursued by
geographers in one or more of three general approaches. Another outcome of the
workshop should be new knowledge by NSF program officers of research needs that
must be addressed in order to stimulate greater involvement of geographers in
basic and applied inquiries into the human and other dimensions of global
change. This workshop should facilitate the more active involvement of
geographers in research on global change by identifying ways that current
theoretical frameworks and methodological approaches can be adapted to address a
variety of problems. The workshop also should assist NSF program officers in
determining new strategies that the foundation might use to facilitate and
support basic research by geographers and other spatially oriented scientists on
this critical topic.