* 9310537
* Dissertation Research:  Contested Terrain:  Gender and      Labor Dynamics in Horticultural Contracting, Meru, Kenya
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/1993,01/31/1995
* Peter Little, SUNY at Binghamton
* Standard Grant
* Raymond B. Hames
* 01/31/1995
* USD 5,042.00

Little/Dolan 9310537 The recent and widespread growth of contract farming in
East Africa has the potential to fundamentally alter the division of labor and
power relations between men and women. This project will examine how the
institution and expansion of horticultural contracting is changing gender
relations in Meru District, Kenya. Because gender relations are redefined in the
face of shifting economic relations, the delineation of power relations and
social divisions based on the traditional household is key to an analysis of
contract farming. In some areas the participation of women in contract farming
has provoked intra-household struggles over labor rights and resource
allocation. While a small number of contracting schemes in Kenya have been
intensively researched there are virtually localized analyses that examine
contract production from either a household or gender perspective. Moreover,
although research on the connection between gender-based crop and property
rights has been extensive in West Africa, it is largely absent in East Africa.
This gap provides a fertile opportunity for an in-depth local study on the
interface of gender relations and contract production in Kenya that will provide
valuable data for comparative studies of agrarian change in Africa. This project
will synthesized various methods of inquiry-feminist anthropology, political
economy and practice theory - to integrate symbolic and materialist approaches
to social change. Significant questions to be addressed include: 1) how do
socioeconomic conditions enable or constrain indigenous gender relations? 2) To
whom are the ben efits of contract farming accruing? 3) Is there a change in the
sexual division of labor of subcontracting? 4) How are customary social
practices manipulated or recast in the context of contract farming? 5) How do
indigenous gender ideologies affect the reproduction of contract farming as both
a social institution and a means of capital accumulation? *** s( t( gh their
RTG's. I assume you already know of the regular NSF Graduate Fellowship program
that supports graduate study in all sciences as well as history and Z a S X Z !
! f ? Z a Z L Times New Roman Symbol & Arial & Lucida Sans Bookman Old Style z z
| | z c " h ) @ g little dolan abstract abstract thesis abstract little dolan
Raymond Hames Raymond Hames