* 9310326
* Applications of High Performance Matrix-                    Assisted Laser Desorption Mass Spectrometry (MALD)
* TIP,TI
* 09/01/1993,02/29/1996
* John Chakel, Charles Evans & Associates
* Continuing Grant
* Darryl G. Gorman
* 02/29/1996
* USD 299,937.00

9310326 Chakel This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II project
deals with the development and applications of high resolution, high mass-
accuracy matrix-assisted laser desorption mass spectrometry (MALD). Both high
resolution and high mass accuracy have been demonstrated in the Phase I project
on a novel triple electrostatic sector time-of-flight mass spectrometer. Many
biochemical techniques such as peptide mapping require accurate mass assignments
to identify various proteolytic fragments. These fragments can be rapidly and
unambiguously identified in a single MALD experiment. The Phase II research will
develop innovative methods for achieving routine high mass resolution and
accuracy measurements of biomolecules. Specific applications illustrating the
power of the MALD technique for accurate biomolecule analysis will be developed.
The inherent sensitivity, speed of analysis and simplicity of MALD analyses will
provide major advantages in applications of immediate and valuable use to the
clinical and biological research communities. %%% This SBIR Phase II project
will continue the advances initially started in the Phase I project. An
important goal of the SBIR Program is the ultimate conversion of NSF-supported
research into technological innovation and commercialization. ***