* 9310557
* Analysis of Organizational Structure and Gender             Stratification
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/1993,08/31/1996
* Kevin Leicht, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Shelton White
* 08/31/1996
* USD 115,000.00

9310557 LEICHT One of the most important developments in the workplace over the
past twenty years has been the movement of large numbers of women into
professional work. This has occurred in a context of growing dissatisfaction
with differences in professional opportunities available to men and women in
bureaucratic organizations. In spite of the public recognition this problem has
received, there has been little systematic study of careers among male and
female professionals and little understanding of when and how the careers of
male and female professionals diverge. This project will provide answers to
fundamental questions regarding gender stratification among professionals, such
as the processes that lead male and female professionals to change jobs and the
labor market forces that lead them to accept positions in corporations with
different characteristics. This information will be of vital importance for
understanding workplace discrimination in a context of expanding opportunities
for women in the professions. The study examines the growth and divergence of
opportunities for professional men and women by studying career development
within corporate legal departments in large U.S. corporations. The project will
be conducted in two phases. The first phase will attempt to determine what
characteristics of corporations and legal departments lead to high
concentrations of women within certain departments and job titles. The second
phase of the project will look at factors affecting job changes among individual
department members, focusing on the effects of early career events on the
movements of male and female professionals. The data for this project will be
taken from successive waves of the Law and Business Directory of Corporate
Counsel (1980-1992) and be supplemented with corporation level information
provided by other published sources. ***