* 9310755
* Remote Sensing Fundamentals and Applications, Second U.S.-  India Symposium and Workshop, Bombay, India, 1994, Award    in U.S. and Indian Currencies
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/1994,12/31/1996
* Homer Hiser, University of Miami
* Standard Grant
* Marjorie Lueck
* 12/31/1996
* USD 41,091.00

9310755 Veziroglu Description: This project supports a second "U.S.-India
Symposium-Workshop on Remote Sensing Fundamentals and Applications", to be held
in Bombay, India, in late 1994. The first meeting was held in March 1985, and,
since then, major developments have taken place in the field of remote sensing.
Sessions planned include: design and development of active and passive, surface
airborne and spacecraft remote sensing systems; satellite receptions and data
processing; remote sensing data processing; data archiving and retrieval;
meteorological and hydrological applications; agricultural and forestry
applications; oceanographic, fishing and aquaculture applications; land use and
geographic applications; geology and mineral resources; remote sensing applied
to energy and fuels problems; pollution and waste heat monitoring; remote
sensing for the commercial and private sector; government's role in remote
sensing; space shuttle remote systems and results; and remote sensing education.
Scope: The proposed meeting will be open to scientists from many countries in
South Asia and the Middle East, in addition to the main participants from India
and the U.S. The lecture texts of the invited lecturers will be published before
the Symposium-Workshop. The Workshop reports will be published as one volume
after the meeting and will be made available to interested organizations in the
U.S. and India and to the participants. ***