* 9310713
* The Cotopaxi Subsistence Project--Phase I
* SBE,BCS
* 07/15/1993,12/31/1994
* George Gumerman IV, Occidental College
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 12/31/1994
* USD 20,000.00

With National Science Foundation support, Drs. George Gumerman and Mary
Weismantel will conduct archaeological research in the Angamarca region which is
located on the western slopes of the Cordillera Occidental of Ecuador. They will
examine a total area of ca. 96 square kilometers which includes the important
prehistoric political center of Angamarca la Vieja. The main goal of this first
pilot stage of what is conceived as a long-term project is to test different
archaeological survey techniques both to determine the range of cultural
materials and sites present and also to discover the best technique for locating
sites in this tropical environment. The team will employ a stratified random
sampling technique to examine three primary zones: riverine, lowland and upland.
Within each zone selected areas will be surveyed. Once sites are located, their
boundaries will be determined, a sketch map drawn, and a fraction of the
cultural materials collected for analysis. Three multicomponent sites will be
chosen for test excavations which will focus on recovering temporally diagnostic
artifacts and subsistence remains. On this basis a tentative chronology can be
constructed and the first step of a subsistence reconstruction carried out.
Although the archaeology of this region is not well known, it is clear that the
Inca empire, centered in Peru to the South, extended this far North. Drs.
Gumerman and Weismantel are interested in how, in this fringe of the empire the
Inca maintained their control and how local inhabitants adapted to their
incorporation into the empire. Ultimately, they plan to study contrasting
environmental zones in Ecuador and compare both across regions and across time.
They will establish a pre-Inca baseline and use this to determine post-Inca
contact changes. They will focus on utilization of food since manipulation of
this essential resource can serve both as a mechanism of social control and as a
marker of status. Before such issues can be addressed however, it is necessary
both to determine how best to work in this little known region and to develop a
detailed chronology. This research is important for several reasons. It will
shed new light on how large complex societies develop and are maintained. It
will provide data of interest to many archaeologists and develop analytic
techniques which, hopefully, will be applicable in many archaeological
situations. It will also further the career of two young and very promising
scientists.