* 9310735
* ENGINEERING RESEARCH EQUIPMENT: A Real-Time Processor and   Diagnostic Equipment for Closed-Loop Control Experiments
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/1993,08/31/1995
* Elmer Gilbert, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 08/31/1995
* USD 40,792.00

9310735 Bernstein The Department of Aerospace Engineering at the University of
Michigan will purchase a real-time control processor and related diagnostic
equipment which will be dedicated to support research in control-system
engineering. The equipment will be used for several research projects, including
in particular: control of unstable plants, control with actuator constraints,
control of rotating spacecraft, control of acoustic vibration, control of
flexible structures, and control of fluids. Control -system technology is an
enabling technology for many complex, high performance systems. In many of these
applications the control system is so essential that the system simply cannot
operate without it. On the other hand, failure of the control system can have
dire consequences. Graphic examples include the Chernobyl disaster and Airbus
crashes. In view of the importance and risks of control-system technology, this
proposal seeks laboratory equipment in the form or real-time control processor
and related diagnostic equipment to allow researchers to carry out a broad range
of experiments in feedback control technology. The proposed real-time processor
is the central piece of equipment needed to carry out closed-loop control
experiments. With this equipment, new control laws represented in a high level
language can be transformed into real-time assembly code for high-speed
execution. This capability will allow researchers to implement linear and
nonlinear controllers designed for a variety of applications. Among the projects
that will utilize the equipment are two projects that focus on fundamental
problems in feedback technology, namely, control of unstable plants and control
with actuator constraints, as well as four projects that focus on specific
applications, namely, control of spacecraft, acoustics, structures, and fluids.
***