* 9310385
* The Structure and Function of Synapse-Specific,             Extracellular Matrix Components
* BIO,IOS
* 08/15/1993,01/31/1997
* Arlene Chiu, Beckman Research Institute City of Hope
* Continuing grant
* Dr. Susan F. Volman
* 01/31/1997
* USD 249,221.00

9310385 Chiu Information is relayed between nerve cells or a nerve cell and a
muscle cell by a specialized connection called a synapse. The formation of
synapses occurs during development, but little is currently known about the
mechanisms responsible for this developmental process. This project will study
this process in the neuromuscular junction, the connection between nerve and
muscle cells. The formation of this synapse appears to be regulated by rare
molecules located within the extracellular matrix (ECM) within the synapse. One
such molecule may be s-laminin, a recently described form of the well
characterized molecule, laminin. Laminin is present in the ECM surrounding the
muscle cells and promotes axon growth from neurons. In contrast, s-laminin is
only present at the neuromuscular junction and appears to abrogate the growth-
promoting activity of laminin. This raises the possibility that during
development, laminin promotes and guides neurons toward potential target cells,
while s-laminin may act to terminate growth and initiate synapse formation. To
elucidate the function of s-laminin requires large quantities of purified
molecule, as well as an understanding of its structure. However, because
s-laminin is restricted to synaptic sites, this molecule is present in very
small amounts around developing muscle cells. Recently, this laboratory found
that a cancer cell line, maintained in the laboratory, produced and released
large amount of this rare molecule. In addition, this cell line also released a
second synaptic ECM molecule that may be related to another ubiquitous ECM
component, entactin. The aim of this project is to better characterize s-laminin
and the novel form of entactin isolated from the cell line. Most importantly,
the role of these molecules in the formation and function of the neuromuscular
junction will be studied. *** Q =Q l sw A wwwwwww KÃ• Y 9310385 Chiu Information
is relayed between nerve cells or a nerve cell and a muscle cell by a
specialized connection called ! ! F f f 8 Times New Roman Symbol & Arial "
Univers (WN) d d d " h L %M E " b 8 Steve McLoon, IBN William Proctor, IBN