* 9310833
* Establishment of a Nutrient Analysis Laboratory and Sample  Archive at the Harvard Forest
* BIO,DBI
* 12/15/1993,05/31/1996
* Richard Boone, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* None
* 05/31/1996
* USD 150,000.00

9310833 Foster The Harvard Forest is a 1300-hectare field station in central
New England. In addition to the resident science and technical staff of
approximately 35, over 50 researchers from over a dozen institutions conduct a
major portion of their field studies at the Harvard Forest. In the area of
education the Harvard Forest activities include (1) serving as a host to 2-4
visiting faculty annually through the Bullard Fellowship Program in Forest
Biology at Harvard University (2) sponsoring approximately 24 students annually
as summer research assistants to faculty and science staff, (3) hosting more
than 15 university courses for field studies, (4) convening numerous state,
national, and international conferences in science and policy, and (5) educating
more than 5000 visitors annually in the Fisher Museum of Forestry. Research at
the Harvard Forest is integrated around the central theme of studying and
dynamics of forest ecosystem as affected by natural and human disturbance
processes. In recent years there have been much higher demands for laboratory
facilities, offices, and equipment in the areas of biogeochemistry, atmosphere-
biosphere interactions, and microbial ecology. Education-related demands on
laboratory facilities have risen as both graduate student research and
undergraduate research program have expanded. Beyond the need for expanded and
improved laboratory facilities, there is the critical need to archive soil and
plant tissue samples in a systematic and orderly fashion. Currently, samples
collected at Harvard Forest are stored at various places. None of these
locations have adequate archive facilities. Valuable samples have been discarded
simply because storage space is unavailable. The project will support the
development of a multi-user nutrient analysis and new offices in the current
J.G. Torrey Laboratory and to construct a soil/plant tissue archive facility.
Major acquisitions will include CHNS Analyzer, balances, drying ovens, grinder,
fume hoods, muffle furnace, pH meter, work benches, and storage cabinets. The
nutrient analysis facility will create 1048 ft2) will provide storage and
electronic cataloging for over 32,000 samples.