* 9310403
* Engineering Research Deployment Teaching Initiative:        Plasma and Beam Induced Chemistry for Materials Processing
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/1993,02/28/1997
* Cameron Moore, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Kramer
* 02/28/1997
* USD 25,000.00

9310403 Collins The use of plasma and beam processing of materials is ibiquitous
in the manufacture of semiconductors and integrated circuits. Plasma processing
is also continuouslu elvolving due to the changing needs of modern devices.
Nevertheless, plasma processing of optoelectronic, magnetic, and microelectronic
devices is absent from the curricula of many universities. An elective
undergraduate or first year graduate coourse, "Plasma and Beam Induced Chemisty
for Materials Processing will be developed". It will emphasize the fundamentals
of plama based processing (etchinng, deposition, ashing) and yet be technically
current with regard to manufacturing applications. The course is intended for
students about to enter the high technology micro /optoelectronics workforce as
well as for practicing engineers. Dissemination and deployment of the new course
to other universities as well as industry will occur via the preparation of
transportable instuctional materials including high quality lecture handout,
videotaped lectures whih are highly correlated. Hence, students on campus as
well as at remote sites can easily follow the lectures. The pedagogy will be
improved by 1) transforming the hard copy lecture handoutsss into a set of disk
based notes (which can be continually updated), and 2) computer enhancement of
the videotaped lctures to include animation, graphial display of mathermatical
operations, and digitized video and photographs of plasma processing tools and
results from these processes. The fully developed course will be disseminated
via conventional videotapes and satellite transmission through the National
Technololgy University.