* 9310767
* Workshop:  Biological Diversity and Ecosystem Function:     Islands as Model Systems; The Bahamas; October 1993
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/1993,01/31/1995
* Peter Vitousek, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Richard F. Dame
* 01/31/1995
* USD 25,000.00

9310767 Vitousek The loss of biological diversity if the most permanent of the
many global consequences of an expanding human population and level of activity.
To what extent does this loss of diversity lead to changes in the functioning of
ecosystems? Twenty and more years ago, the ecological community thought we knew
the answer to this question-diversity leads to ecosystem stability, and its loss
therefore should de stabilize ecosystems. However, at that time our
understanding of both diversity and ecosystem function were inadequate even to
frame the question in a meaningful way. %%% The advances in ecology since (both
in population biology and ecosystem studies) and the urgent need to understand
the consequences of ongoing global changes in biological diversity have led the
Scientific Committee on Problems of the Environment (SCOPE) to establish a
3-year project to evaluate a)what is known about connections between biological
diversity and ecosystem function; and b) what research should be initiated now
so that we will be able to understand and manage these connections in the
future. This proposal requests funding to support a workshop within the SCOPE
program to evaluate biological diversity and ecosystems; the workshop will be
held in mid-October, 1993, in the Bahamas. ibute to our understanding of the
development of C4 ecosystems. Based on the excellent reviews, the Program agrees
with this assessment, and recommend that this proposal be funded. Panelist
Beatty rated this proposal as "Fair." She believed that the research was very
important and that the PI was highly qualified, but that the study w as much
more "geol ! ! ! F ( Times New Roman Symbol &amp; Arial " h z E z E 5 jethro
moorefield jethro moorefield