* 9310411
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:  Women as Subjects:  An     Ethnography of Difference in South Africa
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/1993,07/31/1994
* James Ferguson, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Shelton White
* 07/31/1994
* USD 9,000.00

9310411 FERGUSON This project investigates the impact on the psychology of
social and legal identity caused by changing legal classifications of race and
gender in South Africa. In South Africa, race and gender have been understood to
constitute "naturally" different social and legal subject positions. Recent and
pending re-definitions of legal status, by race and gender, have destabilized
these subject positions and will have important psychological implications for
the restructuring of political identity. The investigator will focus on women's
collective action as the context in which to examine how women articulate their
sense of identity in social and legal practice. At this vantage point, the
investigator will observe and document the ways in which categories of racial
and gender difference create attitudes and behaviors, and structure social
interactions. The research will make an important theoretical contribution to
the scientific understanding of legal and political psychology. The project will
employ both long term ethnographic fieldwork and archival research of relevant
court records. Research will be conducted in Durban, Natal (and to a limited
extent in Ulundi, KwaZulu), with two community organizations. The investigator
will document the ways in which women represent themselves to each other, and,
as collectivities, how they represent themselves and their interests to the
state (via court hearings), political organizations, and other agencies. ***