* 9310656
* Polarized Conversion Electron Mossbauer Studies of Layered  Ferroelectric Films
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/1993,08/31/1995
* Clyde Kimball, Northern Illinois University
* Standard Grant
* H. Hollis Wickman
* 08/31/1995
* USD 50,000.00

9310656 Kimball A study of the dynamics of valence and structural behavior in
ferroelectric materials and their analogues will be explored by a combination of
Mossbauer spectroscopy and synchrotron radiation. The efficacy of combining high
resolution X-ray Absorption Near Edge Spectroscopy and Mossbauer effect
measurements to clarify valence fluctuation behavior will be examined. Polarized
Mossbauer radiation sources will be used in the laboratory to delineate
anisotropic interactions near ferroelectric phase transitions. Synchrotron-based
Mossbauer measurements in the time-domain will be made to study non-equilibrium
behavior such as photon induced states in ferroelectric materials. %%% The
proposed research program is of an exploratory nature and may have an important
impact in providing new insights for the understanding of ferroelectric
materials and ferroelectric behavior. The study of polarization phenomena is
relevant to a number of critical problems in ferroelectric thin films for non-
volatile memory applications. The dynamics of valence and structural behavior in
these materials and their analogues will be explored by a combination of
Mossbauer spectroscopy and synchrotron radiation. Polarized Mossbauer radiation
sources will be used in the laboratory to delineate anisotropic interactions
near ferroelectric phase transitions. Synchrotron-based Mossbauer measurements
in the time-domain will be made to study non- equilibrium behavior caused by
radiation-induced states. ***