* 9310711
* Dissertation Research:  A Comparative Study of Nestling     Begging Behavior in Neotropical Migrant Birds
* NONE,NONE
* 08/01/1993,07/31/1995
* David Winkler, Cornell Univ - State: AWDS MADE PRIOR MAY 2010
* Standard Grant
* Fred Stollnitz
* 07/31/1995
* USD 3,236.00

9310711 Winkler Mr. David G. Haskell's doctoral-dissertation research will
investigate how variations in predation risk have affected the evolution of
begging calls of nestling wood warblers (Parulidae). These diverse New World
tropical migrants nest in a wide variety of sites, and Mr. Haskell's recent
experiments show that nestlings begging from ground nests incur greater
increases in the risk of predation than do nestlings begging from trees. Mr.
Haskell will now test the hypothesis that ground-nesting species have begging
calls that are harder to hear and to locate than the begging calls of tree-
nesting species. This will be the first comparative study of nestling calls to
use standardized recording protocols and to take into account the phylogenetic
relationships of the species being compared. Predation is the major source of
mortality for most nestling birds, an the results of this study should be of
interest to biologists interested in the productivity of bird populations and
the behaviors that have evolved to mitigate nestling mortality. The evolution of
begging has also been the subject of considerable theoretical work, and this
study should be of interest to biologists studying the evolution of parent-
offspring interactions as well.