* 9310508
* Wound-Evoked Changes in Transcription: The Role of          Electrical Signals
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/1993,01/31/1996
* Eric Davies, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Continuing Grant
* Machi F. Dilworth
* 01/31/1996
* USD 124,800.00

9310508 Davies Plants are confronted with potentially harmful environmental
factors such as insect attack, drought, heat, cold and UV irradiation. They have
evolved strategies of accommodation, whereby they can perceive and respond to
such stimuli without them resulting in death. These strategies require
integrated mechanisms where stressful conditions experienced by one part of the
plant elicit responses in distant parts. Some of these responses need to be
extremely rapid, and thus conventional explanations involving manufacture and
transport of diffusible chemicals (hormones) may not be sufficient. This
proposal fcuses on two types of rapidly-generated and transmitted signals which
we have described recently in both sunflower and tomato: action potentials
(APs), which result from the activity of voltage-sensitive (voltage-gated) ion
channels; and variation potentials (VPs), which are based on pressure-sensitive
(stretch-activated) ion channels and result from rapid changes in the hydraulic
condition of cells and tissues in proximity to the xylem. In the research
proposed here, we will perform treatments to selectively evoke or repress either
or both of these electrical signals in order to determine their role in
modulating the expression (up-regulation and down-regulation) of various genes.
***