* 9310696
* RUI:  The Effect of Debt-for-Nature Swaps on National Legal Structures
* SBE,SES
* 09/15/1993,11/30/1996
* George Santopietro, Radford University
* Standard Grant
* Harmon M. Hosch
* 11/30/1996
* USD 18,000.00

9310696 SANTOPIETRO Debt for nature swaps are being used by private
international conservation non governmental organizations as a means of
increasing the purchasing power of the financial resources they devote to the
preservation of endangered areas around the world. Preliminary research suggests
that the decision making of managers in allocating funds among countries and
projects has been heavily influenced by the legal costs of the transactions.
Legal costs divert a sponsor's funds away from conservation programs and thereby
reduce the net benefit of the swap. Differences in legal costs among countries
can also bias the selection of sites, as managers seek to develop programs where
legal costs are lower. Economic theory predicts that changes in legal structures
will be brought about by the activities of individuals seeking efficiency gains
when legal costs of economic activities are reduced. The objective of this
project is to establish a base of knowledge about how national legal
institutions affect the transaction costs of debt for nature swaps and how these
institutions are affected by the potential for efficiency gains from changes in
the legal system. This planning grant will support preliminary data collection
in three neighboring South American countries Argentina, Chile and Paraguay. The
data collection will include interviews with participants in the debt for nature
process, both in government and in non governmental organizations. ***