* 9310553
* Dissertation Research:  Molecular Examination of the        Relationship Between the Skunks (Mephitinae) and the Rest   of the Mustelidae
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/1993,07/31/1996
* John Bickham, Texas A&M Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* James E. Rodman
* 07/31/1996
* USD 9,500.00

9310553 Bickham and Dragoo Although individual species of the family Mustelidae
(weasels, badgers, otters, and skunks) in the mammalian order Carnivora are easy
to recognize, taxonomic relationships among them and their phylogenetic
connections are problematic, with numerous conflicting hypotheses based on
morphological and chromosomal evidence. The diversity of morphological form, of
behaviors, and of ecological preferences among mustelids is thought to represent
several instances of parallel or convergent evolutionary change since the
Miocene. The subfamily Mephitinae, the skunks, in particular is recognized as
extremely divergent and perhaps is the earliest evolutionary lineage in the
group. The purpose of work by graduate student Dragoo under the supervision of
Dr. Bickham is to acquire new DNA nucleotide sequence data for comparative
analysis of mutational difference among all species of skunks and among
representatives in the four other subfamilies of Mustelidae. Both mitochondrial
and nuclear genes are targeted for analysis, to provide evidence on both
maternal lineages and biparental inheritance. %%% Conflicting interpretations of
traditional morphological characters in mammal taxonomy have left unresolved the
phylogeny of the family Mustelidae, the weasels, badgers, otters, and skunks of
the world. An independent and robust dataset of DNA nucleotide sequences from
both mitochondrial and nuclear genes will help resolve this problem, and in turn
provide direction for evolutionary analysis of biogeography, behavioral changes,
and ecological shifts.