* 9310148
* SunRISE Proposal:  Precision Solar Disk Photometry--A Tool  for Understanding Changes in the Sun's Luminosity
* GEO,AGS
* 07/15/1993,06/30/1997
* Kenneth Libbrecht, California Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Robert M. Robinson
* 06/30/1997
* USD 194,136.00

This proposal will continue an ongoing effort to precisely measure large-scale
solar surface brightness variations across the solar disk. A unique and
specialized instrument to make these measurements has been constructed at Big
Bear Solar Observatory, and preliminary data have been acquired. With a
timeseries of precision photometric data, the PI will conduct a number of
investigations: 1) The PI will compare measured latitude- and time-dependent
brightness variations with time-dependent solar constant measurements. The more
complete spatial information gotten from the photometer will be used to better
understand the physical mechanisms responsible for short- and long-term solar
luminosity variations. For example, measured average latitude- and >-dependent
brightness structure (here > is the usual heliocentric angle), together with the
measured facular contrast function, can be used to directly measure the
contribution of faculae to solar luminosity changes. Further, if the Sun's
luminosity variations are determined (using our photometric data) to be confined
to the active latitudes, then precision ground-based measurements such as those
proposed here could make an excellent substitute for space- based solar constant
measurements, when the latter are unavailable. 2) The PI will make a better
measurement of the pole-equator temperature difference, making some effort to
separate the cycle- dependent magnetic signals from the presumably time-
independent) differential rotation signal. Such a measurement will constrain
models of the Sun's differential rotation. 3) The PI will accurately measure
brightness variations near the solar pole, in order to get a better
understanding of the polar magnetic fields and polar faculae. Making precision
measurements of the large-scale brightness structure of the Sun is to date a
largely unexplored area of research. The data set of measurements could
contribute significantly to the understanding and monitoring of the Sun's
luminosity variations. #