* 9310581
* Role of CNTF, BDNF, and Other Factors in Motor Neuron       Sprouting
* BIO,IOS
* 08/15/1993,07/31/1996
* Mark Gurney, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* None
* 07/31/1996
* USD 214,287.00

WPC? 2 B P Z Courier 10cpi #| p Sj x 6 X @ 8 ; X @ HP DeskJet 500 HPDES500.PRS
x @ x X , , 0 FX @ #| p 2 B V P Z CG Times 12pt 8 p C &lt; , W X p P rk ; X P HP
DeskJet 500 HPDES500.PRS X p P rk ; x X , , 0 FX P " m o 8 ; ^&lt;D\dd DDDd
DDDDddddddddddDD X | |x DL | t l| DDDddDXdXdXDdd88d8 ddddHL8dd ddXXdXd d ddDDddd
D d d d X X X X X X|X|X|X|XD8D8D8D8 d d d d d d d d d d X d d d d dtd X X X X X
X X d|X|X|X|X d d d d d d d dD D D8D L d|8|8|8|8|8 d t d d d d H H
HlLlLlLlL|8|8|8 d d d d d d d X X X d|8 d HlL|8 d d d d d D/ N d ddDXPPdd ddd
dHdddd H d x H d h 1D DD x dp d x d x X L p x xdx X x x xL
xxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxLLLLLLL x 2 = 9310581 Gurney Sprouting occurs from undamaged
motor neurons as a consequence of partial denervation or paralysis of muscle.
Muscle is thought to produce the stimulus for sprouting. This project seeks to
identify the molecular nature of that stimulus. The following working hypotheses
will be tested: (1) sprouting is regulated directly by ciliary neurotrophic
factor (CNTF) released from denervated or paralyzed muscle; and (2) sprouting is
regulated by a soluble component of the CNTF receptor released from denervated
or paralyzed muscle. The assumptions of the model are that CNTF from a nonmuscle
source is continuously available to motor neuron terminals, that the amount of
CNTF available is not sufficient to induce sprouting, and that when CNTF is
presented as a complex with a soluble component of the CNTF receptor, its
activity is potentiated and reaches the threshold for inducing terminal
sprouting. Dr. Gurney will test the two working hypotheses by using a
combination of molecular and biological assays to determine the effects of CNTF
and CNTFR components on sprouting. In addition, monoclonal or polyclonal
antibodies will be used to inhibit the biological activity of endogenous CNTF or
soluble components of the CNTFR. The most interesting implications of this study
are that the motor neuron growth factor is not a entity and that different
growth factors may regulate programmed cell death, synapse elimination, and
regeneration or sprouting. ***