* 9310247
* Organized Interests and the Mobilization of Bias in Congress
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/1993,07/31/1997
* Francis Wayman, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* JEANETTE CAMPBELL
* 07/31/1997
* USD 124,975.00

9310247 Hall Critics of American political institutions have long lamented the
infuence of organized "factions" in national policy making. The proliferation of
Washington lobbyists and the growth of political action committees have
intensified the charge that Congress is the province of "special" interests in
general and private business interests in particular. Federal agencies and
commissions, likewise, are often said to be "captives" of the industries they
were established to regulate, and various accounts suggest that Congressional
actors conspire in such arrangements. An important counterweight to this view is
the notion that the public interest groups play an important and healthy role in
the politics of American pluralism. Such organizations vary considerably in the
purposes to which they aspire, but a significant number of them seek to
influence public policy, especially on issues where important public goods are
at stake. While a few of these have formidable PACs, such groups tend to rely
far more heavily on lobbying and informational efforts than they do campaign
contributions to achieve their legislative purposes. What counterweight, if any,
do the efforts of such organizations provide? More generally, what influence do
the advocacy efforts of public interest groups have relative to the more
numerous, more moneyed, more studied, and more maligned private groups or
business associations? The investigators examine this question by assessing the
role of public and private interest groups on a diverse set of issues where
actors from the two sectors compete in congressional policy making and,
indirectly, in agency rule-making. They first elaborate a theory of legislative
mobilization which lays out the conditions under which one might expect both the
lobbying and campaign contribution efforts of each (or both) to pay off. Second,
they undertake a broad empirical study, including samples of cases from the
energy, environment, human resources, a nd foreign policy domains. The study
will employ interview and archival data, and the analysis will be multi-method.
This study should enhance substantially our understanding of public advocacy
groups and private interests in Congressional law-making and Congressional
intervention in agency rule-making. ***