* 9310084
* Laboratory Studies of Alfven Waves
* NONE,NONE
* 06/15/1994,11/30/1997
* James Maggs, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing grant
* kile baker
* 11/30/1997
* USD 381,000.00

9310084 Yamada Existing laboratory facilities will be enhanced to create a major
facility for magnetic reconnection experiments (MRX). Magnetic reconnection is a
key physical process in magnetospheric physics, solar physics, and astrophysical
plasmas generally. Topological changes in magnetic field line configuration
often result in large JxB forces with release of magnetic energy into MHD flows
and the creation of topologically distinct plasmoid configurations. The MRX will
be used to investigate the fundamental topology of microscale reconnection
regions as well as the global MHD flows and equilibria. Plasma scaling is
established to be very relevant to space plasma conditions with a large
Lundquist number (or magnetic Reynolds number) of about 2000 and many gyroradii
in the system (about 100). A flexible double spheromak configuration will be
used under various initial states to measure (1) whether reconnection processes
remain axisymmetric or whether three-dimensional phenomena will spontaneously
break out, (2) how the reconnection rate depends on the helicity of mergin
spheromaks, (3) the dependence of reconnection rate on global MHD forces which
can be controlled via currents in the MRX coils and cores, (4) flow fields
associated with reconnection and the transformation to heat, and (5) the
evolution of patchy reconnection where plasmas converge to a point instead of
along a line. Diagnostics will include magnetic and Langmuir probe arrays, an
imaging interferometer, and flow visualization via high-speed photography of
vaporized impurity pellots. Preliminary experiments on double spheromaks have
already been carried out on the TS-3 device at the University of Tokyo. ***