* 9310617
* Social Movements and Public Discourse:  Comparative Study   of Discourse Construction in Germany and the United States
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/1993,08/31/1998
* Myra Ferree, University of Connecticut
* Continuing Grant
* Patricia White
* 08/31/1998
* USD 197,859.00

9310617 Ferree This is a study of public discourse on the issue of abortion in
Germany and the United States, examining how it shifted over the past 30 years.
The issue of abortion will be used to develop and test a broader theory of
public discourse and the conditions under which social movements are likely to
influence it. The abortion issue provides significant variation between
countries and over time on two major variables of interest: (a) the degree of
polarization reflected in mass media discourse and (b) the relative influence of
social movement actors compared to political parties and other institutional
actors in shaping it. The primary methods employed are content analysis of
newspapers and other mass media sources over time and a combination of content
analysis and informant interviews with spokespersons who have promoted a
particular interpretation or way of framing the abortion issue. The research
design will employ common research instruments and cross-national teams in data
collection. This project will contribute significantly to scientific
understanding of how the mass media and social movements interact to shape
public perceptions of major social issues. Because it focuses on an important
controversy that has developed quite differently in Germany and the United
States, it will contribute to knowledge about the differences between these
societies and provide insights that will be valuable to policy-makers
confronting future disputes. ***