* 9310369
* Support for the SSRC Committee for Research                 on Global Environmental Change
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/1993,01/31/1997
* David Featherman, Social Science Research Council
* Continuing Grant
* Bernard O. Bauer
* 01/31/1997
* USD 337,300.00

9310369 FEATHERMAN Since 1989, the Committee for Research on Global
Environmental Change of the Social Science Research Council (SSRC) has
facilitated research and training on human- environmental interactions that are
at least continental in scale and that occur over time periods ranging from
decades to centuries. Among the committee's accomplishments are development of
three major interdisciplinary research projects that involve eighty researchers
from around the world, sponsorship of workshops and other gatherings to
stimulate research, and development of plans for training institutes and
fellowships. This renewal award continues support for core operations for the
committee for three additional years. Among the activities to be undertaken by
the committee over that period are continued catalytic development of major
international, interdisciplinary research projects, exploration of a variety of
ways to foster interdisciplinary research training, and sponsorship of the first
regularly scheduled meeting of researchers examining the human dimensions of
global environmental change, tentatively scheduled for October 1994. Through
continued operation of the SSRC Committee for Research on Global Environmental
Change, major interdisciplinary research and training activities designed to
attract more scientists to the study of longer-term, wide-ranging human-
environmental interactions will continue. Special emphasis on expansion of
outreach activities during the next three years should increase the number of
scholars who benefit directly through participation in committee-sponsored
activities and indirectly through the advancement of research on this important
topic. ***