* 9310658
* Engineering Research Equipment Grant:  Femtosecond Optical  Characterization of Semiconductor Materials and Devices
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/1993,02/28/1995
* Robert Kolbas, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Brian J. Clifton
* 02/28/1995
* USD 115,353.00

9310658 Kolbas The Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering at North
Carolina State University proposes the purchase of a femtosecond/picosecond Ti
sapphire pulsed laser system and data acquisition systems. The system will be
used to investigate: 1) artificially structured semiconductor materials and
nanostructures; 2) high speed integrated circuits, and; 3) wide bandgap
semiconductors. The equipment would have an immediate impact and would be used
in several existing research projects which include: 1) carrier scattering and
phonon participation in semiconductor laser operation; 2) characterization of
low temperature (A1)GaAs in Integrated Optoelectronic circuits; 3) time resolved
studies of surface emitting lasers, and; 4) time resolved studies of new wide
bandgap materials such as SiC and GaN. The addition of this equipment would also
make possible future projects in the areas of: 1) ultra-fast semiconductor
lasers for high speed interconnects; 2) high speed test and evaluation of
digital circuits with clock rates above 1 GHz, and; 3) microcavity lasers and
mesoscopic devices. A significant impact on the infrastructure is realized in
both the depth and breadth f the proposed research because of the synergy with
the existing Optical Characterization Laboratory and the newly formed (NSF
funded) Picosecond Digital Systems Laboratory. ***