* 9310770
* Application of Adhesion-Deficient VOC-Degrading Bacteria in the Bioremediation of Contaminated Aquifers
* TIP,TI
* 09/01/1993,02/29/1996
* Mary DeFlaun, Envirogen, Inc.
* Continuing Grant
* Todd M. Martensen
* 02/29/1996
* USD 298,829.00

WPCM 2 B P Z Courier 10cpi #| x =V x 6 X @ 8 ; X @ Canon LBP-8III (Additional)
CALB8IAD.PRS x @ 0J zX @ #| x 2 Z B % X F ` Canon LBP-8III (Additional)
CALB8IAD.PRS x @ 0J zX @Courier 10cpi Courier Footnote 16cpi . ? x x x , x 6 X @
8 ; X @ + H H H , S , H 6 X @ ; @ t" t } r } r 6e t t } r 6h t } r . s u t a < s
} r' I ut r PQV 6e L 2 K 9310770 DeFlaun In situ bioremediation requires that
competent degradative bacteria be able to penetrate soil or aquifer solids to
reach the contamination. One of the major obstacles to this approach is that
bacteria often adhere strongly to solid surfaces and plug porous materials
rather than pass through them. Our Phase I research demonstrated the feasibility
of isolating non adhesive variants of several different bacterial strains that
are capable of degrading a suite of chlorinated organic chemicals commonly found
as contaminants in groundwater and aquifers. The strains that were developed in
Phase I have the potential to travel at least an order of magnitude further into
aquifer solids than their adhesive parental strains. By using trichloroethylene
as a model chlorinated organic, we also demonstrated that the degradative
competence of these non adhesive variants had not been altered. Phase II
research will bring this technology to commercialization by establishing a
number of operating parameters for the use of these non adhesive degradative
strains in situ . In addition to establishing the stability of the adhesion
deficient phenot ype, we will measure the penetration and degradative efficiency
of these strains in different types of aquifer material. A pilot scale model
aquifer will be constructed and used to demonstrate an in situ bioremediation
system based on the use of these highly specialized microorganisms. %%% Ground
water pollution is a growing problem worldwide and the development of methods to
control it are extremely important. One method to confront this problem is to
continue to pump water and purify it on the surface. Since this is very
expensive, new methods are being sought to destroy water contaminating chemicals
by using microorganisms in the well, or in the aquifer, itself. These cells can
consume contaminating chemicals and purify the water. However, during the
process, the cells that degrade the polluting compounds stick to soil particles,
and, as they metabolize pollutants, they grow and eventually plug the well. In
an attempt to circumvent this problem, we developed certain strains of pollutant
degrading, non sticking, or non adhering, bacteria. In the present research
program, we will determine if these non adhering cells work equally well in
ground water purification, but without growing into a barrier and plugging the
flow of water into the well. *** 0*0*0*