* 9310892
* Atmospheric Science and Environmental Politics
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/1993,08/31/1994
* Paul Edwards, CA Fellowships
* Fellowship Award
* Rachelle D. Hollander
* 08/31/1994
* USD 51,911.00

9310892 Edwards A central focus for research about the interactions of science,
technology and social institutions concerns the roles of science and social
movements in shaping the conceptual construction, public debate, and political
resolution of social problems. This Professional Development Fellowship will
provide an investigator who specializes in this research area with a year of
training and research in atmospheric science, particularly climatology and
climate modeling. It is designed to help him answer two questions: how
atmospheric scientists are shaping social response and responsiveness to global
environmental problems, and how, reciprocally, the political debates around
these problems are shaping atmospheric science. The training program includes
coursework, tutorial instruction and literature review under the guidance of
host scientists. Research plans include attending conferences, undertaking
laboratory visits and interviews, observation of the appearances of atmospheric
scientists before public agencies and NGOs, and interviews with representatives
of these groups. The investigator will also research and analyze three important
cases of scientific models influencing global environmental policy debates: (a)
the 1972 Limits to Growth study of the Club of Rome, (b) the 1987 Montreal
Protocol and its several successor agreements, and (c) the 1992 UNCED Rio global
environmental summit. The training and research provide the basis for future
comparative studies of other similar social phenomena. Since this is a training
grant, publications are not the primary goal. Nonetheless, the investigator
plans to complete a number of articles and possibly develop some joint
publications with his hosts. ***