* 9310647
* Immigration Economic Restructuring and Internal Migration   among U.S. Metropolitan Labor Markets, 1965-1990
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/1993,07/31/1996
* Richard Wright, Dartmouth College
* Standard Grant
* James W. Harrington
* 07/31/1996
* USD 85,000.00

9310647 Barff Little is known about how flows of immigrants to a particular
destination affect the decision to leave or the destination choice of native
migrants. That is, are flows of immigrants into the United States linked to
internal flows of population, and does this activity form part of a broader
system of interregional labor exchange? If so, then the hypothesis that
population movements within a country are unaffected by immigrant streams must
be reassessed. Additionally, previous research measuring the effect of
immigration on the welfare of natives in impacted labor markets also requires
reevaluation. Failure to recognize important linkages between immigration and
internal migration of natives may result in serious underestimation of the
effects of immigration on the welfare of natives since many immigration impacts
be dissipated within the migration system. This project will measure the
stability of the native migratory response to immigration over time by
developing a series of migration models for the United States between 1965 and
1990. The models will test the linkage between immigrant flows and internal
migration streams by occupation for all metropolitan areas. The 21 largest
metropolitan areas will be examined in detail in order to illuminate the
contextual subtleties of immigrant and migrant impact on each city's employment
structure through time. A series of econometric models of migration will be
estimated using public use microdata samples from the U.S. Census of Population
for the time period in question. In 1965, landmark legislation was passed which
relaxed the upper limits on the volume of immigration to the U.S. Econometric
research so far has uncovered no instance where an increase in the supply of
immigrants significantly and adversely affected the earnings or employment
opportunities of natives. This research project extends the analysis of
immigrant impacts to the question of whether immigrants cause native workers to
move to other locations and what affect this movement has on the employment
situation of both groups. It involves finding out if the migration response to
immigration is even across space, which will add important new knowledge about
the spatial context of immigration into the United States. ***