* 9310374
* Dissertation Research: Parasites of Sexual and Asexual GeckoCongeners:  Does Differential Parasitism Favor Sexuals?
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/1993,07/31/1995
* Ted Case, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Lindsay Fox
* 07/31/1995
* USD 8,461.00

9310374 Case Parasites maybe responsible for the maintenance of reproductive
patterns, "Red Queen" hypothesis. In some systems asexuals have significantly
more parasites than sexuals, but pilot data for the current studies show just
the opposite pattern. However, it is impossible to use such data as a direct
test of the Red Queen hypothesis since a variety of mechanisms, such as parasite
transmission dynamics and virulence, can shape patterns of parasite distribution
in the wild. The Red Queen hypothesis generates predictions about which
mechanisms must be important in host/parasite interactions in order for asexuals
to be favored: i) host susceptibility must be the most important determinant of
parasite distribution in a population; ii) host susceptibility must be
genetically determined; and iii) host susceptibility must be frequency-
dependent, with the most common genotype becoming the most susceptible over
time. The current study will experimentally test these predictions in the
sexual/asexual gecko system. %%% Understanding the maintenance &amp; development
of major demographic properties, such as mode of reproduction among species, is
a major goal of population biology. However, theory predicting that
parthenogenetic forms are rare because they are more susceptible to parasites
has largely remained untested in complex ecological situations. The present
research takes an ecological perspective to a fundamental problem in
evolutionary biology. ***