* 9310460
* Electrical Transport in Ferromagnetic Alloys and Glasses
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/1993,01/31/1996
* Luc Berger, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Continuing Grant
* H. Hollis Wickman
* 01/31/1996
* USD 120,000.00

9310460 Berger This project will investigate the interaction between a magnetic
domain Bloch walls and an applied electric currents in nickel-iron alloys. The
interaction depends on the magnetic exchange interactions between the transport
electron and the localized magnetic atoms. The wall displacements will be
measured over a range of current densities. The critical current for incipient
wall displacement and the displacement as a function of pulse width will also be
investigated. These measurements will be done in a number of samples in the
range 10-1000 nm. The anisotropy of the response will be determined using
ferrofluids or polarizing microscopes. The primary objective is to understand
the detailed role of the Bloch wall lines as contributor to magnetoresistance in
the thin film materials. %%% In this project, the influence of an electric
current on the properties of a magnetic alloys of nickel and iron. Iron and
nickel atoms act like miniature bar magnets. In certain regions of the sample,
called magnetic domains, these atomic magnets all point in the same direction.
The displacement of these domains induced by an electric current flowing through
the materials will be investigated. The magnitude of these displacements will be
determined for various values of the current density, and in samples of various
thicknesses. Such motion of magnetic domains may be used for storage of
information in computer memories. ***