* 9310933
* PLANNING ACTIVITIES: Development of a Master Plan for Konza Prairie Research Natural Area
* BIO,DBI
* 02/01/1994,07/31/1996
* David Hartnett, Kansas State University
* Standard Grant
* None
* 07/31/1996
* USD 15,000.00

WPC 2 &lt; B P Z &lt; Courier 10cpi #| x : x B P ; X P# HP Laserjet (25-in-one,
Network) HPLASEII.PRS x @ , t 0 NX @ # : x B P ; ,qX P# 2 &amp; n , X Courier
10cpi Tms Rmn 12pt (25inOne!) " m ^4@@ d 0LLd 0@0ddddddddddd88 d | HX x l
@d@dd0dlXld@`l84h8 llllLL@l\ XXXddd dH d ddd@ x @@ d x l d dxd d d X d d d
dH8H8H8H8 l l l l l l l l lxX d l l l Xxlxl d d d X X X X l d d d d ` ` ` ` ` `
l lH H H8H X h 8 8 8xx 8 l l l l l l L L LlLxxlLlL @ @ @ l l l l l l X X X X l 8
l LlL @ X X l l lNx xx dd@dddd xxHH d&lt; llx &lt; xxxxx xxxx x xm@ xx xx
dxxxxxxx x xxxxxxxxxx xt xx x xxxxxx x x 2 x x x , x @ 8 ; X @ * t C 4 , X t 4 P
z S X P 2 &lt; J Z &amp; # : x B P ; X P# HP Laserjet (25-in-one, Network)
HPLASEII.PRS x @ , t 0 NX @ #| x Courier 10cpi Tms Rmn 12pt (25inOne!) 2 , H X t
, ` " m ^4@@ d 0LLd 0@0ddddddddddd88 d | HX x l @d@dd0dlXld@`l84h8 llllLL@l\
XXXddd dH d ddd@ x @@ d x l d dxd d d X d d d dH8H8H8H8 l l l l l l l l lxX d l
l l Xxlxl d d d X X X X l d d d d ` ` ` ` ` ` l lH H H8H X h 8 8 8xx 8 l l l l l
l L L LlLxxlLlL @ @ @ l l l l l l X X X X l 8 l LlL @ X X l l lNx xx dd@dddd
xxHH d&lt; llx &lt; xxxxx xxxx x xm@ xx xx dxxxxxxx x xxxxxxxxxx xt xx x xxxxxx
x x 2 x x x , x @ 8 ; X @ * t C 4 , X t 4 P z S X P t k &lt; Cr F u&gt;$ &lt;Pu
F $ : t+ &lt;pu t F $ &amp; $&lt; u ~ u l ~ u(= t = u ~ u- ^ N : r F w tM= t =
uC ~ t &amp; 9310933 Reichman Konza Prairie Research Natural Area (KPRNA) is a
3,487 ha tallgrass prairie preserve located 15 km south of Manhattan, Kansas
that, in 1980, became one of the first Long Term Ecological Research sites. The
site, and the LTER program itself, have spawned numerous additional research
activities which now involve 133 projects representing 40 KSU faculty members
(from 14 Departments and 4 Colleges), 23 visiting scientists, and an additional
13 studies involving intersite comparisons between LTER sites. Konza Prairie has
hosted these myriad projects for over 10 years without substantially increasing
its ability to support the efforts. The site is near its carrying capacity for
facilitating research, even though many additional researchers are interested is
working there. The number of new requests for research permits has climbed
dramatically over the last decade and the cumulative effect may have reached the
maximum sustainable by the current facilities. This project is designed to
prepare a Master Plan for the expansion of Konza Prairie research capability
including the renovation of existing facilities, and the construction of new
laboratory space and living quarters for visiting scientists and students.
Concurrently, the management and operational plan and the administrative
structure will be revised to accommodate the expanded opportunities. A coalition
of participants has been organized who have agreed to support the implementation
of the plan once it is developed. Currently, the coalition consists of the
faculty and students working on Konza Prairie, Kansas State University (from the
Division to the Dean of Arts and Sciences and the Provost), The Nature
Conservancy, and KSU Foundation. ***