* 9310810
* Dissertation Research: Population Biology, Phylogenetic     Systematics, and Conservation Management of Spiranthes      diluvialis
* BIO,DEB
* 08/15/1993,07/31/1995
* Thomas Ranker, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Mark Courtney
* 07/31/1995
* USD 11,000.00

9310810 Ranker This research project will address three questions central to
understanding the evolution of the rare orchid, Spiranthes diluvialis, and
ensuring the future existence of this threatened species 1) What is the
phylogenetic or genealogical history of S. diluvialis? 2) What is the genetic
structure and variation within and among populations of S. diluvialis? and, 3)
What is the interplay between life history stages and environmental conditions
and how do these parameters impact the continued existence of S. diluvialis? %%%
This research will provide information critical to formulation of conservation
management plans for S. diluvialis as well as data on the basic biology and
evolution of this threatened species. This study is the first to explore the
origin of a polyploid species (a species with more than two sets of chromosomes)
in the Orchidaceae through the application of molecular techniques. The research
will provide information regarding the possible allopolyploid origin (via
hybridization of two genetically distinct diploid species) of S. diluvialis and
its distinctness as a species. Electrophoretic data will allow identification of
the putative parental taxa and provide insight into the genetic variability
present within the genus. Knowledge of the evolutionary origin of S. diluvialis
will provide a meaningful framework for and insight into both genetic and
ecological studies critical to the continued existence of this rare orchid. ***
9310810 Ranker This research project will address three questions central to
understanding the evolution o f the rare orchid, Y U F ( Times New Roman Symbol
&amp; Arial p Y " h _ ea e Z Ranker/Arft Abstract Dissertation Elizabeth M.
Behrens Elizabeth M. Behrens