* 9310058
* CAA: Phonological and Phonetic Investigation of Syllable    Weight Distinctions
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/1993,12/31/1995
* Ellen Broselow, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Paul G. Chapin
* 12/31/1995
* USD 56,956.00

9310058 Broselow Research on the sound structure of human language has generally
proceeded from two directions. Phoneticians have traditionally focused on
creating abstract models of the mental representation of sound structure, with
the ultimate goal of discovering universal constraints underlying the surface
diversity of human language. With the increasing availability of sophisticated
technology for speech analysis, these two strands of research have begun to
converge, with the beneficial result that abstract phonological models can be
tested against precise descriptions of sound properties. This project will
investigate one candidate for a universal constraint on linguistic structure
from both a phonological and a phonetic perspective; the goal is to compare the
abstract representations motivated by phonological analysis against the phonetic
properties revealed by instrumental analysis. The particular structures to be
investigated are syllables of different types. It has long been recognized that
syllables are one of the basic structural units of human language, and that
syllable weight (the length of a syllable's vowel and the number of consonants
following that vowel) plays a fundamental role in many grammatical processes,
such as the positioning of stress and accent. One currently controversial issue
concerns the number of distinctions in syllable weight to which languages make
reference: while most languages seem to distinguish only two degrees of syllable
weight, a few languages have been argued to require additional distinctions. The
question of whether syllable weight distinctions are maximally binary reflects a
more fundamental issue: since it has been proposed that no linguistic process
requires reference to more than a binary distinction, limiting syllable weight
distinctions to binary would be consistent with a significant constraint on
possible variations across human languages. One approach to maintaining the
claim that syllable wei ght distinctions are maximally binary involves the
postulation of particular phonological representations for syllables that reduce
all syllables to one of two categories: light vs. heavy. The project involves
both detailed analysis of the phonological evidence for these abstract
representations of syllable weight, and testing of the predictions made by these
representations against the instrumental data available from phonetic analysis.
***