* 9310654
* REG:  Engineering Research Equipment:  A Mass Spectrometer  with Ion Monitoring Capability for Measuring Ions and       Molecular Species in Plasma Discharges
* ENG,CBET
* 07/15/1993,12/31/1994
* Brian Thompson, University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Maria Burka
* 12/31/1994
* USD 65,043.00

Radio-frequency plasma discharges are used in the semiconductor industry for
plasma deposition and plasma etching. In a typical reactor, a radio-frequency
(RF) voltage is applied between two parallel electrodes inside a vacuum chamber
at 0.01 to 10 Torr. The electric fields created accelerate electrons to very
high energy levels. These electrons collide with molecules to produce more
electrons, ions, and highly reactive neutral radical species. These chemical
species then react with each other and solid surfaces according to the
particular application. Because the resultant composition of the gas phase will
affect the rates and qualities of the etching or deposition, it is useful to
sample the gas composition through a small orifice to a mass analyzer. Besides
the role of neutral reactive species, the bombardment of the solid (wafer)
surface by ions is also important. Because of the electrical interaction of
electrons and ions in the plasma, a plasma "sheath" is formed near any solid
surface. This sheath contains an electric field that repels electrons and keeps
them better contained within the center of the plasma. The same electric field
will accelerate positive ions towards the solid surface. Therefore, the ions are
directed to the surface with substantial energy (mean energies of a few eV to
several hundred eV). This directed, high- energy ion bombardment at solid
surfaces produces directional etching in plasma etching applications, and it can
alter film properties in plasma assisted chemical vapor deposition (CVD) of thin
films. Because of this important role of ions, the PI plans to sample this ion
bombardment with subsequent analysis of the ion energy distribution and the
composition of this ion stream. Mass spectrometry is a technique to determine
the composition of either of these sampled neutral species or ions. In the case
of sampling uncharged molecules, these molecules first pass through an ionizing
chamber where they are bombarded by electrons with sufficient energy to ionize a
substantial fraction of the molecules. For sampling the ions directly from the
plasma, this step is not needed. Once the ions are created or sampled, they pass
through a mass filter (quadrupole) that allows ions with a narrow range of
atomic mass to electrical charge ration (m/q) to pass through. The flux of ions
that pass through the filter at this m/q are then collected and measured with a
Faraday cage or electron multiplier. Thus by tuning through a range of m/q, the
distribution of ions with particular m/q is measured. This is a Research
Equipment Grant (REG) to purchase a quadrupole mass spectrometer with ion
monitoring capabilities which will be used to examine the neutral molecular
species and ionic species from plasma discharges and a chemical vapor deposition
reactor.