* 9310860
* Planning Activities: Hawk Mountain Sanctuary, late February or early March, 1994
* BIO,DBI
* 12/15/1993,05/31/1996
* Keith Bildstein, Hawk Mountain Sanctuary Association
* Standard Grant
* None
* 05/31/1996
* USD 14,960.00

9310860 Bildstein, K. Established in 1934, Hawk Mountain Sanctuary is the
world's oldest refuge for migratory raptors. The Sanctuary straddles the eastern
most ridge of the Appalachian Mountains in eastern Pennsylvania, along an
important migration corridor for 16 species of raptors. Hawk Mountain's 56-year
monitoring program for migratory birds of prey has produced the longest and most
complete record of raptor migration in the world. The Sanctuary's annual counts
of migrating hawks and eagles have proved to be a critical resource in assessing
long-term trends in raptor populations in North America. This extensive data
base played a key role in exposing organochlorine pesticides as causative agents
of declines in several species of predatory birds earlier this century. The
Sanctuary's 890 hectares represent the largest preserve of privately-owned and
protected secondary growth forest in the central Appalachians. To date,
Sanctuary staff and collaborators have contributed more than 75 publications to
the scientific literature. Even so, limited housing, laboratory space, and
equipment have restricted use of the Sanctuary's long-term record of raptor
migration, and its biotic resources by both resident staff and visiting
scientists. This project will provide for site visit by consulting scientists to
assist Sanctuary staff in developing plans to: (1) improve the management of the
site's unique long-term data base; (2) establish a Geographic Information System
(GIS); and (3) increase use of the site as a field laboratory for Appalachian
ecology. ***