* 9310921
* Property, Resources, and the Globalization of Legal Systems
* SBE,SES
* 09/15/1993,02/28/1998
* Peter Vandergeest, Yale University
* Continuing Grant
* Shelton White
* 02/28/1998
* USD 350,000.00

9310921 PELUSO This project will investigate the links between transformations
in local and national property relations and the construction of nation states
in Southeast Asia. The research will describe and explain the reasons for
similarities in outcomes which conform to global models, the reasons for
variation within these similarities across the study region, and the sources of
conflict over property issues. The project will focus on sites in Thailand
(never colonized), Malaysia (colonized by England), and Indonesia (formerly
under Dutch law), to provide comparisons across three different legal
traditions. Major sources of variation in national and local sociolegal
processes include differences among pre- colonial states, in center-periphery
relations, in local property relations, and in different colonial histories. The
research will show how these historical differences at the state level produced
diverse ways of dealing with "customary" or local property relations during the
transition from the colonial period to nation states and market economies. The
project will contribute to empirical and theoretical understanding of the
relationship between local property law and practices and global legal and
economic processes, and particularly how this relationship affects the
allocation of forest and other land resources. The project will employ the
method of "incorporated comparison" to assess how similarities and differences
in local and national sociolegal processes across the region were influenced by
and contributed to processes of global change. The investigators will collect
data from several sources in various countries: cases from both colonial legal
archives and local legal systems, records of changes in the natural environment,
legal documents concerning land administration and transactions, maps and land
surveys across historical periods, and interviews with local leaders and legal
practititioners. The research will detail the different sequenc es through which
territorial states constructed private property regimes and under what
conditions these different sequences led to conflicts between the state and
local people and among local people. In this light, the project will describe
and assess the many implications of these sociolegal processes for understanding
global change. ***