* 9310036
* Ethnic Mobilization, Political Process, and the Demise of   the USSR:  An Event Analysis
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/1993,01/31/1996
* Mark Beissinger, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* JEANETTE CAMPBELL
* 01/31/1996
* USD 82,800.00

9310036 Beissinger This research extends our understanding of nationalist
mobilization through an empirical investigation of the wave of mass unrest that
engulfed the former USSR during the glasnost'period. A unique set of event-level
data on thousands of demonstrations, strikes, and mass violent events in the
former Soviet Union to be completed during this research will explore the role
played by the dynamics of political change and political opportunities in
structuring national consciousness and ethnic mobilization. The data are the
only systematic and detailed record of mass protest activity in the former USSR
currently in existence. Building on previous research, the project uses this
unique set of data to provide new insights into the glasnost'protest cycle, as
well as to explore the ways in which politics acts to structure ethnic
identitites and ethnic political action. Unlike traditional approaches to the
study of nationalist mobilization, this study takes the political arena itself
as a key factor in determining the nature and intensity of ethnic mass action.
In particular, the project focuses on the effects of political liberalization,
elite conflict and turnover, governmental coercion, and electoral competition on
ethnic mobilization and conflict. Data gathered on these factors are used to
explore their roles in triggering waves of ethnic mobilization and in shaping
the character of protest.