* 9310433
* Mathematical Sciences: Geometry of Characteristic Classes   and Non-Abelian Cohomology
* MPS,DMS
* 07/15/1993,12/31/1996
* Dennis McLaughlin, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Ralph M. Krause
* 12/31/1996
* USD 60,000.00

9310433 McLaughlin In his work on algebraic K-theory, Beilinson introduced
characteristic classes for holomorphic bundles, which refine the usual Chern
classes. At present, they cannot be constructed directly from a given bundle and
are poorly understood. McLaughlin will attempt to remedy this by finding
explicit formulae for the Beilinson classes. This work will lead to a new
interpretation of polylogarithms in terms of multicategories. He also expects to
shed new light on Bloch's conjecture concerning characteristic classes of flat
bundles. His methods are inspired by the degree three non-abelian cohomology
recently defined by Breen. This geometric technique will also be used to attack
some "classical" problems in topology, e.g., lifting group actions in bundles
with non-abelian structure group. This research project has important
implications for several areas of mathematics and physics. In number theory,
there is the two hundred-year-old problem of finding the values of Riemann's
zeta function at odd whole numbers. Some of these unknown values are related to
the Beilinson classes, and this project will lead to a better understanding of
the subject. Furthermore, the research provides a framework for understanding
the emerging area of non-abelian geometry. This encompasses such diverse areas
as the classification of three-dimensional spaces (a problem known as the
Poincare conjecture) and even quantum physics (in particular, string theory).
The project's unifying approach has already yielded new insights, and there is
the promise of more to come. ***