* 9310507
* A Study of the 1992 Presidential Campaign Elite
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/1993,01/31/1995
* Warren Miller, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Frank P. Scioli  Jr.
* 01/31/1995
* USD 90,000.00

This research investigation explores the relevant attitudes and campaign
activities of delegates to the 1992 Republican and Democratic party presidential
nominating conventions. The delegates are important because they are not only
involved in the process of selecting the presidential nominees, they also
mobilize and provide the resources that sustain presidential election campaigns.
They not only help elect the president, they provide the context within which a
new president shapes his administration. They also help define the political
parties and structure the political images and the institutional bases of
partisan activities for the party's rank and file as well as for the larger
electorate. The activity of these partisans is usually not limited to attendance
at the national nominating conventions. They are also occupied with local,
county or state political affairs. The delegates include elected public
officials and party officers at every level, as well as many who have no
aspiration for a political career. They by no means include all of the active
participants in presidential electoral politics, but they do represent virtually
all types and categories of presidential campaign activists. The study employs a
mail questionnaire sent to all delegates from both parties attending the
nominating conventions in 1992. It is a multi-purpose study organized around
three sets of objectives. The first objective is an analysis of the level of
agreement between the goals of the political elite and those of the mass
electorate. Second, the investigators expand previous studies of the
communication networks among the individuals located at all levels of
presidential political activity. Finally, they place these two objectives within
the context of the transitions taking place in and around both parties. The
Democrats have opted for a new generation of leadership, while the GOP is facing
turnover in its leadership. The comparisons of the 1992 elites with their
counterparts in the post-Carter and post-Reagan eras will be an invaluable
documentation of change in contemporary politics. The data collection will be
timely because the immediate baseline for monitoring changes within the parties
has been established with comparable data collections in 1980, 1984 and 1988.