* 9310043
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Television News and         Attributions of Responsibility
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/1993,01/31/1996
* Mark Peffley, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* JEANETTE CAMPBELL
* 01/31/1996
* USD 6,760.00

9310043 Peffley An important prerequisite of democratic government is that
citizens have the opportunity to hold elected officials accountable for their
actions. In order for such opportunities to be effective, however, citizens must
base judgments of political responsibility on accessible and relevant
information provided by the mass media. Since most citizens rely heavily on
television for such information, a growing body of research in political science
has begun to investigate the way the network news broadcasts often prevent
citizens from making the most meaningful assessments of political
responsibility. Past research, however, has not examined the importance of
visual stimuli in affecting citizens' judgments of who is responsible for
various national problems. This is unfortunate given that television is
primarily a visual medium where important political information is presented
through visual, as opposed to textual or auditory, channels. This doctoral
dissertation research investigation represents one of the first systematic
investigations of the importance of visual images on citizens assessments of
political responsibility conducted in political science. In addition, while
prior studies have focused extensively upon assessments between individual and
societal responsibility, this research will investigate the influence that the
media has upon citizens' evaluations of the president, and, to this date, no
such studies have been conducted concerning Congress and congressional
incumbents. Consequently, this investigation will also investigate how coverage
from the network news media influences viewers' evaluations of the institutions
of the Presidency and Congress as well as the respective incumbents.
Specifically, the researcher conducts a content analysis of network news
coverage of important political issues as well as a series of experiments
intended to fill in these gaps left by prior research. ***