* 9311959
* Nonlinear Vibronic and Electronic Spectroscopy of Molecules in the Condensed Phase
* NONE,NONE
* 08/01/1993,07/31/1997
* Andreas Albrecht, Cornell University
* Continuing grant
* Joan M. Frye
* 07/31/1997
* USD 487,900.00

9311959 Albrecht In this project of the Physical Chemistry Program of the
Chemistry Division, Prof. A. Albrecht of Cornell University will use four-wave-
mixing nonlinear spectroscopies to study the molecular condensed phase. The
electronic properties of medium -to-large polyatomic molecules will be
investigated to provide data for the continued testing of different theoretical
models for quantum chemical calculations. Also studied will be the dynamics in
the condensed phase by probing the stochastic processes that are responsible for
vibrational and electronic lineshaping. The nonlinear techniques that will be
used in these studies are interferometric coherent spectroscopy (ICS) using
phase-noisy light and femtosecond coherent spectroscopy. %%% This research will
contribute to the ability to extract information about the molecular dynamics in
excited electronic states and solute-solvent interactions in various complex
systems. The ICS technique is still in its early developmental stage but
promises to reveal signals due to Raman transitions that are hidden by solution-
phase broadening interactions. This has special significance for the study of
biological materials for which the technique of Raman spectroscopy is preferred
since it is not affected by the strong absorptions due to water which renders
the method of infrared spectroscopy inappropriate. Additional advantages accrue
for situations where remote coherent detection with pulses of visible light is
advantageous. ***