* 9311343
* AMPP:  Interfacial Processing and Adhesion of Titanium,     Nitride, Diamondlike and Diamond Films on Metallic and      Polymer Substrates
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/1993,10/31/1997
* Vivian Stannett, North Carolina State University
* Continuing Grant
* Robert M. Wellek
* 10/31/1997
* USD 403,763.00

9311343 Narayan Diamond, diamondlike and titanium nitrade films have extremely
desirable chemical, electrical and mechanical properties for a variety of
applications ranging from corrosion and erosion resistant coatings to electronic
packaging of microelectronic devices. However, many of these applications are
limited by poor adhesion of these films with metal and polymer substrates. The
adhesion of a film is determined primarily by internal stresses in the film,
thermal and lattice mismatch, and most importantly by interfacial bonding.
Techniques are required to deposit these films, and methods based upon selective
laser and ion beam irradiation of interfacial regions to improve adhesion
between polymer, diamond and diamond like films and the substrate. The proposed
research addresses interfacial processing and adhesion phenomena in the
following systems of technological importance: diamondlike, titanium nitrade and
diamond films on copper, tungston, titanium, titanium nitride, and polymer
substrates. The adhesion of the polymer to the metal substrate can be improved
through the silane adhesion promoters, but the adhesion of metal to the polymer
substate must rely on interfacial processing. For polymer substrates, a very
thin buffer layer of titanium will be used to improve adhesion between
diamondlike and polymer substrates. The affinity between C (diamond) and the
underlying substrates varies from zero for copper to a very high degree for
titanium and tungston. The proposed research emphasizes: a) interfacial
processing to improve adhesion; b) interface characterization, properties of
thin films and adhesion measurement, and c) modeling to evaluate interfacial
stresses and strains and toughness and to understand the adhesion and
interfacial bonding mechanisms. The structure and chemical composition of the
interfaces will be studied as a function of laser, ion beam, and substrate
parameters. Modeling of stresses and strains within the film and t he interfaces
will be carried out and the results correlated with adhesion measurements of
these films.