* 9311383
* Transition in New and Regenerated Nitrogen Production       in the Arabian Sea
* GEO,OCE
* 06/01/1994,05/31/1997
* Raymond Sambrotto, Columbia University
* Continuing Grant
* Phillip R. Taylor
* 05/31/1997
* USD 277,394.00

OCE-9311383, PI-Sambrotto: In the Arabian Sea, as in other ocean regions, new
production (that component of total nitrogen production fueled by nitrate and N2
fixation) is closely associated with the flux of organic material to deeper
water. This flux is a crucial first step in the absorption of atmospheric C02 by
the ocean, and in the Arabian Sea, is also associated with an extensive suboxic
layer in which a singificant amount of denitrification occurs. In this project,
new (nitrate) and regenerated (ammonium and urea) production will be measured
with 15N tracer techniques during the low productivity spring transition period
and again during the productive southeast monsoon. This provides an unusual
opportunity to examine the seasonal development of elevated rates of new
production that are not dominated by the steady improvement in the light field
as they are in most high latitude systems. The biological nature of this
transition will be evaluated by examing the light response of nitrate uptake as
well as by post-incubation size fractionation experiments to determine if
variations in new production and f-ratio are associated with changes in particle
size distribution. Also, this project is designed to quantify the impact of new
production on the carbon system experimentally during planned time series
stations in which the 15N measurements can be compared to the changes determined
by core measurements of the surface layer carbon system. This will test the
nitrogen limited model of carbon consumption that is a crucial assumption in
many estimates of carbon export.