* 9311086
* Dissertation Research: Molecular Systematics of Artemisia   Sect. Tridentatae
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/1993,01/31/1997
* Daniel Riggs, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Standard Grant
* Mary C. McKitrick
* 01/31/1997
* USD 9,500.00

9311086 Watson Artemesia ( sensu lato ) L. is composed of approximately 400
species distributed throughout the north temperate regions of the world. It is
the largest and ecologically most important genus in the Tribe Anthemideae
(Asteraceae). The genus has been the subject of numerous comparative
biosystematic investigations, but remains poorly understood. Section Tridentatae
is native to western North America and plays an important ecological role in the
sagebrush communities. Tridentatae is composed of 11 species of xerophytic
shrubs, separated from the other North American species by the presence of
homogamous flower heads. The rapid expansion and divergence of Tridentatae ,
coupled with wind pollination has resulted in extensive convergence and parallel
evolution. This has made interpretation of phylogenetic relationships difficult.
The main objectives of this study are to elucidate interspecific phylogenetic
relationships within Tridentatae , and to determine the affinity of Tridentatae
to other subgeneric taxa of Artemesia and to the segregate genus Seriphidium .
Several molecular techniques will be utilized including phylogenetic analysis of
chloroplast DNA and nuclear ribosomal DNA restriction site maps and analysis of
sequence data from the ORFk (Open Reading Frame k) region of the cpDNA genome.
Previously proposed hypotheses of evolutionary relationships of Tridentatae will
be tested using cladistic analyses of molecular data. An examination of
concordance between cytoplasmic and nuclear marker based phylogenies of
interspecific relationships will be used to test proposed modes of speciation
and to examine patterns of character evolution. The inferred phylogenies will be
useful in understanding the evolutionary and ecological success of Tridentatae
in the cold deserts of western North America. %%% This project will obtain
molecular data (both from the chloroplast and nuclear genomes) for 11 species of
sagebrush in the Section Tridentatae of the genus Artemesia . These data will be
used to decide relationships among these species that have been the subject of
some confusion when morphological characters have been used to establish
relationships. These woody shrubs are a highly visible and important component
of the cold desert ecosystem and understanding species relationships will
enhance other research efforts in ecology and biogeography of these plants. ***