* 9311734
* Dissertation Research:  Prehistoric Bororo Subsistence      Change
* SBE,BCS
* 12/01/1993,11/30/1995
* Robert Drennan, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 11/30/1995
* USD 5,430.00

9311734 Drennan Under the direction of Dr. Robert Drennan, Ms. Cristiana Barreto
will collect data for her doctoral dissertation. As part of a larger
archaeological project she will conduct excavation in the plateau region of
Central Brazil. From an ethnographic perspective this region is well known and
characterized by large groups of hundreds of individuals who practice a mixed
foraging and simple agricultural way of life. They live in large villages, and
have complex forms of social organization. On the other hand they are
egalitarian and lack leaders with inherited offices. They also live in a
relatively unproductive environment and this combination of traits is both
unusual and unexpected. Many anthropologists have speculated on the origin of
this social system yet no concrete data is available. Ms. Barreto will attempt
to trace its development archaeologically and determine its cause. Work to date
suggests that prior to 500 BC small groups followed a strictly hunting and
gathering way of life and lived primarily in caves and rock shelters. The period
between 500 BC and 800 AD marks a transition to village life and by 800 AD large
villages appear in the archaeological record. Ms. Barreto will excavate one of
each type of site. In particular she will attempt to recover data which relates
to subsistence activities and to look for objects which indicate contact with
other regions. Some archaeologists believe that the ethnographically observed
pattern developed through outside stimuli. Others believe that agricultural
practices changed, that crops such as maize were introduced and that these
allowed for higher population densities. A final hypothesis suggests that
neither of the above occurred but rather that large villages provide a means
both to deal with environmental unpredictability and to ensure adequate defence
against other human groups. Ms. Barreto's work should provide data to
distinguish among these hypotheses. This research is important for several
reasons. It will increase our understanding of how human societies, at a simple
technological level, adapt to a harsh tropical environment. It will provide data
of interest to many anthropologists and contribute to the training of a
promising young scientist. ***