* 9311328
* Mentoring and Scientific Values
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/1993,02/28/1997
* Glyn Roberts, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Rachelle D. Hollander
* 02/28/1997
* USD 70,605.00

9311328 Sprague The literature on mentoring relationships largely concentrates
on management and the development of leaders for business. This is rather
surprising since higher education, particularly graduate study, bases itself on
the mentor model. Available evidence indicates that mentors have considerable
influence over the developing careers of students. There is some anecdotal and
descriptive information but almost no quantitative data on the influence of
professors-mentors on the development of scientific values and ethics in
students. There is no literature about the impacts of gender, race and
nationality in these relationships. This project proposes to begin to gather
information and develop methods to investigate these matters from the standpoint
of values and ethics in science. This first phase involves a pilot study and
interviews of a sample of faculty-student pairs to obtain information on what
both mentors and students consider important in the mentoring relationship with
respect to values. Both formal mentors, those designated by the university, and
informal mentors, designated by the student, will be interviewed in each of
seven departments: biology, chemistry, computer science, earth sciences,
economics, physics, and psychology. Results from this study will provide more
qualitative information about the characteristics of mentor relationships. The
data base will make it possible to develop a comprehensive list of areas of
values influenced by mentors, and begin to construct a psychometrically sound
questionnaire which could be administered to a larger sample. ***