* 9311885
* Metallaborane Chemistry, Synthesis of New Main Group Transition Element Cluster Types
* NONE,NONE
* 12/15/1993,11/30/1997
* Thomas Fehlner, University of Notre Dame
* Continuing grant
* Brian J. Rappoli
* 11/30/1997
* USD 350,090.00

In this project supported by the Inorganic, Bioinorganic, and Organometallic
Chemistry Program, Dr. Thomas P. Fehlner will investigate the synthesis of new
main group-transition element cluster types. New routes to metal-rich
metallaboranes will be developed by utilizing the high reactivity of metal
carbonyl boranes. In order to obtain an empirical definition of the relative
stability of cluster structural forms, a low temperature oxidative coupling
reaction of cluster dianions will be used to form metastable clusters. In order
to obtain paramagnetic species which are thought to be intermediates in the
formation metallaborane clusters, the reactions of paramagnetic organometallic
precursors with boranes will be investigated. The clusters will be used as
ligands to produce classical coordination complexes which may have unusual
electronic properties and may have nonlinear optical behavior. This project
involves the development of new synthetic methods for cluster molecules which
contain a transition metal and boron. To systematize the structural
relationships between cluster geometries, a low temperature route to metastable
clusters will be developed. Metal cluster compounds will be prepared which
contain unpaired electrons. These species will be utilized to form yet larger
clusters. This work has application both to the understanding the bonding and
reactivity of large clusters and to the design of nonlinear optical devices.