* 9311978
* NSF-CGP Science Fellowship Program:  Production of Valuable Natural Products in Vitro
* O/D,OISE
* 08/15/1993,01/31/1995
* Gamin Wang, SRI International
* Standard Grant
* Patricia Jones Tsuchitani
* 01/31/1995
* USD 39,240.00

9311978 Wang This award will support an eighteen month grant under the NSF CGP
(Center for Global Partnership) Science Fellowship Program for Dr. Gamin M.
Wang, Cellular and Molecular Biology Division, SRI International, Menlo Park,
California. Dr. Wang will undertake a six month cooperative research project
with Dr. Yasuyuki Yamada, Department of Agricultural Chemistry, Kyoto University
in Japan. The research objective is to develop a scalable, in vitro,
differentiated plant cell culture system for production of rose oil from
Rosaceae. Floral organs are the source of numerous valuable secondary metabolic
products, including spices, dyes, medicinal products, and fragrances (such as
rose oil). Differentiation of floral organs from various types of plant tissue
cultures has been accomplished in several species of plants, but this approach
has not been widely used with Rosa species. In the proposed research, two
techniques will be tested. The first method is based on a scheme designed to
promote proliferation of floral organs, i.e., stigmas, from partially
differentiated stigmas of tobacco. The second was originally designed to
differentiate flowers directly from thin layer tissue explants, also from
tobacco. The collaborative aspects of the research will focus on modification of
the growth media, hormones, and other environmental inputs necessary to optimize
induction and differentiation of floral organs of Rosa with these basic schemes.
Once flowers are formed, it will then be possible to analyze them for their rose
oil content. Results of the research should facilitate the development and
production of desirable secondary product components. Dr. Yamada is a wo rld
renowned leader in the field of plant tissue culture for secondary metabolite
production and his laboratory at Kyoto University is well equipped for the
research project. Dr. Wang also has considerable expertise in this area and it
is anticipated that a fruitful collaboration will result with continued
cooperation at the completion of the formal agreement.