* 9311138
* Research Planning Grant:  Development and Validation of an  Isokinetic Wrist Dynamometer
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/1993,09/30/1996
* M. Susan Hallbeck, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Standard Grant
* F. Hank Grant
* 09/30/1996
* USD 18,000.00

9311138 Hallbeck Cumulative trauma disorders (CTD) of the wrist are a common and
costly problem in industry. High force exertions and repetition coupled and
awkward wrist and hand postures are believed to lead to CTD. The levels of these
factors and interactions among them are currently unknown. Additionally, most of
the research done to date, has focused on static forces. An isokinetic
dynamometer for flexion and extension of the wrist must be designed,
constructed, and validated to evaluate the main factors of force repetition and
posture on fatigue or endurance and link them to CTD in workers. The isokinetic
dynamometer must be developed such that force (torque), velocity (repetition),
and range of motion (awkward posture) can be controlled with a personal computer
for reproducibility of the exertion. Measurement and recording of the dependent
variables for either force, torque, endurance, or fatigue will also be performed
via computer. Completion of this phase of the project will permit future novel
research on the effects of independent variables such as hand/handle coupling,
glove type, wrist posture, ambient (hand) temperature, subject gender, and
subject age on dependent variables such as force, torque, endurance, or fatigue.
These tasks require that equipment not in existence be developed and testing
protocols for this equipment formulated. The development of the equipment and
testing protocols require time and planning which are the intent of this
research planning grant. ***