* 9311077
* Calcite Production Rates in the Arabian Sea
* GEO,OCE
* 12/01/1994,11/30/1995
* William Balch, University of Miami
* Continuing Grant
* Phillip R. Taylor
* 11/30/1995
* USD 130,000.00

9311077 Balch This project will address the magnitude of the calcification
relative to the organic production in the Arabian Sea as part of the U.S. JGOFS
program. Geological and geochemical evidence points to calcite dominating the
burial of carbon in this very productive region. However, no direct estimates of
calcification exist at time scales compatible with standard photosynthesis
measurements. Indirect estimates based on vertical changes in alkalinity and
TCO2 suggest that euphotic zone calcification rates will be on the order of
0.3-0.4 gC m-2d-1 during the SE monsoon as compared to primary production of 1-2
gC m-2 d-1. Indirect estimates based on sediments accumulation rates give very
similar predictions. In terms of carbon burial, however, the organic carbon is
preferentially remineralized such that the regional organic carbon deposition is
2.65x10 5 tonnes C yr-1, less than a tenth of the calcite burial of 3.6x10 6
tonnes C y-1 over the northern Arabian Sea. Such indirect estimates of calcite
production require broad assumptions which need to be validated with empirical
data. Direct isotope estimates of calcification are essential to understanding
the magnitude of the production rate of calcite, measured on time scales
compatible with standard primary production measurements. Equally important will
be the comparison of the estimates of calcification with geochemical estimates
made by others in the program. ***