* 9311927
* Installation of Mobile Storage and Integration of the       Oregon State University and University of Oregon Herbaria
* BIO,DEB
* 12/15/1993,03/31/1997
* Aaron Liston, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* None
* 03/31/1997
* USD 317,884.00

9311927 Liston This award will allow the Oregon State University Herbarium to
accept and incorporate an important historical and systematic research
collection of 123,000 plant sheets that is being orphaned by the University of
Oregon Herbarium. A formal collection transfer agreement between the Oregon
institutions was signed in February, 1993 and follows from discussions begun in
1991 when the University of Oregon collections were deemed not to fit the long
range priorities of its biology department. The consolidation plan involves
housing the integrated Oregon collections in mobile compactors on one floor of
the Oregon State herbarium as well as deaccessioning the duplicates (except for
types and complementary material) estimated at 13,000 specimens and donating
them along with older herbarium cases and duplicate books to Boise State
University. The combined collections represent an invaluable teaching and
research resource representing the flora of Oregon. %%% The Oregon State
University Herbarium will accept and incorporate an important historical and
regional research collection of 123,000 plants that is being orphaned by the
University of Oregon Herbarium because the collection no longer fits the long
range priorities of its biology department. The integrated Oregon collections
will be housed in mobile compactors on one floor of the Oregon State herbarium,
with unneeded duplicate material, estimated at 13,000 specimens, donated to
Boise State University. The combined collections represent an invaluable
teaching and research resource representing the flora of Oregon.