* 9311823
* Water Knowledge and Technology in Modern China
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/1993,02/29/1996
* Baruch Boxer, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Edward J. Hackett
* 02/29/1996
* USD 46,053.00

9311823 Boxer Dr. Boxer is seeking to enhance our understanding of the relations
between cultural and technological aspects of the methods employed for
conservation, control and use of water resources in the 20th century China. In
particular, Dr. Boxer is examining how the traditional approach, called shuili,
to control of water resources conflicts with modern Western engineering
approaches. Shuili is not simply folk-knowledge but is a scientific and
technical knowledge based on over two thousand years of trying to control raging
rivers and streams in this ancient land. How the traditional Chinese engineers
have adapted shuili to meet the demands of technological modernization and
change is the principal interest to be investigated in this project. Dr. Boxer
is contrasting Chinese and foreign views over the past 70-80 years on the social
benefits and costs of water engineering in the Yangzi River basin. He is
examining three cases: the controversial Three Gorges Dam, the Dujiangyan
irrigation system, and controversies over physical connections between upstream-
downstream water problems and the social and ecological effects of engineering
solutions. Dr. Boxer is aiming to show how tensions between Chinese and foreign
technological approaches helped redefine traditional Chinese ideas about water's
role in mediating nature- society relations. A major goal is to document the
process through which traditional attitudes and beliefs about the human and
environmental impacts of water engineering change in response to foreign values,
technologies, and political ideologies. Results of this study promise to be of
great interest for examining human/environment interactions and for students of
modern China, and the comparative social history of science, technology and
engineering. ***