* 9311566
* Investigation of the Electronic Structure of High           Temperature Superconductors and Related Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 02/15/1994,07/31/1998
* Zhi-Xun Shen, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* H. Hollis Wickman
* 07/31/1998
* USD 220,000.00

9311566 Shen High energy resolution angle-resolved photoemission measurements
will be carried out on high quality single crystal samples. Doping of the
samples will allow to vary Tc. The photoemission studies are aimed at
understanding the gap anisotropy in HTS materials where an improved energy and
angular resolution will be utilized. The study of Bi2212 will be extended to
YBCO, TI2212, TI2201, and NCCO. Studies of the normal state will correlate the
results of photoemission measurements with transport data aimed at understanding
the doping behavior of Mott insulators. High efficiency core level photoemission
spectroscopy will be used to investigate changes in the local electronic
structure due to the opening of the superconducting gap. The proximity effect
studied near normal metal/superconductor interfaces and ferromagnetic materials
will be investigated with respect to the role of oxygen in determining
differences in the electronic structure of transition metals and transition
metal oxides. %%% Photoemission is a powerful experimental tool in which
impinging radiation leads to the ejection of electronic carriers from a solid.
Measurement of the energy and angle of emission can yield important information
about the electronic structure of the solid. The photoemission technique has
proved to be an excellent technique to study the electronic properties of high
temperature superconductors. In the present study the technique is extended to
various different materials which are available as very high quality single
crystal samples. A much improved spectrometer will be employed in this work. The
technique will be extended to other materials, notable ferromagnetic solids. Of
particular interest will be to compare transition metals such as nickel and iron
with their respective oxides. ***