* 9311544
* Dominance/Status, Gender, and Nonverbal Behavior
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/1993,02/28/1997
* Judith Hall, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* Steven Breckler
* 02/28/1997
* USD 100,849.00

9311544 Hall Several theorists have suggested that subtle aspects of nonverbal
communication help to foster dominance relations among individuals, both as role
displays and as means of interpersonal control. These writers propose that
subordinate or low status people (such as women) are especially sensitive to
nonverbal communication, and that behaviors such as interpersonal touch and
smiling both create and maintain a dominance/status hierarchy between sexes.
However, others have noted that although nonverbal gender differences are well
documented, there is only a slim empirical foundation thus far for
dominance/status as the explanation. The present research will help to establish
how dominance/status, measured in several ways, relates to nonverbal
communication and to nonverbal gender differences. Four studies will be
conducted. The first study, conducted in a laboratory, will relate ability to
decode nonverbal cues to trait measures of status/dominance and will measure
nonverbal behavior is a structured interaction in which dominance/status roles
are assigned experimentally. In Studies 2 and 3, attendees at psychology and
philosophy professional meetings, respectively, will be observed for instances
of interpersonal touch, and their genders and names/affiliations will be noted.
Touch will be related to objective indicators of status/prestige. In Study 4,
employees in the company headquarters of a convenience foodstore chain will be
videotaped while interacting in a controlled situation, and their respective
status's in the organization, genders, and nonverbal behaviors will be recorded.
The value o f the work will be (a) in providing a wide set of definitions of
dominance/status, (b) in relating dominance/status to a wide range of nonverbal
skills and behaviors, (c) in conducting studies in both laboratory and field
settings, (d) in addressing key gaps in current knowledge and theory, variables
to nonverbal communication, and (e) in testing whether these relations are
capable of statistically accounting for sex differences in the nonverbal
communication skills and behaviors observed. The significance of the research
goes beyond the study of gender. For example, subtle nonverbal cues indicating
dominance and subordination may help to express and maintain racism, through
self-fulfilling interpersonal expectations. And, in work environments,
hierarchical roles may be hard to break down due to employees' continued but
unconscious use of dominance and subordination cues. ons of the ways that
different things relate to each other at specific places and the ways that
places are connected with each other. The study of i i ! ! ! ! D i i ( Times New
Roman Symbol & Arial s " h 7 e7 e h > Hall Abstract Denise A. Spain Denise A.
Spain