* 9311113
* U.S. JGOFS: Microbial Communities in the Arabian Sea:       Composition, Size, Spectra, and Growth Rates from           Individual Cell Properties
* GEO,OCE
* 11/01/1994,04/30/1999
* Robert Olson, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Continuing Grant
* Phillip R. Taylor
* 04/30/1999
* USD 310,688.00

9311113 Olson A central mission of the JGOFS project in the Arabian Sea is to
determine how efficiently the carbon pump operates in this region and how it
responds to changes in physical forcing. To approach these problems we need to
analyze the structure of the food web and determine how it varies with
geographical and temporal gradients in nutrients supply and water column mixing.
The juxtaposition of productive and oligotrophic oceanic systems in the Arabian
Sea, and the regular oscillation between very high and low rates of nutrient
supply under relatively constant conditions of solar illumination, offers
opportunities for us to gain insights into food web regulation processes. In
this project, Dr. Olson will (1) Characterize the distribution, abundance, and
light scatter properties of the picoplankton and nanoplankton at the four
intensive stations and at selected intermediate stations, using dual beam flow
cytometry and DNA specific staining to distinguish heterotrophic as well as
autotrophic organisms; (2) Estimate in situ growth rates of specific groups of
phytoplankton, and grazing pressure on these groups, from diel patterns in cell
number, light scatter properties and DNA content of individual cells from depth
profiles; and (3) Test the hypothesis that the phytoplankton are physiologically
N-limited during non-monsoon periods by measuring the C:N ratios of
phytoplankton ( in particular, coccolithophores and picoplankton) purified by
cell sorting. Relative responses of different groups of phytoplankton to N
enrichment will be determined from 14C bicarbonate incubation experiments
followed by cell sorting to obtain cell-specific growth rates.