* 9311759
* Programming Paradigms for Computational Science
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/1994,08/31/1996
* Per Brinch Hansen, Syracuse University
* Continuing Grant
* Frank D. Anger
* 08/31/1996
* USD 100,000.00

9311759 Brinch Hansen The goal of this project is to develop a new programming
methodology for computational science based on programming paradigms for
multicomputers. The research is guided by a precisely defined paradigm concept:
A programming paradigm is defined as a class of algorithms that have the same
control structure. For every paradigm, a general program is developed that
implements the common control structure on a multicomputer. From the general
program, two or more model programs are derived that illustrate the use of the
paradigm to solve specific problems. The general problem includes a few
unspecified data types and procedures that vary from one application to another.
A model program is obtained by replacing these data types and procedures with
the corresponding data types and procedures from a sequential program that
solves the same problem. The essence of the programming methodology is that a
model program has a parallel component that implements a paradigm and a
sequential component for a specific application. The clear separation of the
issues of parallelism and the details of application is essential for writing
model programs that are easy to understand. So far, only a fraction of the
possible paradigms have been studied. This project would follow up a preliminary
investigation of regular computations with a study of irregular computations
that require dynamic load balancing. ***