* 9311004
* Dissertation Research:  Significance of Inter-Specific      Variation in Plumage Patterns of Birds
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/1993,08/31/1994
* H. Bradley Shaffer, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Fred Stollnitz
* 08/31/1994
* USD 11,900.00

9311004 Shaffer Explanations for species differences in color patterns have
usually invoked variation in perceptual systems, such as female preferences.
Because conspicuousness of color depends upon context, properties of the
environment should also affect the evolution of color patterns. Through
observational and experimental studies, Ms. Karen Marchetti has shown that
differences in color patterns among warbler species of the genus Phylloscopus
can be predicted from environmental and behavioral features that affect signal
transmission. Her studies were conducted at one locality in the breeding season,
and concentrated on mechanisms of sexual selection (female choice and male-male
competition). Now she will extend the study to encompass the non-breeding season
and geographical variation. First, she will experimentally manipulate plumage
patterns of one species, which maintains individual territories through the
winter, in order to examine potential selective forces (such as predation) that
could balance identified selective forces in the breeding season. Second, she
will study a new locality in the breeding season, measuring the extent to which
geographical variation in coloration (within species) is associated with
geographic variation in habitat. Third, she will examine habitat associations
and display movements in other groups of birds to determine the extent to which
factors influencing the evolution of coloration in Phylloscopus can be
generalized. This doctoral-dissertation research will contribute to a number of
important areas in evolutionary and behavioral biology. It will shed light on
the conditions that lead to sameness or difference in appearance between males
and females, on the mechanisms of sexual selection, and on the importance of the
non-breeding season in affecting the evolution of displays and plumage patterns.