* 9311867
* The Sevilleta Field Station: Development of a Library/      Computer Center and expansion of Housing for Visiting       Researchers
* BIO,DBI
* 01/01/1994,06/30/1996
* Clifford Crawford, University of New Mexico
* Standard Grant
* None
* 06/30/1996
* USD 175,000.00

9311867 Crawford, C. The Sevilleta Field Station serves a large number of
research scientists and students who study the extensive and ecologically
diverse region of central New Mexico. The region incorporates transition zones
among numerous biomes, including Great Plains Grassland, Chihuahuan Forests.
Additional biotic assemblages within these biomes include Rio Grande "Bosque"
(Riparian Cottonwood Forest) and Wetlands, Subalpine Forests, and Subalpine
Grasslands. Much of the current scientific research in the region focuses on
biotic responses to climate change at various spatial and temporal time scale
(seasonal, annual, and long-term), biodiversity issues, and ecosystem
restoration following natural and anthropogenic disturbance. Recently the
Sevilleta Field Research Station has completed construction of several
residences and laboratory facilities to meet the demand for field logistical
support. Construction of a shop/storage building and a plant lath-house is
scheduled to begin in March 1993. Additional funds have been used to provide
laboratory equipment, computer communication systems, meteorological
instruments, and a 4x4 field vehicle. This project will support significant
increase in the research support capability of the Sevilleta Field Research
Station. The project includes construction of a library/computer-center for the
purpose of increasing research capabilities by resident and visiting scientists.
The library will contain books and scientific jounals relevant to research
activities in the Sevilleta region, permitting ready access by station
scientists to current and past literature sources. The computer-center will
consist of 20 modular desk-units, each equipped with one of a variety of
computer teminals or PC's (5 IBM-compatible PC's, 5 Apple PC's, and 10 Unix
Terminals, all connected to the Sevilleta Field Station Network). Resident and
visiting scientists and graduate students can be assigned desk-units during
their stays a t the station, permitting readily available access to computer
networks, and providing a secure and spacious work area for data anaylsis and
manuscript preparation. In Addition four additional residences will be
constructed. This will bring the total field station residence capacity to 48
persons. ***