* 9311913
* Gallium Arsenide Heterostructures by Optical                Detection of Pulsed Nuclear Magnetic Resonance
* MPS,DMR
* 01/01/1994,12/31/1996
* Erwin Hahn, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Jean Toulouse
* 12/31/1996
* USD 220,000.00

9311913 Hahn The technique of sensitive optical detection of nuclear magnetic
resonance (ODNMR) in semiconductors will be applied to study the properties of
gallium arsenide heterostructure and quantum wells. ODNMR measurements will be
made of electric fields, Knight shifts, doped constituents, and impurities. A
new pulsed and double resonance ODNMR technique will be developed and applied to
GaAs heterostructures in order to improve the detection sensitivity and
versatility beyond conventional cw ODNMR techniques. The research will focus on
the study of spin-spin coupling between photo-induced GaAs surface spin
polarization and external spin systems. %%% This research project will develop
new techniques involving optical spectroscopy techniques and radio-frequency
nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy techniques. The relatively weak
interaction between a nucleus and a radio-frequency signal is amplified and
detected by optical or laser spectroscopy methods. These techniques will be
applied to surface atoms on semiconductors. The objective to detect a transfer
of magnetism from electrons in the semiconductors to non-semiconductor atoms
residing on the semiconductor surface. The results will be of fundamental
interest and will provide unique information of potential application in
semiconductor technology. ***