* 9311210
* Dissertation Research: Indirect Interactions Mediated by    Changing Plant Chemistry: Does Beaver Browsing Benefit      Beetles?
* BIO,DEB
* 07/15/1993,12/31/1995
* Thomas Whitham, Northern Arizona University
* Standard Grant
* Lindsay Fox
* 12/31/1995
* USD 8,404.00

9311210 Whitham Primary work has detect an interaction involving beavers, leaf
beetles, and cottonwood trees: beetles appear to hypothesis that beetles benefit
from beaver herbivory. cottonwoods contain salicin, a chemical that is an
effective defense against mammalian herbivores but is sequestered and used by
the beetles for their own defense, the PIs pose that beetles are attracted to
beaver-cut trees because the resprout growth is both nutritionally superior and
chemically better defended. Beetles fed resprout growth develop faster, weigh
more at maturity, and are better defended against predators than those fed
nonresprout growth. This study expands previous work to assess whether 1)
resprout cottonwood is nutritionally a better food resource for beetles and 2)
resprout cotton wood contains more defensive chemicals that directly benefit the
beetles. The study also examines the importance of beaver herbivory in affecting
the distribution of beetles and will examine the generality of this interaction
by censuring other river systems. %%% Indirect interactions between distantly
related taxed have rarely been studied in detail. The current study focuses on
such on interaction. This is important to identify in the cottonwood system
because beavers are keystone species that can alter the environment at the
landscape level, &amp; cottonwoods are currently suffering widespread dieback in
the western US.. ***