* 9311587
* Metal-Ligand Electron-Transfer Complexes:  Experimental     Investigations of the Limits of Semiclassical Electron-     Transfer Theory
* MPS,CHE
* 12/15/1993,11/30/1997
* Jay Winkler, California Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Brian J. Rappoli
* 11/30/1997
* USD 496,885.00

In this project in the Inorganic, Bioinorganic, and Organometallic Chemistry
Program, Dr. Harry B. Gray and Dr. Jay R. Winkler of the California Institute of
Technology will explore metal-ligand electron-transfer (ET) processes under
conditions where semiclassical ET theory should break down. To determine the
role of tunneling, a series of Ir(I) complexes in which the ET rates at high
driving forces are substantially slower than theoretically predicted will be
studied. To aid in the theoretical interpretation of the ET rates, nuclear
reoganization parameters, temperature, and isotope effects on ET rates will be
determined. A systematic investigations of bimolecular ET reactions of Ir(I)
dimers will show whether electronic excited products can reduce the effective ET
reaction driving force. Photoinduced ET reactions in the region where ET is
slower than predicted tend to be faster than recombination processes at
comparable driving forces. Based on this fact, coordinatively unsaturated metal
complexes with weakly coupled electron acceptors will be investigated to
determine whether long-lived charge-transfer states can be prepared by direct
light absorption. Some of the most important processes which occur in chemical
and biological systems involve the transfer of electrons and the rate of such
transfers is often critical to the operation of the process. A semi-empicical
theoretical model has been developed to account for these rates. In this study
specially designed iridium complexes will be used to probe the factors which
this theory uses to describe the rate of electron transfer. Such studies are
important both to the basic understanding of electron transfer and to the
development of new methods of, for example, solar energy conversion.