* 9311563
* Multifunctional Polymerization Kinetics and Network         Structure Thereof
* ENG,CBET
* 08/15/1993,01/31/1997
* Nicholas Peppas, Purdue Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Maria Burka
* 01/31/1997
* USD 197,419.00

Abstract - Peppas - 9311563 Highly crosslinked polymers have potential uses as
materials for information storage systems, aspherical lenses and optical fiber
coatings. The requirements for the manufacture of these materials include a
rapid polymerization rate, low volume shrinkage on polymerization, high
dimensional and thermal stability of the polymer, and minimal structural
inhomogeneities within the polymer network. Polydimethacrylates are currently
used in many applications; often produced from dimethacrylate monomers. These
reactions are slow, they may take 30-40 minutes to reach liniting conversions.
Acrylate monomers react seven to ten times faster and are therefore better
polymerization systems to study. The mathematical modeling of multifunctional
polymerization/crosslinking reactions will be investigated in this research
project. A theoretical model for the prediction of initiator efficiency
thoughout the course of the polymerization will be developed. Fundamental
descriptions for the propagation and termination rate constants will also be
developed. These expressions will be incorporated into the typical initiation-
propagation-termination mechanism and model simulations will be carried out.
Kinetic gellation simulations will be carried out to determine the final network
structure at the specified reaction conditions. Polymerization/crosslinking of
polyethylene glycol diacrylate networks will be studied by exposure to UV light.
Volume shrinkage on polymerization, swelling characteristics, molecular weight
between crosslinks, glass transition temperature and thermal stability of the
resulting networks will be determined and used to analyze the crosslinked
struture. By varying the length of the etylene glycol unit between the two C=C
bonds, changes in the kinetics of these polymerizations will be studied. The
conversion-time profiles will be obtained at different light intensities using a
calorimetric and a spectroscopic technique. limitingthroughoutstructureethylene9
9 9 9 9 9 9 9 9Abstract - Peppas - 9311563 Highly crosslinked polymers have
potential uses as materials for information storage systems, asp L T ^ g o Z \ L
! ! D ! ! o L ( Times New Roman Symbol &amp; Arial | V ^ L T ' ^ 6 g J " h A %F
% / Maria K. Burka Maria K. Burka