* 9311352
* Collaborative Research: Circadian Rhythms of Gene           Expression in Cyanobacteria
* BIO,MCB
* 04/01/1993,03/31/1997
* Susan Golden, Texas A&M Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Philip Harriman
* 03/31/1997
* USD 217,783.00

Circadian rhythms are an adaptation of organisms to the regular daily change of
their environment. Although much is known about the formal properties of
circadian rhythms which allow them to synchronize to the daily light/dark
cycles, almost nothing is known about how these rhythms work on a biochemical
level. This project is two-fold. First, the simplest organism now known to
express circadian rhythms will be used namely, prokaryotic cyanobacteria.
Second, genetic tools will be used to analyze its mechanism. A reporter gene
encoding a bioluminescence enzyme has been attached to an endogenous promoter.
Not only does this construct make these cyanobacteria bioluminescent, the glow
meets all of the salient criteria of circadian rhythmicity. This is the first
"artificial" overt rhythm of a circadian clock yet described. This unique case
of circadian gene expression is being exploited to: (1) identify by action
spectroscopy the photoreceptor involved in the clock's entrainment; (2) analyze
the control pathway by which the circadian clock regulates this " artificial"
rhythm; and (3) search for genes which are involved in the clock's central
mechanism. %%% Using a simple bacterial system should accelerate the
identification of cellular mechanisms by which daily rhythms. Dr. Golden is
collaborating with Dr. Carl Johnson of Vanderbilt University on this project.