* 9311029
* International Conference:  Bose and the 20th Century        Physics, Award in Inidan and U.S. Currency
* O/D,OISE
* 12/01/1993,11/30/1994
* Kameshwar Wali, Syracuse University
* Standard Grant
* Marjorie Lueck
* 11/30/1994
* USD 13,750.00

9311029 Wali Description: This is a group travel proposal for five U.S.
scientists to participate in the S.N. Bose International Centenary Meeting: Bose
and 20th Century Physics, Calcutta, Dec. 30 - Jan. 5, 1994. The meeting will
gather together some two dozen leading physicists from the U.S. and Europe to
honor one of India's legendary scientists and one of the most prominent
scientists of this century. The organizers are K.C. Wali, Syracuse University
and C.K. Majumdar, the National Bose Centre for Basic Sciences. Financial
supporters include the Indian Department of Science and Technology, the Royal
Society of London, the International Centre for Theoretical Physics,Trieste.
Bose made outstanding contributions in the development of quantum theory, in low
and high energy nuclear physics, statistical mechanics, superconductivity/
superfluidity, quantum optics, statistics, and organic chemistry. The program is
of very high quality. An eminent array of speakers will lecture on topics in
particle physics, quantum optics and quantum mechanics, general relativity,
statistics, condensed matter physics, chemistry. Scope: This meeting is an
important international event that has attracted scientists from diverse
disciplines from all parts of the world. A large contingent of scientists from
Europe, Japan and the developing countries will be present, plus leading Indian
physicists, science policy makers and students. Considering the international
standing of the invited speakers, this is an exceptional opportunity for the
exchange of ideas on topics of current interest. The event will be beneficial
for Indian and non-Indian participants. ***