* 9311368
* The Ahmarian Tradition of the Upper Paleolithic in          Northeastern Sinai
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/1993,01/31/1996
* Bruce Gladfelter, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 01/31/1996
* USD 31,831.00

9311368 Phillips With National Science Foundation support Drs. James Phillips
and Bruce Gladfelter will conduct one season of archaeological fieldwork in the
Sinai Desert of Egypt. They will carry out small scale excavations at sites
which belong to the Ahmarian tradition and date to approximately 30,000 to
35,000 years ago. They will also focus on associated sediments from this period
which are likely to contain pollen and other remains permitting fine scale
environmental reconstruction. This work constitutes the first step in a larger
scale project in which the team hopes to excavate entire sites to reconstruct
specific activities and to integrate site specific data into a broader
environmental context. The research should reveal the underlying subsistence
strategies employed by Ahmarian groups. The Amharian dates to the early Upper
Paleolithic period in the Near East and represents one of the earliest cultures
uniquely associated with anatomically modern humans. What makes it of particular
interest is its limited areal distribution. Dr. Phillips believes that Amharian
peoples developed subsistence strategies which facilitated adaptation to what
was a patchy mosaic environment and that group size and movement maximized use
of a wide range of areal limited resources. The data he wishes to collect will
allow him to examine this hypothesis. This research is important for several
reasons. It will provide data of interest to many archaeologists. It will also
increase our understanding of how humans at a simple level of technology adapted
to a marginal semi-arid environment.