* 9311143
* Dissertation Research: Effects of Carbon Fertilization and  Temperature on Methane Cycling
* BIO,DEB
* 07/15/1993,06/30/1995
* William Schlesinger, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Richard F. Dame
* 06/30/1995
* USD 13,968.00

9311143 Schlesinger The proposed research makes use of a rather unusual
freshwater swamp ecosystem on the North Carolina coastal plain which is flooded
and drained twice- daily due to tidal forcing. In these forests, the flooding
regime is essentially uncoupled from seasonal patterns of soil warming. I
propose to monitor the major cycling pathways for CH4 in situ over a one-year
period to determine if sources and sinks respond equally to elevated
temperatures. Seasonal studies have rarely considered both production and
oxidation of CH4. The field data will be compared to the temperature response
characteristics of methane production and oxidation as determined in the
laboratory. This study will show if the temperature-limited step for oxidation
is enzymatic, implying a large increase with soil-warming, or O2 diffusion
implying a smaller response. Finally, I propose to determine the potential for
CO2-fertilization and elevated temperature to synergistically increase methane
flux through increased root productivity and root exudation. Such positive-
feedbacks have important implications for modelling trace gas emissions under
various climate change scenarios. %%% There is legitimate concern that elevated
CO2 concentrations in the atmosphere will increase CH4 emissions from wetlands.
Elevated CO2 may stimulated methanogenesis directly by increasing plant
production or indirectly by increasing soil temperature. ***