* 9311618
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Understanding International Environmental Regimes: The Origins, Creation and Expansion  of the Ozone Regime
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/1993,01/31/1995
* Timothy McKeown, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Frank P. Scioli  Jr.
* 01/31/1995
* USD 7,613.00

McKeown 9311618 This doctoral dissertation research support improves our
understanding of international regimes and international environmental relations
by examining the creation and expansion of the "Ozone Regime" - the series of
international agreements designed to protect stratospheric ozone. Although
widely recognized as an historic case of environmental cooperation, there has
been little in-depth analysis of the ozone regime. The first part of the study
examines the development of "international regime" as an analytical concept,
assesses its strengths and weaknesses, and delineates how the dominant theories
of regime creation and change would attempt to explain the ozone regime. The
second part of the research uses a comprehensive, process-tracing case study of
the origins, creation, and expansion of the ozone regime to examine the accuracy
of these expectations. Then, the investigators examine the importance of three
factors that are largely ignored by existing regime theory but which preliminary
research indicates may be of primary importance in explaining the ozone regime:
1)international economic competition; 2)the influence of pre-exisiting
international institutions; and, 3)the "structure" of the negotiations
themselves. The research concludes by arguing for synthesizing the consideration
of these types of factors with the strengths of exisiting theory to obtain a
fuller understanding of international regimes and international environmental
relations. The study is significant in three important ways: First, it provides
the first comprehensive, theoretically informed case study of the ozone regime.
Second, it critiques exisiting regime theory by comparing its expectations to
this important case. Third, it expands our understanding of international
regimes by identifying, analyzing and generating hypotheses concerning important
but previously ignored causal factors. ***