* 9311803
* CONFERENCE SUPPORT:THE 1993 RESEARCH CONFERENCE ON NONLINEAROPTICS AND LASERS AUGUST 2-6, 1993, TO BE HELD AT BREWSTER  ACADEMY, WOLFEBORO, NEW HAMPSHIRE
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/1993,01/31/1994
* Dana Anderson, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* Athena C. Harvey
* 01/31/1994
* USD 6,000.00

9311803 Anderson This proposal requests a grant in support of the 19923 Gordon
Research Conference on Nonlinear Optics and Lasers to be held at Brewster
Academy, Wolfeboro, New Hampshire, August 2-6, l993. As in previous years, the
purpose of this conference is to provide an informal forum for the presentation
and discussion of new work on selected topics in nonlinear optics, quantum
electronic, and lasers, and their applications to physics and chemistry. An
informal atmosphere with a strong emphasis on discussion is intended to
encourage the exchange of ideas in a manner not possible at regular meetings of
professional societies. Particular effort is made to provide an opportunity for
graduate student and postdocs to interact in this informal atmosphere with
foremost experts in the field. A total attendance of approximately 135
scientist, including students and postdocs, from universities and industry is
anticipated. It is proposed that the estimated total expenses for the conference
of $42,000 be shared by the National Science Foundation, the Office of Naval
Research, the Air Force Office of Scientific Research, the Army Research Office,
and the Chairman's Special Fund of the Gordon Research Conferences. The National
Science Foundation grant will be used to provide partial support for invited
speakers and selected junior faculty postdoctorals and students who, because of
limitations of their own source of funding, require financial assistance to
attend the conference. No honoraria will be paid. ***