* 9311301
* Dissertation Research: The Role of Plant Parasitism in      Community Structure
* BIO,DEB
* 10/15/1993,09/30/1996
* Daniel Doak, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Standard Grant
* Mark Courtney
* 09/30/1996
* USD 8,000.00

9311301 Doak Unlike most plants which obtain water and nutrients from the soil
and carbohydrates from photosynthesis, parasitic plant species obtain at least
some of their water, nutrients, and carbohydrates by tapping into the vascular
systems of other plant species. Despite their widespread occurrence, the role of
parasitic plants in structuring plant and herbivore communities has received
little attention from researchers. The proposed research will examine the role
of nutrient, water, and secondary compound transfer from host plants to
parasitic plants, and the effect of this transfer not only on the plant species,
but also on the insect herbivores exploiting both the parasite and host plants.
A series of field and greenhouse studies will 1) examine the effects of
parasitic plants on their surrounding plant and herbivore communities and 2)
compare the impacts and interactions of two types of plant predators, parasitic
plants and herbivores, on host plant performance and plant community structure.
This work will provide information on when and why parasitic plants exert
significant effects in natural ecological communities and in agricultural
settings, where several parasitic plants are economically important weeds. %%%
More generally, this work will examine a complex parasite-host interaction from
the viewpoint of its community-wide effects and its indirect interactions on
other co-occurring species. *** INI P MOUSE SYS @ j ! x DOSAPP INI Vb &lt;
9311301 Doak Unlike most plants which obtain water and nutrients from the soil
and carbohydrates from phot osynthesis, parasi &amp; ( J L d i # ( F ( ( ( Times
New Roman Symbol &amp; Arial " h M eM e Doak/Marvier abstract Dissertation
Elizabeth M. Behrens Elizabeth M. Behrens