* 9311748
* LINGUIST Software Development
* SBE,BCS
* 07/15/1993,12/31/1994
* Helen Aristar-Dry, Eastern Michigan University
* Standard Grant
* Paul G. Chapin
* 12/31/1994
* USD 4,000.00

9311748 Dry This grant will be used in modifying and developing editing software
for The LINGUIST List. The LINGUIST List is an Internet discussion forum for
academic linguists, which is distributed from Texas A&M University and moderated
by Anthony Aristar (Texas A&M) and Helen Dry (Eastern Michigan University). In
its 26 months of existence it has experienced extremely rapid growth in both
subscribers and functions. LINGUIST provides an already-established and fully
functional means of communicating effectively with members of the discipline
across the world; and its success demonstrates the viability of the electronic
medium as a means of stimulating linguistic research. However, LINGUIST needs to
be made more efficient, as its expansion has already overburdened its current
editorial resources. If it is to continue, LINGUIST needs to be made more
efficient, as its expansion has already overburdened its current editorial
resources. If it is to continue, LINGUIST must have editing software that is
easy to learn and designed specifically for the intelligent handling of large
volumes of mail. Part of the current project's budget, then, will be spent in
producing software specifically aimed at improving LINGUIST's mail and data
handling capabilities; and part will go toward the creation of self-
instructional materials (for example, a computer tutorial) for training new
student assistants on LINGUIST. ***