* 9311366
* Stanford University Composites Design Center Planning       Meeting
* ENG,EEC
* 03/15/1993,11/30/1993
* Stephen Tsai, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* alexander schwarzkopf
* 11/30/1993
* USD 10,000.00

Designing with composites has often been based on a "black aluminum" approach.
Some design tolls have been developed to advance the design of composites in the
past decade. The manufacturing processes of composites have also been dominated
by manual operations. Nearly all manufacturing methods used today are by batch
rather than continuous process. An Industry/University Cooperative Research
Center on Composites at Stanford University could provide a better mechanism to
achieve efficiency and economy in material and processes in terms of energy
consumption, dual-use technologies, and friendliness to the environment. The
Center will focus on the integrated material and processing technology such as
thermoplastic composites and continuous manufacturing processes for low-cost
civilian applications. A planning meeting will study if industry will support an
Industry/University Cooperative Research Center on Composites Technology to be
headquartered at Stanford University. The meeting will assess industry interest
and determine if the Center has sufficient support and merit to meet the
Industry/University Cooperative Research Centers Program criteria. The proposed
research projects will address: 1) computer-based data base for composite
design; 2) process research on continuous or fast consolidation such as
pultrusion and thermo-forming; 3) research in methodology of testing,
inspection, maintenance, and repair of composite material; 4) ultrasonic welding
of thermoplastics for assembly and repair; 5) design of low-cost glass-
thermoplastics tapes for structural composite; 6) design of low-cost stiffened
composite panel. The Principle Investigator is recognized as an eminent
researcher and has the resource for this planning meeting. The Program Director
recommends Stanford University be awarded $10,000 for three months.