* 9311406
* Mathematical Sciences: Algorithms and Numerical Analysis for Partial Differential and Integral Equations
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/1994,11/30/1997
* Lars Wahlbin, Cornell University
* Continuing Grant
* Deborah Lockhart
* 11/30/1997
* USD 315,000.00

9311406 Bramble The investigator and his colleague study new techniques and
methods of analysis of behavior in existing approximation methods, and introduce
and analyze new algorithms for the numerical approximation of various problems.
Specific areas to be considered include: i) Preconditioned iterative methods for
fast solution of resulting algebraic equations. ii) Finite element methods in
domains with curved boundaries and interfaces. iii) Local behavior of finite
element methods in differential and integral equation problems with
singularities. iv) Superconvergence phenomena in differential and integral
equations. Numerical experimentation and examples will play important roles in
the discovery and elucidation of various numerical methods. Of course, practical
application is a motivating factor for the problems studied here. One of the
principal aims of the studies proposed is to develop a deeper understanding of
many existing methods, improve them or develop new ways of treating old and new
problems. This kind of understanding is central to the design of accurate and
efficient algorithms for the use in present and future computer environments.
The investigators are researching various questions concerning the practical
solution of problems of interest in engineering and science. For example, such
problems give rise to extremely large sets of equations and the investigators
study mathematical questions related to computing their solutions. One aim is to
construct methods that are faster and more accurate than existing ones. A second
aim is to invent and study techniques for the solution of problems heretofore
beyond the scope of even the most powerful computers. Some areas of application
in which the above mentioned studies are very important are Structural
Mechanics, Fluid Dynamics, Groundwater flow and Electromagnetic theory.