* 9311795
* Flow-Induced Orientation in Liquid Crystalline Polymers and its Influence on the manufacture of Precision-Molded Parts
* ENG,CBET
* 06/15/1993,05/31/1997
* Dale Pearson, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Mihail Roco
* 05/31/1997
* USD 240,617.00

This is a CRISP (Combined Research - Industrial Sabbatical Program) proposal for
a joint project between the UCSB and AT&T Bell Laboratories. The main objective
is to control the molecular structure and orientation of liquid crystalline
polymers (LCPs) during injection molding in order to obtain precise manufactured
parts and increased electrical conductivity. The research approach combines
molecular theory modeling to predict the behavior of LCP melts, experimental
studies of their rheological and optical microstructural properties, and various
precision molding processes. The selected model thermotropic LCP is well suited
for rheological and structural studies, and will open a more fundamental
approach to characterize the LCPs as compared to previous studies. The project
will use resources at the UCSB and AT&T Bell Laboratories. According to the
CRISP requirements, the PI will submit a report to NSF after the completion of
the industrial visit of Prof. Pearson in order to evaluate a possible
redirection of research. Applications include high accuracy interconnection
parts used in the fiber optics and electronics industry, with an immediate use
in the construction of the AT&T nationwide data network. The selected LCP is the
base for development of an "enabling" technology in high precision molding, with
optoelectronic devices as a first application area.