* 9311484
* Connections to NSFNET for North Carolina Institutions
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/1993,02/29/1996
* Joe Ragland, MCNC
* Standard Grant
* Mark A. Luker
* 02/29/1996
* USD 235,422.00

9311484 Ragland The CONCERT Network (Communications for North Carolina
Education, Research, and Technology) is a mid-level network that serves the
State of North Carolina. CONCERT is connected directly to the NSFNET Backbone
Network. It is the intention of CONCERT to offer NSFNET connections to all
higher education institutions in North Carolina. This proposal requests support
to establish ten new connections for 4 year colleges in the state including:
Belmont Abbey College, Bennett College, Brevard College, Gardner-Webb College,
Johnson C. Smith University, Louisburg College, Mars Hill College, Pfeiffer
College, St. Augustine's College, and St. Mary's College. Three additional
colleges that have "connection" support from other sources (Greensboro College,
Salem College, and St. Andrews College) request training and Network Information
Support (NIC Services) from the CONCERT organization. A primary goal of CONCERT
is to facilitate collaborative projects and sharing of resources between
institution, including those outside the state. CONCERT will provide operations
management and information services as well as provide appropriate dedicated
connections to the thirteen institutions. The universities and colleges need
greater functionality and network speed to be able to access supercomputers,
libraries, and make file transfers along with being able to implement a more
reliable mail system. Students and faculty research will benefit from the link.
This is also a unique opportunity for the schools to explore innovative
educational resources. ***