* 9311420
* Industry-University Cooperative Research Grant:             Model Predictive Control of Nonliner, Stochastic Processes
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/1993,08/31/1995
* James Rawlings, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* Maria Burka
* 08/31/1995
* USD 106,125.00

Abstract - Rawlings - 9311420 Of the advanced process control methods, model-
predictive control (MPC) is probably the most popular method in industrial use
today. Linear MPC refers to the class of control algorithms that compute a
manipulated variable profile by utilizing a linear process model to optimize a
linear or quadratic open-loop performance objective over a future horizon
subject to linear inequality constraints on the state and manipulated variables.
The first move of this open-loop optimal manipulated variable profile is
implemented. This procedure is repeated at each time interval and the process
measurements are used to update the optimization problem. While the process
model is linear, the controller is nonlinear because of the inequality
constraints. The objective of this research is to extend this theory to develop
a more flexible and industrially relevant framework for process control
applications. The issue of how to extend existing theory to the case of
incomplete state measurements from nonlinear, stochastic systems will be
investigated. This extension is important for industrial applications because
the number and types of available sensors are limited and the sensors are
subject to noise and occasional failure. This combined constrained state
estimation and state feedback control, subject to the process constraints, would
allow greater flexibility in designing the controller for challenging process
control applications. The application of the method to nonlinear processes will
also be explored, as most chemical processes are inherently nonlinear. This is
an industry/university co operative research project; DuPont is cosponsoring the
research. ! L !This program cannot be run in DOS mode. $ NE 4 =E V H @ P | V B P
a ^ 0 ` 0 moire WEP KERNEL GDI USER ? ? ? c ? ? ? ? x ? moire1.exe SAVERDLGPROC
SAVERINIT LAbstract - Rawlings - 9311420 Of the advanced process control
methods, model-predictive control (MPC) is probably the most 0 0 ! ! D 0 0 (
Times New Roman Symbol &amp; Arial &gt; &gt; " h k{ { { ~ a / Maria K. Burka
Maria K. Burka