* 9311655
* International Symposium on Electrical Energy Systems, Dhaka,Bangladesh, December, 1993
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/1993,02/28/1995
* Saifur Rahman, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Marjorie Lueck
* 02/28/1995
* USD 22,850.00

9311655 Rahman Description: This project is to support an International
Symposium on Electrical Energy Systems, to be held in Dhaka, Bangladesh during
December 1993. The purpose is to enhance interactions among Bangladeshi and U.S.
scientists, engineers, and planners with a view to further development of an
integrated system approach to electrical energy systems planning and analysis,
especially as these apply to developing countries' conditions. Six speakers are
to be supported for travel to Dhaka to present keynote papers. The focus areas
of the presentations will include: technical and non-technical losses of
electricity; system reliability and maintainability; optimum generation mix and
fuel diversity; energy management and conservation; and environment sensitive
planning. The sessions will include presentations made by Bangladesh speakers
about the electrical energy sector in that countries, its technical problems and
prospects, presentations about utility practices and research tools in developed
countries, papers in the five focus areas. Parallel workshops will be held to
address the five focus areas, to be followed by general discussions of the
working groups' reports. Scope: The project deals with an area that is extremely
important to the developing countries of the world whose consumption of electric
energy is rising at very fast rate, and whose environmental problems are acute.
The topic is also important to the developed world because of the environmental
impact of developments on the world's climate and pollution, and because of the
commercial benefits from guided development. The scientific issues to be
discussed and the resulting report should also be of interest to the U.S.
scientific community.