* 9311534
* Virginia Tidewater Consortium for Higher Education          Connection to Southeastern Universities Research AssociationNetwork
* CSE,CNS
* 09/15/1993,02/29/1996
* Lawrence Crum, Hampton Roads Educational Telecommunications Association, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Mark A. Luker
* 02/29/1996
* USD 42,198.00

9311534 Crum The Virginia Tidewater Consortium for Higher Education (VTC) and
public television station WHRO-TV request hardware, software, and communications
support to connect VTC LINK to SURAnet. A direct connection to SURAnet will
provide researchers, faculty, staff and students at VTC member institutions with
improved access to national and international networks such as NSFNET, ESnet,
NSI, and a whole host of other information resources available via the Internet.
For some VTC member institutions, particularly the community colleges, this
connection represents the only method of accessing the Internet. By linking VTC
LINK to SURAnet, the VTC and WHRO- TV propose to set an example for other higher
education consortia of individual community colleges interested in working with
their local public television stations to establish similar connections. The
connection, once in place, will greatly facilitate collaborative research
efforts involving community colleges, four year institutions of their education
and research organizations such as CEBAF (the Continuous Electron Beam
Accelerator Facility) and the Oak Ridge National Laboratory. In addition to VTC
LINK, WHRO-TV operates two other telecomputing systems, VA.PEN and Learning
Link, serving the kindergarten through 12th grade educational community. A side
benefit of the SURAnet connection will be the inclusion of K-12 teacher and
student, when appropriate, in the above mentioned projects. *** NSFNET