* 9311636
* Dissertation Research:  Craft Production and the            Organization of a Hohokam Platform Mound Community
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/1993,07/31/1995
* Katherine Spielmann, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 07/31/1995
* USD 7,780.00

Under the direction of Dr. Katherine Spielmann, Mr. James Bayman will collect
data for his doctoral dissertation. He will conduct archaeological excavation at
the site of Marana in the Sonoran Desert of Arizona. This site, constructed and
occupied by Hohokan peoples, dates from approximately AD 1100-11350 and
consists, in effect of a vast multi-site community which spans a 146 km square
area and cross-cuts three environmental zones. To date, research has been
conducted in two of these zones and with National Science Foundation support Mr.
Bayman will excavate in the third of these to collect comparative data. He will
place 1 x 2 meter test pits in four of the largest refuse middens which appear
the represent the remains of separate households. He will then analyze the
materials recovered both to determine the kinds of production activities which
characterized this zone and nature and frequency of "exotic" materials. With
these data he will attempt to reconstruct the social, political and economic
organization of Marana. By early in the first millennium A.D. Hohocam peoples
had developed a complex society which knit together large numbers of peoples in
a harsh and unpredictable desert environment. Archaeologists wish to understand
how Hohocam groups organized themselves to exist successfully in this seemingly
difficult situation. In many areas groups developed large scale irrigation
systems and archaeologists believe that the need both to build and then maintain
canals led to the growth and continual reinforcement of political
centralization. The Marana community is interesting because this group appears
to have depended on rainfall agriculture and a canal system is not present. Mr.
Bayman believes that a combination of economic specialization by subregion and
control of exotic materials by elites served the same social function as canals
and his research will evaluate this hypothesis. This work is important for
several reasons. It will increase our understanding of an only partially
understood period in American prehistory. It will shed new light on how
societies at a simple level of technology adapted to harsh and unpredictable
environments and finally it will contribute to the training of a promising young
scientist.