* 9311196
* Dissertation Research:  Effects of Mortality Risks on an    Ontogenetic Niche Shift
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/1993,07/31/1995
* Michael Ryan, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Mark Courtney
* 07/31/1995
* USD 11,000.00

9311196 Ryan This project will investigate why animals hatch when they hatch,
and how the timing of hatching affects their survival. An amphibian species,
Agalychnis callidryas, lays its eggs on plants overhanging ponds, and the
tadpoles fall into the water when they hatch. Tadpoles are able to hatch as
early as 5 days old and will do so to escape from egg-eating snakes, if they are
attacked. Undisturbed tadpoles, however, usually delay hatching for several
days. They continue growing, inside the egg, and when they hatch they are less
vulnerable to aquatic predators than are the smaller, early-hatching tadpoles.
The proposed research examines the effect on survival of developmental and
behavioral flexibility in hatching, in the context of risks facing embryos and
tadpoles. %%% Many animals live in different environments at different stages in
their lives, and most animals hatch. The problems facing animals making such
changes are general, but in many systems only one of the two stages is
accessible to study under natural conditions. This study of the effects of
changes in hatching time on both the eggs and larvae will add to our
understanding of behavior and ecology. It will also provide detailed information
on the ecology of this high profile rainforest species, particularly its
interactions with its predators at a crucial life stage. *** l investigate why
animals hatch when they hatch, and how the timing of hatching affects the ! ! !
! !h h F % % ( Times New Roman Symbol &amp; Arial # # p " h Ryan Abstract
Doctoral Dissertation Elizabeth M. Behrens Elizabeth M. Behrens