* 9311114
* Illegal Chinese Immigrants in the United States
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/1993,02/29/1996
* Ko-lin Chin, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Shelton White
* 02/29/1996
* USD 77,000.00

9311114 CHIN This project will examine the social and economic networks that
underlie illegal Chinese immigration to the United States. The research will
describe the migratory processes (from initiation in China to entering the
United States), and the problems faced by illegal immigrants after their
arrival. The social and economic networks make the immigration possible and also
support the illegal aliens in this country. Some of this support is by otherwise
legal groups and families, and some is by illegal groups and enterprises. The
research will describe the ways in which illegal immigrants cope with their
illegal status, including their economic and criminal activities, and identify
those factors in the legal, social and economic environment that facilitate or
inhibit their success. The study will analyze these data in the historical
context of previous waves of immigration by other ethnic groups over the past
100 years or more. This research will make an important empirical contribution
to scientific knowledge about immigration processes as well as to policy
analysis focused on current illegal immigration. In order to examine the legal,
social and economic aspects of illegal immigration among the Chinese, the
investigators will conduct in-depth interviews with 200-300 illegal Chinese
immigrants who are now living in New York City and its vicinity. In addition,
social workers, business leaders and community leaders in Chinatown will be
interviewed. These interviews will make it possible for the investigators to
trace the various immigration networks within the Chinese community and document
the ways in which these networks also provide the economic and social bases for
illegal immigration. The study will also explore comparisons between current
(legal and illegal) Chinese immigration and earlier waves of immigration by
other ethnic groups through an examination of the historical literature on
immigration to the United States. ***