* 9311911
* Use of Polarimetric Radar Measurements to Initialize        Moisture Fields in Cloud/Mesoscale Numerical Weather        Prediction Models: The Severe Hailstorm
* GEO,AGS
* 01/15/1994,06/30/1997
* Jerry Straka, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Stephan P. Nelson
* 06/30/1997
* USD 226,409.00

9311911 Straka Research tasks that are crucial for advancements in short term
weather forecasting are improvements in model initialization and assimilation of
data. An important first step is to develop methods for determining cloud
hydrometeor types within storms through remote sensing. The Principal
Investigators will use a variety of information from advanced weather research
radars to determine hydrometeor distribution within convective storms. Using
this information, the Principal Investigators will make a first attempt to
initialize moisture fields in a cloud/mesoscale numerical weather prediction
model. Specific objectives include: (1) Refine and test an algorithm designed to
deduce precipitating hydrometeor types and amounts from reflectivity, dual-
wavelength, polarimetric and Doppler radar measurements; (2) Use precipitation
information from radar measurements with combined
velocity/thermodynamic/microphysical retrieval and dynamic initialization
schemes to initialize cloud/mesoscale numerical prediction model; (3) Test the
sensitivity of numerical model to initialization with observed and retrieved
wind, thermodynamic, cloud and precipitation information; (4) examine popular
theories on the formation and growth of hail using information from radar
analyses. ***