* 9311742
* Language Restrictions on Language Restructuring in the      Spanish of San Antonio, Texas
* SBE,BCS
* 07/15/1993,06/30/1996
* MaryEllen Garcia, University of Texas at San Antonio
* Standard Grant
* Paul G. Chapin
* 06/30/1996
* USD 45,601.00

9311742 Garcia Abstract Previous approaches to the study of change in ethnic
languages in situations of language contact have attributed change solely to the
combination of linguistic systems in contact and/or the language dominance of
individual speakers. Recent research suggests that a constriction in the domains
of ethnic language use must be considered in addition to external factors such
as age, sex, social class, etc. This research will explore the idea that change
is also due to the restriction in domains (socially defined settings) in which
bilingual speakers use the ethnic language in the community. The Spanish spoken
by Mexican-Americans in the United States, Southwest Spanish, is characterized
by phenomena typical to language situations, for example, phonological transfer,
loan translations, and lexical borrowings. This study will be conducted in a
Spanish-English community (San Antonio) and in a home/family domain rather than
a school domain, as in previous research. Sociolinguistic sampling and data
collection will be conducted with young adults and adults. Data will be
deposited in the University of Texas-San Antonio, Hispanic Research Center.
Results of this research will add to our knowledge of Spanish sociolinguistics
and will have potential application in bilingual education, language
acquisition, and language policy and planning. ***