* 9311274
* ENGINEERING RESEARCH EQUIPMENT: Wideband Millimeter-Wave    System for Studying Waves in Composite Materials and        Disordered Media
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/15/1993,07/31/1996
* Akira Ishimaru, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Virginia M. Ayres
* 07/31/1996
* USD 29,856.00

9311274 Kuga The Department of Electrical Engineering at the University of
Washington will purchase millimeter wave (MMW) equipment which will be dedicated
to support interdisciplinary research in engineering. The equipment will be used
for several projects, including (i) bistatic scattering from rough surfaces,
(ii) localization of MMW in disordered media, (iii) coherent reflectivity of
densely distributed particles, and (iv) characterization of composite materials
and photon gap materials. Under NSF sponsorship, we have been conducting
extensive experimental, numerical and theoretical studies on wave propagation
and scattering in disordered media. These studies have potential applications in
many engineering problems including localization of waves, photon gap materials,
remote sensing and monitoring of environments, communications, imaging of
biological media, and characterization of composite materials. Our main
objective is to understand the interactions of waves with random or
inhomogeneous media with the aim of applying the results to various engineering
problems. We have emphasized the importance of combining analytical studies,
controlled experiments, and numerical simulations. However, our MMW experiments
are inadequate for our present and future studies because of the limited
bandwidth available. The proposed wide band MMW will significantly expand the
scope of our research to include short pulses in disordered media and material
characterizations. ***