* 9311861
* NSF-CGP Science Fellowship Program:  Genetic Algorithms and Simulated Annealing
* O/D,OISE
* 08/15/1993,07/31/1994
* Bruce Rosen, University of Texas at San Antonio
* Standard Grant
* Janice Cassidy
* 07/31/1994
* USD 26,160.00

WPC 2 B V V Z Z CG Times (Scalable) 8 w C ; , WX w P 7 X P " m ' ı ^;C dd CCCd
CCCCddddddddddCC Y ~ ~w CN ~ s k~ CCCddCYdYdYCdd88d8 ddddJN8dd ddYYdY C dd
dddCCCC dddddd ddd8 Y Y Y Y Y Y~Y~Y~Y~YC8C8C8C8 d d d d d d d d d d Y d d d d
dsd Y Y Y Y Y Y Y d~Y~Y~Y~Y d d d d d d d dC8C8C8C8 oN d~8~8~8~8~8 d v d d d d J
J JkNkNkNkN~8~8~8 d d d d d d d Y Y Y d~8 d JkN~8 d d d d d C dd C CC/ N d
ddCYQQdd ddd dFdddd F CC hhd 44 ddzz d d d w oo dCh d F" d h dÕ dCC z xC d dod
dCd Yds z Uw d Y Y C C C C z~o zo Y~N Y d YC8 Y o o Y d Y zsdzd d~Y Y z o
zzzzNd88YYYzYz z zz CCddddd dd zzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzNNNNNNNdddddddddddddddddddd888
888888888YYYYYYYYYYYYYYYYYYYzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzC s ~ C zC d dYC xHP LaserJet
III HP_LJ_3.PRS o \ P C , \ , X P 2 f V V #| w 7 i C 3 , X i \ P 6 X P Times New
Roman 2 Z HP LaserJet 4 HPLAS4.PRS o \ P C \ X P " m ^3ETgg
EEEgt3E39gggggggggg99ttt ~r EP ~ r r~ ~E9E`gE g g Egg99g9 ggggEP9gg gg c)co E3EE
"EEE C EEEEEE dEg9 Y Y Y Y Y Y~Y~Y~Y~YC8C8C8C8 d d d d d d d d d d Y g g d d dsd
g~ ~ ~ ~ g g g g g g g gE8E9E9E9 oP g~9~9~9~8~9 g v g g g g E E ErPkNrPrP~9~9~9
g g g g g g g~ Y~ g~9 g ErP~9 g g g g gNH 3 gE gggg g9@ gFdddg F %C g EE ggzz d
d d w rr E d F 9311861 Rosen NSG CGP Science Fellowship Program: Genetic
Algorithms and Simulated Annealing This award will enable Dr. Bruce Rosen of the
University of Texas at San Antonio to conduct collaborative research for six
months with Dr. Ryohei Nakano at NTT Kyoto Research Laboratories and with Dr.
Tadahiro Kitahashi at Osaka University. The team will test and analyze hybrid
algorithms which Dr. Rosen developed by combining genetic algorithms and
simulated annealing. Solutions to numerical problems often involve fitting a set
of parameters to minimize a function. Deterministic algorithms may be used to
efficiently and quickly find solutions, however, they are not guaranteed to find
the optimal function state. Two relatively new methods, Genetic Algorithms (GA)
and Simulated Annealing (SA), perform well on both numerical and combinatorial
optimization tasks and could be combined to improve performance and runtime
characteristics. Genetic Algorithms are population based search strategies which
are fast and inherently parallel. Simulated Annealing algorithms employ
randomness to determine new parameter values and rely on stochastic importance
sampling to find the optimal function value. Rosen, Nakano and Kitahashi will
investigate different methods of combining the desirable properties of both
simulated annealing and genetic algorithms and test the performance of these
hybrid algorithms on difficult optimization problems. Dr. Nakano's expertise in
applied, real world optimization genetic algorithms and Dr. Kitahashi's
expertise in simulated annealing algorithms for optimizing computer vision
systems complement Dr. Rosen's experience in combining the two types of
algorithms to optimize neural networks. By combining their efforts, the team
will produce a fast, efficient, parallelizable hybri d GA SA algorithm for both
combinatorial and numerical optimization.