* 9311941
* NSF-CGP Science Fellowship Program:  Control of Solute      Permeability Across Membranes Made of Di/Triblock           Copolyelectrolytes.
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/1993,11/30/1994
* Sasidhar Varanasi, University of Toledo
* Standard Grant
* Patricia Jones Tsuchitani
* 11/30/1994
* USD 16,194.00

9311941 Varanasi This award will support a fifteen month grant under the NSF-
CGP (Center for Global Partnership) Science Fellowship Program for Professor
Sasidhar Varanasi, Department of Chemical Engineering, University of Toledo,
Ohio. Professor Varanasi will undertake a three month cooperative research
project with Dr. Norihiko Minoura, Department of Organic Materials, National
Institute of Materials and Chemical Research (NIMC) in Tsukuba, Japan. The
research will focus on the control of solute permeability across membranes made
of di/triblock copolyelectrolytes. This will be accomplished by fabricating
membranes, the permeability of which to large Brownian solutes can be tuned in a
predictable manner, via changing the pH and/or ionic strength of the solutions
bathing the membrane. This ability, in turn, should allow one to make the
membrane highly selective in separating two solutes the sizes of which differ
only to a small extent. Two kinds of membranes will be perfected to achieve the
goal. First, will be polyelectrolytes absorbed in the pores of non-selective
microporous membranes. The second would be ABA type triblock copolypeptides cast
into a film using a solvent. The performance characteristics of membranes made
by microphase separation will be compared to those made via grafting copolymers
into microporous membranes to determine which of the methods leads to reliable
and robust membranes with "tunable" permeation properties. Results of the
research have potential for practical applications in a variety of important
fields such as self-regulated release of pharmaceutics and the synthesis of
several biochemicals. The National Institute of Materials and Chemical Research
is a first- rate facility that has made considerable progress in polymeric
materials research. Dr. Minoura is a well-known expert in membrane science in
general and in synthetic polyelectrolyte membranes in particular. This
specialization coupled with Professor Va ranasi's expertise in the area should
provide an excellent collaboration that most likely would continue on an
informal basis in the future.