* 9311444
* Spatial Structure and Dynamics of Non-Equilibrium Systems
* MPS,DMR
* 12/01/1993,11/30/1998
* Michael Cross, California Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* G. Bruce Taggart
* 11/30/1998
* USD 416,000.00

9311444 Cross This proposal is concerned with the theoretical understanding of
pattern forming systems far from thermodynamic equilibrium. The PI is well known
for his work here and has just finished coauthoring a long "Reviews of Modern
Physics" article on the subject. The techniques used by the PI are multifold -
varying from linear and non-linear stability analyses of spatially homogeneous
states - to including the effects of defects and boundaries on the pattern
evolution - to the numerical investigation of model systems. Specifically, the
PI proposes to consider instabilities and paterns in fluid and chemical systems
- such as stripe phases, convective phases and stationary periodic chemical
patterns. Further, the PI proposes to study the less well-characterized field of
patterns in materials systems - such as deformation bands and dislocation
patterns in strained crystals. %%% Many fluid systems exhibit patterns when they
are kept under conditions away from equilibrium. For example, a fluid between
hot (bottom) and cold (top) plates exhibits convective patterns. Similarly,
solid materials under applied stress (eg shearing) can develop deformation
bands. Such non-equilibrium conditions occur all the time in everyday life (eg
the formation of clouds) - and form by far the majority of cases in the
processing of materials (milling, rolling, sintering etc). Their study is
important in the understanding of material and liquid behavior. This proposal
undertakes a theoretical study of these phenomena. The PI is one of the leading
lights in this field and the work is at the cutting- edge of what is known and
understood. ***