* 9311558
* U.S.-FSU: Developing Mathematics Information Centers in the Former Soviet Union
* O/D,OISE
* 07/01/1993,12/31/1996
* Susan Friedlander, American Mathematical Society
* Continuing Grant
* Bonnie Thompson
* 12/31/1996
* USD 107,600.00

This proposal, "Developing Mathematics Information Centers in the Former Soviet
Union ıFSU!," to be performed by the American Mathematical Society ıAMS! (Dr.
Susan Friedlander, Principal Investigator ıPI!), will expand its existing
efforts to assist the development of mathematics infrastructure by directly
aiding mathematics libraries in the FSU and establishing mathematics information
centers in areas of highly concentrated mathematical activity. The AMS Advisory
Committee, which has been coordinating current AMS initiatives in this area,
funded by donations from AMS members and a matching Sloan Foundation grant,
would provide oversight for this program. The Advisory Committee obtains advice
from consultants it has organized in Russia and Ukraine, from expatriate FSU
scholars resident in the U.S., and from the various Divisions of the Society. In
addition, the PI and co-PI's are very knowledgeable about current needs of the
mathematics community in the FSU, as well as existing and planned efforts to aid
science in the FSU. This award provides support to demonstrate the effectiveness
of establishing mathematics information centers and aiding 22 libraries
throughout the FSU by distributing current mathematical journals and books. The
goal of this AMS program is to promote scientific interchange between U.S.
scientists and their counterparts in the FSU, and to establish and foster a
capability for mathematicians within the fSU to network and communicate, and to
form and expand alliances within a professional society framework for their
common benefit. ***