* 9311635
* Dissertation Research: Demographic and Genetic Processes    During Population Establishment of Silene alba
* BIO,DEB
* 08/15/1993,08/31/1996
* Janis Antonovics, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Lisa D. Brooks
* 08/31/1996
* USD 9,000.00

9311635 Antonovics This study will focus on the parameters that affects the
colonization process in plants. Specifically, the investigators wish to examine
the role of genetic connections between small newly established colonies and the
correlated rate of population increase. By studying both the genetic and
demographic factors that influence the process of colonization in a common
species, they will gain information useful for understanding the population
dynamics of species made rare by habitat fragmentation. %%% The process of
colonization in Silene alba will be studied experimentally three ways. First the
investigators will establish founder colonies planted in an array with graded
spacing intervals between colonies. Measurements of gene exchange between
colonies will then be correlated with demographic attributes such as rates of
colony growth. Secondly, they will investigate the effects of the relatedness of
the founders and the role of isolation on colonization establishment by
comparing artificial colonies established with genetically variable outcrossed
colonists to colonies established with genetically inbred (sib-mated) colonists.
Thirdly, the investigators will investigate the demographic effects of varying
the number of individuals that found a colony. Finally, they will conduct
demographic genetic studies of natural colonization episodes as they occur in a
previously censused metapopulation of Silene alba to provide a natural backdrop
against which to interpret the experimental results. *** tonovics This study
will focus on the parameters that affects the colonization process in plants .
Specifically, t $ / ! !. !. !. F ( Times New Roman Symbol &amp; Arial * " h 6 e:
e V Antonovics/Richards abstract Elizabeth M. Behrens Elizabeth M. Behrens