* 9311438
* Mathematical Sciences: Nonlinear Hyperbolic and Dispersive  Waves
* MPS,DMS
* 12/15/1993,05/31/1998
* Rodolfo Rosales, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Deborah Lockhart
* 05/31/1998
* USD 198,128.00

9311438 Rosales ` ` Research in Nonlinear Waves for Dispersive and Hyperbolic
Systems of Equations is proposed. The following projects will be conducted: (1)
"Focusing and Reflection of Weak Shocks and the von Neumann Paradox": These
problems and related ones arising in the theory of Weakly Nonlinear Geometrical
Optics ( WNGO ) will be examined (2) "Resonant Periodic Waves in Hyperbolic
Systems" and (3) "Resonant Oscillations in Closed Tubes": Using WNGO, some
interesting and surprising solutions for the equations of Gas Dynamics, and
other hyperbolic systems, will be obtained and studied (4) "Long Weakly
nonlinear Surface Waves in a Ferro-Fluid": Simplified equations for surface
waves in a Ferro--Fluid will be derived (using Long Wave Asymptotics) and
studied (5) "Wave Modulation Breakdown in Nonlinear Dispersive Systems": The
behavior waves exhibit, after current theories to model nonlinear dispersive
wave propagation breakdown and cease to apply, will be studied (6) "Square Wave
Detonations": Using a simplified model, the reasons and the mechanisms that
cause the "Catastrophic Instabilities" in the Square Wave Theory for Detonation
Waves will be studied. This proposal deals with research in Nonlinear Waves.
Waves are important in many fields, such as Acoustics, Optics, Gas Dynamics,
Combustion Theory, Ocean Dynamics, Solid Mechanics, etc. Many advances have been
made in Non-linear Wave Theo ry in the last few decades, but many puzzles
remain. An example of the Wave Theory problems in this proposal is the "von
Neumann Paradox" of Weak Shock Reflection and Focusing. This problem has been
the object of much study since John von Neumann pointed it out, but remains
open. The P.I. and a graduate student advanced significantly in prior research
and are very close to a complete resolution. A resolution of the Paradox will
have considerable scientific significance and will shed light into many
important practical problems. Example: issues in noise generation or control;
such as "sonic boom" reflection, generation and amplification of sound by
reflection or transmission from shear, shocks or rapidly moving surfaces.
Another example occurs in the treatment of kidney stones (Lithotripsy) by use of
focused weak shocks. It seems clear that a firm grasp of the details of Weak
Shock Focusing should be very important in reducing the amount of "collateral"
damage --living tissue destruction-- produced by this technique. ***