* 9311380
* Dissertation Research: The Functional Significance of       Denitrifier Population Diversity to Nitrous Oxide Productionin Terrestrial Ecosystems
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/1993,02/29/1996
* G. Philip Robertson, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* None
* 02/29/1996
* USD 11,000.00

9311380 Robertson This proposal will examine the effect of environmental factors
and diversity of denitrifying bacteria on the spatial and temporal variability
of denitrification in agricultural and grassland ecosystems. Specific questions
to be addressed include 1) to what extent, and under what circumstances, is
denitrifier community composition different among ecosystems with different
nitrous oxide production potentials?, 2) do denitrifiers from different
ecosystems produce nitrous oxide at different rates?, and 3) does spatial and
temporal variability in nitrous oxide production reflect differences in dominant
denitrifier populations as well as differences in environmental controls? These
questions will be addressed by sampling soil from ecosystems that differ in
chemical conditions that affect nitrous oxide flux rates, incubating to
characterize nitrous oxide flux rates, and denitrifier isolation to characterize
community structure. %%% Denitrifiers are bacteria that, during anaerobic
respiration, convert nitrogen from a form available to plants to gaseous nitrous
oxide not available to plants. Thus, denitrifiers have a direct impact on soil
fertility and plant production. Denitrification also is important because the
nitrous oxide is an important greenhouse gas and a catalyst of statospheric
ozone decay. Environmental factors affecting denitrification processes have been
examined, but their relative importances and the significance of particular
denitrifier species composition is not known. This study will all evaluation of
the relative contributions of environmental controls and denitrifier diversity
to nitrous oxide flux rates. ***