* 9311472
* Tsien Hsue-shen:  Father of the Chinese Missile
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/1993,09/30/1995
* Iris Chang, Individual Award
* Standard Grant
* Edward J. Hackett
* 09/30/1995
* USD 61,000.00

9311472 Chang Tsien Hsue-shen came to the United States from China in 1935 in
order to study aerodynamics at Caltech under Theodore von Karman. During the
McCarthy period of the Cold War, Tsien was falsely accused of being a Communist
spy and was forced to return to China in 1955. He brought back to his homeland
all the skills he had learned in the US and became the lead rocket scientist for
the Chinese military. Under his guidance, China developed its own ballistic
missiles capable of carrying warheads to destroy targets throughout Asia. Ms.
Chang is undertaking a study of this "Father of the Chinese Missile" both in the
US and in China. Ms. Chang's study of Tsien's life promises to shed new light on
the history of the development of nuclear missiles in both the US and China and
to illuminate some of the worldwide consequences of McCarthyism. Her study also
includes an account of the turbulent relationship between science and politics
of the 20th century through the analysis of scientific mentorship of three
generations of world-class aerodynamicists--Ludwig Prantl who taught von Karman
in Germany who taught Tsien in the US. Prantl disowned von Karman, a Jew, in
Nazi Germany. In turn, von Karman failed Tsien when he was attacked by the
McCarthyites. Tsien, following his mentors, denounced his students during the
Cultural Revolution of 1965. ***