* 9311940
* Colloidal Dispersions in Non-Aqueous Media - A Fundamental  Study of Adsorption and Stabilization Mechanisms
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/1993,08/31/1997
* Ponisseril Somasundaran, Columbia University
* Continuing Grant
* Robert M. Wellek
* 08/31/1997
* USD 269,876.00

9311940 Somasundaran The stability of colloidal dispersions in non-aqueous media
is a phenomenon of vital importance in a number of technologies such as ceramic
and tape processing, inks and paints manufacture, oil recovery from tar sands
and electrophoretic displays systems. However, major questions on the mechanisms
of adsorption of stabilizers on colloidal particles and their stabilization
remain largely unanswered. The complex solid- solvent-dispersant interactions
that play a critical role in adsorption and subsequent stabilization are not
well understood. Also, there is a lack of both fundamental information on the
role of water and other polar impurities which have been identified to affect
the suspension behavior markedly and on methods to counter the detrimental
effects on these impurities. It becomes important to develop such information in
order to further advance so many technologies that use processes involving non-
aqueous media. Project addresses a multi-pronged approach combining the
phenomenological description of suspension stability (settling rate, viscosity),
the measurement of physico-chemical properties (adsorption, zeta potential,
heats of adsorption) and the use of spectroscopic techniques (ESR, NMR,
Fluorescence spectroscopy) to probe micro-structures in solution and at the
interface. It focuses on some of the critical issues of adsorption and colloidal
stability in non polar media. Specifically, the project investigates the role of
the solid surface and the solvent on the adsorption of surfactants on particles
from non- aqueous media. Also the role of surface charge and hydration in
stabilizing dispersions, the effect of water and other polar impurities on
charge development and conformation of the adsorbed molecules investigated.
Stabilization effects of macromolecules and surfactant mixtures will be included
in the study since they hold maximum practical potential. These studies coupled
with the proposed novel spe ctroscopic investigation will enable the PI's to
elucidate the fundamental mechanisms of adsorption and stabilization and also to
provide guidelines for choosing the appropriate dispersant/solvent combinations
and processing schemes to obtain optimum properties for a given non-aqueous
dispersion. *** 9311940 Somasundaran The stability of colloidal dispersions in
non-aqueous media is a phenomenon of vital importance in a number of
technologies such as ceramic and tape processing, inks and paints manufacture,
oil recovery from tar sands and electrophoretic displays systems. However, major
questions on the mechanisms of adsorption of stabilizers on colloidal particles
and their stabilization remain largely unanswered. The complex solid-solvent-
dispersant interactions that play a critical role in adsorption and subsequent
stabilization are not well understood. Also, there is a lack of both fundamental
information on the role of water and other polar impurities which have been
identified to affect the suspension behavior markedly and on methods to counter
the detrimental effects on these impurities. It becomes important to develop
such information in order to further advance so many technologies that use
processes involving non-aqueous media. Project addresses a multi-pronged
approach combining the phenomenological description of suspension stability
(settling rate, viscosity), the measurement of physico-chemical properties
(adsorption, zeta potential, heats of adsorption) and the use of spectroscopic
techniques (ESR, NMR, Fluorescence spectroscopy) to probe micro-structures in
solution and at the interface. It focuses on some of the critical issues of
adsorption and colloidal stability in non polar media. Specifically, the project
investigates the role of the solid surface and the solvent on the adsorption of
surfactants on particles from non-aqueous media. Also the role of surface charge
and hydration in stabilizing dispersions, the effect of water and other polar
impurities on charge development and conformation of the adsorbed molecules
investigated. Stabilization effects of macromolecules and surfactant mixtures
will be included in the study since they hold maximum practical potential. These
studies coupled with the proposed novel spectroscopic investigation will enable
the PI's to elucidate the fundamental mechanisms of adsorption and stabilization
and also to provide guidelines for choosing the appropriate dispersant/solvent
combinations and processing schemes to obtain optimum properties for a given
non-aqueous dispersion. ***