* 9311853
* Calorimetric Study of Smectic Liquid Crystals
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/1993,08/31/1997
* Carl Garland, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing grant
* David Nelson
* 08/31/1997
* USD 333,695.00

9311853 Garland In this project, new calorimeters are developed for quantitative
measurements of the latent heat and pre-transitional heat capacity. The new
calorimeter can operate over a wide frequency range (10.2 HZ to 10.3 HZ) because
there is evidence that slow dynamics occurs near some of the transitions, and
because the heat capacity can be a complex function of frequency. With these
enhanced calorimetric capabilities, it will be possible to resolve the critical
behavior at SmC-Sml (tilted smectic-tilted hexatic) transitions by studying
binary mixtures, where the nature of the transition should change from first
order to critical to supercritical. The proposed research has the following
specific goals: 1) quantitative measurement of latent heats and pre-transitional
Cp wings for first-order transitions; 2) determination of critical behavior for
the static heat capacity at second-order and multicritical points; 3)
characterization of the continuous non-critical evolution or order in bulk
liquid crystals and liquid crystals in a porous medium (aerogel); and 4)
investigation of the slow dynamics near liquid crystal transitions which give
rise to a complex frequency- dependent heat capacity. %%% Liquid crystal,
exhibit a variety of long range ordering that is intermediate between that of
crystalline solids and simple liquids. Understanding the phase transition
behavior in these materials is of importance in view of the growing development
of liquid crystal display and device technologies. Several challenging problems
remain. Almost nothing is known about the slow time response near some liquid
crystal phase transitions, and this will be studied with a newly developed
dynamic calorimeter. The effects of chirality (right- or left-handedness in
asymmetric molecules) are poorly understood and will be expolored in studies of
bond-- orientational ordering and the newly discovered twisted-grain- boundary
phases. The behavior of liquid crystals in random por ous media like aerogels is
a new field that is closely related to applications involving liquid crystals in
restrictive geometries. A wide range of exploratory studies concerned with
surface effects, finite size confinement effects, and random field effects will
be undertaken. ***