* 9311818
* Indo-U.S. Workshop on Atmospheric Technology,               Bangalore, India, March 1994, Group Travel Award in Indian  and U.S. Currencies
* O/D,OISE
* 02/01/1994,01/31/1995
* V. Bringi, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* Osman Shinaishin
* 01/31/1995
* USD 8,100.00

9311818 Bringi Description: This project supports participation by U.S.
scientists in a U.S.-Indo workshop and discussion on atmospheric technology to
be held in March 1994 at the Indian Institute of Technology in Bangalore, India.
The goals are: 1. to identify key advances in atmospheric technology that can be
applied to the Indian context, 2. to explore establishment of a modern rainfall
ground-truth site in India for a Tropical Rainfall Measurement Mission (TRMM)
validation program, and 3. to identify areas of mutual interest for possible
collaboration in atmospheric research and instrumentation. The technical
sessions will include topics in: weather radars, wind profilers, advanced
instruments for atmospheric and surface measurements, mesoscale meteorology and
cloud physics, and aviation meteorology, and hazards. a proceedings will be
published. Scope: The project is expected to include scientists from Colorado
State University and from NCAR. Also, at least one other USG agency is expected
to support its staff's participation. The study of the monsoon over India is
crucial to that country, and is also very important to other countries around
the world, because of the impact of the monsoon on the weather in other regions.
This planned meeting will follow a similar binational meeting held in December
1986. It is receiving strong support from the Government of India. This project
meets the objectives of the Division of International Programs. ***