* 9311335
* The Dynamics of Support for New Parties and National Party  Systems in Contemporary Democracies: The Canadian Case
* SBE,SES
* 09/15/1993,02/28/1997
* Harold Clarke, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Pierre Perrolle
* 02/28/1997
* USD 154,306.00

9311335 Clarke This is a proposal to investigate the conditions under which
politically significant charges can occur in the structure and composition of
party systems in contemporary democracies. The study is prompted by the
observation that the party systems of several of these countries have
experienced substantial partisan dealignment since the mid 1960's. Such
dealignments, together with important social-structural and cultural changes and
the emergence of new issue agendas, seemingly create conditions propitious for
the development of new parties and associated party system realignments. To
date, however, there have been only very limited changes in the basic contours
of existing party systems, and new parties that have emerged have enjoyed only
very limited and often, short-lived success. The project in study factors which
facilitate and inhibit the emergence of new parties and party system realignment
through a coordinated combination of cross-sectional and panel surveys of the
Canadian electorate and members, through a coordinated combination of cross-
sectional and panel surveys of the Canadian electorate and members, activists
and local officials in Canada's new Reform Party. The surveys will be conducted
over the 1993-1995 period, and a book-length manuscript on the research is
expected to be completed in 1996. ***