* 9311295
* Selectivity of Partial Oxidation Reactions and Reactors
* ENG,CBET
* 09/15/1993,02/28/1997
* Rutherford Aris, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Maria Burka
* 02/28/1997
* USD 292,151.00

Abstract - Schmidt Oxidation reactions are difficult to manage because in most
situations they exhibit a complex interplay between surface reactions, mass
transfer, heat transfer, and homogeneous reaction. These factors produce
complicated experimental behavior in terms of temperature variations across the
reactor, flow patterns, multiple steady states, and reaction selectivity. It has
been estimated that one-half of all industrial catalytic processes are oxidation
reaction which are difficult to characterize under laboratory conditions. If
this is done by lowering pressures and temperatures to obtain rates and
selectivities without interference from heat and mass transfer and homogeneous
reaction, then the results may have little relevance to an atmospheric pressure
industrial reactor. The principal investigators plan an experimental and
modeling program to characterize catalytic oxidation reactions and reactors in
situations which would be useful in designing new configurations for chemical
synthesis by partial oxidation and for pollution abatement by total oxidation.
They will consider novel reactor geometries designed to manipulate flow patterns
and residence times to adjust heat and mass transfer and contacting in order to
attain maximum selectivity to a desired product. Various types of catalytic
monoliths and also fluidized beds will be used to achieve very high mass and
heat transfer rates and very short residence times in adiabatic reactors so that
the yields of intermediates can be maximized. Reactors will be operated
adiabatically to allow reaction heat to determine reactor temperature and to si
mulate industrial reactors more closely. Staged monoliths will also be examined
to determine how systematic variations in reactor with position can be used to
control performance. Catalyst geometries, flow conditions, and temperatures will
be altered such that wide variations in these properties can be attained. n 7
ÕSPL152FTMP n 7 ÕSPL1671TMP n 7 Abstract - Schmidt Oxidation reactions are
difficult to manage because in most situations they exhibit a complex interplay
b + + ! ! ! D + + ( Times New Roman Symbol &amp; Arial " h E E E R / Maria K.
Burka Maria K. Burka