* 9311507
* Central Bank Policy and Exchange Rates
* SBE,SES
* 11/15/1993,10/31/1996
* Kathryn Dominguez, National Bureau of Economic Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Lynn A. Pollnow
* 10/31/1996
* USD 81,283.00

9311507 Dominguez The purpose of this research is to analyze the effects of
central bank policies on the behavior of foreign exchange rates. Central banks
have at their disposal two instruments that can influence exchange rates;
monetary policy and sterilized foreign exchange rate intervention policy.
Monetary policy can directly affect exchange rates, but central banks appear to
use monetary policy primarily with domestic objectives in mind. Sterilized
intervention operations, which change the composition rather than the number of
outstanding assets, affect exchange rates in a somewhat less direct fashion than
monetary operations do. Nevertheless, central banks apparently rely heavily on
sterilized intervention policy. The G-5 central banks have undertaken an
unprecedented number of both coordinated and unilateral intervention operations
in the last seven years. The empirical evidence presented in the literature on
the effectiveness of intervention is quite mixed. This project will bring
together the this literature to examine the effects of U.S. and German monetary
intervention policies on the dollar-mark exchange rate. The research will cover
the period since the abandonment of the Bretton Woods system. This research is
important because it will determine the effectiveness of recent central bank
intervention as compared to past interventions, and whether intervention has its
greatest effect on the level or the variance of exchange rates. ***