* 9311632
* Imperfect Competition, Sticky Prices, and Firm Specific     Menu Costs
* SBE,SES
* 07/15/1993,12/31/1994
* William Jackson, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Vincy Fon
* 12/31/1994
* USD 12,069.00

This planning grant research will extend a study done in the investigator's
University of Chicago 1989 dissertation. That dissertation examined the impact
of differing market structures on the price adjustment behavior of commercial
banks. The major findings of that dissertation were: (1) a major proportion of
the differences in pricing rigidity (or behavior) was not explained by
differences in market structure, and (2) intramarket variation in the price
rigidity patterns of individual firms was very significant. This latter finding
motivated a search for a theory to explain intramarket, or firm specific, price
adjustment behavior, and led to a consideration of the "New Keynesian" economics
literature on imperfect competition and costly price adjustment. Most of this
existing literature has focussed exclusively on "market" characteristics to
explain differences in price rigidity patterns. This project will focus on
"firm" characteristics as the relevant variable in analyzing the price
adjustment behavior of firms. This extension from market to firm specific
analysis is very important in understanding and identifying the causes of sticky
prices. As such, it is also crucial for developing a complete analysis of the
economy-wide misallocation of resources imposed by wage and price rigidities.
Specifically, the award will be used to: (1) review the price rigidity
literature, (2) develop testable hypotheses about firm specific costs of price
adjustment, and (3) begin developing tractable empirical models to test these
hypotheses. These models will focus on commercial banks and their role as
financial intermediaries. However, the results will have implications for other
industries, and the economy as a whole.