* 9311731
* Operation and Enhancement of the LSU                        Gravitational Wave Observatory
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/1993,07/31/1996
* Warren Johnson, Louisiana State University
* Continuing Grant
* Richard Isaacson
* 07/31/1996
* USD 980,000.00

WPC` 2 B P Z Courier 10cpi #| x x @ 8 ; X @ LETTERHEAD - HP Laserjet II
HPLASER2.PRS x @ , t 0# lX @ 2 &lt; Z L $ #| x BOND - HP Laserjet II
HPLASERJ.PRS x @ , t 0# BmX @ Courier 10cpi Line Printer 16.67cpi 2 X F ` ^ 2 x
x x , x @ 8 ; X @ t j , H H H , H | @ ; @ iled proposal for a new type of
detector which promises to be much more sensitive. The LSU detector has been
observing for 2 years. Its sensitivity to short b 9311731 Hamilton The LSU
gravitational physics group will continue with a program of research which has
the goal of detecting a short burst of gravitational waves. The program has
three parts: 1) continued observation with the LSU bar type gravitational wave
antenna, 2) improvement of its sensitivity; and 3) preparation of a detailed
design for a new type of detector which promises to be much more sensitive. The
LSU detector has been observing for 2 years. Its sensitivity to short bursts is
now the best ever obtained by any detector anywhere (average burst gravitational
strain 2 ` noise is 6x10 19 ), and is probably sufficient to detect the
gravitational waves from a supernova within our galaxy. The LSU group will
continue to operate their detector, until they are ready to improve its
sensitivity. Data exchange and searches for coincidences with any other
detectors operational will continue. The LSU group will also investigate a new
type of detector with a nearly spherical shape, the Truncated Icosahedral
Gravitational wave Antenna, or TIGA. They have already published calculati ons
that predict a 56 fold increase in energy sensitivity for a TIGA detector,
compared to the equivalent bar type antenna. A TIGA system could consist of
several omni directional detectors at different frequencies, all designed to
work in coincidence with each other and with the Laser Interferometer
Gravitational (LIGO). The LSU group will continue its program to verify the
theoretical predictions by experimental measurement on a prototype TIGA. In
collaboration with other U.S. resonant mass detector groups, the LSU
gravitational physics group will undertake the detailed design of a TIGA system
of gravitational wave detectors. The goal of the collaborative research effort
will be the production, by January of 1995, of a detailed design and a plan for
the construction and operation of the system in conjunction with all other
gravitational wave detectors in the world. ***