* 9311706
* Developing World Perspectives and Understanding Values in   Public Communication of Science & Technology, Montreal,     Canada, April 21-24, 1994
* SBE,SES
* 02/01/1994,01/31/1996
* Bruce Lewenstein, Cornell Univ - State: AWDS MADE PRIOR MAY 2010
* Standard Grant
* Rachelle D. Hollander
* 01/31/1996
* USD 28,542.00

9311706 Lewenstein This project is designed to begin ongoing discussion and
debate about the role of values, especially national and cultural values, in
public communication of science and technology. The award provides partial
support for a panel on the subject and for a roundtable discussion on how to
include values issues in education and training for people engaged in public
communication of science and technology. These activities will occur at the
meeting on "Science Literacy and the Global Village," sponsored by the
International Network on Public Communication of Science and Technology,
scheduled for April 21-24, in Montreal, Canada. This award will enable the
participation of approximately eight specialists from developing countries and
three, including minority scholars, from the United States. The panel will be
asked to address questions of individual rights and communal goods in approaches
to communication about science and technology, and the relation between values
in journalism and cultural values. The roundtable will be charged to identify
existing education and training efforts on values and public communication of
science and technology, and to consider future initiatives that might be
suggested or recommended. Scientists, engineers, and specialists in public
communication about science and technology in the U.S. need exposure to these
international perspectives inorder to prevent misunderstandings and to develop
better educational programs in this field. Results are expected to be published
as part of a collection of papers from the meeting and, perhaps, as a special
issue of the journal Public Understanding of Science. The final report to NSF
will include copies of the presentations and associated documents. ***