* 9311216
* History of the Mass Extinction Debates
* NONE,NONE
* 08/01/1993,08/31/1996
* William Glen, American Institute of Physics
* Standard Grant
* Edward J. Hackett
* 08/31/1996
* USD 59,035.00

9311216 Glen Dr. Glen is completing his decade-long study of the history of the
current mass extinction debates. These debates were opened in 1980 by the advent
of the Alvarez-Berkeley group hypothesis that the second greatest extinction in
Earth's history which occurred 65 million years ago was caused by the impact of
a meteorite. This hypothesis triggered a number of corollary and alternative
ideas, including that of periodic mass extinctions which prompted the further
surmise that meteoritic impacting was also periodic. Within months, periodicity
was addressed by three alternative astronomical hypotheses that sought to
regularly shower the earth with comets. Other hypotheses arose that speak to
various aspects of the biosphere, atmosphere and lithosphere bearing on mass
extinctions. By 1984, the explosive-volcanism hypothesis emerged to fuel the
debates as the strongest alternative to the impact hypothesis. Over the past 13
years, the growing upheaval has spawned more than 2500 professional publications
representing almost a dozen different disciplines and opened windows on
multiple, interconnected theoretical conflicts in science. Closure has not been
reached on any of the many debated issues. Dr. Glen's study is underpinned by a
perhaps singularly comprehensive, stage-specific data base with a full range of
primary historical materials including large oral and ethnographic components
collected as the debates progressed. His study touches on how perceptions form
and changge in science as arguments evolve, including the phenomenon of
conversion to an opposing hypothesis; the role of theory choice in the
assessment of evidence; the influence of disciplinary specialty in theory
choice, and how theory choice and discipline influence the selection, use, and
origin of standards of appraisal. ***