* 9311999
* The Construction of a Multi-User Data Base on the           Attributes of U.S. Courts of Appeals Judges, 1891-1992
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/1993,07/31/1996
* Gary Zuk, Auburn University
* Standard Grant
* Harmon M. Hosch
* 07/31/1996
* USD 98,483.00

9311999 BARROW The primary objective of this project is construction of a
definitive, multi-user data base on the personal, social, economic, career and
political attributes of U.S. Courts of Appeals judges who served from 1891 (the
inception of this level of court) through 1992. We know the presidents of
different political parties generally have different domestic agendas, that
Democratic legislators from the South often vote differently from their
counterparts outside that region, and that mass political behavior is related to
social and economic characteristics. We are less informed about the extent to
which these factors influence the voting (judicial decision) tendencies of
appellate judges. Indeed, development of integrated theories about why judges
vote as they do has been impeded by the lack of a comprehensive and reliable
data base. This type of information has been assembled for Supreme Court
Justices, but this is the first project to extend the data collection to the far
larger number of federal appellate judges. The project will assemble the
requisite data on federal appellate judges and then make them available to the
scholarly community in a user-friendly format. The constructed data base will
include the following information for each judge: appointing president,
predecessor (if there was one), religion, party affiliation, education, date and
place of birth, state of residence, age at time of appointment, previous
positions held (in temporal sequence), gender, race, ethnicity, A.B.A. rating
(since these have been available), and the timing and reason for leaving the
bench. A complementary data base on case characteristics and votes is being
completed; both data sets will include a unique identification number for each
judge, thereby permitting the merger of the two for appropriate research
projects. The merged multi-user data base will allow the scholarly community to
pursue important lines of research that heretofore were impossible. * **