* 9311622
* Using Parallelism and Randomness in the Analysis of Large-  Scale Real-Time Systems
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/1993,02/28/1997
* Insup Lee, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Forbes D. Lewis
* 02/28/1997
* USD 205,000.00

9311622 Lee The goal of this project is to develop efficient algorithms for the
automated analysis of communicating systems and distributed real-time systems.
We base this research on a general framework, called a Communicating Timed State
Machine with Probability (CTSMP). CTSMPs are state machines that communicate
messages synchronously over one-to-many channels. In addition, CTSMPs support
several features that are useful in describing real-time computer systems.
Examples of such features include local variables, timed state transmissions,
and probabilistic state transitions. The compositional semantics of CTSMPs
allows a complex system to be specified as a collection of simple machines that
communicate and synchronize with one another. The inclusion of both timed state
transitions and probabilistic state transitions allows the modeling of faults
and timing properties in the same framework. The fundamental issue in the
automated analysis of communicating systems is the efficient generation of the
reachable state space. For finite state systems, the problem is state explosion.
For infinite state systems, it is not possible to generate all the states;
instead, we need to find a way of combining sets of states. There are two
approaches to address the state explosion and exploration problem: 1) reduce the
state space either through efficient encoding or by clustering sets of
equivalent states; and 2) generate or explore less space using probability. This
research employs both of these approaches and consists of several related parts:
1) design of CTSMP state minimization algorithms; 2) discovery of probabilistic
state generation and exploration algorithms; 3) design of efficient model
checking algorithms using CTSMP and comparison with binary decision diagram
based algorithms; and 4) improving the efficiency of the above algorithms using
parallelism and randomization. This project will implement these algorithms and
evaluate their effectiveness exper imentally. ***