* 9311922
* When Juries Disobey the Law:  Jury Nullification in Civil   and Criminal Trials
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/1993,01/31/1996
* Irwin Horowitz, University of Toledo
* Continuing Grant
* Shelton White
* 01/31/1996
* USD 111,646.00

9311922 HOROWITZ Juries have the implicit power to acquit defendants despite
evidnce and judicial instructions to the contrary. This power, embedded in the
phenomenon called jury nullification, has historically permitted sympathetic
juries to acquit those who are legally guilty but morally upright. This research
proposal presents a theory that predicts when juries obey the law (that is,
follow their prescribed role as finders of the facts) and when they sometimes
disobey the law (i.e., do not apply the law as instructed). The research also
examines the concepts of nullification in civil trials, a neglected area of
concern. The theory distinguishes between nullification, which we define as a
principled decision to disobey the law, and other forms of jury noncompliance
with the judge's instructions. This research will allow for a clearer
understanding of when and why juries disobey the law. Jury nullification is an
increasingly important topic but it has been enmeshed in speculation and
unsubstantiated assumptions about how juries operate. The nullification
controversy, and the place of the jury in the legal system, will be well served
by a serious empirical investigation of the jury's nullification tendencies. To
test the predictions made by our theory of jury nullification, we have designed
three experiments using individuals drawn from juror rolls who will view various
videotaped trials in a realistic setting (the moot courtroom of a law school).
These jurors will deliberate to a verdict. The deliberations will be taped and
both outcomes and group decision processes analyzed. The experiments examine the
nullification process in both criminal and civil trials. The results of these
experiments will provide empirical information about why and how juries decide
to obey or disobey the dictates of the court. ***