* 9311596
* Dissertation Research:  Migration, Fertility Transition and Change in the Life Course among Ethiopian Jewish Women in   Israel
* SBE,BCS
* 06/15/1993,12/31/1994
* Carol Worthman, Emory University
* Standard Grant
* Raymond B. Hames
* 12/31/1994
* USD 12,000.00

The 1991 airlift of 15,000 Ethiopian Jews to Tel Aviv presents a remarkable
opportunity to study the impact of social change on women's reproductive
careers. In Ethiopia Jewish women married young, bore children early, and had
high fertility, trends opposite of Israeli Jewish women. This project has two
major goals. The first is to quantify the effect of changes in economy,
education, and opportunity structure on fertility decisions. And the second is
to provide a qualitative ethnographic context for understanding those decisions
based on an analysis of women's life histories. A restructuring of the life
course, as reflected in marriage and childbearing patters, pursuit of education,
and employment experience, is proposed to account for differences in fertility
regimes between older women who began their child bearing careers in Ethiopia
and younger women who have begun their child bearing careers in Israel. The data
collected in this study will be generated from a series of directed and open-
ended interviews that will provide a complete life history of immigrations,
residence, education, employment, and fertility. The details of the immigration
history of the Ethiopian Jewish population, including an abrupt rather than a
gradual social, economic, and technical change, provide a unique opportunity to
test hypotheses regarding the factors that influence the demographic transition.
Thus, this study will provide critical linkages between social transformation,
cultural values, and individual behaviors pertaining to reproduction and
fertility.