* 9311219
* Grass-Roots Science in America
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/1993,08/31/1995
* Daniel Goldstein, Individual Award
* Standard Grant
* Edward J. Hackett
* 08/31/1995
* USD 55,505.00

9311219 Goldstein The tradition of the "amateur" scientist has played a major
role in the history of science in the United States. Famous "amateurs" included
founding fathers such as Benjamin Franklin (who presented a major theory of
electricity) and Thomas Jefferson. These traditions continue to the present day
though most of contemporary science is now done by "professionals." Dr.
Goldstein is examining the history of "rank and file" scientists and their
characteristic institutions, the state and local academies of science. He argues
that the trend toward professionalization of the sciences which other historians
have documented as part of the coming of age of science in America was
complemented by the expansion of non- professional science at the local level.
"Grass-roots" naturalists engaged in research that was important to professional
scientists but which was shaped by local or regional concerns that were
independent of and occasionally conflicted with the goals of the scientific
elite. Nevertheless, Dr. Goldstein has found that the relations between
"professional" and "amateur" scientists were characterized by cooperation and
interdependence rather than the hostility that some historians have postulated.
Dr. Goldstein's research is organized around the membership and activities of
local academies of science. He analyzes grass-roots naturalists in terms of
their significance in the rapidly changing scientific community and also in the
context of local society and culture. He explains how these local scientists
responded to changes in the structure and methodologies of the natural sciences-
-especially the professionalization of science and the rise of the research
universities in the 20th century. Even after the professionalization of science,
these local academies continued to survive by meeting local needs, remaining
active in natural history research and participating in the emerging
conservation movement. The sources for this research inclu de scientific texts,
published and manuscript proceedings of academy meetings, several representative
samples of various segments of the scientific community, and private
correspondence. He is paying particular attention to issues of gender and
regionalism in his analysis. ***