* 9311397
* Stability and Change in Support for the European Court      of Justice
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/1993,08/31/1995
* James Gibson, University of Houston
* Standard Grant
* Shelton White
* 08/31/1995
* USD 117,653.00

9311397 GIBSON This project addresses questions of stability and change in mass
support for the European Court of Justice. It is important for social stability
in democracies to know how legal institutions sustain themselves. Most courts
have no access to the powerful legitimizing process of elections, while at the
same time they are often charged with making decisions contrary to the
preferences of (sometimes impassioned) majorities. Why do citizens comply with
unpopular decisions of courts? In the absence of stores of institutional
legitimacy, compliance itself is a problematic question. These problems of
legitimacy and compliance assume even broader importance in the context of
emerging transnational legal institutions like the European Court of Justice.
The European Court of Justice, the high court of the European Community, has
become the most powerful judicial institution in Europe and has been the single
institution most effective at promoting the integration of Europe. In light of
its increasingly salient and controversial decisions, it is important to ask how
this court is acquiring political legitimacy and how willing are individual
Europeans to accept its decisions. This project investigates the connections
between legitimacy and compliance, focusing on the European Court of Justice. It
focuses in particular on change in mass attitudes toward the Court, on how these
attitudes are formed, evolve and ultimately affect popular willingness to accept
Court decisions. The data collection will be by survey of a panel of respondents
(300 in each of seven countries that are members of the European Community). The
projects promises to make a significant contribution to the scientific
understanding of legitimation processes and how legitimacy affects compliance.
***