* 9311880
* Dissertation Research:  Aurignacian Lithic Economy in the   Vezere Valley
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/1993,10/31/1994
* Randall White, New York University
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 10/31/1994
* USD 11,757.00

9311880 White Under the direction of Dr. Randall White, Mr. Brooke Blades will
collect data for his doctoral dissertation. He will study three archaeological
collections which are housed in French institutions and are attributable to the
Aurignacian culture of Vezere Valley in Southwest France. These materials are
all from carefully controlled excavations at well dated sites and span the major
interval when these early modern humans inhabited Europe and the Near East. Mr.
Blades will conduct several studies. First he will examine the technologies by
which these tools were produced and shaped to produce their final form. In
particular he is interested in the intensity of utilization of raw material and
the efficiency with which it was used. Secondly, based on visual analysis he
will attempt to match the raw material - mostly flint - to the source of origin
and in this way reconstruct patterns and extent of prehistoric movement.
Finally, in collaboration with researchers at the University of Missouri, he
will obtain trace element data on one subseries to characterize source areas and
chemically match excavated artifacts to them. The goal of Mr. Blades work is to
understand the subsistence strategies practiced by Aurignacian peoples. During
the millennia when the Aurignaican occupied Western Europe, glaciers advanced
and retreated and climate changed dramatically. These shifts have been
reconstructed through the paleoenvironmental record and Dr. Blades wishes to
understand how Aurignacian subsistence and ranging patterns varied accordingly.
This research is important for several reasons. The Aurignacians are the
earliest anatomically modern people in Europe and this work will shed new light
on their cultural competence and strategies. It therefore sets a baseline
against which later accomplishments can be judged. The work also increases our
understanding of human- environment interactions and will show how people with
relatively simple technologies adapted to a rapidly and markedly changing
environment. Finally the project will contribute to the training of a promising
young scientist. ***