* 9311819
* Engineering Faculty Internship: Modeling of the             Two-Dimensional Chip Breaking Process for Maching with a    Grooved Tool Insert
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/15/1993,08/31/1994
* Ibrahim Jawahir, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Kramer
* 08/31/1994
* USD 26,525.00

This proposed work is to develop a new cutting force model for chip breaking in
machining with a conventional grooved tool insert. This is expected to be
accomplished using a recently established force model for machining with a flat-
faced (non-chip forming) tool. The proposed work will involve analytical
modeling of the process of chip breaking process for conditions requiring
consideration of additional forces at the free-end of the chip as well as at the
back-wall of the chip groove. Variable frictional conditions will be assumed at
the chip/tool back-wall and chip/work surface contact points. The well known
shear plane theory of metal cutting will be extended to include the effects of
the above additional friction forces. Experimental work will include the use of
a high speed filming camera system to study the varying chip curling and
breaking patterns within a typical chip breaking cycle while continuously
monitoring the cutting force variations with the use of a three-component tool
dynamometer system. Based on the analytical simulations and the experimental
work, it is expected to model the curled chip using the finite element modeling
technique for continuously varying chip loading. The variation of mechanical
properties such as the tensile strain which normally contribute to the chip
breaking process will be estimated. The major objective of this work is to
establish the most significant factors that influence chip breaking and to
develop a new chip breakability criterion based on the new findings. It is hoped
that the new findings anticipated in this project will help cutting tool
manufacturers in designing new and innovative chip forming tool inserts.