* 9311357
* Engineering Research Deployment Teaching Initiative: A      Software Package for Rapid Analysis of Queueing Systems     (RAQS)
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/15/1993,12/31/1994
* Manjunath Kamath, Oklahoma State University
* Standard Grant
* Frank A. Settle
* 12/31/1994
* USD 22,331.00

9311357 The purpose of this project is to address the lack of instructional
resources as the undergraduate level and to support the ongoing research and
teaching efforts at the graduate level in the area of queueing network theory
and applications. Another major objective is to be better prepare students in
the area of performance modeling using queueing networks, so that they can help
industry to make effective use of performance analysis tools and packages in
managing their operations. The work will make a significant contribution to the
preparation of students in the systems analysis and design area. It will do so
by bridging the gap between research and instruction in the area of performance
modeling using queueing networks. With exposure to recent developments in the
performance analysis area, students will be able to help industry in making
effective use of this technology. Using currently available commercial software
tools they can then help industry to remain competitive in the global
environment. With regard to engineering education, this effort will contribute
to the attainment of a much needed science base for production or manufacturing
systems design. It also has the potential for greatly increasing the use of
queueing theory in practice.