* 9311858
* The Record of ENSO in the Warm Pool of the Western          Pacific: Multi-century Reconstructions from the Geochemistry of Long-lived Corals
* GEO,AGS
* 12/15/1993,05/31/1998
* Julia Cole, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* Herman Zimmerman
* 05/31/1998
* USD 211,251.00

Abstract ATM-9311858 Cole, J.E. Title: The Record of ENSO in the Warm Pool of
the Western Pacific: Multi-century Reconstruction from the Geochemistry of Long-
lived Corals The western Pacific warm pool provides a major source of water
vapor and energy to the global atmosphere and is a "center of action" for the El
Nino/Southern Oscillation (ENSO) system, whose signal permeates the global
record of interannual climate variability. ENSO warm extremes originate from the
region, and the western Pacific convection anomalies associated with ENSO
propagate climate variability throughout the tropics and the world. This award
supports a project that will reconstruct multi-century records of variability in
the ocean/atmosphere of the western equatorial Pacific, using geochemical
records from the skeletons of long-lived corals. The study will extend the
limited record to ENSO to span the past few centuries along an equatorial
transect from the region of the date line into the heart of the western Pacific
warm pool. The resulting records will provide a new understanding of long-term
temporal and spatial variability of ENSO and its relation to variations in the
western Pacific warm pool and to external forcings, including the regional
response to the Little Ice Age. The proposed paleoclimatic study will place the
TOGA/COARE observations in a long-term perspective and delineating the range of
natural variability that models must aim to simulate.