* 9311514
* Galactose Oxidase - A Radical Enzyme that Catalyzes Radical Reactions to Generate Radical Products
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/1993,01/31/1997
* Bruce Branchaud, University of Oregon Eugene
* Continuing grant
* Marcia Steinberg
* 01/31/1997
* USD 270,000.00

The wood rot fungus Dactylium dendroides excretes large amounts of the enzyme
galactose oxidase (GOase) into the extracellular medium1. GOase has been
classified as an alcohol oxidase, using O2 to convert primary alcohols (RCH2OH)
into aldehydes (RCHO) and H202. GOase can react with a wide variety of primary
alcohols, includingmany carbohydrates, such as glucose, cellobiose, maltose,
lactose, sucrose, and polymeric carbohydrates, including cellulose. Although the
oxidase reaction of GOase has been known for decades, the main biological
purpose of GOase has always been a puzzle. Recent work in the Branchaud
laboratory indicates that GOase possesses multiple activities, including an iron
reductase activity. Fe(II) produced by the iron reductase activity and H202 from
the oxidase activity could combine to produce hydroxyl radicals via the Fenton
reaction. The PI proposes that the principle activity of GOase in nature is to
generate hydroxyl radicals for the purpose of breaking down wood cellulose and
other complex polymers. The research examines and characterizes the multiple
activities of this enzyme. %%% Galactose oxidase produces hydroxyl radical, one
of the reactive, broad specificity oxidants known. Such a biocatalyst has
potential application in oxidatively degrading complex biomolecules in toxic
wastes and in developing more environmentally friendly bleaching technologies.