* 9311304
* Dissertation Research: Non-trophic Indirect Interactions in a Seagrass Community: Effects of a Predatory Gastropod on a Benthic Fish Assemblage
* BIO,DEB
* 07/15/1993,10/31/1994
* William Herrnkind, Florida State University
* Standard Grant
* Scott L. Collins
* 10/31/1994
* USD 4,920.00

9311304 Herrnkind The purpose of this Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant is
to investigate a non-trophic indirect interaction between a predatory marine
gastropod and an assemblage of benthic fish that shelter and lay eggs in the
shells of the gastropod's main prey, the pen shell Atrina. As a major source of
Atrina mortality, the gastropod should influence shelter availability, and thus
indirectly affect species occupying the shells. Since the fish also use the
shells as a site for reproduction, the gastropod predator may influence both
population distribution and egg production. This study will assess the
relationship between Atrina and each fish species by experimentally varying pen
shell mortality rates, and separately measuring factors that should influence
Atrina mortality, namely abundance and individual feeding rates of the gastropod
predator. %%% This information will allow a quantitative evaluation of the
interaction between the predator and the fish occupants in terms of local
abundance and reproductive output. Understanding how interspecific interactions
influence populations and communities has been a major goal of ecological
research. Direct predator-prey and competitive interactions are widely studied.
Indirect interactions have received less attention, but evidence for their
importance is growing. This study will contribute important information towards
a better understanding of the role of indirect interactions in the abundance and
distribution of aquatic organisms. ***