* 9311203
* Thermoregulatory Capability and Temperature Effects on      Foraging Success in Two Species of Crab Spider,             Misumenoides formosipes and Misumenops asperatus
* BIO,IOS
* 08/15/1993,01/31/1996
* Timothy Casey, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Sharon Emerson
* 01/31/1996
* USD 2,620.00

9311203 Casey Temperature affects organisms at many levels and influences such
fundamental processes as metabolic rate, growth rate, and movement capability.
Although a great deal of research has been devoted to determining how
temperature affects various processes within a single organism, little work has
been done to investigate the influence of temperature on between-organism
interactions. Using spiders as model terrestrial predators, our research will
focus on the affect of temperature on predator-prey interactions by asking the
following questions: does spider foraging success change as environmental
temperature changes over the course of a day, and if so, can spiders extend the
period of maximal prey capture by regulating body temperature? We will use two
species of crab spider, Misumenops asperatus and Misumenoides formosipes, which
mature in late spring and late summer, respectively. These spiders are ambush
predators that hunt on flowers and physically over-power prey rather than
ensnaring it in silk. Employing a combination of laboratory and field
experiments, we will determine (for each species) preferred temperature, the
temperature range over which spiders are capable of activity, the effect of
temperature on spider foraging success within that temperature range, the timing
of greatest prey capture in the field, and the timing of greatest prey
visitation to flowers used by the spiders. Using spider species which mature at
different times during the season, and thus experience different temperature
regimes, will allow us to make a better determination of how temperature may
affect spiders directly by limiting the amount of time a spider can remain
active. Alternatively, spiders may be tolerant to a broad temperature range, yet
may still be indirectly temperature limited by direct temperature limitations on
prey activity time. *** v s t $ $ $ ( F / C Dutch (scalable) Symbol " Swiss
(scalable) 5 Courier New " h G H W G R:\WW20USER\ABSTRACT.DOT Rochelle D Ray
Rochelle D Ray