* 9311773
* The Settlement Pattern of Caracol
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/1993,06/30/1996
* Diane Chase, The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Continuing Grant
* John Yellen
* 06/30/1996
* USD 219,369.00

With National Science Foundation support Drs. Diane and Arlen Chase will
continue their archaeological research at the site of Caracol located in Belize,
Central America. At an altitude of over 500 meters it is among the highest sites
in the Maya lowlands. The site was rediscovered approximately 55 years ago and
until the Chases began their project little was known about it. Survey work has
shown the site to be quite large. The core is conservatively estimated at 88
square kilometers. It contains at least 10 intra- site causeways which run
outward like the spokes of a wheel from the site core. Over 3000 structures have
been recorded and the number is far from complete. Excavations have provided
evidence of occupation from ca 300 B.C. to ca. 1150 A.D. and it is clear that
Caracol played a major role in the Mayan prehistory of the region. What makes
the site especially interesting are the carved stelae or written tablets which
have been recovered. These permit a partial historical reconstruction and
indicate Caracol emerged victorious in two major battles. The two principal
investigators plan to focus their efforts in one of the city's sectors and
conduct survey work as well as both trial and extensive excavation. What they
wish to do is use these data, in conjunction with other information to
reconstruct the demographic history of the site and to search for relationships
between periods of construction and warfare. While much work has been done on
large Mayan sites, archaeologists still do not know whether they functioned as
true integrated cities, how much of them were occupied at a single moment in
time, and how their growth and development were integrated into a larger
regional and political context. The only way to answer such questions is through
large scale, long term excavation and the Chases have pursued just that goal for
many years. The additional data they plan to collect will help to illumine both
the history and functioning of this major Mayan site. This research is important
for several reasons. It will provide data about a major Mayan center and shed
new light on the factors which led to the rise of urban civilization.//