* 9311463
* Behavioral Mechanisms that Determine Pattern of Herbivory   and Foraging Efficiency on Spatially Heterogeneous Plant    Communities
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/1993,01/31/1995
* Emilio Laca, Texas Tech University
* Standard Grant
* Fred Stollnitz
* 01/31/1995
* USD 17,994.00

9311463 Laca Deciding where to search for food is fundamental for animals.
Because herbivores are selective while foraging, their interaction with the
plant community is spatially variable. Foragers encounter vegetation with
characteristics different from the average for the whole community. Removal of
plant tissue and other herbivore impacts are concentrated on some areas and
light on others. The importance of vegetational heterogeneity depends strictly
upon the behavioral mechanisms animals exhibit in response to heterogeneity. Dr.
Laca will test three behavioral mechanisms that may be used by a large grazer to
forage efficiently in heterogeneous environments: restriction of search to areas
where food has been recently encountered, learning of food locations, and
regulation of time spent feeding on food patches. The importance and rate of
learning will be tested in controlled food arenas. Foraging efficiency is
hypothesized to be greater in heterogeneous environments because, by using
specialized and learned searching strategies, animals experience a foraging
environment better than average. Large-scale patterns of grazing behavior on
natural plant communities will be related to small-scale behavioral mechanisms.
Additionally, a literature review will be conducted and a conceptual model of
foraging behavior on heterogeneous landscapes will be developed. If animal
performance is affected significantly by heterogeneity, measures of spatial
variability should allow better evaluation of the nutritional value of habitats.
If heterogeneity is shown to improve livestock performance, some pasture and
rangeland management practices may have to be reviewed, de-emphasizing
homogeneity as a goal.