* 9311539
* Mathematical Sciences: Quasiregular Mappings and the Heat   Equation
* MPS,DMS
* 06/15/1993,11/30/1996
* John Lewis, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* John V. Ryff
* 11/30/1996
* USD 50,000.00

This project continues mathematical research on quasiregular mappings and the
heat equation. Quasiregular mappings were introduced during the past quarter
century to describe transformations of the plane and space whose distortion
(dilatation) about any point is bounded. Quasiconformal maps have the same
definition except that they are required to be univalent. Quasiregular maps are
closely related to questions of uniqueness in the theory of partial differential
equations. This project will focus on investigations into weak solutions of
elliptic and parabolic differential equations and the relationship between the
branch set of an entire quasiregular or quasimeromorphic function and its value
distribution. Work will also continue on singular integrals and the heat
equation for certain time varying domains in space. The one space variable case
is now well understood. Current plans are to carry forward recent results into
the multidimensional case. The goals are to study the Dirichlet and Neumann
problems on these domains and seek to determine the mutual absolute continuity
of parabolic measure with respect to a certain projective Lebesgue measure. This
will use the method of layer potentials, the David buildup scheme and singular
integral estimates. Partial differential equations form a basis for mathematical
modeling of the physical world. The role of mathematical analysis is not so much
to create the equations as it is.