* 9311303
* Collaborative Research: Drought in the Australian Outback:  Milankovitch and Anthropogenic Forcing of the               Australian Monsoon
* GEO,AGS
* 10/01/1993,03/31/1998
* Gifford Miller, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* Herman Zimmerman
* 03/31/1998
* USD 307,251.00

ATM-9311303 Miller University of Colorado Title: Collaborative Research: Drought
in the Australian Outback: Milankovitch and Anthropogenic Forcing of the
Australian Monsoon The Lake Eyre Basin, an interior basin covering one sixth of
the Australian continent, receives the vast majority of its precipitation from
cyclonic disturbances associated with the summer monsoon. The Australian summer
monsoon is strongly influenced by the Asian winter monsoon, the intensity of
which is controlled by changes in solar radiation caused by variations in the
Earth's orbit around the sun (Milankovitch effect). This award supports research
designed 10 to develop an improved geochronology of lake-full events as a first-
order test of the proposition that January insolation over the Tibetan Plateau
can be as a proxy for the intensity of the Australian monsoon; 2) to produce an
independent reconstruction of aridity for the last 150 ka across the basin, and
reconstruct vegetation during the last lake-full interval (60-70 ka), using the
isotopic composition of organic and inorganic molecules preserved in ratite
eggshells (reflecting the proportion of C3 and C4 plants), and 3) to test the
potential impact of vegetation change on climate by modeling the penetration of
monsoonal precipitation into the Lake Eyre Basin with a high-resolution (3o
grid) Global Circulation Model incorporating two different vegetation regimes.