* 9311660
* Assessing the External Validity of Jury Research
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/1993,12/31/1996
* Steven Penrod, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Harmon M. Hosch
* 12/31/1996
* USD 65,456.00

9311660 PENROD Social scientists have studied jury decision-making in order to
identify factors in the process that conform to the ideal model of the jury in a
democratic society, as well as factors that might be changed to improve jury
functioning. However, access to real juries is restricted by law and as a result
many jury researchers use simulated juries as the basis for their studies.
Simulated juries have the advantage that researchers can carefully control and
systematically vary the content of their simulation to maintain experimental
research controls not typically available in real courtrooms. Critics within the
social science and legal communities argue, however, that the decision-making
observed in jury simulations may not generalize to actual trials and that it may
be unwise to base policies on the results of simulation research. This project
will test whether the research methods used (those features of jury studies that
arguably make them more or less applicable to actual cases) are systematically
related to the size and nature of the results. A number of variables (such as
jury size, jury decision rules, jury comprehension of legal instructions, and
pretrial publicity) that have been examined using both simulations and field
observations of real juries will be examined. The project will include a number
of stages. First, a search will be undertaken to identify all relevant studies.
Second, existing reviews of the jury literature and theoretical articles on jury
behavior will be reviewed to identify variables for coding. A coding scheme for
all included characteristics will be developed and tested. Then all of the
studies will be coded according to the coding scheme. These data will be
analyzed to test the average effect sizes produced by the independent variables
in the full data set and the average effect sizes for specific research domains
within the full data set. The relationships among the various research methods
and the magni tude of the effect sizes will then be tested in both the full data
set and the specific research domains. The goal is to identify any
methodological variables that moderate the influence of the independent
variables and thereby limit the generalizability of results from simulation
studies. ***