* 9311436
* Biological Field Station Proposal: Refurbishment of Kemp    Natural Resources Station
* BIO,DBI
* 12/15/1993,11/30/1995
* Stith Gower, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* None
* 11/30/1995
* USD 100,000.00

9311436 Gower, S. The Kemp Natural Resources Station, a research center operated
by the University of Wisconsin-Madison's College of Agricultural and Life
Sciences, is located in north-central Wisconsin. The station has several unique
characteristics: (1) It is located near some of the few remaining large tracts
of old growth forests int he easter United States, (2) It is located in a region
that contains diverse landforms that are juxtaposed in complex patterns, (3) The
proximal location of Keep to Trout Lake Station offer an excellent opportunity
to examine interactions between terrestrial and research and
undergraduate/graduate training scale. Keep has a long history as a center for
community ecology, wildlife ecology, plant pathology and entomology. Current
research programs include biological and physical sciences such as terrestrial
ecosystem ecology, ecophysiology, restoration, and landscape ecology; and
involve scientists from UW-Madison and other UW campuses, USFS, USGS, and
several American and Canadian universities. Despite recent and ongoing
improvements to both physical structure and research capabilities at Keep
Station, the laboratory facilities are not adequate to meet current and future
demands. This project will support the remodeling and expansion of the existing
research laboratory and the purchase an image analysis system. The modernization
of the laboratory will re-establish Keep Natural Resources Station as a center
for terrestrial research and promote inter-disciplinary research on terrestrial-
aquatic interaction with scientists at Trout Lake Station -- a center for
aquatic research. ***