* 9311898
* Theoretical Investigation of Diffusional Phase              Transformations and the Possibility of Stable Nanoscale     Structures in Ionic Ceramics
* MPS,DMR
* 07/15/1993,06/30/1997
* Long-Qing Chen, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* G. Bruce Taggart
* 06/30/1997
* USD 138,000.00

9311898 Chen A theoretical investigation will be carried out on the
thermodynamics and kinetics of continuous phase transformations and on the
possibility of stable nanoscale structures in multicomponent ceramic materials.
The main objective is to develop theories and computer simulation techniques for
understanding the fundamental thermodynamic and kinetic origins leading to the
formation of an important class of self-assembled nanocomposites which resist
continuous coarsening. To reach this objective, systematic phase stability
analysis and phase diagram calculations for ionic systems with stable nanoscale
structures will be performed. The key structural and thermodynamic factors
leading to the formation of thermodynamically stable nanoscale phases will be
identified. Extensive computer modeling will be conducted of the kinetics of
atomic ordering, compositional clustering and microstructural coarsening in
systems involving both short-range chemical and long- range Coulomb
interactions. A computer simulation technique will be developed which can
describe the coarsening dynamics of domains interacting with each other through
electric dipole-dipole interactions, elastic interactions and Coulomb
interactions. The focus will be on the diffusional transformations in the self-
assembled relaxor nanocomposites. The relation of atomic ordering and
compositional clustering tendencies to the atomic sizes and charge valences of
cations will be investigated through a combination of modern statistical
mechanics theory of order- disorder transformations and atomistic computer
simulations using shell-model interatomic potentials. %%% This theoretical
research grant involves both analytical theory and computer simulation to study
the properties of ceramic materials which undergo changes of phase into
materials having novel structures. The research will identify the conditions
which control the formation of these structures during the phase change. The
research is com plicated by the fact that the materials are ionic. This causes
additional forces over long distances which are difficult to handle
theoretically. However, the results of this work will have important
ramifications for understanding and processing these technologically important
materials. ***