* 9311307
* A Model for Vasopressin Gene Construct Expression           In Vivo
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/1993,01/31/1997
* Thomas Sherman, University of Pittsburgh
* Continuing Grant
* Kathie L. Olsen
* 01/31/1997
* USD 285,746.00

9311307 Sherman Vasopressin is a peptide hormone that is synthesized in
magnocellular neurons of the hypothalamus and is secreted into the blood stream
from nerve endings in the posterior pituitary. The primary stimulus for
vasopressin release by the posterior pituitary is dehydration. Indeed, this
neuropeptide is the antidiuretic hormone. It is essential for the regulation of
water balance. In addition, vasopressin is involved in stress mechanisms since
it acts synergistically with the hypothalamic- pituitary-adrenal axis to
stimulate secretion of adrenocorticotropic hormone. Much of our knowledge about
vasopressin has resulted from work with the Brattleboro rat. These rats do not
synthesize vasopressin because of a single base deletion in the gene which is
inherited as an autosomal recessive trait. As a consequence of this gene defect,
Brattleboro rats develop diabetes insipidus. Dr. Sherman is examining the use of
a modified herpes virus to facilitate in vivo investigations of vasopressin
structure- function relationships. The herpes virus type 1 (HSV-1) is uniquely
capable of infecting non-dividing cells, such as neurons. Moreover, it has the
added characteristic of existing in neurons, under some conditions, in a dormant
or quiescent state termed latency, during which only a small portion of the
herpes genome is active. Using newly developed state-of-the-art techniques, Dr.
Sherman will engineer a special modified HSV-1 virus to incorporate a working
version of the gene for vasopressin. He will develop different versions of
normal vasopressin gene constructions and various HSV-1 viral modifications to
maximize the expression of normal vasopressin hormone in Br attleboro rats.
Results from this work are likely to make significant contributions both within
the field of vasopressin research and the development and use of HSV vectors for
gene expression. Indeed, the ultimate goal is to correct the diabetes insipidus
defect by specifically targeting magnocellular neurons by direct injections of
the vasopressin-containing virus into the posterior pituitary, where the virus
particles can be taken up by the magnocellular nerve terminals, retrogradely
transported to the hypothalamic cell bodies, establish latency, and begin
expressing the virally-contained vasopressin gene. This work provides an
important bridge between neuroscience and virology and leads the way for new
developments in gene therapy. ***