* 9311671
* Aspects of Productivity Measurement
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/1993,07/31/1997
* Robert Gordon, Northwestern University
* Continuing Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 07/31/1997
* USD 215,339.00

9311671 Gordon There is widespread agreement that slow productivity growth over
the past two decades is the greatest economic problem faced by the United
States. While the importance of U.S. productivity is widely recognized,
economists have as yet made little progress in understanding the phenomenon. The
post-1982 slowdown in the growth rates of average labor productivity and multi-
factor productivity have withstood the efforts of economists to provide a
single-cause explanation, including fluctuations of energy prices, inadequate
private investment, inadequate infrastructure investment, excessive government
regulation, and declining educational scores. While some of these may make a
partial contribution, even when combined they appear to leave most of the
slowdown unexplained. This ongoing research project takes a comprehensive
approach to the study of slow U.S. productivity. Its focus combines three
dimensions - (1) long-run historical, (2) cross-country, and (3) individual
industry studies - and attempts by studying these dimensions singly and in
combination to develop an improved degree of understanding. Contrary to
conventional wisdom, over the past 120 years productivity growth in the U.S.
displays the pattern of "one big wave," slow from 1870 to 1913, rapid from 1913
to 1964 (peaking in 1928-50), and slow again after 1964. The project attempts to
isolate the industrial sectors where the big wave occurs, assess its statistical
accuracy, and develop hypotheses to explain it. The cross-country aspect of the
research detailed industry-by- industry data on productivity for other large
nations to identify the largest differences between the U.S. It assesses the
role of differing measurement methodology in accounting for the differences.
Finally, a detailed industry study will be carried out for the U.S. construction
sector, which has exhibited negative measured productivity growth since the
mid-1960s. ***