* 9311244
* JGOFS: Response of Arabian Sea Phytoplankton Biomass,       Pigmentation, Growth Rates, and Community Structure To      Seasonally Varying Physically Forcing
* GEO,OCE
* 06/01/1994,05/31/1997
* Ralf Goericke, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Continuing Grant
* Phillip R. Taylor
* 05/31/1997
* USD 360,000.00

9311244 Goericke The U.S. Arabian Sea JGOFS program offers the unique
opportunity to study the response of an oceanic ecosystem to strong and
seasonally predictable physical forcing in an environment with strong spatial
gradients. Biological conditions in the Arabian Sea vary from extreme
oligotrophy to extreme eutrophy. Primary production and concentrations of
chlorophyll a, for example, change by one to two orders of magnitude over space
and time. We propose to study the effects of the seasonally varying physical
forcing on the phytoplankton community as a whole and on individual populations
of microalgae, using primarily pigment-based methods. We will test the
hypothesis, suggested by data from other environments, that phytoplankton
community structure and growth rates during most of the year. The exception is
the area off Oman during the SW monsoon when oceanic upwelling occurs. At this
time the community is expected to be dominated by diatoms growing at high rates.
Phytoplankton community structure will be monitored by measuring the
concentration of taxon-specific chlorophylls and carotenoids by high-pressure
liquid chromatography. It is proposed to carry out theqe analyses as part of the
JGOFS core measurements. Using the pigment 14c-labeling method we propose to
measure phytoplankton carbon-biomass, phytoplankton growth rates and taxon-
specific growth rates to study the physiological response of the phytoplanton
community to the seasonally varying physical forcing. Carbon to Chl a ratios
will be calculated from phytoplankton biomass and chl a and used to calculated
seasonal maps of phytoplankton carbon-biomass for the Arabian Sea from remotely
sensed ocean and biomass will allow us to determine factors which control the
growth and abundance of the individual phytoplankton population, such as
coccolithophores or prochlorophytes, and their contribution to carbon cycling in
this environment.