* 9311491
* Dissertation Research: Fitness Components and Ontogenies in Complex Societies
* BIO,DEB
* 08/15/1993,07/31/1996
* Kerry Rabenold, Purdue Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Mark Courtney
* 07/31/1996
* USD 13,800.00

9311491 Rabenold The investigators will conduct a study of highly social brown
jays in Costa Rica. They will employ genetic analyses and trace ontogenies to
determine the complexity of breeding options available to young individuals. %%%
This research builds on a long-term study of the relationship between social
behavior and increasing density as this population has grown since its inception
30 years ago. A key element in this society is the role played by delayed
maturation and the signaling of dominance status. By understanding differential
reproductive activity, territory inheritance and patterns of dispersal and
survival, light will be shed on the "parental facilitation" hypotheses. These
hypotheses propose that tolerance by dominants by others might under some
circumstances by favored. Study of brown jays as a model of social birds, will
provide a definitive demonstration of a major, but poorly understood, branch of
vertebrate sociality. *** ofbejays as a model of social birds 9311491 Rabenold
The investigators will conduct a study of highly social brown jays in Costa
Rica. They will employ genetic O Q S U t p u J O Q ! !. !. !. F t Q ( Times New
Roman Symbol &amp; Arial \ \ \ ! d ! # = \ Q m S U O " h e e T Rabenold/Williams
abstract Elizabeth M. Behrens Elizabeth M. Behrens