* 9311109
* Dissertation Research:  Acoustic Communication in a         Subsocial Invertebrate
* BIO,IOS
* 08/15/1993,09/30/1995
* Allen Moore, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Fred Stollnitz
* 09/30/1995
* USD 5,611.00

9311109 Moore Unambiguous communication is a feature of populations that have
structured social systems. Nonetheless, variation among individuals in their
communication signals may be important in the establishment and maintenance of
stable social organizations. However, the genetic basis and consequences of
variation in acoustic communication are poorly understood. Ms. Deborah C.
Clark's doctoral-dissertation research will attempt to clarify the role of
acoustic communication in competition between males of a subsocial invertebrate,
Gromphadorhina portentosa. This cockroach species is notable for its agonistic
interactions among males, involving diverse and complex behavior including the
use of agonistic hisses. Using behavioral, acoustic, and genetic techniques, Ms.
Clark will quantify the variation among individuals in frequency, amplitude,
duration, and temporal pattern of hisses occurring during interactions between
males. Ms. Clark will estimate genetic variances and covariances for
characteristics of agonistic hisses, and will conduct experiments to investigate
the function of variation in hisses. This research is unique in investigating
social competition and acoustic communication in a subsocial invertebrate. These
studies will address important issues relevant to the evolution and use of
acoustic signals in communication.