* 9311296
* Workshop on the Origins of Logical Empiricism, to be Held   in Minneapolis, Minnesota, October 21-24, 1993
* SBE,SES
* 10/01/1993,09/30/1994
* Ronald Giere, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Edward J. Hackett
* 09/30/1994
* USD 10,000.00

9311296 Giere Contemporary philosophy of science with its current view of the
nature of science and scientific theory developed out of an explicit reaction
against the Logical Empiricist school of philosophy that dominated our view of
science for nearly a quarter of a century after World War II. To understand our
current views, it is extremely important to understand the positions against
which we have reacted. Logical Empiricism grew out of the long empiricist
tradition in Anglo-American philosophy which includes Locke, Hume, Mill, and
Bertrand Russell. But the new mathematical logic, developed by Russell and
Whitehead in the first decade of this century, played an equally important role.
It provided a language in which empiricist claims could be formulated,
techniques for developing empiricist analyses of scientific hypotheses and
methods, and, above all, a standard for rational reference. The objective of
this workshop is to promote research on the origins of Logical Empiricism by
bringing together a number of active researchers for three days of discussion on
previously circulated papers. This group of researchers will then produce a
comprehensive and unified volume that will help legitimate the study of this
history both within the philosophy of science and within the broader discipline
of philosophy as part of the history of twentieth century philosophy. Interest
in the history of Logical Empiricism has recently been promoted by a number of
conferences celebrating the births, in 1891, of the two major founders of
Logical Empiricism, Rudolf Carnap and Hans Reichenbach. The concerns of this
workshop is by no means to continue the celebration, but to capitalize on the
interest these celebrations generated to promote the study of the origins of
Logical Empiricism as part of both the philosophy of science and the history of
philosophy. The organizers hope thereby to provide encouragement for younger
scholars who have taken up this important study. ** *