* 9311828
* Solution and Gas-Phase Photochemistry Involving Multiple    and Delocalized Excited States
* MPS,CHE
* 07/15/1993,06/30/1996
* Harry Morrison, Purdue Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Kenneth M. Doxsee
* 06/30/1996
* USD 192,531.00

Photochemical and photophysical properties of molecules which react from
delocalized and/or multiple excited states will be studied, with a particular
emphasis on evaluating the relative roles of through-bond and through-space
interactions. In solution, polyfunctional substrates will be studied, utilizing
antenna chromophores or delocalized excitation to activate distal groups which
are transparent or weakly absorbent in the ultraviolet or are absorbent but may
be selectively activated through the antenna. Special attention will be given
to: (1) charge transfer transmission through the steroid frame-work, (2) energy
transfer in trifunctional steroids, and (3) the potential role of sigma bonded
relay mechanisms to facilitate virtual orbital mixing. In the gas-phase, studies
will emphasize the newly discovered Norrish Type II chemistry of thioketones.
%%% This grant from the Organic Dynamics Program supports the continuing work of
Professor Morrison at Purdue University. Functional groups in molecules will be
excited by light absorption and the mechanism by which this energy is
transferred to other functional groups in molecules will be studied. A
particular concern will be to determine if the energy is transferred through
bonds or through space. In another phase of the research, unique photochemical
and photophysical properties sulfur containing compounds will be investigated.