* 9311979
* Support of the Bird Collection of the Museum of Vertebrate  Zoology, Univerity of California at Berkeley
* BIO,DEB
* 10/15/1993,09/30/1995
* Ned Johnson, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* James R. Estes
* 09/30/1995
* USD 280,323.00

9311979 Johnson This award will support drastically needed improvements to the
bird collection in the Museum of Vertebrate Zoology, University of California
Berkeley, which is one of the nation's largest (173,500 specimens) and has
important holdings from North America (83%). The collection is a fundamental
international and national resource in teaching and research in biodiversity and
biological disciplines. The improvements coincide with a move of the collections
to new, modern facilities in a Life Sciences Building that the University has
renovated at a cost of $80M $120M. The renovation has achieved a 48% increase in
space for all collections. The support will provide cabinets to replace
inadequate old cases and to alleviate crowding, two ultracold freezers for
housing an irreplaceable frozen tissue collection, and student assistants for
packing and unpacking the collection. %%% The bird collection in the Museum of
Vertebrate Zoology, University of California Berkeley is internationally
recognized in its importance to systematic and ecological research. It is a
fundamental resource in biodeversity studies and education. This support will
enable the collection to be moved to newly renovated facilities and rehoused in
modern cabinets that will ensure its conservation for future generations of
students and researchers. ***