* 9311457
* Experiemental Studies of Intra-Particle Forced Convection   in Large-Pore Materials
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/1993,10/31/1995
* John Chen, Lehigh University
* Standard Grant
* Robert M. Wellek
* 10/31/1995
* USD 59,675.00

9311457 Hsu Large-pore materials have been used in many chemical engineering
applications such as catalysis, chromatography, ceramic membranes, adsorption
and immobilized cell fermentation. In each case, the effectiveness of the
material is believed to be enhanced by intraparticle forced convection which
improves the intraparticle mass transfer. Several investigators have presented
models of this phenomenon which are intended to provide methods of predicting
the performance of these materials under various operating conditions. However,
all of the models rely on theoretical estimates of the intraparticle velocity in
determining the mass transfer rates without providing experimental confirmation.
This project seeks to measure the intraparticle velocity versus pressure drop
relationship using a unique particle flow apparatus. Analysis of the results
will provide a quantitative measure of Darcy's constant for the particle. This
constant can then be used in any pressure gradient field, including packed and
fluidized beds, to determine the corresponding intraparticle fluid flow field.
Knowledge of this field will allow for the development of a more comprehensive
model of intraparticle mass transfer which includes both diffusion and
convection. Such a model should be applicable to any type of process which uses
the large-pore materials and therefore can be used to determine their optimum
operating conditions. ***