* 9311384
* US-FSU Workshop on Biogeochemical Processes in the          Arabian Sea (Mid-September 1993; Crimea, Ukraine)
* O/D,OISE
* 07/15/1993,12/31/1994
* Joel Goldman, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* Cassandra Turczak
* 12/31/1994
* USD 39,175.00

This U.S.-Former Soviet Union ıFSU! Workshop on Biogeochemical Processes in the
Arabian Sea, will be held during mid-September, 1993, in the Crimea, Ukraine.
Dr. Joel C. Goldman and Dr. Hugh D. Livingston, Woods Hole Oceanographic
Institution, will cooperate with the Marine Hydrophysical Institute (MHI) and
the Institute of Biology of the Southern Seas (IBSS), both located in
Sevastopol. It has been designed to: (a) disseminate data and literature from
previous research activities of Former Soviet Union (FSU) oceanographers in the
Arabian Sea, (b) describe to FSU colleagues the current US and International
interests in the forthcoming Arabian Sea initiatives by JGOFS, NOAA and other US
agencies, (c) provide opportunities for FSU scientists to establish scientific
contacts with their US counterparts, and (d) form connections which might lead
to scientific cooperation between each other in both the Arabian Sea and other
ocean areas of mutual interest. The proposed work would be jointly funded by the
US and the two laboratories in Sevastopol. It would last five days and involve
17 US and 20-25 FSU participants, many of whom have previous research experience
in the Arabian Sea and Indian Ocean. This project in oceanography fulfills the
program objectives of advancing science by enabling leading experts in the U.S.
and the FSU to combine complementary talents and pool research resources in
areas of strong mutual interest and competence.