* 9311224
* Dissertation Research:  Local Knowledge Systems and         Agroforestry Management:  A Case Study from Southwestern    Phillippines
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/1993,05/31/1995
* John Willigen, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Raymond B. Hames
* 05/31/1995
* USD 8,500.00

Willigen/Suminguit 9311224 In third world economic development circles and
academia, there is an increasing interest in local knowledge systems (LKS) and
agroforestry (AF). However, little is known about the linkages between them and
the benefits of combining them to improve upland farming systems and to slow
down deforestation. This study proposes to examine the linkages between LKS and
AF (1) by documenting folk taxonomy and traditional management practices of
trees, food crops, and soils among the Subanun and Visayan farmers in the
southwestern Philippines; and (2) by comparing the differential distribution of
this technical knowledge by age, gender, socioeconomic status, and ethnicity.
The researcher will use archival research, participant observation, informal,
and formal interviews to collect primary data. In addition, semantic domain
analysis, a linguistic technique, will be used to analyze qualitative data. This
study will enhance of our understanding in the linkage of local knowledge
systems and agroforestry. This will also make a basic contribution to the study
of intracultural variation. The applied significance is its potential
contribution to an improved design of agroforestry projects that increase food
production of the upland farmers and forest occupants, while slowing down the
process of deforestation. *** bert J. MacCoun RAND Corporation Richard Nisbett
University of Michigan Rita J. Simon American University RAPAPORT, Elizabeth
9309890 Duke University $28,254 09 mos 01 Jun B D F Q Q E Times New Roman Symbol
&amp; Arial 1 Pres Elite 5 Courier New " h m Em E J r willigen suminguit
abstract abstract"willigen suminguit abstract thesis Raymond Hames Raymond Hames