* 9311612
* NSF-CGP Science Fellowship Program:  Surface Anchoring and  Alignment in Polymer Dispersed Liquid Crystals
* O/D,OISE
* 01/01/1994,03/31/1995
* John West, Kent State University
* Standard Grant
* Patricia Jones Tsuchitani
* 03/31/1995
* USD 20,117.00

WPC< 2 B J Z Courier #| x 6F x 6 X @ `7 X @ HP LaserJet 4 (935-Mail)
INTHP4-1.PRS x @ \ E X @ 2 6 F V N Z #| x Courier ? x x x , x 6 X @ `7 X @ HP
LaserJet 4 (935-Mail) INTHP4-1.PRS x @ \ E X @ 2 0 F Z : 9311612 West This award
will support a cooperative research project between Professor John L. West,
Liquid Crystal Institute, Kent State University, Ohio, and Dr. Shunsuke
Kobayashi, Faculty of Technology, Tokyo University of Agriculture and Technology
in Tokyo. During a four month visit, Professor West will conduct research on
surface anchoring and alignment in polymer dispersed liquid crystals (PDLC).
Measurements will be taken of the azimuthal anchoring energy as a function of
temperature of the eutectic liquid crystal mixture E7 at a polyvinylformal
surface. The results will be correlated with previous experimental results which
show that the electro optic response of a PDLC changes abruptly at the glass
transition temperature of the polymer binder. The experimental technique will
then be expanded to other polymer and liquid crystal combinations. Establishment
of a positive correlation between the polymer glass transition and azimuthal
anchoring energy will lead to a wide variety of additional research, such as
determining if anchoring energy is the cause of observed electro optic
variations in PDLC materials composed of different polymer binders.
Understanding of the mechanism and role of surface anchoring in the electro
optics of PDLC materials will allow materials to be optimized for a variety of
applications such as high definition projection and flat panel displays.
Professor Kobayashi is at the forefront of liquid cr ystal research, with
expertise in the alignment and anchoring of liquid crystals at a solid
interface. This specialization coupled with Professor West's significant
research in PDLC and related composites should provide an excellent
collaboration that will continue after the completion of this phase of the
research. This project is supported by the NSF CGP (Center for Global
Partnership) Science Fellowship Program.