* 9311935
* Exploratory Synthesis at High Pressures:  Routes to New     Oxide and Sulfide Superconductors
* MPS,DMR
* 12/15/1993,11/30/1996
* David Walker, Columbia University
* Continuing Grant
* David Nelson
* 11/30/1996
* USD 390,000.00

311935 Walker A joint research program between the Lamont-Doherty Earth
Observatory at Columbia University and the International Business Machine Thomas
J. Watson Research Center is proposed. The project combines Lamont-Doherty Earth
Observatory's unique capabilities in high-pressure petrology with International
Business Machine's expertise in solid state chemistry and physics for the
purpose of investigating the synthesis of new copper oxide and sulfide phases.
This proposal represents an academic-industrial collaboration. National Science
Foundation support is sought for the Lamont- Doherty Earth Observatory part of
the program only. Exploratory synthesis work will be performed to create a
homologous series of ordered copper oxide phases based on the infinite layer-
type structure. High pressures will be used to produce perovskite- related
precursors, and phase equilibrium studies conducted to determine the conditions
for ordering of various combinations of A- site cations and oxygen vacancies
into specific derivative structural forms. The goal is to create new materials
and at the same time learn how high-temperature superconductivity arises in
these various structure types. Also proposed is a high-pressure investigation of
possible copper sulfide analogs of the superconducting cuprates. Since
tetrahedral copper coordination predominates in the crystal chemistry of the
copper sulfides, pressure is expected to be a major factor in the stabilization
of ternary copper sulfides into desired perovskite or intergrowth-type lattices.
Preliminary work focuses on transforming copper sulfide into a rock-salt type
structure, and proceeds to exploratory studies on sulfide analogs of the high-
temperature cuprates. The routes to such new materials are unexplored and the
synthetic challenge promises unexpected and exciting developments. ***