* 9311300
* Research Equipment Grant:  High Performance Liquid          Chromatograph for Chemical Reaction Studies
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/1993,07/31/1995
* Phillip Savage, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Maria Burka
* 07/31/1995
* USD 52,500.00

The Department of Chemical Engineering at the University of Michigan will
purchase a high performance liquid chromatograph (HPLC) that will be dedicated
to support research in engineering. This instrument will be used to identify,
characterize, and quantify the products from thermal and oxidative degradation
reactions. The equipment will be used for several different research projects
that investigate systems in which degradation reactions occur and are important.
In some cases the degradation reactions are desired and carried out
deliberately, (for example, destruction of hazardous wastes, conversion of crude
oils and coal to liquid fuels). In other cases the degradation reactions are
undesired, and engineers and chemists seek means to prevent or suppress them
(for example, deterioration of automotive engine oils, formation of solids in
jet fuel). The HPLC will provide access to heretofore unavailable analytical
information that will allow the PI to understand thermal and oxidative
degradation reaction pathways, kinetics, and mechanisms, more completely. This
analytical instrument will facilitate advances in several different
technological areas, including employing new approaches for treating hazardous
wastes, developing better liquid lubricants, formulating the next generation of
fuels for jet aircraft, and more efficiently converting coal and heavy oils into
transportation fuels. This is a Research Equipment Grant (REG).