* 9311522
* Non-Linear Response of the Magnetosphere
* GEO,AGS
* 01/01/1994,06/30/1997
* Channon Price, University of Alaska Fairbanks Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Robert M. Robinson
* 06/30/1997
* USD 62,106.00

9311522 Price There is non-linear response of the Earth's magnetospheric system
to the solar wind. We propose to determine the degree of this non- linearity as
a function of the level of activity and to use the 11 station magnetometer
records to quantify more completely the nature of the solar wind driver and the
nature of the magnetospheric response. The degree of non-linearity in the
magnetospheric response to the solar wind is controlled by the level of
magnetospheric activity. Our primary interest in predictability is for the
identification of deterministic non-linear response; our interest in
predictability qua prediction is secondary to that. To continue our previous
non- linear analysis, we will analyse the response of the magnetosphere (as
given by the 11 auroral oval magnetometer station records) to the solar wind
input (given by the parameters v, n, B and calculated from 1 minute resolution
ISEE-3 data). We should be able to identify the solar wind parameters which have
the most effect on the magnetosphere and the prevailing pattern of response of
the magnetosphere, as observed by the ground station magnetometers. Physically,
it is likely that the present auroral electroject indices cannot reveal
significant dynamical information about electroject dynamics. We will use the
results of this non- linear prediction study to propose a new index based on the
data from the 11 stations which more accurately represents the solar wind driven
activity in the Earth's magnetosphere. we will generate the basis function whose
projection leads to the least prediction error. ***