* 9311928
* Dissertation Research:  Selection on Wing Coloration
* NONE,NONE
* 08/15/1993,07/31/1994
* William Hamilton, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Fred Stollnitz
* 07/31/1994
* USD 6,169.00

9311928 Hamilton Darwin offered "sexual selection" as an explanation for a wide
variety of traits having in common the paradoxical quality of being apparently
detrimental to survival. He proposed that such traits have evolved because they
give an advantage to the bearer in competing for or attracting mates. Sexual
selection is now widely regarded to be a major mechanism for the evolution of
differences between the sexes and a potentially important factor in the
evolution of new species. Yet little is known about the mechanisms underlying
sexual selection, the factors constraining it, or the nature of variation in
sexually selected traits. Mr. Gregory F. Grether's doctoral-dissertation
research will address several of these issues in a model invertebrate system,
the rubyspot damselfly. Mr. Grether has obtained evidence that the red-pigmented
spots at the base of the males' wings are sexually selected. He now will conduct
a series of experiments to (1) determine the effect of wing-spot variation on
interactions between males, (2) test for female mate preferences, (3) measure
ecological costs of the wing spot in terms of conspicuousness to predators and
prey, and (4) investigate the relationship between wing-spot variation and male
quality as assessed by deviations from bilateral asymmetry. Mr. Grether has
demonstrated outstanding depth of understanding of sexual-selection theory and
has developed an experimental system with the potential to produce unequivocal
results for tests of the theory.