* 9311799
* SGER: Inventory of the Biota in Amazonian Rainforest in Northern Peru: A Pilot Project
* NONE,NONE
* 04/01/1993,09/30/1994
* William Duellman, University of Kansas Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Leonard Krishtalka
* 09/30/1994
* USD 16,645.00

This pilot project, co-funded by Occidental Petroleum and the University of
Kansas, will inventory terrestrial vertebrates, insects and woody vegetation and
measure abiotic/physical data in the Amazon rainforest of northern Peru. The
inventory will serve as the basis for a biological master plan for the Peruvian
government to survey, monitor and reclaim areas being developed by Occidental
and other concerns for petroleum extraction. The pilot project will survey
plotted quadrats at two sites. Voucher specimens will be divided between KU and
the Museo de Historia Natural in Lima. Permits will be issued by the Peruvian
Government under the auspices of the Associacion de Ecologia y Conservacion
(ECCO) in Lima. CITES threatened and endangered species will not be collected.
The NSF funds will support the vertebrate component of the survey, with OXY
supporting the woody vegetation, insect and physical parameters component. KU
has already funded the development of this project and will support travel by KU
personnel. The quadrats will be permanently marked for future work, which OXY
promises to support. This collaboration promises to become a long-term
partnership between KU and OXY in conservation and restoration projects in Peru.
%%% This pilot project is a uniquely opportunistic and fruitful collaboration
between US industry, US basic academic science, Peruvian government agencies and
NSF to establish the responsible monitoring, conservation and reclamation of
biodiversity on lands impacted by extractive industries. The study, funded with
Occidental Petroleum and the University of Kansas, will inventory terrestrial
plants and animals and measure relevant climatic, physical and chemical data on
lands in the Amazon rainforest of northern Peru being developed by Occidental
and other concerns for petroleum extraction . The inventory will serve as the
basis for a biological master plan for the Peruvian government to survey,
monitor and reclaim such areas throughout the country.