* 9311097
* Dissertation Research:  Systematic Monograph, Cladistic     Analysis and Biogeography of the Neotropical Salacia,       Species Group Ellipticae (Hippocrateaceae)
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/1993,01/31/1996
* Alwyn Gentry, Missouri Botanical Garden
* Standard Grant
* James E. Rodman
* 01/31/1996
* USD 9,500.00

9311097 Gentry and Talbot Among the fascinating growth forms of tropical plants,
lianas or woody vines are common in forests and ecologically important. They are
also poorly studied taxonomically, in part because of difficulties in procuring
flowering and fruiting material from high in the forest canopy. Graduate student
Talbot under the supervision of Dr. Gentry is studying the species of the New
World genus Salacia of the family Hippocrateaceae, mostly lianas and small
trees, with a great diversity of floral form in regions of northern South
America. Herbarium study of preserved specimens will be supplemented by
extensive field work in Brazil, Peru, and Ecuador to acquire new materials and
to make observations on pollination and seed dispersal. New morphological
characters will be acquired through use of scanning electron microscopy of
pollen and of leaf surfaces, adding to traditional anatomical and morphological
features. %%% The diversity of species in the tropics is still little
appreciated or documented, and in particular for lianas or woody vines, where
flowers and fruits are difficult to collect from the high forest canopy. This
research will focus on plants of the genus Salacia and will improve our
understanding of species recognition, phylogenetic relationships among the
species, and patterns of geographical spread and endemism. ***