* 9311415
* Creation of a Pilot Video on Solar Prominence               Research
* GEO,AGS
* 08/15/1993,07/31/1995
* Sara Martin, California Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Sunanda Basu
* 07/31/1995
* USD 49,386.00

9311415 Martin This project is to produce a video that fulfills three needs:
communication, education, and the stimulation of research on the subject of
solar prominences. The central idea is to create a unique research review paper
by utilizing the descriptive and pictorial advantages of video format. The
intended audiences are scientists in astronomical and space sciences and their
graduate or undergraduate students. One of the goals is to communicate recent
research discoveries about solar prominences to a wider audience than is usually
reached by publishing results only in journals. The broader anticipated audience
of scientists would comprise plasma physicists, stellar astronomers,
interplanetary and solar investigators. A second goal is to provide sufficient
introductory and background material to capture the interest of these viewers. A
third goal is to present the subject from a provocative, questioning perspective
which will stimulate work on key unsolved problems about solar prominences. The
creation of this video is proposed as a pilot video because of the potential
desirability of subsequently modifying and amplifying the video to appeal to a
wider audience of viewers at in college or highschool science courses or at
planetariums. It is also an experiment in using imagery to review scientific
material in a format that is both condensed and easy to mentally assimilate. ***