* 9311812
* New Transition Metal Complexes and Low Dimensional Compoundswith Nitrile, Cyanide or Phosphine Ligands
* MPS,CHE
* 07/15/1993,06/30/1995
* Kim Dunbar, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Margaret A. Cavanaugh
* 06/30/1995
* USD 133,750.00

9311812 Dunbar With this award, the Inorganic, Bioinorganic, and Organometallic
Chemistry Program supports research on synthesis of compounds containing heavier
transition metals by Dr. Kim R. Dunbar of the Chemistry Department, Michigan
State University. Solvated mononuclear and dinuclear complexes with new
phosphine ligands possessing unusual steric or electronic properties and with
cyanide or polynitrile will be used as starting materials for the synthesis of
unusual or unstable species. Targeted for synthesis are monomers of iridium,
palladium, and platinum which contain seven d-electrons and which might have
activity in radical coupling reactions. In addition, some iron(II) oligomers
will be synthesized, using bulky ether-phosphines to stabilize the structure.
Polynuclear metal nitriles of molybdenum, rhenium, rhodium, manganese and
vanadium which may have unusual magnetic or electronic properties will be
prepared. %%% Some metal ions associated only with solvent molecules are readily
available for reaction with other species in solution which are able to
substitute for the solvent molecule. Dr. Dunbar is able to prepare such species
for a variety of second and third row transition metals, starting from dinuclear
compounds. In this project, she will synthesize new solid-state inorganic
compounds containing organophosphorus, organonitrile, and cyanide ligands. This
research may result in new routes to unusual materials having useful solid state
properties. ***