* 9311538
* Biosynthesis of 7-Mercaptoheptanylthreonine-phosphate and   the Methyl Reducing Factor in Mehtanogenic Bacteria
* BIO,MCB
* 02/01/1994,01/31/1998
* Robert White, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Continuing Grant
* A Berry
* 01/31/1998
* USD 210,000.00

White 9311538 In this project, the biosynthetic pathway(s) for the methanogenic
coenzymes 7-mercaptoheptanylthreonine-phosphate (HS-HTP) and methyl reducing
cofactor (MRF) will be established. The first phase of work will be to establish
the presence of HS-HTP and MRF in different species of methanogenic
archaebacteria and to determine any possible precursor/product relationship
between these coenzymes. The presence and interconversion of the molecules will
be determined by fluorescence measurement of their monobromobimane derivatives
using procedures recently developed by the author. The incorporation of
individual subunit and groups of subunit molecules into HS-HTP and MRF will be
determined. Both in vivo and in vitro experiments, using stable isotopically-
labeled molecules and mass spectrometry to measure incorporation, will be
performed to help define the biosynthetic pathways. %%% The biochemistry of the
metabolic reduction of carbon dioxide to methane by the methanogenic
archaebacteria represents an exciting area of microbiological metabolism. One
important aspect of this metabolism is the discovery of seven new coenzymes.
Many of the coenzymes in the methane pathway have chemical structures completely
different from other well known coenzymes and vitamins. Because of this each
structure represents a new biological compound with unusual functions to be
discovered. In this award, the biosynthesis, structure, and to a limited extent,
the distribution of two cofactors, 7-mercaptoheptanylthreonine-phosphate and
methyl reducing cofactor, will be explored. Specific questions to be addressed
are; how are each of these cofactors biosynthesized and assembled, and are they
biosynthetically interrelated? Answers to these questions may complete another
chapter in our understanding of the biosynthesis of the methanogenic coenzymes,
and also shed more light on the microbial biochemistry of the formation of
methane, an important energy source. ***