* 9311175
* Optically Induced Ultrashort Transient Dynamics in          Condensed Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 01/01/1994,12/31/1998
* Walter Bron, University of California-Irvine
* Continuing Grant
* H. Hollis Wickman
* 12/31/1998
* USD 285,000.00

9311175 Bron Changes in the index of refraction of compound semiconductors will
be measured after optical injection of coherent optical phonons and polaritons.
The injection of the phonon/polariton states occurs on a subps time scale
through a coherent Raman excitation (CRE) process. The injected phonons are
nearly monochromatic, have known wave vectors and polarizations, have initially
fixed relative phase, and are initially spatially localized to the overlap
region of the two pump lasers. A beam deflection or a photoinduced grating
technique will be used to monitor the changes in the index of refraction. The
effect will be studied as a function of the intensity and frequency of the pump
lasers, the relative orientation of the propagation vector of the coherent
phonon state and the crystal axes of the semiconductor, and the effects of
lattice defects. Other measurements of interest include the coherent
phonon/polariton dephasing time and the measurement of the real and imaginary
components of the third order nonlinear electronic susceptibility. In a related
experiment, the effect of plasma excess energy on the dephasing time of coherent
LO phonons will be measured for GaP using a pulsed (50 fs), tunable laser
source. %%% Changes in the optical properties of a compound semiconductor will
be measured on extremely short time scales. These changes are induced by two
laser pulses which are focused to overlap the same region of the semiconductor.
The frequency of the two lasers differs by an amount which is exactly equal to a
characteristic frequency of certain vibrational modes of the semiconductor.
These vibrational modes will in turn alter the transmission or reflection of
another light beam which is incident on the semiconductor. The experiment can
yield important insight into the basic mechanisms which are essential to the
development of ultrafast optical switching devices. ***