* 9311705
* Lake Water System, Boat Dry Dock, and Replacement of        Obsolete Instruments at the Flathead Lake Biological        Station
* BIO,DBI
* 01/15/1994,06/30/1996
* Richard Hauer, University of Montana
* Standard Grant
* None
* 06/30/1996
* USD 130,000.00

9311705, PI-Stanford: Established in 1899, the Flathead Lake Biological Station
(FLBS) has a long tradition of field based education and research, with emphasis
in limnology. FLBS has a 15 member staff and an annual budget of $700,000 (50%
extramural). Since 1983, over $2 million has been invested by the State in new
housing, labs and equipment. Two professorships and technical support positions
(Data Manager and Assistant Director for Operations) were added in fiscal year
1992. Recent research has addressed on groundwater ecology (1987 90) and food
webs of oligotrophic lakes (1990 93) have been added to the stations array of
facilities. Collaborative studies involv e visiting investigators from around
the world and encompass many aspects of limnology, from organism level work on
the phenology and genetics of stream biota to ecosystem level examinations of
materials flux in large lakes and river floodplains. To enhance research
capability, this project will retrofit and improve the lake and stream water
delivery system to the Elrod Laboratory. The present approach is to supply water
from the epilimnion and hypolimnion of Flathead Lake, and from a springbrook on
the Station grounds, in order to provide an array of sources, temperatures and
food supplies to biota confined in laboratory microcosms within existing wet
rooms. Also requested is new instrumentation (CHNS analyzer, scintillation
counter, 2 research microscopes, ion chromatograph, field fluorometer) to
replace outdated units. These items are required for continuation of long term
limnological data bases and growth of multi investigator research.