* 9312029
* Theory of the Nonlinear Optical Response in One-dimensional Systems:  Charge vs. Energy Transfer
* MPS,DMR
* 02/15/1994,07/31/1997
* Francis Spano, Temple University
* Continuing Grant
* G. Bruce Taggart
* 07/31/1997
* USD 120,000.00

9312029 Spano A theory for the nonlinear optical response in quasi-one-
dimensional systems, such as electron-donor-acceptor crystals, halogen-bridged
mixed-valence transition metal complexes, polysilanes and molecular J-aggregates
will be developed in an effort to better understand the roles of energy transfer
versus charge transfer in systems with varying degrees of diagonal and
nondiagonal disorder. Charge and excitation delocalization affects the magnitude
and size dependence of the nonlinear optical response in profoundly different
ways. In the initial phases of the research, noninteracting electron and mean-
field Hamiltonians will be used to obtain an analytical expression for the third
order optical response. Beyond mean-field theory, numerical calculations will be
conducted on finite chains and extrapolated to the crystal limit. This new grant
is funded jointly by the Division of Materials Research and the Chemistry
Division. %%% A theoretical research program funded jointly by the Division of
Materials Research and the Chemistry Division will be initiated to calculate the
nonlinear optical properties of quasi-one-dimensional materials. A thorough
understanding of these materials, in the bulk limit, is necessary in order to
apply them to various photonic devices. ***