* 9312138
* Local Moment and Heavy Fermion Physics
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/1993,01/31/1997
* Piers Coleman, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* G. Bruce Taggart
* 01/31/1997
* USD 159,000.00

9312138 Coleman This proposal concerns heavy Fermion physics. Four projects will
be considered: 1) Development of an odd frequency pairing model for heavy
Fermion superconductivity. 2) A critical test for quadrupolar ground-state
doublets in uranium heavy Fermion compounds. 3) Computation of the optical
conductivity and dynamic susceptibility of Kondo insulators within an Anderson
lattice model. 4) Development of a theory for anisotropic spin pairing to model
the hidden itinerant order in URu2Si2. %%% This proposal is concerned with the
behavior of electrons which behave, with regards to their transport in a
material, as if they have large masses. This field has a rich history but recent
discoveries have highlighted fundamental difficulties in our present
understanding. For example, two newly discovered heavy Fermion materials -
UPd2Al3 and UNi2Al3 - have large magnetic moments and exhibit superconductivity
from the same magnetic degrees of freedom. This causes problems for the present
theory of such materials. Also, recent anomalies observed in such properties as
the specific heat in the heavy fermion material URu2Si2 suggest that there is a
"hidden" variable in the theoretical description of the system. Work such as
this is at the forefront of what is considered state-of-the-art in contemporary
condensed matter theory. ***