* 9312460
* Cation Radical Explorations
* MPS,CHE
* 07/15/1993,12/31/1996
* Joseph Dinnocenzo, University of Rochester
* Continuing Grant
* Kenneth M. Doxsee
* 12/31/1996
* USD 255,000.00

9312460 Dinnocenzo The generality, scope, and limitations of three-electron SN2
substitutions on cation radical sigma bonds will be studied. The study will: (1)
extend the variety of nucleophiles that can be used in practical substitution
reactions, (2) investigate the factors that control the regiochemistry of three-
electron SN2 reactions, (3) probe the electronic structures of various
cyclopropane cation radicals to test structure/reactivity relationships, and (4)
test the viability of substitution reactions on simple, alkyl- substituted
cyclopropane cation radicals and, in addition, cation radicals which do not
contain a cyclopropane ring. %%% This grant from the Organic Dynamics Program
supports the work of Professor Joseph P. Dinnocenzo at the University of
Rochester. The reactions of electron-rich molecules with cyclopropane cation
radicals will be studied. The latter species are three-carbon cycles in which
one electron has been removed. The study will include consideration of where the
electron-rich molecule attacks the cyclopropane cation radical and extension of
the reaction to species other than the cyclopropane cation radical. These
reactions will have the potential to make larger molecules that are of interest.
The reaction to be studied will provide important theoretical insight as well,
since it is the three-electron analog of a common two-electron substitution
reaction. ***