* 9312451
* Estimation and Closed-Loop Control for Rapid Thermal        Processing Systems
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/1993,02/28/1998
* Bernard Friedland, New Jersey Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 02/28/1998
* USD 234,746.00

9312451 Friedland A technique of rapid thermal processing (RTP) has recently
been developed which promises to break a bottleneck in semiconductor
manafacturing. This new technique involves the use of high power tungsten-
halogen lamps to raise the temperature of a semiconductor wafer rapidly to the
desired curing temperature. By use of multivariable feedback control it is
possible to maintain the wafer temperature within an acceptable tolerance band.
Until recently, the only accurate method of performing the required temperature
mearsurments was to imbed thermocouples in the wafer. This technique, however,
is not practical for use in production. A potential breakthrough in performing
the required measurement is based on the use of a multi-wavelength infrared
imaging pyrometer recently developed by NJIT's Electronic Imaging Laboratory in
conjunction with the David Sarnoff Research Center. This sensor, in principle,
is capable of measuring the temperature of the wafer through a sapphire window
with the required accuracy. Extraction of temperature data will entail
sophisticated data processing, owing to the requirement of estimating both
emissivity and temperature at the different wavelengths. Extended Kalman
filtering (EKF) is the preferred algorithm. Use of the EKF algorithm, however,
impacts on how the control problem is formulated. In particular, it is necessary
to use a nonlinear dynamic model of the process in order to capture the correct
temperature dependence for estimation of emissivity. Hence, designing a closed
loop controller necessitates dealing with a nonlinear control and estimation
problem. The proposed investigation will address this problem and the
theoretical issues it raises. ***