* 9312534
* Industry/University Cooperative Research Center for         Innovation Management Studies
* ENG,EEC
* 09/15/1993,08/31/1997
* Alden Bean, Lehigh University
* Continuing Grant
* alexander schwarzkopf
* 08/31/1997
* USD 166,764.00

9312534 Bean This three-year continuing award is augmenting the basic research
program of Lehigh University's Industry/University Cooperative Research Center
for Innovation Management Studies. This funding is provided under the "Self-
Sufficient Partnership for Research" Program. The Center continues to meet the
renewal criteria requirements of the Industry/University Cooperative Research
Centers Program. Funding for an evaluator to study the industry/university
interaction occurring in the Center is part of the three-year continuing award.
Additional funding is provided for a woman undergraduate to augment the Center's
research program. She will study "Technology Transfer in the Construction
Industry." A woman Professor from Brandeis University is being funded as a
Research Opportunity Award (ROA) to study "Downsizing Industrial R&D: Effects on
the Work Environment for Creativity and Innovation." The U.S. Department of
Energy's Environmental Restoration and Waste Management Office is providing
funds to obtain a non-voting membership in the Center. The Program Manager
recommends Lehigh University be awarded: $28,000 for the first year of a three-
year continuing award (includes $8,000 for the evaluator); $4,000 for one year
for a woman undergraduate student; $20,006 for one year for a ROA to Brandeis
University; and $10,000 for one year with funds provided by the U.S. Department
of Energy. Near the end of each 12-month period, the Program Manager and/or the
Division Director of the Engineering Education Center Division will review the
progress of the Center on a number of renewal criteria requirements, including
the following: 1) the extent to which the industry/university is developing; 2)
the extent to which the support base is developing; and 3) the extent to which a
robust research program is developing. If the review is satisfactory, the
Program Manager will recommend support for the next period of this continuing
award.