* 9312240
* Parallelization of Particle Transport Algorithms in         Semiconductor Device Physics
* ENG,ECCS
* 06/01/1994,11/30/1997
* Stephen Goodnick, Oregon State University
* Continuing grant
* George K. Lea
* 11/30/1997
* USD 361,269.00

9312240 Goodnick This is a renewal project to continue the development of
parallelized algorithms for semiconductor device simulation using particle
methods. Improvements will be made to the prototype multiprocessor code PMC-3D
to include state of the art physics such as full band structure effects, and
generalize the code for a variety of different device technologies and arbitrary
geometries. The codes will be developed in a high level parallel language
(Dataparallel C) to increase their portability from machine to machine.
Furthermore, full electromagnetic solutions rather than Poission's equation will
be coupled in the particle-force calculation, in order to develop simulation
tools for high frequency microwave and optoelectronic device applications.
Parallel particle transport algorithms for semiconductor devices to include
molecular dynamics and cellular automata techniques will developed. In the
molecular dynamics case, hybrid particle-particle particle-mesh methods will be
investigated to find efficient parallel algorithms which would greatly reduce
the computational requirements of this technique. Parallel cellular automata
device simulation algorithms in three dimensions will be developed and compared
with Monte Carlo methods as a cost effective alternative to the latter
technique. ***