* 9312435
* ABR:  Experimental Comparison of Ecosystem Process          Limitations Between Grasslands Dominated by Large Mammalian Ungulates
* BIO,DEB
* 03/01/1994,08/31/1999
* Samuel McNaughton, Syracuse University
* Continuing Grant
* Penelope L. Firth
* 08/31/1999
* USD 1,250,000.00

9312435 McNaughton This project will consist of experimental studies of the
control of ecosystem processes (emphasizing primary productivity, consumption by
grazers and secondary productivity, plant mineral uptake as related to plant and
herbivore nutrition, and soil mineralization rates) by nutrients, emphasizing,
but not restricted to, nitrogen, in grazing ecosystems supporting abundant
native ungulate populations. Study sites will be in Serengeti National Park,
Tanzania, and Yellowstone N.P., USA. experiments will measure (1) the level of N
required to saturate ecosystem processes, (2) the relative effect of small,
multiple N applications (as might result from chronic air pollution) compared to
a single, larger application equivalent to a urine dose (a natural recycling
pathway), (3) the potential for N fertilization to induce deficiencies of other
nutrients, as expressed in primary productivity, microbial activity, or
properties of forages as an ungulate nutrient source, and (4) the effect of
carbon enrichment, which will surely occur as atmospheric CO2 enrichment
proceeds. These studies will contribute to a quantitative understanding of
carrying capacity in native grazing ecosystems on two continents and in
radically different climates, add to our understanding of the appropriate
conservation strategies in ecosystems supporting abundant ungulate populations,
and provide information about two components if global change (chronic nutrient
enrichment from air pollution, and carbon enrichment) in ecosystems supporting
large grazing mammals.