* 9312406
* "Advanced Control Strategies for Plasma Enhanced Chemical   Vapor Deposition"
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/1993,08/31/1997
* David Greve, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 08/31/1997
* USD 409,994.00

9312406 Greve The objective of this project is to demonstrate the use of new
sensor technology and multivariable control strategies to improve the
performance of critical processes for the manufacture of integrated circuits
(ICs). In current practice, unit processes for IC manufacturing are controlled
by independent regulators of macroscopic variables such as temperature,
pressure, and gas flow rates. Setpoint values for these variables are determined
by off-line studies and applied without adjustment during the processing of a
given batch of wafers. Although setpoint tuning may be performed from batch-to-
batch using techniques such as statistical process control (SPC), the use of
real-time feedback to adjust the process setpoints in real time has not been
possible until recently because of absence of in situ measurements of process
variables more directly related to the actual process performance variables. The
particular process to be studied is plasma enhanced chemical vapor deposition
(PECVD) which exhibits many features common to several IC unit processes. A
differentially-pumped quadrupole mass spectrometer will be used to sample
species directly incident on the wafer platform during the processing. Using
physical models and experiments to characterize the response curves for the
process and the dynamic responses of the species concentrations with respect to
the regulated variables, multivariable control strategies will be implemented to
enable the direct regulation of the species concentrations. Process recipes will
then be developed in terms of these measured process variables to more directly
influence the process outcome as measured by several performance variables
including breakdown voltage, flat band shift, thickness, and index of
refraction. Two general approaches to multivariable control (robust
multivariable regulation and model predictive control) will be implemented and
compared leading to new insights into the practical advantages and l imitations
of alternative multivariable control methodologies. New models of the PECVD
process will also be identified in the course of this research leading to
improvements in the process performance based on new recipes defined in terms of
the measured process variables. Many of these results will be useful for other
critical IC processes such as plasma etching. ***