* 9312637
* U.S.-Taiwan Cooperative Research: Membrane Fusion and Lysis by Taiwan Cobra Venom
* O/D,OISE
* 04/01/1994,03/31/1998
* Huey Huang, William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* W. Y. B. Chang
* 03/31/1998
* USD 52,410.00

9312637 Huang This is a three-year cooperative research project proposed by Dr.
Huey Huang, Rice University, and Professor Wen-guey Wu, National Tsing Hua
University. Membrane fusion and lysis are two key cell destruction processes
utilized by viruses and toxins. This project proposes to use Taiwan cobra venom
to understand the processes of membrane fusion and lysis. Taiwan cobra venom
contains two biochemical components, cytotoxin (CTX) III and V. The former
causes membrane fusion, but exhibits little hemolysis activity, while the latter
induces significant hemolysis but exhibits little fusion activity. The contrast
between these two closely related small peptides provides a unique means for
studying the molecular mechanisms involved in cell destruction processes. Dr.
Huang has experience in the structural biology of membrane active peptides and
proteins and has developed innovative approaches to the problems of studying
these molecules, and his Co-PI in Taiwan has successfully purified the Cobra
Toxin peptides, CTX III and V. It is an excellent cooperative study and can
provide a good hands-on opportunity for students in structural biology, as well
as increasing their understanding of the ecology and behavior of Taiwan cobra.
This project is jointly supported by the NSF and the Taiwan National Science
Council (NSC).