* 9312693
* Practical Dynamics and Time Series Analysis
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/1993,01/31/1995
* Judy Klein, Mary Baldwin College
* Standard Grant
* Ronald J. Overmann
* 01/31/1995
* USD 65,000.00

9312693 Klein It is important to remember that relationship between science and
society is not a one-way street. While clearly science has revolutionized our
lives, society has itself influenced the development of science. This is true
even of the most esoteric of sciences, i.e. mathematics. Dr. Klein is examining
the direct influence of commercial bankers and merchants on the development of
modern statistical practices. Statistics, originally developed as a study of
mass phenomena in a state of rest, eventually came to be used to analyze dynamic
systems. Dr. Klein is investigating the practical roots to the techniques
statisticians use to transform time series data from fluctuations into
deviations. Her research so far has indicated a chronological primacy to what
she calls `monetary algorithms,' which were developed by European merchants and
financiers in the 17th through 19th centuries. In applications of relative time
frameworks, first differences, index numbers and moving averages, commercial
practice preceded political arithmetic, which in turn fed into scientific
investigation and statistical theory. Her periodization from commercial to
political to scientific arithmetic parallels a comparison of forms of
statistical representation of temporal phenomena from the tabular to the
graphical to the algebraic modes. This investigation addresses the interplay of
deception and accountability in the development of statistical tools, the
relative contributions of the practice and the theory of monetary exchange to
mathematical statistics, and historical distinctions between processes modeled
as functions of time and those modeled as functions of place in a sequence. The
endpoint for this study is the identification in 1938 of stationary stochastic
processes. ***