* 9312175
* Workshop: Selected Topics in Field Theory, High Energy      Physics & Cosmology, Kathmandu, Nepal, May 22-June 7, 1994
* O/D,OISE
* 01/01/1994,06/30/1995
* Qaisar Shafi, Bartol Research Institute
* Standard Grant
* Osman Shinaishin
* 06/30/1995
* USD 20,000.00

9312175 Shafi Description: This project provides $20,000 to support the
participation of up to ten leading U.S. scientists at a regional Summer
School/Workshop in Physics, Kathmandu, Nepal, May 22-June 7, 1994. The theme is
"Selected Topics in Field Theory, High Energy Physics and Cosmology." Its aim is
to: 1) bring together some of the brightest young physicists from the BCSPIN
countries of South Asia, 2) present the most recent advances in their fields of
research and 3) emphasize the rich and exciting frontiers that straddle Field
Theory, High Energy Physics and Cosmology. The topics covered include:
Introduction to Advanced Topics in Field Theory, Anomaly and Topology in Field
Theory, Tests of the Standard Model Particle Physics, Supersymmetry, Frontiers
in Cosmology/Astrophysics, including Structure Formation, Black Hole Physics and
Related Areas. Scope: The establishment of a school of excellence will
contribute to the growth of science in Asia and will greatly strengthen the
scientific potential of young researchers there. Without the opportunity given
by a school of this kind, it is unlikely that the majority of the students would
ever have exposure to such outstanding scientists. Previous schools have been
highly regarded and the best students will no doubt eventually enrich American
science. ***