* 9312026
* Evaluation of a Portable Microcomputer-Based Laboratory     in Sixth-Grade Science Classes
* TIP,TI
* 09/15/1993,02/29/1996
* Donald Frey, Architectural Energy Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Sara B. Nerlove
* 02/29/1996
* USD 299,950.00

9312026 Frey A strategy for stimulating student interest in and commitment to
science is to engage them in active discovery of reality by taking them out of
the classroom into the field. Microcomputer- Based Laboratories (MBLs), which
typically consist of a computer, sensors, graphing software, and instructional
materials, were developed to give students a hands-on learning method and have
been shown to improve student performance. Results of the Phase I Small Business
Innovation Research (SBIR) study establish the technical basis for going beyond
the conventional MBL by integrating existing, state-of-the-art, low-cost, palm-
sized, portable data acquisition equipment into a new educational tool, Earth
Explorer, a Portable Microcomputer-Based Laboratory (PMBL), which will allow
students to collect data without being directly connected to the computer yet
permit them to download that data after collection. The objectives of the Phase
II study focus on (1) creating Earth Explorer courseware for additional sixth
grade science education units; (2) modifying and expanding the Earth Explorer
hardware; (3) improving and enhancing the Earth Explorer software and related
materials; (4) creating teacher education materials for understanding and
effectively using the Earth Explorer system; (5) designing and implementing an
effective evaluation process; and (6) conducting a national field test involving
schools representing socioeconomic and racial diversity in their student
populations. By providing an instructional system, the Earth Explorer, that is
compatible with and usable in a broad range of curriculum frameworks, the
project will aim to provide an opportunity for students to benefit from
instructional strategies which capitalize on student interest through active
hands-on participation. ***