* 9312042
* The Impact of Agrarian Restructuring on Mexican Gender and  Family Relations: 1993-1998
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/1993,06/30/1995
* Lynn Stephen, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* Raymond B. Hames
* 06/30/1995
* USD 18,000.00

9312042 Stephens, L Rural economies in developing nations are fundamentally
altered by a variety of world and local events such as variation in demand for
raw commodities or land reforms. This project will evaluate the impact of the
recent free trade agreement between the US and Mexico and ejido restructuring on
gender and family relations in three sectors: rural ejido communities, non-ejido
rural subsistence communities, and in the urban informal sector. Research will
focus on regional factors such a changing employment availability, land prices
and family dynamics in six sites. The investigator predicts that economic
restructuring in Mexico will have different effects on the rural and urban poor
in relation to region, gender, age, and ethnicity. The specific topics to be
explored in local reserach sites include the gendered division of labor,
household, marital and family relationships, migration patterns, political
mobilization, and participation in community cultural institutions. Research
will be eventually be extended to a total of six sites in Oaxaca and Nayarit.
This Research Planning Grant for Women Scientists requests funding for the first
18 months of a five year project to facilitate a pilot study in the state of
Oaxaca and to allow the principle investigator time to gather background data to
write a three-year NSF proposal to complete the full project. Specific planning
activities include: (1) spending part of the 1993-94 summer and academic year in
Oaxaca, Mexico to institute a pilot study in three communities; (2) spending one
month during the 1994-95 academic year at the Center for US-Mexican Studies in
San Diego, California using the data base on ejido household to frame questions
and collect background data for the states of Oaxaca and Nayarit; (3) spending
part of the investigator's sabbatical year, 1994-95 writing a multi-year NSF
proposal to fund the remaining three years of this project; and (4) reading
relevant materials available in Me xico and communication with scholars involved
in research on agrarian restructuring in Mexico during the 18 month planning
period. ***