* 9312208
* U.S.-North Africa Workshop on Hypergroups
* O/D,OISE
* 07/01/1993,12/31/1995
* Alan Schwartz, University of Missouri-Saint Louis
* Standard Grant
* Patricia Jones Tsuchitani
* 12/31/1995
* USD 21,850.00

9312208 Connett Technical Narrative: A conference, entitled Applications of
Hypergroups and Related Measure Algebras, will take place at the University of
Washington in Seattle from July 31 - August 06, 1993. Participating in this
conference will be three Moroccan and five Tunisian mathematicians who have a
research interest in this topic; these individuals will also be participants in
a post- conference workshop organized by Drs. W. Connett and A. Schwartz of the
University of Missouri at St. Louis. The purpose of the workshop is to discuss
and develop collaborative research projects involving the group from North
Africa and their U.S. counterparts. This cooperative activity will bring
together highly regarded experts from the U.S., Morocco, and Tunisia
representing a number of universities. A goal of this joint meeting is to
reinforce and extend an international network of American and North African
mathematicians that will endure beyond the conference/workshop. This activity
partially supports the participation of approximately 12 U.S. and 8 North
African scientists. This conference/workshop in mathematical science fulfills
the program objective of advancing scientific knowledge by enabling leading
experts in the United States and North Africa to combine complementary talents
and present research results in areas of strong mutual interest and competence.
This activity has an educational and outreach effort that has the potential for
generating new scientific activity and new international linkages. ***