* 9312378
* Computer Modeling of Free-Surface and Pressurized Flows,    Support of Participants from South Asia and the Middle East in a NATO Advanced Study Institute in Pullman, WA
* O/D,OISE
* 06/15/1993,06/30/1994
* M Hanif Chaudhry, Washington State University
* Standard Grant
* Osman Shinaishin
* 06/30/1994
* USD 18,400.00

Description: This project supports participation by six scientists from South
Asia and the Middle East in a NATO Advanced Study Institute on "Computer
Modeling of Free-Surface and Pressurized Flows". The Institute is to be held at
Washington State University in Pullman, WA, from June 28th to July 9th, 1993.
Topics to be covered include: governing equations of free- surface flows, and
use of finite difference methods, turbulence models, modeling of three
dimensional flows, modeling of flows with undular bores, modeling of sediment
transport, flood routing models, urban drainage models, governing equations of
pressurized flows and steady-flow in pipe networks, modeling of two-component
flows, modeling of water quality in pipe networks, modeling of slow transients
and of rapid transients, and modeling of cooling water systems. Fourteen well-
known authorities in the field will present state-of-the-art lectures to be
followed by discussions with the participants. Most of the participants will
have postgraduate degrees, and many could be considered as established
specialists. Scope: The NATO Advanced Study Institute provides a well-planned
forum for presentation of recent advances in research and for interaction
between the lecturers and the participants during a two-week period in a small
university town setting. This will provide excellent opportunities for exchange
of information and for developing contacts for future cooperative research. This
project to support the participation of six scientists from countries outside
NATO is in line with INT's objective of increasing interaction between U.S.
scientists and those from developing countries, who have limited access to
similar scientific meetings in the U.S.