* 9312335
* U.S.-Switzerland Cooperative Research on Issues in          Gravitation and Cosmology
* O/D,OISE
* 03/01/1994,07/31/1999
* Robert Brandenberger, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* Rose Gombay
* 07/31/1999
* USD 19,950.00

9312335 Brandenberger This award supports a group of three U.S. researchers and
their graduate students, led by Professor Robert H. Brandenberger of Brown
University, to collaborate in theoretical physics with Professor Christoph
Schmid and others of the Swiss Federal Institute of Technology (ETH) and the
University of Zurich. These research groups represent centers of excellence that
share an interest in understanding the physics of the very early universe. The
participants bring complementary expertise in particle physics, field theory,
astrophysics, and cosmology to the cooperative effort. A collateral goal of the
proposed project is to enable the junior U.S. and Swiss participants to broaden
their intellectual horizons through international collaboration. The joint
research will focus on three topics of mutual interest: 1) applications of the
theory of cosmological perturbations to gravitation and cosmology; 2)
application of entropy arguments to the theory of cosmological phase
transitions; and 3) construction of a nonsingular universe. This research
addresses several intriguing questions about the physics of the early universe.
The combinations of different backgrounds and perspectives among the
participants increases the potential contribution of the research toward
improved understanding of the formation of large scale structures in the
universe. This area of cosmology is particularly interesting now because of
recent and planned satellite observations that measure anisotropies in the
cosmic microwave background and the clusters, superclusters and the walls and
voids of galaxies. These observations may provide means of evaluating and
refining the models and otherwise advancing the research of the U.S. and Swiss
collaborators. ***