* 9312345
* Using Kerr-Type Nonlinear Optical Materials for Artificial  Neural Network Implimentations
* ENG,ECCS
* 10/01/1993,09/30/1996
* Steven Skinner, Wichita State University
* Continuing Grant
* Paul Werbos
* 09/30/1996
* USD 136,401.00

9312345 Skinner The objective of this project is to investigate the usefulness
of Kerr- Type nonlinear optical materials for all-optical implementations of
feed forward artificial neural networks with optical error back- propagation
training. These types of materials have pico-second response times and allow
both weighted connections and nonlinear neuron processing to be implemented
using thin materials layers separated by free space. This gives such networks
and advantage over other optical implementations which require complicated
hardware devices to implement the weighted connections and separate hardware for
neuron processing. In addition, a layered network of Kerr-Type material can
process both forward calculation signals and backward error propagation
simultaneously. The nonlinear layers serve as processing layers and the linear
layers (fee space) serve as connection layers. Each nonlinear layer can be
thought of as a plane continuum of neurons connected with the layers before and
after it by a continuum of optical paths. The number of available neurons and
connections are limited only by the available resolution of the system optics.
The inputs and weights are a distribution of irradiance in 2D space and the
weights vary the refractive index profile of the nonlinear medium. The nonlinear
forcing and processing functions necessary for neural computing are given by the
self-action effects of the propagating wave coupled with the optical with
signals applied to the nonlinear layers. Such a network has been numerically
simulated in two dimensions and trained to perform logic functions and a simple
optical demonstration of this network is constructed. Further simulation and
training of the network to preform more complicated tasks as well as
implementation of these networks in two dimensions is proposed, followed by an
extension of the simulation and implementation to three dimensions. This well
involve both theoretical and experimental investigations in parallel with
computer simulation to determine the optimal network geometry (number and type
of layers, size and required resolution of with and signal fields) as well as
better techniques for controlling the application of the weight light fields.
***