* 9312753
* Dissertation Research:  Belief Systems, Psychological       Affliction, and Traditional Treatment of Mental Illness     among Maya Indians of Highland Chiapas, Mexico
* SBE,BCS
* 06/15/1993,05/31/1995
* Brent Berlin, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Raymond B. Hames
* 05/31/1995
* USD 11,996.00

This project will examine how the Tzeltal and Tzotzil Maya experience, diagnose
and treat mental disorders. A period of 24 months will be spent collecting data
that will address interrelated concerns within three domains: (1) traditional
Maya ethnopsychiatry, (2) the relationship of the Maya ethnopsychiatric model to
the Western biomedical psychiatric model, and (3) medical pluralism and
hierarchy of resort of treatment of mental disorders. An ethnoepidemiology
survey will be central to the project. This survey will establish the prevalence
and cultural definition of the mental conditions under study, form the basis for
screening of cases in subsequent stages of the research, and for recruitment of
self-identified cases of recognized folk disorders. Focus on the experiences of
the sufferers of mental disorders has yet to be undertaken in this region and
will provide valuable information on the afflictions, the system of ethnomedical
practice, the beliefs which direct treatment choice, the dynamic relation
between belief and behavior, and the relation between the indigenous and
biomedical systems. The use of the Western psychiatric assessment instruments
(e.g., Computerized Diagnostic Interview Schedule) will provide comparative
information on cultural variation in psychological disorders. Importantly,
knowledged gained about Maya disorders and their definition and treatment will
allow public health officials to more effectively design treatment strategies
for the Maya.