* 9312136
* Industry/University Cooperative Research Center for         Electromagnetics Research
* ENG,EEC
* 08/01/1993,01/31/1998
* Michael Silevitch, Northeastern University
* Continuing Grant
* John C. Hurt
* 01/31/1998
* USD 928,928.00

9312136 Silevitch This award provides funding for the first year of a three-year
continuing award under the "Self-Sufficient Partnership for Research" Program
and to support an evaluator at Northeastern University's Industry/University
Cooperative Research Center for Electromagnetics Research. The Center has
demonstrated successful research support from industrial members and has met the
review criteria of I/UCRC Program. Funding is also provided to support an
evaluator at the Center to continue the evaluation responsibility on the
monitoring of the industry/university interaction within the Center. Additional
Funding is provided by the U.S. Army Natick RD&E Center to augment a membership
in the Center and to support ongoing research. Funding is also provided by Rome
Laboratory to obtain a membership in the Center and to examine the
electromagnetic dynamics of high temperature superconductors in the microwave
and millimeter wave frequency ranges. The Department of Energy's Environmental
Restoration and Waste Management Office has provided funding to obtain a non-
voting membership in the Center. Additional funding is provided for a woman
undergraduate student to aid the Center in its's ongoing research activities.
The Program Manager recommends Northeastern University be awarded $58,000 for
the first year of a three-year continuing award; $63,672 for one year with funds
provided by Rome Laboratory; $25,000 for one year with funds provided by the
U.S. Army Natick RD&E; $10,000 for one year with funds provided by the
Department of Energy; and $5,000 for one year with funds provided by the Women,
Minorities, and Disabled Engineering Research Assistants Program. Near the end
of each 12-month period the Program Manager and/or the Division Director of the
Engineering Education Centers Division will review the progress of the Center on
a number of renewal criteria, including the following: 1) the extent to which
the university-industry intera ction is developing; 2) the extent to which the
support base is developing; and 3) the extent to which a robust research program
is developing. If the review is satisfactory, the Program Manager will recommend
support for the next period of this continuing award.