* 9312932
* Improved Conceptual Design Using Implicit Solid Modeling
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/15/1993,08/31/1997
* Duane Storti, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* george hazelrigg
* 08/31/1997
* USD 255,668.00

9312932 Storti The goal of this project is to create a robust conceptual design
system in which solids are described by a single potential function (rather than
approximated by a multitude of faces, volume elements, or surface patches as in
conventional modelers). This formulation of geometric design, called implicit
solid modeling (ISM), offers three distinct advantages: (1) A straightforward
approach to solid modeling which is intuitive and easy to learn. (2) All of the
basic data which defines the shape of a solid is specified and manipulated using
exact, rational arithmetic which guarantees that geometric property evaluation
tests performed are robust and reliable. (3) Point/solid classification
(determining whether a point lies inside, on the surface of, or outside a given
solid), the fundamental geometric test traditionally used in solid modeling,
reduces to simply evaluating the potential function and comparing its value to a
specified threshold level. Moverover, evaluation of the potential function
inherently provides (at no additional computational cost) a measure of the
distance from the given point to the surface of the solid, which is exactly the
information needed for intelligent engineering design. During the course of this
research, an effective ISM conceptual design system based on exact computation
is created and used to explore ways in which the distance measure provided by
the ISM potential function can be used to develop improved engineering design
tools. The underlying exact computations are achieved using a computer algebra
system, and swept solids (essential for modeling offset surfaces and path
planning) are created using tech niques from algebraic geometry including
envelope theory and elimination theory. A polygonizer is incorporated to provide
capability for rapid visualization on standard graphics hardware and
availability of a suitable output format so that the ISM system can serve as a
conceptual preprocessor for conventional solid modeling systems and rapid
prototyping systems based on stereolithography. While the primary implications
of this research involve advances in traditional areas of engineering design
such as sculptured surface description, optimal layout, packaging, and motion
planning, an additional goal of this project involves broadening the scope of
engineering design research through enhanced interaction with investigators in
the fields of computer algebra and algebraic geometry. ***