* 9312428
* Experimental Nuclear Physics Research
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/1993,07/31/1997
* Aruna Nadasen, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Bradley D. Keister
* 07/31/1997
* USD 120,831.00

9312428 Nadasen The nuclear physics research program of the University of
Michigan Dearborn is carried out by the principal investigator and about four
undergraduates students. It focuses on studies of nuclear structure and nuclear
reaction mechanisms in order to evaluate theoretical predictions and to provide
a better understanding of nuclear phenomena in general. Elastic scattering of Li
6 ions at 210 and 318 MeV on a range of targets has provided a global
macroscopic description of the Li 6 nucleus interaction in terms of its energy
and target mass dependence. More fundamentally, the data were used to evaluate
microscopic folding model calculations. Extension of these studies to Li 7, Li 9
and Li 11 will illustrate the perturbation caused by the extra neutrons and the
effect of using unstable beams. Measurements of light ions emanating from
nucleus nucleus collisions using the MSU 4pi Array have elucidated many features
of heavy ion reactions. The addition of Bragg curve detectors and parallel plate
avalanche counters facilitate measurement of heavier fragments and thus
broadened the studies of nuclear matter and dynamics of heavy ion reactions.
(p,pHe 4) reaction studies in the 100 200 MeV region and measurements of (He 4,
2He 4) at 580 MeV indicate that projectiles with energies above 100 MeV/Nucleon
provide reliable information of alpha clustering in nuclei. These studies will
be continued in order to investigate alpha cluster structures of heavier nuclei
with the hope of determining alpha decay rates of long lived nuclei.