* 9312745
* Distributed System Observability and Controllability with   Finite-Dimensional Sensors and Actuators:  Application to   Thermal and Fluid Dynamics
* ENG,ECCS
* 01/01/1994,12/31/1997
* Ronald Mohler, Oregon State University
* Continuing grant
* Chanan Singh
* 12/31/1997
* USD 86,000.00

9312745 Mohler The object of this research is to develop new observability and
controllability techniques for a number of both linear time-varying and
nonlinear distributed-parameter systems with internal discrete- time finite-
dimensional observation and control. Emphasis is given to location of finite-
dimensional sensors and actuators. These problems, being the inverse problems
for partial differential equations of traditional interest, have received
considerable attention in the literature, mostly in the linear time-invariant
setting. On the basis of harmonic and nonharmonic analysis it was shown that in
this case observability and controllability of the system in question depend
crucially upon the associated eigenvalues (in particular, upon their growth and
multiplicity) and, consequently, stationary finite-dimensional sensors and
actuators often fail when the space dimension is higher than 1. The research
proposed here is aimed to overcome this difficulty on the basis of the
introduction of spatially scanning observations and control. In the above
context, the proposed methodology mostly deals with the eigenfunctions, while
employing in the case of the heat equation, for example, only the sign of the
eigenvalues. It is planned to study the interrelation between continuous-time
and discrete-time observations and controls for the above systems, interpreting
the discrete-time setting as a skeleton for the continuous-time one. The
objective of research here is to develop a methodology (introduced in our
previous studies) that allows us to replace continuous-time sensors and
actuators, the spatially- averaged ones, associated with the set-valued mappings
will also be studied. The latter is a natural generalization of the notion of
pointwise observations/control for the case of discontinuous generalized
solutions, allowing us to ensure the well-posedness of the finite-dimensional
observation and control. ***