* 9312006
* Dissertation Research:  Pre-hispanic Argentinian Settlement Patterns
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/1993,07/31/1994
* Timothy Earle, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 07/31/1994
* USD 11,990.00

9312006 Earle Under the direction of Dr. Timothy Earle, Ms. Elizabeth DeMarrias
will collect data for her doctoral dissertation. She will conduct archaeological
research in the Calchaqui valley which lies on the eastern slopes of the Andes
in northwest Argentina. This location was selected for several reasons. First
Ms. DeMarrias can coordinate her work with other U.S. researchers who are
currently present in the area. Of greater importance however is that fact that
this well defined geographical entity contains an archaeological sequence which
begins approximately 6,000 years ago and extends up through late Inka times to
the appearance of the Spanish. The region documents therefore the shift from
hunting and gathering to agriculture and the change from small mobile human
grouping to larger more highly organized entities which were incorporated into a
state society. Ms. DeMarrias is interested in the latter portion of the sequence
and wants to determine how social stratification and centralization of political
power took place. To do this, she will survey broadly within the region.
Following an initial reconnaissance, she and her colleagues will note all sites
which fall within selected sample areas. Surface materials such as pottery and
stone tools will be collected and architectural and agricultural features such
as irrigation canals mapped. With these data Ms. DeMarrais will be able to
reconstruct changing group size and organization over time. While archaeologists
recognize that the general picture observed in the Calchaqui is repeated in many
parts of the world and that with the adoption of agriculture groups become
sedentary and increase in size and organizational complexity, the mechanisms by
which these changes take place are not well understood. In particular it is not
clear how authority becomes concentrated in the hands of limited numbers of
individuals. By examining the development of centralization such as public works
and by focussing on evidence of inequality as reflected in differential
distribution of metals and other valuable goods, Ms. DeMarrais hopes to gain
insight into this process. This research is important for several reasons. It
will provide data of interest to many archaeologists. It will shed new light on
the process which leads to social complexity and finally it will assist in the
training of a promising young scientist. ***