* 9312888
* Coupled Modeling of Annual and Interannual Tropical         Ocean-Atmosphere Interaction
* GEO,AGS
* 12/01/1993,11/30/1997
* Fei-Fei Jin, University of Hawaii
* Continuing Grant
* Jay S. Fein
* 11/30/1997
* USD 243,600.00

PROJECT SUMMARY PROPOSAL ID: ATM-9312888 PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR: Jin, Fei-fei
INSTITUTION: University of Hawaii PROGRAM: TOGA, CDP TITLE: Coupled Modeling of
Annual and Interannual Tropical Ocean- Atmosphere Interaction Investigations of
the tropical ocean-atmosphere interaction have focused largely on aspects of the
interannual variability related to the El Nino-Southern Oscillation (ENSO)
phenomenon. Coupled models of differing complexity have been developed to
understand, simulate, and predict this phenomenon. However, there are increasing
indications from both observational and modeling studies that the annual cycle
and interannual variability are intrinsically related. This project will use a
series of intermediate and hybrid coupled models, proven to be useful and
economical in tropical coupled modeling, to investigate annual and interannual
variability with an emphasis on the role played by the annual cycle in the
interannual tropical ocean-atmosphere interaction. The goal of this research is
improved understanding of the annual and interannual variabilities observed in
the tropical ocean-atmosphere system. The intermediate coupled model, based on a
simplified version of the 1987 Zebiak &amp; Cane model, has been developed and
extensively analyzed by Jin &amp; Neelin. This model incorporates asymmetric
components of sea surface temperature and ocean dynamics to give a realistic
simulation of the climatological annual cycle and will be used to investigate
the role of the annual cycle on the interannual variability. The mechanisms of
frequency locking that give rise to coupled annual and sub-harmonic oscillations
will be investigated. The regimes of coupled annual, quasi-biennial and low-
frequency modes will be explored in an extensive range of parameter space. The
intermediate coupled model will be improved with better parameterization of the
physics and used fo r further studies of the coupled dynamics of the annual
cycle and the interannual coupled modes. This investigation will be extended,
based on the results from the research with the intermediate coupled model, to
studies with a hybrid coupled model system which includes an ocean general
circulation model and a quasi-steady tropical atmosphere model. The hybrid
coupled model system permits a more sophisticated examination of the interaction
between annual and interannual nodes and an exploration of the regime which
supports the quasi-biennial and low-frequency variability with a regime
diagnostic tool based on the intermediate model.