* 9312422
* Gate Quality in situ Deposited Semiconductor Insulator      Structures:  Elemental and Compound Semiconductors
* MPS,DMR
* 04/01/1994,03/31/1998
* Hadis Morkoc, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* LaVerne D. Hess
* 03/31/1998
* USD 390,000.00

9312422 Morkoc Fundamental materials science and engineering issues of thin
dielectric films will be addressed using in situ growth and diagnostics
apparatus which exploits the advantages of both chemical vapor deposition and
molecular beam epitaxy; metal- insulator-semiconductor structures based on group
III-V GaAs and InP semiconductors will be investigated. Due to intrinsically
better transport properties of III-V semiconductors, advances in the speed and
power performance of microelectronic devices/circuits are anticipated from this
study. One of the likely beneficiaries is low-power consumption digital
electronics such as mobile communication systems. Moreover, this project, if
successful, can provide an alternative path to further size reduction of Si
devices for enhanced performance. %%% To date, semiconductors other than silicon
have resisted implementation into the class of transistors, known as the metal
oxide field effect transistor, that has been responsible for the commercial
electronics revolution. Using modern materials-growth and in situ surface
science diagnostic techniques, dielectrics and semiconductors with intrinsically
higher potential (than silicon) for high speed field effect transistor
applications will be studied. If successful, the project will have considerable
beneficial impact on digital electronics systems such as wireless personal
mobile communication systems; telecommunications, in general; information
processing; and computing. ***