* 9312467
* Electrons in the Geomagnetic Tail
* GEO,AGS
* 02/01/1994,01/31/1996
* Maha Ashour-Abdalla, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Timothy E. Eastman
* 01/31/1996
* USD 50,000.00

9312467 Ashour-Abdalla The proposed theoretical investigation is to calculate
electron distributions in the geomagnetic tail to the Earth's magnetosphere and
to evaluate the local and global problem of charge neutrality between electrons
and ions. Although the dynamics of ions in the magnetotail has been the subject
of extensive theoretical investigations using single particle orbit
calculations, hybrid simulations, and magnetohydrodynamic fluid simulations,
electron dynamics have been virtually ignored. Yet, the most fundamental aspect
of a plasma - the establishment and maintenance of charge neutrality - depends
on electron behavior. Some electrons move at high speeds and rapidly traverse
large volumes of space; the establishment of local charge neutrality depends on
both the global sources and sinks of electrons and the large scale structure of
the electric and magnetic fields in the tail. Until now, no scientific
methodology has existed capable of addressing global transport and calculating
the local distributions of electrons in the tail. In the proposed large scale
kinetics approach, starting from various source regions, electrons will be
allowed to propagate throughout the entire volume of the magnetotail along
trajectories which are determined using model electromagnetic fields to
represent the tail configuration. The local electron distribution function will
be calculated by summing the contributions of each trajectory passing through
the local spatial region, and the electron density will be compared to the local
ion density (which is similarly calculated by the large scale kinetics
technique) to determine the extent of charge neutrality violation. Parallel
electric fields will be added to the electromagnetic field model, and will be
adjusted to obtain the closet reasonable balance between electron and ion charge
densities. The potential significance of this proposed is profound in that, with
its success we could for the first time directly asses s the problem of charge
neutrality in a space plasma, determine the large scale potential electric
fields required to maintain charge neutrality, and establish the extent to which
charge neutrality demands the exchange of electrons between the tail plasma and
the ionosphere. ***