* 9312988
* NSF-CGP Science Fellowship Program:  Ohmic Heating of Solar Atmosphere
* O/D,OISE
* 04/01/1994,09/30/1995
* Satoshi Hinata, Auburn University
* Standard Grant
* Edward Murdy
* 09/30/1995
* USD 28,008.00

9312988 Hinata This award will support a cooperative research project between
Professor Satoshi Hinata, Department of Physics, Auburn University, Alabama, and
Dr. Tadashi Hirayama, Solar Physics Division, National Astronomical Observatory,
Japan. During a six month visit, Professor Hinata will conduct research on ohmic
heating of the solar atmosphere. The collaborators will calculate the dynamical
response of the whole loop plasma (from lower chromosphere to corona) heated by
the dissipation of force-free currents, where the currents density is determined
by the requirement that the coronal energy loss is balanced by local ohmic
dissipation. Dynamical calculations are necessary to obtain a meaningful
interpretation of the variable UV/EUV fluxes, because the transition layer
plasmas are almost always in dynamical states, probably due to heating in the
other parts of the atmosphere as well as in the transition layer itself. Results
of the research should contribute to knowledge concerning environmental issues
in the chemistry and dynamics of ozone. In addition, it could contribute to
studies of climate change that also depend on the variation of the total and
UV/EUV solar radiative output. Professor Hinata's expertise lies in the area of
electric fields in the solar atmosphere. Professor Hirayama is a well known
solar physicist who first suggested chromospheric evaporations. Two other
scientists in Professor Hirayama's laboratory, who are experts in dynamical
behavior of transition layer plasma and magnetic field calculations, are
participating in the project. This project is supported by the NSF-CGP (Center
for Global Partnership) Science Fellowship Program. ***