* 9312656
* U.S.-Hungary Workshop on Environmental Chemistry (Balaton,  Hungary, September 5-8, 1993)
* O/D,OISE
* 08/15/1993,01/31/1995
* Janos Fendler, Syracuse University
* Standard Grant
* Bonnie Thompson
* 01/31/1995
* USD 29,350.00

INT 9312656 Fendler This US-Hungary workshop on "Environmental Chemistry,"
organized by Dr. Janos Fendler of Syracuse University and Dr. Imre Dekany of
Attila Jozsef University, Hungary, will be held in Hungary during September 5-8,
1993. The workshop will bring together ten Hungarian scientists and engineers
with ten from the United States to define an agenda for future, long-term
cooperative research that will address environmental problems. Efforts of the
participants will directed toward those pollution problems which may be defined
as chemical reactions, governed by fundamental molecular interactions. The goal
of this workshop is to stimulate new cooperative research that bears upon the
fundamental issues affecting environmental problems. The research agenda to be
formulated during the meeting will draw upon multiple disciplines in chemistry
and examine problems from the theoretical, computational and experimental
perspectives. While the workshop will be organized by the United States and
Hungary, other participants from France, the Czech Republic, the Slovak
Republic, Bulgaria, Romania, and Poland will participate. The intent is to
involve chemists throughout the region in early stages of planning cooperative
research with the hope of strengthening professional ties that cross national
boundaries. Results of the workshop should include new competitive, proposals
for joint research in environmental chemistry and an invigorated, better
coordinated multi- national approach to examining chemical solutions to basic
environmental problems.