* 9312549
* Industry/University Cooperative Research Center for         Communications and Signal Processing
* ENG,EEC
* 09/15/1993,08/31/1995
* Sarah Rajala, North Carolina State University
* Continuing Grant
* Jay Lee
* 08/31/1995
* USD 167,218.00

9312549 Abbott This three-year continuing award is under the "Self-Sufficient
Partnership for Research" Program. It supports basic research to augment the
research agenda of North Carolina State University's Industry/University
Cooperative Research Center for Communications and Signal Processing. The Center
continues to meet the renewal criteria requirements of the I/UCRC Program.
Funding for a three-year continuing award for an evaluator to study the
industry/university interaction occurring in the Center is also provided. The
U.S. Army (AMSEL) is providing funding to augment ongoing research projects and
to obtain a membership in the Center. Additional funding is provided by the U.S.
Department of Energy's Environmental Restoration and Waste Management Office to
obtain a non-voting membership in the Center. The Program Manager recommends
North Carolina State University be: awarded $58,000 for the first year of a
three-year continuing award (includes $8,000 for an evaluator); $50,000 for one
year with funds provided by the U.S. Army (AMSEL); and $10,000 for one year with
funds provided by the U.S. Department of Energy. Near the end of each 12-month
period, the Program Manager and/or the Division Director of the Engineering
Education Centers Division will review the progress of the Center on a number of
renewal criteria requirements, including the following: 1) the extent to which
university/industry interaction is developing; 2) the extent to which the
support base is developing; and 3) the extent to which a robust research program
is developing. If the review is satisfactory, the Program Manager will recommend
support for the next period of this continuing award.