* 9312235
* An Investigation of the Role of Protozoa in an Organically- Contaminated Subsurface Environment
* ENG,CBET
* 10/01/1993,12/31/1997
* Nancy Kinner, University of New Hampshire
* Continuing Grant
* Edward H. Bryan
* 12/31/1997
* USD 441,365.00

9312235 Kinner This is an award to support research the objective of which is to
obtain a more complete understanding than now exists of the factors affecting
protozoan transport behavior in groundwater. The project involves determination
of the sources of organic carbon used by the aquifer protozoa, the variation in
numbers and diversity of trophic and encysted protozoa in response to temporal
variations in geochemical and biological parameters, and the extent of protozoan
activity and diversity in the unsaturated zone as a function of depth to the
water table. It is a renewal of research conducted previously under NSF Grant
No. 90- 12183. The project involves field studies in cooperation with the U.S.
Geological Survey (Ronald W. Harvey) at its groundwater contamination site
located at the Otis Air Force Base on Cape Cod, Massachusetts and also includes
a subcontract for collaboration on groundwater microbiology with the British
Museum of Natural History (Alan Warren and Gianfranco Novarino). This research
is expected to provide information on the role that protozoan transport through
aquifers and sediments contaminated by organic chemicals plays on microbial
populations in aquifers. This has significant implications for both public
health and for potential use in bioremediation of contaminated aquifers and
sediments. Results may be applied in engineering design of systems for
decontamination of aquifers using a bioremediation process alone or as part of a
system that includes physical and chemical processes.