* 9312375
* U.S.-Czech Workshop on New Legislatures of Central Europe:  Institutionalization of the Democratic Transformation
* O/D,OISE
* 09/15/1993,12/31/1995
* David Olson, University of North Carolina Greensboro
* Standard Grant
* Bonnie Thompson
* 12/31/1995
* USD 8,300.00

9312375 Olson This U.S.-Eastern Europe workshop on "New Legislatures of Central
Europe: Institutionalization of the Democratic Transformation" is organized by
Dr. David M. Olson of the University of North Carolina, Greensboro, and Dr.
Lubomir Brokl of the Institute of Sociology of the Czech Academy of Sciences. It
will be held in Prague during August 1994 and will involve ten participants from
the United States, ten from the Czech Republic and the Slovak Republic and seven
from other countries in Central Europe. The workshop itself will feature country
papers as well as specialized sessions on methodological and topical matters.
The overall objective is to examine the course of development of parliament(s)
as a whole institution during the beginning phases of a new post-communist
political system, with the intent of understanding the legislatures' reciprocal
interplay with the wider political system. Results should point to new
international cooperative research opportunities for future study of the ways in
which the institution of parliament(s) in Central Europe adapt(s) to the new
circumstances of democratization. This workshop in political science fulfills
the program objectives of advancing science by enabling leading experts in the
U. S. and Eastern Europe to combine complementary talents and pool research
resources in areas of strong mutual interest and competence.