* 9312153
* Non-Methane Hydrocarbon Emmissions from Plants
* GEO,AGS
* 09/15/1993,02/28/1997
* Richard Fall, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* Anne-Marie Schmoltner
* 02/28/1997
* USD 330,000.00

ATM-9312153 Fall Although tremendous quantities of volatile organic compounds
(VOCs) are released from vegetation into the atmosphere annually, it is not
clear why plants expend a considerable amount of energy synthesizing volatile
and reactive VOCs. The fact that these emissions shape global tropspheric
chemistry underscores the importance of developing an understanding of the
underlying processes that regulate emissions. Plants evolved under conditions
which, due to man's influence, are much different that present day conditions
throughout the industrial world. Until we better understand the basic mechanisms
that are responsible for the emission of these compounds, we will not be able to
assess the effects that these changing conditions have on vegetation currently,
or how these plants and their emissions will respond to further global change.
This research will address three fundamental questions: 1) What are the
underlying mechanisms for the biosynthesis and emission of major classes of VOCs
to the atmosphere? 2) What are the major physical and biological "drivers" that
regulate VOC emissions? 3) How do VOCs exit plant surfaces? The biogenic VOCs to
be studied include those organics that make up the majority of natural
emissions: the non-methane hydrocarbons, isoprene and monoterpenes; and the
oxygenated hydrocarbons, methanol, ethanol, acetaldehyde, acetone, 2
methyl-3-buten-2-ol (methyl butenol), and the hexenal family (hexenal, hexenyl
acetate). For example, detailed experiment will examine; 2) the mechanisms of
methanol, acetone methyl butenol, and isoprene biosynthesis; b) the possibility
that isoprene is a "leaky" metabolic intermediate and that leafiness may explain
why isoprene-emitting plants range form high to low emitters: and c) the role of
light, temperature, humidity, carbon dioxide concentration, stomatal conductance
and leaf development as major "drivers" of VOC emissions. In addition, d)
experiments will be conducted to establish the role of cuticle surfaces and
stomatal pores in the exit of VOCs from leaves, including the emission of
monoterpenes from conifer needles. These studies should provide new insights
into how and why plants emit VOCs, reduce uncertainties about the "drivers" of
emissions, and allow prediction of future VOC emissions in response to global
change.