* 9312947
* Materials Growth and Processing Research for Wide-Bandgap   Semiconductor Heterostructures and Devices
* MPS,DMR
* 12/15/1993,11/30/1997
* Russell Dupuis, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* LaVerne D. Hess
* 11/30/1997
* USD 285,290.00

9312947 Dupuis Research will be carried out to develop a fundamental
understanding of conventional and low temperature metalorganic chemical vapor
epitaxial materials growth and novel device processing techniques for wide-
bandgap III-V compound semiconductors in the system consisting of the AlGaInN
quaternary and related ternary and binary alloys. Lattice-matched and
intentionally lattice-mismatched heteroepitaxial heterostructures will be grown
in this materials system using both low-pressure metalorganic chemical vapor
deposition, and low-temperature epitaxial growth by flow-rate modulation. In
addition, this program will study the fundamental structural, electronic, and
optical materials properties, as well as the heterojunction band alignments of
these materials. %%% The primary goal of this program is to develop a
fundamental-understanding of the epitaxial growth, processing, and properties of
wide bandgap semiconductor materials so that they can be exploited in the
realization of a variety of advanced electronic and photonic devices. This
research program is strongly coupled to direct collaborative efforts with US
optoelectronic industrial research and development groups. An important feature
of the program is the training of graduate and undergraduate students in a
fundamentally and technologically significant area of materials and processing
research. This research will contribute to improving the general performance of
advanced devices and integrated circuits used in computing, information
processing, and telecommunications. ***