* 9312489
* Best Achievable Control System Performance
* NONE,NONE
* 02/15/1994,08/31/1997
* Vasilios Manousiouthakis, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing grant
* Maria Burka
* 08/31/1997
* USD 212,026.00

Abtract - Manousiouthakis - 9312489 In recent years, the lack of major capital
investments in the process industries has made the implementation of control
projects one mode to increased plant profitability. These economic benefits are
typically associated with the improved dynamic performance offered by advanced
controls. In a regulatory control context, a quality variable is desired to stay
within control limits and is not allowed to exceed specification limits. If one
control strategy can achieve tighter control limits than another, then the
setpoint of this quality variable may be changed so as to enhance process
economics. Dynamic performance is not one criterion in selecting a control
system. Uncertainty, complexity and reliability are also critical issues.
Chemical process models are often empirical, neglect complex physicochemical
phenomena or lack information on process parameters. Consequently, high levels
of uncertainty are associated with these models. Chemical processes are also
large scale interconnected systems in which a large number of variables are
measured and/or manipulated. The geographical location of these interconnected
unit operations would necessitate the installation of a complex communication
network for the purpose of transferring information from the measurements to a
central location and then to the manipulations. The installation and maintenance
costs and the complexity of such a network often prevent the implementation of
such a centralized control system. Instead, control system simplicity is
attained by: 1) the use of a decentralized control system in which measurements
and manipulations are classified into subsets and information is exchanged only
between corresponding subsets, and 20 the use of simple low order control
strategies with which human operators are familiar. Reliability is another
criterion in control system design. Failures of control system elements such as
sensors/actuators often lead to the manual operation of control loops . It is
desirable that the control system be such that it can be readily reconfigured so
as to maintain plant operation albeit with degraded dynamic performance
characteristics. The objective of this research project is the development of a
methodology that addresses the question: What is the best achievable dynamic
performance that a decentralized and/or low order simultaneously stabilizing
and/or reliable feedback control system can deliver in the presence of external
disturbances. The formulation of these control problems leads to quadratically
constrained, infinite dimensional optimization problems. The investigation of
computational techniques for the global solution of such problems is one of the
main issues that will be addressed. Branch and bound, decomposition, interval
arithmetic techniques and combinations thereof and computational implementations
will be sought.