* 9312686
* Mathematical Sciences:Collaboration Between Statistical and Atmospheric Sciences on Modeling the Climate System
* MPS,DMS
* 07/15/1993,06/30/1999
* Richard Katz, University Corporation For Atmospheric Res
* Continuing Grant
* K Crank
* 06/30/1999
* USD 3,600,000.00

9312686 Katz The modeling and analysis of the climate system is a complex
problem that challenges the statistical, mathematical, and geophysical sciences.
Increased collaboration among these sciences would result in more efficient
analyses and more accurate interpretation of data from the climate system and
its models, and in a more reliable assessment of accompanying uncertainties. It
is proposed that a team of statistical scientist be assembled at the National
Center for Atmospheric Research (NCAR) to help foster such a collaboration.
NCAR, basefunded by the National Sciences Foundation, is a focal point for basic
research on the atmosphere and has strong links to universities throughout North
America. With the addition of more statistical and mathematical expertise, it
could serve as well as a focal point for promoting collaboration among
geophysical, statistical, and other mathematical sciences. The general objective
is to develop and utilize new techniques of data analysis that arise from the
collective understanding of physical scientists, mathematicians, and
statisticians. The climate system has a very large number of degrees of freedom
and exhibits some chaotic behavior. Consequently, the specific focus of the
collaborative research would be on the development of inferential methods
appropriate for high-resolution analysis of the climate system. Such analyses
are appropriate both because realistic models of the climate system require the
treatment of smaller scale phenomena, and because assessments of societal impact
of climate require information on regional or smaller scales. Besides the
immediate benefits to the scientific fields directly involved, improved
understanding of the climate system would result in potential benefits to
society that would be accrued indefinitely into the future. For instance, it
could lead to improved weather and climate forecasts over a wide range of time
scales from hours to seasons in advance, as well as to more realistic scenarios
of future changes in climate. Such improvements would be of substantial value to
decision makers and policy analysts.