* 9312149
* U.S.-Indonesia Cooperative Research: Hidden Power in Gender Relations  Among Indonesians: A Case Study in Javanese      Villages
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/1994,05/31/1997
* Ann Tickamyer, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Gerald Edwards
* 05/31/1997
* USD 22,183.00

9312149 Tickamyer This project supports dissertation research of Ms. Siti
Kusujiarti under the direction of Dr. Ann R. Tickamyer, Department of Sociology,
University of Kentucky, and subsequent collaborative research on hidden power in
gender relations among Indonesians, for a period of 24 months. Gender relations
and power negotiations in daily relations in 48 couples in two villages in Java,
Indonesia, will be investigated by intensive interviewing and observation. This
study will focus on 5 household activities: household chores, reproduction,
production, financial matters, and social activities analyzing who has power,
how it is negotiated, and the "hidden transcripts" which hide latent conflict.
This research has both theoretical and practical social significance.
Theoretically, it provides a comparative view of how power is conceptualized and
manifested in gender relations among the Javanese people. Gender ideology plays
a central role as the foundation of women's government programs and in defining
the characteristics of women's involvement in these programs. Thus, this
research has great practical significance for the course of Indonesian
development and for understanding how the development process benefits women.
The PI is a highly respected researcher in the field of this proposal. She is
fortunate in having as a graduate student and, later, as a postdoctoral
collaborator an Indonesian woman with a thorough knowledge of the culture and
acceptability, as an insider, to those whose relations will be studied. This
project is relevant to the objectives of the East Asia and Pacific Program which
seeks to increase the level of cooperation between U.S. scientists and engineers
and their counterparts in the Asia-Pacific region through the exchange of
scientific information, ideas, skills, and techniques and through collaboration
on problems of mutual benefit. ***