* 9312091
* Catalysis, Adsorption and Charge Transfer Kinetics in       Reactions at Electrodes
* MPS,CHE
* 12/01/1993,05/31/1999
* Fred Anson, California Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Gene W. Wilds
* 05/31/1999
* USD 1,049,465.00

9312091 Anson This project is in the general area of analytical and surface
chemistry and in the subfield of electrochemistry. During the tenure of this
five-year continuing grant, Professor Anson and his students will design,
synthesize, and evaluate new surface confined electrocatalysts for the direct,
four-electron reduction of dioxygen to water and for the electrooxidation of
organic substrates such as methanol, ethanol, formaldehyde, and formic acid. The
general applicability of electrocatalysis by adsorbed electroactive ligands and
their metal complexes will also be explored. Because many electrocatalytic
species are surface confined using polymeric matrices, the impact of solution
composition-controlled thermodynamic driving forces on the kinetics of electron
transfer across polymer-electrolyte interfaces will also be investigated.
Finally, the electrochemical behavior of metastable transition metal-dioxygen
complexes, long believed to be key intermediates in the electrocatalytic
reduction of dioxygen, will be probed to afford insights into the mechanisms of
these transition metal-promoted processes. %%% The rational design of efficient,
economical fuel cells and batteries is predicated on a fundamental understanding
of the electrochemical processes involved. This research is aimed at enhancing
knowledge of how electrochemical transformations of inexpensive substrate
molecules can be facilitated through electrocatalysis for use in these
technologically and societally important devices. ***