* 9312485
* SGER:  Physiological Correlates of Early Conscience
* SBE,BCS
* 06/01/1993,11/30/1994
* Don Fowles, University of Iowa
* Standard Grant
* Jean B. Intermaggio
* 11/30/1994
* USD 49,569.00

Kochanska NSF FORM 7 This is an SGER request to augment the ongoing research of
Kochanska (DBS-9209559) in her study the development of conscience in children.
Toddlers and their mothers are currently being studied using observations,
reports, and experimental paradigms. Kochanska's research considers the role of
temperament in moral development and brings together parental socialization and
children's temperatment as influences in the early formation of conscience. In
the SGER request, Fowles will collaborate with Kochanska to examine the
physiological correlates of conscience development. Specifically, he will look
at electrodermal reactivity, which has been considered an index of individual
temperamental qualities. He will also measure heart rate. This collaboration is
part of a strong trend in the field to add biological measurement to the study
of personality development. Imaginative procedures have been developed to carry
out this research. A "space lab" will be used as the setting with T- shirts for
the children carrying the logo: "University of Iowa Astronaut Training". A
special chair with foot and arm rests will be used; the chair can be slightly
tipped back to simulate the astronaut-type sitting position. These procedures
have been developed in consultation with Nancy Eisenberg, Jerry Kagan, and
Nathan Fox, researchers who have studied physiological processes in small
children. The physiological assessments will be tied to other measures planned
for the fall of 1993. This timeliness is the reason for the SGER application,
with its quick turn-around time. Program Director recommends an award of
$49,569, one half of which ($24,785) should come from the CPL cluster reserve,
with the remaining funds from the Social Psychology program.