* 9312295
* Dissertation Research:  Prehistoric Ritual Technology:  A   Pueblo Case Study
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/1993,12/31/1994
* E. Charles Adams, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 12/31/1994
* USD 11,796.00

Under the direction of Dr. E. Charles Adams Mr. William Walker will collect
data for his doctoral dissertation. He will participate in the excavation of a
large or "great kiva" which is part of the Homol'ovi II site located in
northeastern Arizona. The size of the kiva, ca. 11 m. by 6 m., makes it large
both in Southwestern terms and also in relation to other ritual structures at
the site. In the course of extensive excavation the site will be trenched to
divide it into four quadrants which will be mapped and excavated in their
entirety. Pollen and flotation samples will be collected from features and other
locations to assess the ritual use of plants. The chronology of use will be
determined through ceramic as well as tree ring and radiocarbon dating. In
addition to the ceramic materials, lithic and groundstone artifacts as well as
faunal and macrobotanical remains will be studied. In this way the history of
the structure and its use can be reconstructed. In the centuries preceding
Columbus complex societies developed in the U.S. Southwest. They were
characterized by large population aggregations, construction of multistory
"apartment" houses and of ritual structures. Archaeologists want to understand
how complex societies develop and are maintained and for this reason have
focussed on this Southwest phenomenon. Based both on archaeological and
ethnographic evidence, it is known that religion played a central role both in
social control and integration. Just how it functioned and changed over time
however is unknown. Through a study of this grand kiva Mr. Walker will address
this issue. Because ritual features are added over time the history of the
structure and its use can potentially be reconstructed. This project is
important for several reasons. It will increase our understanding of how complex
societies emerge and are maintained. Mr. Walker also wants to develop new
techniques both to excavate and to interpret architectural remains such as kivas
and his work should set an example which may be applied in other parts of the
world. Finally, the project will assist in the training of a promising young
scientist.