* 9312554
* Industry/University Cooperative Research Center for ChemicalProcess Modeling and Control
* ENG,EEC
* 09/15/1993,08/31/1997
* Christos Georgakis, Lehigh University
* Continuing Grant
* Tapan K. Mukherjee
* 08/31/1997
* USD 139,000.00

9312554 Georgakis This award provides funding the first year of a three-year
continuing award for a "Self-Sufficient Partnership award for Research " at
Lehigh University's Industry/University Cooperative Research Center for Chemical
Modelling and Control. The Center has demonstrated successful research support
from industrial members and has met the review criteria of I/UCRC Self-
Sufficient Partnership Program. Funding is also provided to support an evaluator
at the Center to continue the evaluation responsibility on monitoring the
industry/university interaction for the Center. Additional funding is provided
for a woman undergraduate student to aid the Center in its's ongoing research
activities. The U.S. Department of Energy's Environmental Restoration and Waste
Management Office has provided funding to obtain a non-voting membership in the
Center. The Program Manager recommends Lehigh University be awarded: $30,000 for
the first year of a three-year continuing award; $8,000 to support an evaluator
at the center for one year; $10,000 for one year with funds provided by the
Department of Energy; and $5,000 for one year to support an undergraduate
student at the Center. Near the end of each 12-month period, the Program Manager
and/or the Division Director of the Engineering Education Centers Division will
review the progress of the Center on a number of renewal criteria requirements,
including the following: 1) the extent to which the university/industry
interaction is developing; 2) the extent to which the support base is
developing; and 3) the extent to which a robust research program is developing.
If the review is satisfactory, the Program Manager will recommend support for
the next period of this continuing award.