* 9312348
* Mathematical Sciences: Spatial Stochastic Models in         Biology; May 26-28, 1994; Colorado Springs, Colorado
* MPS,DMS
* 01/15/1994,09/30/1994
* Gregory Morrow, University of Colorado at Colorado Springs
* Standard Grant
* Jean Thiebaux
* 09/30/1994
* USD 13,050.00

9312348 Schinazi The conference proposed here will bring together a group of
outstanding biologist and mathematicians who are interested in applying
Probability models to Biology. Recently there have been significant advances in
understanding the interplay between some interacting particle systems (Markovian
spatial stochastic models) and the class of differential equations traditionally
used to model ecological systems. The stochastic models extend the traditional
deterministic biological models and open new issues for probabilists and
biologists alike. Indeed a fresh perspective and foothold has been gained in
this well established area of mathematical modelling which promises to quite
fruitful. On the one hand the broader view may be used to justify various
simulations done by biologist as well as give new ideas for simulations, while
on the other hand it raises several interesting probability questions about new
stochastic models. Recent collaboration between researchers in interacting
particle systems and mathematical biology has shown that analyses of stochastic
biological models which have been done in the past can sometimes be clarified
using the modern probablilisitic viewpoint. Seen from this new light, the
original stochastic models introduced by mathematical biologist and ecologists
acquire a unified meaning besides presenting a number of important new
biological insights. This conference represents a unique opportunity to advance
mathematical biology, probability, ecology, and epidemiology in a unified forum.
***