* 9312715
* Surfactants with Two Hydrophilic and Two Hydrophobic Groups;Chemical Structure/Interfacial Property Relationships,      Molecular Interactions, and Synergism
* ENG,CBET
* 02/01/1994,07/31/1996
* Milton Rosen, CUNY Brooklyn College
* Continuing Grant
* Robert M. Wellek
* 07/31/1996
* USD 105,000.00

9312715 Rosen The environmental impact of chemicals causes increasing concern..
One method of minimizing the environmental effects of chemicals such as
surfactants that are used for their "performance" is to increase their
efficiency and effectiveness. For a given level of performance, less chemical
raw material is then required and less chemical effluent must be treated. A new
type of surfactant that contains two hydrophilic groups of two hydrophobic
groups in the molecule (called "gemini" type) has recently been shown to have
surface activity form one to more than two orders of magnitude greater than
comparable conventional surfactant, depending upon surfactant structure. It has
also been shown, in initial studies, to interact more strongly with other
surfactants than comparable conventional surfactants. Since increased
interaction strength increases the probability of synergy in mixtures of
surfactants, this indicated that geminis are more likely to exhibit synergism in
interfacial properties when mixed with other surfactants. This proposal is for a
systematic study of chemical structure/fundamental interfacial property
relationships, including interactions in mixed monolayers and mixed micelles, of
well-defined, well-purified geminis, to be synthesized for the most part in our
institute. The necessary data can be obtained from equilibrium and dynamic
surface tension measurements, supplemented by NMR studies on micellar solutions
and reflectance-absorbance FTIR studies on monolayers. In addition to increasing
our knowledge of structure/interfacial property relationships and of molecular
interactions in mixed micelles and monolayers, the results of this study should
provide guidelines for the design and use of surfactant systems with maximized
desired interfacial properties and minimized environmental impact for industrial
use. ***