* 9312728
* Mineralogy, Paragenetic Sequence, Geochemistry, & Charac-   terization of Phosphorus in the Fluorite-Barite Mineral     Deposits at Okorusu, Namibia:  U.S.-Namibia Coop. Resear
* O/D,OISE
* 08/01/1993,01/31/1997
* Richard Hagni, Missouri University of Science and Technology
* Standard Grant
* Patricia Jones Tsuchitani
* 01/31/1997
* USD 27,945.00

9312728 Hagni This three-year cooperative research project supports field
research and mineralogical and geochemical study of the Okorusu fluorite-barite
mineral deposit in north-central Namibia. The PI and a graduate student from the
Department of Geology and Geophysics at the University of Missouri-Rolla will
collaborate with Dr. Gabriele I.C. Schneider, chief geologist at the Geological
Survey of Namibia, in studying the deposits and collecting specimens for
subsequent laboratory study at UMR and in Namibia. The Namibian partner will
travel to Rolla during the third year to participate in the development of
conclusions from the field and laboratory research. This research will document
several fundamental aspects of the mineral deposit at Okorusu which have not
been studied to date, including: mineralogy, paragenetic sequence, fluid
inclusion geothermometry and salinities, rare earth element geochemistry, trace
element geochemistry, and the character of apatite-fluorite intergrowths. This
study could improve understanding of the origin of fluorite deposits, explaining
why a few carbonatites contain economic concentrations of fluorite, whereas most
do not. The project also promises practical applications of interest to the
Okorusu mining operation - improving separation of apatite and fluorite in order
to produce superior fluorite concentrate. Since somewhat similar deposits occur
in parts of the U.S., the economic as well as the scientific implications of the
research could be mutually beneficial. In addition to the benefits outlined
above, this project advances the Division of International Programs' objective
of strengthening human resources: it offers a US graduate student an opportunity
for field experience in a collaborative research project with a distinguished
scientist in Africa, who also happens to be female. ***