* 9312312
* Accurate Quantum Dynamics of Rare-Gas Heteroclusters and    Hydrogen-Bonded Dimers
* MPS,CHE
* 01/01/1994,06/30/1997
* Zlatko Bacic, New York University
* Continuing Grant
* Celeste M. Rohlfing
* 06/30/1997
* USD 223,960.00

This research is supported by the NSF theoretical and computational chemistry
program. Rigorous quantum mechanical calculations will be carried out to study
the internal dynamics of weakly bound systems, particularly, rare gas
heteroclusters and hydrogen-bonded dimers. The project has three main
components. (1) Quantum Monte Carlo methods will be applied to clusters
consisting of a hydrogen halide molecule with several argon atoms to study the
effects of solvent-solute interaction on energetics, structure, and the
vibrational spectrum. (2) Improved computational methods will be developed for
treating rovibrational states of four-atom clusters with one covalent bond.
Large amplitude distortions of all five weak bonds will be treated explicitly.
(3) Accurate quantum calculations will be carried out for mode-specific
vibrational predissociation dynamics of hydrogen halide dimers to obtain
theoretical predictions of predissociation lifetimes and rotational state
distributions of the resulting monomer fragments. Advances during the past
decade in molecular beam technology and laser spectroscopy have made it possible
today to carry out detailed and highly precise measurements of the relative
energies of vibrational and rotational states of very small molecular clusters
in the gas phase. These experiments are potential sources of important, highly
accurate, and detailed information about weak interatomic forces, but further
theoretical work is required to fully extract this information. The present
project is a theoretical study of three particular classes of clusters ranging
in size from 4 to 17 atoms. The significant difference between these clusters
and typical stable molecules with the same number of atoms are their extreme
floppiness. Well developed mathematicals methods already exist for solving the
quantum mechanical equations of motion for the small amplitude vibrations of
typical molecules. The theory of the more compli cated, large amplitude, motion
in weakly bound clusters is an active area of current research. This work is
motivated, aside from inherent scientific curiosity, by the need for
quantitative information about weak intermolecular forces to be used in
subsequent computer simulations of molecular motion in large molecular systems,
e.g. molecules of biological interest and molecules in liquid solution.