* 9312141
* Hydrogen and Temperature in the High-Latitude Thermosphere  Near Solstice, with Coupling to Nearby Altitude Regions
* GEO,AGS
* 02/01/1994,01/31/1996
* Edward Breig, University of Texas at Dallas
* Continuing Grant
* Sunanda Basu
* 01/31/1996
* USD 100,000.00

9312141 Breig The proposed research will lead to an improved understanding of
the coordinated behaviors of neutral atomic hydrogen and the temperature in the
polar thermosphere near solstice. It will give special attention to several
modes of coupling between this atmospheric region and its neighbors at higher
and lower altitudes. Local H concentrations are to be derived from the condition
of charge-exchange equilibrium between hydrogen and oxygen atoms and ions in
conjunction with satellite plasma observations near the F- peak. Measurements of
ion temperature at these heights provide good estimates of the neutral gas
temperature. Principal use will be made of the unique, and still highly useful,
sets of aeronomic data acquired with the Atmosphere Explorer (AE)-D and Dynamics
Explorer (DE)-2 satellites, both in high-inclination polar orbits. General
emphasis will be given to the latitudinal and longitudinal distributions of H
density and neutral temperature through the summer and winter polar
thermospheres, seeking a more firm confirmation of earlier indications for a
polar hydrogen depletion and a related enhancement in temperature in this
region. A multitude of comparisons will also be undertaken - seasonal
differences between summer and winter high latitudes and the effect of different
levels of solar activity. These results should help fill a serious deficiency of
reliable observational polar data, and contribute to refinements in current
models of the high latitude thermosphere. ***