* 9312166
* Modernization of Collection Facilities and Computer         Databases of the University of Michigan Museum of Zoology   Insect Division
* BIO,DEB
* 01/01/1994,12/31/1997
* Barry OConnor, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* None
* 12/31/1997
* USD 314,915.00

9312166 OConnor This support will enable the improvement and rehousing of the
arthropod collections in the Museum of Zoology, U. Michigan, in the form of new
cabinets (174) and drawers (5200) to replace substandard ones and to accommodate
growth. The collection, with 4 million specimens and 1012 holotypes, is the
third largest university insect collection in North America and is particularly
strong in Odonata, Orthoptera, Diptera, Coleoptera and Acari. This improvement
will occur in concert with the university's renovation of the collection areas:
specifically, the institution will construct a new wet lab and counters, and
prepare the space for air conditioning, with an estimated expenditure of
$520,000 for the divisions of Insects and Amphibians &amp; Reptiles in the
Museum of Zoology. The collection is indispensable for biodiversity research and
education regionally, nationally and internationally. This improvement will
allow better access to the material for researchers and students and will help
preserve these holdings for future generations of biologists. %%% The Museum of
Zoology, U. Michigan houses one of the most important arthropod collections in
the country: with 4 million specimens, it is the third largest university insect
collection in North America. This support will allow rehousing of the material
threatened by substandard and deteriorated drawers and cabinets. At the same
time, the institution is providing $520,000 worth of capital improvements to the
collection facilities, including climate-control and new laboratories. This
support will provide much easier and safer access to the specimens fo r
researchers and students in biodiversity, and will protect the collection for
future biologists. *** Y ` R W Y $ $ $ D Y ` Y ( Times New Roman Symbol &amp;
Arial $ $ $ " h { e{ e 7 Leonard Krishtalka Leonard Krishtalka