* 9312381
* Investigation of Infra Red Spectral Persistence in Condensed Matter
* NONE,NONE
* 12/15/1993,05/31/1997
* Albert Sievers, Cornell University
* Continuing grant
* Jean Toulouse
* 05/31/1997
* USD 360,000.00

9312381 Sievers Persistent spectral hole burning will be investigated in
chalcogenide glasses, polymers, and poled ferroelectrics. A ternary chalcogenide
glass will be used to distinguish processes which are controlled by the glass
topology from those which are dominated by the chemistry of the chalcogen
(primarily Se) chemistry. The influence of network topology on short time energy
transfer and the homogeneous dephasing time will be measured by infrared
picosecond pump-probe and photon echo experiments, respectively. The focus in
these studies is to determine the effect of the average coordination number on
the short time dynamics. Polymers will be investigated at very low temperatures
to inhibit thermally activated recovery to the vibrational ground state. Poled
ferroelectrics will be studied by reorienting the polar molecules by persistent
hole burning in the opposite direction to the crystal polarization. In a related
study, the nature of localized vibrational modes will investigated in various
types of crystals containing defects. In these materials localized modes may be
trapped at a defect site leading to persistent changes in the defect absorption
spectrum at low temperatures. %%% The absorption of light in a glass can be
altered when a laser beam is incident on the same region of the glass. The glass
retains a memory of the laser light. This memory effect is termed "spectral hole
burning" because the optical absorption is reduced precisely for the same light
energy corresponding to the laser energy. Study of the "spectral hole" as a
function of temperature, time and light energy provides important information
about microscopic structural properties of the glass. The proposed study will
extend the investigation of this effect to ultrashort time scales and to
imperfect crystalline solids. The aim of such studies is to modify a solid in
order to observe these hole burning effects at room temperature with the
potential application as optical mem ory devices. ***