* 9312205
* Sonoluminescence in Cryogenic Fluids
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/1993,01/31/1995
* Gary Williams, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* H. Hollis Wickman
* 01/31/1995
* USD 50,000.00

9312205 Williams This exploratory proposal is to study the properties of
synchronous sonoluminescence (SSL) in fluids in order to gain some fundamental
insights into the nature of the phenomenon. The exact mechanism by which there
is a conversion of sound into light (first observed in air bubbles in water) is
not understood, although there is some evidence that the compressional heating
of the gas is enough to yield appreciable black-body radiation. However, it is
not clear whether there are also chemical or atomic processes occurring in the
hot gas or plasma which may control the emission. The work in this proposal is
composed of three main thrusts: The study of the oscillation properties of a
single bubble trapped at the center of a spherical continuous wave acoustic
resonator. The investigation of the intensity of the light emitted by the
bubbles as a function of the applied acoustic fields. The measurement of the
spectrum of the emitted light in the visible to ultra-violet wavelength range.
The SSL research will be undertaken in cryogenic liquids as these fluids have
several advantages over water. They have high chemical purity and the
spectroscopic studies can be carried out over a wider wavelength range. %%% This
exploratory proposal is to study the properties of synchronous sonoluminescence
(SSL) in fluids in order to gain some fundamental insights into the nature of
the phenomenon. The exact mechanism by which there is a conversion of sound into
light (first observed in air bubbles in water) is not understood. There is some
evidence that the compressional heating of the gas is enough to cause the
emission of radiation. However, it is not clear whether there are also chemical
or atomic processes occurring in the hot gas or plasma which may control the
emission. The work in this proposal is composed of three main thrusts: The study
of the oscillation properties of a single bubble trapped at the center of a
spherical continuous wave acoustic resonator. The investigation of the intensity
of the light emitted by the bubbles as a function of the applied acoustic
fields. The measurement of the spectrum of the emitted light in the visible to
ultra-violet wavelength range. The SSL research will be undertaken in cryogenic
liquids as these fluids have several advantages over water. They have high
chemical purity and the spectroscopic studies can be carried out over a wider
wavelength range. ***