* 9312046
* NSF-CGP Science Fellowship Program:  Viscoelastic Effects   on Polymer Phase Separation Processes
* O/D,OISE
* 12/01/1993,03/31/1995
* Steve Granick, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Patricia Jones Tsuchitani
* 03/31/1995
* USD 75,589.00

WPC&lt; 2 B J Z Courier #| x 2 x 6 X @ `7 X @ HP LaserJet 4 (935-Mail)
INTHP4-1.PRS x @ \ E X @ 2 6 F V N Z #| x Courier ? x x x , x 6 X @ `7 X @ HP
LaserJet 4 (935-Mail) INTHP4-1.PRS x @ \ E X @ 2 0 F Z : 9312046 Granick This
award will support a cooperative research project between Professor Steve
Granick, Department of Materials Science and Engineering, University of
Illinois, and Professor Takeji Hashimoto, Department of Polymer Chemistry, Kyoto
University in Japan. During a seven month visit Professor Granick will conduct
research on the viscoelastic effects on polymer phase separation processes
specifically on the nucleation and growth mechanism. Recent work in solutions
has concerned a single polymer system, polystyrene in dioctylphthalate (DOP) in
which the scattering effects are large. In such phenomena, not enough attention
has been paid to the possible importance of nucleation. Little is known about
systems away from the critical composition. The researchers will undertake joint
measurement of turbidity and viscoelastic effects at various hydrostatic
pressures. This will involve investigation of polymer polymer shear induced
demixing under extremely well defined conditions of shear rate, pressure, and
polymer microstructure. Results of the research are expected to lay the
groundwork for new directions in nonequilibrium structure and phases of liquids
research. It will also contribute to a greatly expanded teaching curriculum.
Professor Granick is a leading researcher in the area of dynamics of
macromolecules on surfaces. Professor Hashimato has a reputation as being one of
the best experimental polymer scientist s in Japan and has also developed a
worldwide reputation in his area. Professor Hashimoto has spent many years
developing the unique specialized equipment that will be used in the research.
It is the intent of the researchers that they will continue their collaboration
for many years through the exchange of graduate students in each other's
laboratories. This project is supported by the NSF CGP (Center for Global
Partnership) Science Fellowship Program. h) 0*0*0*