* 9312633
* Dissertation Research:  Redefining Reproduction in Urban    Greece:  A Cultural Study of Family Planning
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/1993,05/31/1995
* Jane Collier, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Raymond B. Hames
* 05/31/1995
* USD 8,500.00

Collier/Parson 9312633 The researcher will investigate whether and how the
recent expansion of women's social and economic opportunities, the
implementation of pro-natalist policies, and the availability of new pre-natal
technologies in urban Greece are prompting people to rethink ideas about gender,
kinship, and individualism. Through ethnographic interviewing, participant-
observation, and archival research in Thessaloniki, the study will investigate
how urban Greeks form ideas about biological reproduction and methods of family
planning at the same time these ideas are used by Greeks to negotiate the
production of social status through personal achievement. The research will
collect data on family planning rhetoric and practice as an index of such
changes. Reproductive ideas and practices will be explored in political-economic
context. Consideration will also be given to way in which reproduction is
implicated in the ongoing construction of the Greek nation-state. Through
interpretation of women's reproductive histories in the broader context of their
life experiences, the study will seek an understanding of contemporary Greek
abortion practices at the historical intersection of 1) "traditional" and
"modern" ideas about motherhood, procreation, and sexuality; 2) legal and
economic constraints on family planning and parenting; and 3) new contraceptive
and prenatal technologies. The dissertation resulting from this research will
extend the insights of feminists studies of reproduction i by investigating how
"traditional" Greek reproductive understandings are defined and valued against
Westernizing influence s. *** _ ! ! ! F y y ( Times New Roman Symbol &amp; Arial
u u u " h e e e m j collier paxson abstract abstract collier paxson abstract
thesis Raymond Hames Raymond Hames