* 9312092
* Low-dimensional Invariant Coordinate Systems for Dynamic    Modeling
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/1993,07/31/1997
* Rick Miranda, Colorado State University
* Continuing Grant
* Paul Werbos
* 07/31/1997
* USD 174,924.00

9312092 Kirby This proposal presents a new analytic tool for extracting a
reduced description of general dynamical systems. It details how systems with
dynamics which lie on low-dimensional invariant manifolds or attractors can be
reformulated into systems of low dimensionality. In the study of such systems
one is typically confronted with complex models wither in the form of partial
differential equations, or large systems of ordinary differential or difference
equations. This "high- dimensionality" contradicts the conjectured idea that the
model of the system should be governable by a small number of equations. This
project addresses the issue of how to objectively proceed from an overly
detailed and redundant description based on modeling considerations to a reduced
model which accurately reflects the true dimensionality of the system. A
technique is presented which allows the reformulation of the model to its
optimally reduced form and it is shown how this can be used to facilitate the
study of dynamical systems with chaotic or turbulent solutions. The basis of the
approach is the reduction of the model, wither a partial differential equation
or system of ordinary differential equations, to the simplest possible form.
This is carried out using a neural network architecture which resembles and
bottleneck. The neural network constructs a nonlinear vector function
approximation in several variables. The values of the nodes in the bottleneck
correspond to the dynamical information optimally compressed onto a manifold of
lowest possible dimension. Consequently, the model equations can be formulated
in terms of the variables on the bottleneck manifold. This can be viewed as a
nonlinear compression of the phase space of the bottleneck manifold. This can be
viewed as a nonlinear compression of the phase space of the dynamical system and
is mathematically equivalent to a projection of the flow onto a non- orthogonal
basis. ***