* 9312734
* An Experimental/Mathematical Determination of an Effective Heat Transfer Coefficient for Continuously Cast Metal During the Cooling Process
* NONE,NONE
* 06/15/1994,05/31/1997
* Ebrahim Bigzadeh, Florida International University
* Continuing grant
* Jay Lee
* 05/31/1997
* USD 129,834.00

9312734 Bigzadeh The main objective of the project is to obtain an effective
heat transfer coefficient on a metal strand in the secondary cooling zone during
the continuous casting process. Previous research indicates that many cooling
processes in this zone have a pronounced effect on the quality of the cast
metal. Two different experimental setups will be designed and constructed to
satisfy the special requirements of the two phases of the experimental study.
During the experiment, spray water and spray (air and water) velocities will be
measured. This will be achieved by the three- dimensional Laser Doppler
Anemometer and Particle Dynamic Analyzer system (3-D LDA/PDA). Thermocouples
with an associated HP data acquisition system will be applied to measure the
temperature distribution. A high resolution photo camera will be used to obtain
information during the droplet impinging process. X-ray diffraction and Auger
experiments will be used in order to determine the composition and the structure
of the surface scale. A suitable method of curve fitting will be used to develop
the correlation equation for determining the heat transfer coefficient for the
metal strand in the secondary cooling zone during the continuous casting
process. Improved understanding of the transfer of heat to the castings may
allow higher quality continuously cost metals to be produced, reducing the cost
and improving the performance of metal sheet stock.