* 9312429
* Investigation of Reactive Intermediates: 1,1 and 1,4        Biradicals and Cation Radicals
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/1993,12/31/1997
* Joshua Goodman, University of Rochester
* Continuing Grant
* Kenneth M. Doxsee
* 12/31/1997
* USD 234,000.00

Several chemical reactions which involve highly reactive, short-lived
intermediates will be examined. The role of these intermediates will be probed
with time-resolved absorption spectroscopy and photoacoustic calorimetry. Two
major goals will be pursued. First, these techniques will be applied to reactive
intermediates which include 1,1- and 1,4-biradicals and their oxidation
products, 1,1- and 1,4- biradical cations. Second, the results will be used to
understand what factors are important in determining how these intermediates are
converted to products. Factors such as substitution, temperature, method of
generation, and solvent will be considered, which will provide insight into how
structure and thermodynamics affect their reactivity. %%% This grant from the
Organic Dynamics Program supports the continuing work of Joshua L. Goodman at
the University of Rochester. Key reactive intermediates in organic chemistry
will be studied that have two formal bonds to carbon (carbenes or
1,1-biradicals) and three formal bonds (1,4- biradicals). In the latter
instance, two such carbon centers are found in an intermediate. These
intermediates will be probed by spectroscopic and calorimetric means on a short
time-scale. The results will provide an understanding as to what factors
determine the products from these intermediates.