* 9312008
* Raman Spectroscopic Characterization of Transition-Metal    Surfaces in Catalytic Reactor Systems
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/1993,02/28/1998
* Christos Takoudis, Purdue Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* RAUL MIRANDA
* 02/28/1998
* USD 320,000.00

9312008 Takoudis This is an exploration of the utility of surface-enhanced Raman
spectroscopy (SERS), in conjunction with mass spectrometry and other methods,
for the in-situ molecular characterization of transition-metal surfaces involved
in gas-phase catalytic reactions. In particular, the program exploits the
ability to prepare ultrathin films of transition metals and other materials by
electrodeposition onto gold and the fact that such films exhibit remarkably
stable and intense SERS activity. This approach allows the measurement of
vibrational spectra for a variety of species on transition-metal surfaces to be
obtained rapidly, with high sensitivity, over a wide frequency range, at
pressures of ambient or higher, and at moderately high temperatures. Coupling
real-time SERS measurements with simultaneous mass-spectrometric assay of the
gas-phase composition enables linking of the molecular state of the surface
under working conditions with reaction rates under either transient or steady-
state conditions. Initial studies are on surfaces of platinum, rhodium,
ruthenium, and palladium; reactions of interest include the oxidation of carbon
monoxide by nitric oxide or by oxygen, the production of dicyandiamide from
ammonia and carbon monoxide, the formation of methane from carbon dioxide and
hydrogen, and the oxidation of alcohols and unsaturated organics. Parallel
studies using SERS and X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy or scanning force
microscopy permit association of vibrational bands with surface structures. This
study is devoted to the elaboration of a new method to study surface-mediated
chemical processes. Although the present effort is devoted to heterogeneous
catalysis, the approach should be applicable to a family of related processes,
including electrochemical transformations, thin-film formation, and corrosion.