* 9312256
* High-Speed Communicatins Networking Using Spectrally EncodedUltrashort Light Pulses: Technology and Systems Studies
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/15/1993,02/28/1997
* Andrew Weiner, Purdue Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Deborah L. Crawford
* 02/28/1997
* USD 317,831.00

9312256 Weiner This project aims at demonstrating the physical feasibility of a
novel, high-speed communications network based on encoding and decoding of
coherent ultrashort light pulses. In this ultrashort pulse code-division
multiple-access (CDMA) environment, a multiplicity of users are connected
together via a common fiber optic communications medium; multiple-access is
achieved by assigning different, minimally interfering code sequences to
different subscriber pairs. A unique attribute of optical CDMA is the use of
optical processing, which overcomes electronics bottlenecks and implements
directly in the optical domain certain network operations, such as addressing,
routing, and security, which traditionally have been performed electronically.
Ultrashort pulse CDMA offers a new paradigm for exploiting the terahertz
potential bandwidth of optical fibers, which is not fully utilized by other
optical networking approaches, and can lead to high-rate local- and
metropolitan-area networks with reduced control requirements, for applications
such as supercomputer interconnects and multimedia networking. This research
aims at experimental tests of an ultrashort pulse CDMA system and of the devices
needed to implement such a system. Encoding and decoding of coherent ultrashort
pulses were previously demonstrated at visible wavelengths by means of a
frequency-domain optical pulse shaping technique; the ability to perform such
encoding and decoding is a key motivation for the proposed CDMA network. To
date, however, no experiments testing ultrashort pulse CDMA at the infrared
wavelengths compatible with fiber optic technology have yet been conducted. The
current proposal aims at assembling a simple ultrashort pulse CDMA testbed,
including fiber transmission at 1.5um, in order to critically test the physical
layer performance of this technique. Research will also be performed on several
ultrashort pulse component technologies, such as ultrafast fiber lasers,
integrated encoding and decodin g devices, fiber dispersions compensation
techniques, and nonlinear optical devices, which will lead to more compact and
practical implementations of ultrashort pulse CDMA networks. ***