* 9312546
* Collaborative Research:  Tests of Terror Management         Hypotheses
* SBE,BCS
* 05/15/1993,10/31/1996
* Jeffrey Greenberg, University of Arizona
* Continuing Grant
* Steven Breckler
* 10/31/1996
* USD 148,272.00

ABSTRACT Terror management theory attempts to explain the psychological
functions of self-esteem and cultural worldviews. According to the theory, the
individual is protected from anxiety by a dual component cultural anxiety
buffer, consisting of (a) a cultural worldview, which includes one's conception
of reality, standards of value, and hope of immortality, and (b) self-esteem, or
the belief that one is living up to the standards of value prescribed by the
cultural worldview. From this perspective, one's beliefs about oneself and the
world in which one lives serve the essential defensive function of protecting
one from anxiety. The equanimity-providing concepts are consensually validated
when others share our beliefs and threatened when others disagree with our
beliefs. Because the cultural anxiety- buffer requires continual consensual
validation for effective protection from anxiety, much social behavior is
directed toward the validation of its two components. Research has shown that:
(a) reminding people of their mortality increases the positivity of their
reactions to people and ideas that support their worldviews and the negativity
of their reactions to people and ideas that threaten their worldviews, (b) high
levels of self-esteem decrease both anxiety in response to threatening stimuli
and defensive distortions that presumably function to reduce one's anxiety, and
(c) threats to the cultural worldview increase susceptibility to anxiety in
response to subtle reminders of one's mortality. The goals of this research are
threefold: (1) to investigate the centrality of death concerns to the processes
posited by the theory, (2) to add to the evidentiary base for the theory by
further assessing both the effects of mortality salience on behavior focused on
bolstering self-esteem and the worldview and the roles of self- esteem and the
worldview in allaying death concerns, and (3) to assess the role of affective
responses to and awareness of threatening material in the production of the
effects posited by the theory. This research will increase our understanding of
why self-esteem is so important and so beneficial for the individual.