* 9312530
* Charge Density Waves and Superconductivity in Metal         Selenides under Stress
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/1993,01/31/1999
* Malcolm Skove, Clemson University
* Continuing Grant
* H. Hollis Wickman
* 01/31/1999
* USD 273,678.00

9312530 Tessema This project will investigate the influence of stress on the
electronic properties of highly anisotropic materials such as superconductors
and materials showing charge denity wave (CDW) behavior. The materials under
investigation include NbSe3, which exhibits CDW properties, and Tl2Mo6Se6, a
highly anisotropic quasi one dimensional superconductor. The effect of stress on
transport and magneto-transport properties of the materials will be
investigated. Of particular interest is the stress-induced metal- to-insulator
transition in the ternary selenides. In addition, the combination of high
magnetic fields and stress are proposed to search for a superconducting
transition in the ternary selenides. These experiments will provide fundamental
information concerning relations between Fermi surface shape and CDW
enhancement. %%% This project will investigate the effects of stress (or
squeezing) on the magnetic and electronic properties of materials such as binary
and ternary selenides that have highly anisotropic electrical properties. The
use of stress to modulate the electrical properties of materials is of
fundamental interest and also could lead to new materials of technological
interest. In addition, experiments are proposed in which very high magnetic
fields will be used in an attempt to induce superconductivity in a material.
These experiments would be of fundamental and technologic importance, since in
most materials, high magnetic fields are incompatible with superconducting
transport properties. ***