* 9312173
* Characterization of Novel Rare Earth Phosphide Compounds    Lattice-matched to InP.
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/15/1993,07/31/1995
* Jennifer Hwu-Sadwick, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Marvin H. White
* 07/31/1995
* USD 60,000.00

9312173 Hwu-Sadwick An investigation of some of the most promising
thermodynamically stable, chemically inert, elemental metal-phosphide binary
compound heteroepitaxial candidates to indium phosphide (InP) is proposed.
Electrical and Optical characterizations at both room temperature and after
elevated temperature annealing will be carried out and theoretical studies will
be conducted to develop the understanding of the material and device properties
of these new heteroepitaxial barriers to InP binary and ternary compound
material. Optical measurements such as photoluminenscence (PL), photoreflectance
(PR), Raman, absorption and transmission and electrical measurements such as
capacitance versus voltage (CV), current versus voltage (I-V), photoresponse,
and resistivity measurements for the Schottky contacts and transmission line and
resistivity measurements for the Ohmic contacts will be performed to determine
the material and device characteristics of these new material systems. The RE-P
heteroepitaxial layers will also be grown on semi-insulating InP substrates so
that Hall effect, magnetoresistance, and resistivity versus temperature
measurements can be performed in an effort to ascertain whether the RE-P
epilayers are metals, semimetals, semiconductors, or insulators. Simulation
models will be developed to perform energy band structure and bandgap
calculations of these new material systems. In addition, novel ternary compounds
such as RExIn1-xP will be theoretically studied. ***