* 9312066
* Nonconvexity in Chemical Process Optimization
* ENG,CBET
* 02/01/1994,07/31/1996
* Angelo Lucia, Clarkson University
* Continuing Grant
* Maria Burka
* 07/31/1996
* USD 97,144.00

Abstract - Lucia - 9312066 Theoretically sound and reasonably reliable and
efficient computer tools for finding local solutions to large chemical process
optimization problems have been the focus of this PI's research. He has been
working on developing a successive quadratic programming (SQP) method for
nonlinearly constrained optimizations problems (an example of such problems are
the design of separation units such as distillation columns). SQP methods are a
very powerful class of methods for solving nonlinear programming problems,
particularly those with strong nonlinear constraints. The single biggest
weakness of SQP methods is the fact that iterative QP solutions can give
directions of nondescent in the nonlinear program (NLP), even for convex
quadratic programs. For this research project the PI plans to: A) Develop the
theoretical framework for linear programming-based, asymmetric trust region
methods that guarantee descent when the quadratic programming solution is not a
descent direction. B) Conduct concomitant numerical studies directed at
developing the necessary rules for adjusting the trust region size to guarantee
both descent and convergence to a local Kuhn-Tucker point. C) Study the
theoretical and computational implications of saddlepoint solutions to nonlinear
programming algorithms. In addition, he plans to look at the general role of
nonconvexity in quadratic programming by: 1) Conducting a numerical
investigation and study of the relationship between nonconvexity and the
inadequacy of current active set methods, the occurrence of constraint
redundancy, the presence of multiplicity, nondescent, the requirement of
starting point feasibility/infeasibility, projected definiteness,
indefiniteness, and projected singularity. 2) Developing, in parallel, reliable
and efficient algorithms that address these and other issues, including (a) new
active set methods capable of handling projected indefiniteness with feasible or
infeasible starting points, (b) preprocessing a lgorithms that can identify all
smallest nontrivial redundant subsets of a given set of constrains, and (c)
incorporating (b) into (a) when singularity is encountered. 3) Establishing
theoretical foundations to both guide and support the algorithmic developments
in 2) above.