* 9312104
* Polar Climates, Clouds, and Seasonality in the Paleogene
* GEO,EAR
* 05/01/1993,04/30/1997
* Lisa Sloan, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Continuing Grant
* John A. Maccini
* 04/30/1997
* USD 75,745.00

Climatic records show that polar regions have demonstrated an amplified
response to global climate change through geologic time. Additionally, polar
regions have significant influence upon global climate processes and conditions.
Clouds also have been cited repeatedly as a critical factor in climatic change.
The early Eocene appears to have been a time of warm polar conditions, but
climate modeling efforts have been unsuccessful in reproducing these conditions.
To date, Eocene seasonality characteristics reconstructed from proxy data have
been unsatisfactorily explained by model scenarios of high atmospheric pCO2 or
by warm high latitude ocean surface temperatures. However, proxy data
interpretations may be explained by the presence of warming clouds at high
latitudes. We have hypothesized that polar stratospheric ice clouds may have
occurred in the early Eocene and produced a dampened seasonal cycle at high
latitudes. Here we propose to test this hypothesis by using an atmospheric
general circulation model to test the sensitivity of high latitude climates to
the presence of such polar clouds. Of paramount interest will be temperature
seasonality of polar climates with and without such clouds. We will examine the
polar cloud mechanism for both poles, thereby testing the cloud influence on a
water-covered pole surrounded by land masses and on a continentally-capped pole
surrounded by ocean.