* 9312084
* US-Russia Workshop on the Fundamental Aspects of Self-      propagating High-temperature Synthesis (SHS) (Honolulu, HI; November 3-6, 1993)
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/1993,02/28/1995
* Gregory Stangle, Alfred University NY State College of Ceramics
* Standard Grant
* Cassandra Turczak
* 02/28/1995
* USD 23,350.00

This grant will support a U.S.-Russia Workshop entitled "Fundamental Aspects of
Self-Propagating High-Temperature Synthesis (SHS)"which will be held in
Honolulu, Hawaii, November 3-6, 1993. Significant advances have been made in
recent years in the research and development of high- performance materials for
technological needs using self- propagating high-temperature synthesis (SHS).
SHS is a unique process based on solid-state combustion using internally
generated chemical energy. Recognized experts in the field in both Russia and
the U.S. will (1) discuss state-of- the-art research results, and (2) identify
specific topic ares upon which collaboration(s) may be built. This workshop will
link the two research efforts that have essentially been conducted in parallel
for more than fifteen years. In addition, this workshop draws its participants
from a variety of U.S. institutions, and includes several younger researchers
(<40 years of age) from both sides. The bulk of the published research on SHS is
from the former Soviet Union ?FSU!, and particularly from Russia. Much of the
remaining work has been conducted in the U.S. Recent political events have
opened the door for a Russia/US collaboration in basic SHS research that would
not have been possible three years ago. This workshop in SHS fulfills the
program objectives of advancing science by enabling leading experts in the U.S.
and Russia to combine complementary talents and pool research resources in areas
of strong mutual interest and competence.