* 9312615
* Design Effective Agricultural Liberalization: An Analysis   of Peasants, Their Markets and Supply Response in           Madagascar
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/1993,05/31/1995
* Michael Carter, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Frances Li
* 05/31/1995
* USD 4,000.00

9312615 Carter Agricultural liberalization in Madagascar has had disappointing
results: agricultural production per capita has declined since reforms began.
This dissertation research project will attempt to explain in microeconomic
terms the fallacies in the logic of liberalization which have produced these
unexpected outcomes. The candidate, Christopher B. Barrett, working under the
supervision of Prof. Michael R. Carter, of the Department of Agricultural
Economics, of the University of Wisconsin - Madison, will collect market-
structure data on ten villages in one of Madagascar's principal agricultural
regions, the Vakinankaratra area of the Central Highlands. The cooperating
Malagasy institution, the Centre d'Etudes Economiques of the Universite
d'Antananarivo, under the direction of Dr. Pepe Andrianomanana, will assist in
identifying informants. These data will be analyzed in conjunction with existing
data already gathered from a variety of sources, including an 825-household
Malagasy farm management study fielded in 1990. The researcher will use the data
to test a microeconomic theory of peasant response to risk in an imperfect
market environment. The conventional, reductionist approach, which identifies
prices as levels and represents markets by price levels alone, predicts
relatively uniform producer response across households. The proposed approach
would add three intuitive insights to the conventional model: that prices are
distributions, that markets are not uniform in the way they transmit price
signals, and that farm-level, non-price constraints bind differentially across
producers and commodities. The potential practical benefit would be a new
perspective that could improve the design of agricultural liberalization
programs. ***