* 9312638
* Proposal to Create an Academic/Research Network for the     State of Kentucky
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/1993,02/29/1996
* Doyle Friskney, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Mark A. Luker
* 02/29/1996
* USD 367,151.00

9312638 Williams This proposal requests funds to create a statewide data network
linking Kentucky's public four year institutions to SURAnet which is the NSF
midlevel network that serves the southeastern United States. This new statewide
network connecting Eastern Kentucky University, Kentucky State University,
Morehead State University, Murray State University, Northern Kentucky
University, Princeton Research, University of Louisville, and Western Kentucky
University to SURAnet through the University of Kentucky is designed to provided
access to 111,737 students and 5,625 faculty. The Kentucky Educational Network
(KECnet), a formal consortium, will provide the governance structure to insure
that all institutions are fairly represented and the necessary steps are taken
to meet all of the connectivity needs of Kentucky's higher education community.
SURAnet will provide operations management and information services and it will
give the universities and colleges a connection to the NSFNET, a high speed (1.5
- 45 million bits per second) National Backbone network. Each of the
universities has provided a description of its organization and a statement of
the benefits of Internet access that it expects including: greater functionality
and network speed to be able to access supercomputers, libraries, and make file
transfers along with being able to implement a more reliable mail system. Both
students and faculty research will benefit from the network which is a unique
opportunity for the schools to explore innovative and educational resources. ***