* 9312363
* Mathematical Sciences: Compactness-Like Properties of Topological Spaces and Groups.
* NONE,NONE
* 07/01/1994,06/30/1997
* Winfried Just, Ohio University
* Standard Grant
* Ralph M. Krause
* 06/30/1997
* USD 137,000.00

9312363 Arhangel'skii The main objective of this project is to understand how
closely countably compact spaces or groups of countable tightness resemble
compact spaces or groups. The project is organized around instances of the
following two general questions: Which results on cardinal functions of compact
spaces generalize to countably compact spaces, and under which conditions do the
latter properties (at least consistently) already imply compactness of the
space? Which results on compact spaces and continuous mappings can be
generalized to countably compact spaces if the space is a topological group (and
the mapping is also a homomorphism)? The concept of compactness of a topological
space lies at the heart of General Topology; it is its most important idea from
the point of view of applications. In order to understand the notion of
compactness fully, one has also to study weakenings of the compactness property.
Perhaps the most important such weakening is a property called countable
compactness. The aim of the project is to determine which theorems about compact
spaces and continuous functions between compact spaces remain valid if the
spaces in question are only assumed to be countably compact instead of compact.
A similar investigation will be done for topological groups, that is, for spaces
which in addition to the topology also carry the structure of an algebraic
group. ***