* 9312614
* Tools and Techniques for Use of the Scheme Programming      Language in Undergraduate Education
* CSE,EIA
* 08/01/1993,07/31/1997
* Christopher Haynes, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* John Cherniavsky
* 07/31/1997
* USD 449,040.00

9312614 Haynes This award is for the development of software and curricular
materials to support the use of a dialect of the Scheme programming language in
undergraduate computer science courses. The simplicity and power of Scheme that
account for its widespread use in computer science research also explain its
increasing use in education. This project, complementary to the one at Oberlin
College, stresses the development of the programming environment and tools. The
programming environment will be portable to a wide range of implementations and
window systems and will support graphical user interface development, hypertext
authoring and delivery, object- oriented programming, and static type analysis,
among other modes of programming and courseware development. Indiana University
will investigate the use of Scheme in a variety of courses, including but not
limited to introductory programming, programming languages, mathematical
methods, data structures, and artificial intelligence. Teaching materials to be
developed include computer assisted instruction courseware, outlines and visual
aids for a variety of curricular options, laboratory manuals, and exercise sets
including software support and solutions. Curricular knowledge, materials, and
software will be disseminated through summer workshops, Internet, professional
meetings, and publications. Evaluation instruments will assess the effectiveness
of Scheme as a first programming language and the utility of the curricular
materials developed by this project. ***