* 9312709
* U.S.-Korea Cooperative Research on Physical and Synthetic   Studies of Organometallic Electrophiles
* O/D,OISE
* 03/15/1994,02/28/1999
* Dwight Sweigart, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* Gerald Edwards
* 02/28/1999
* USD 38,925.00

9312709 Sweigart This award provides funds to permit Dr. Dwight A. Sweigart,
Department of Chemistry, Brown University, to pursue with Dr. Young K. Chung,
Department of Chemistry, Seoul National University, Korea, for 24 months, a
program of cooperative research involving physical and synthetic studies of
organometallic electrophiles. The project will include both organometallic
synthesis and electrochemistry. The synthetic studies will involve the use of
manganese to (1) convert arenes to difunctionalized optically pure
cyclohexadienes and (2) produce new functionalized derivatives of indoles,
steroids, and natural products related to vitamins D and K. The electrochemical
part of the research is designed to study the reactivity of 17- and 19-electron
organometallic radicals with respect to ligand substitution and other
transformations. The proposed research, if successful, will be of significant
interest to a range of chemists, including those concerned with organic
synthesis in the natural products and drug fields. The PI and his Korean
collaborator are highly respected chemists in the fields of this research. Their
expertise is complementary. Dr. Chung's group is expert in a wide range of
synthetic procedures and will be responsible for perhaps two thirds of the
synthetic work. The PI's group will do perhaps one third of the synthetic work
and most of the electrochemical and computer work. The collaborators will be
assisted by three U.S. graduate students supported by this grant and several
Korean graduate students. This project is relevant to the objectives of the
U.S.- Korea Cooperative Science Program which seeks to increase the level of
cooperation between U.S. and Korean scientists and engineers through the
exchange of scientific information, ideas, skills, and techniques and through
collaboration on problems of mutual benefit. Korean participation in the project
is supported by the Korea Science and Engineering Foundation (KOSEF). This
project adds an international cooperative dimension to the PI's research under
NSF Grant No. CHE-8821588. ***