* 9312272
* Workshop:  Ecosystem Function and Biodiversity on Coral     Reefs; Key West, FL; November 1-7, 1993
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/1993,07/31/1994
* John Ogden, University of South Florida
* Standard Grant
* Richard F. Dame
* 07/31/1994
* USD 25,000.00

9312272 Ogden This proposal seeks support for an international group 30- 35
scientists to attend a workshop in Moorea, French Polynesia, 6-11 September
1993, which will address the topic of ecosystem function and biological
diversity (biodiversity) as it relates to coral reefs. This is one of a series
of workshops which SCOPE (UNESCO's Scientific Committee on the Protection of the
Environment) has proposed for this topic in relation to 12 biotic regions:
tundra, ocean upwelling systems, estuaries, Mediterranean, islands, boreal
forest, coral reefs, savanna, tropical forests, freshwater systems, temperate
forests, and arid zones. Following the workshops, there will be an overall
synthesis meeting in Asilomar, California, in 1944, leading to an unprecedented
knowledge base and a substantial publication in support of future strategies for
research and conservation of biodiversity. %%% Specific questions to be
addressed in the workshop include: Do losses of biodiversity compromise the
capacity of coral reefs to maintain their functional and structural integrity?
What are the implications of biodiversity for the sustainable use of reef
resources, both for reef-based recreation, eco-tourism and other commercial
activity, and for subsistence farming and harvesting (particularly in poor and
developing countries)? Over what spatial and temporal scales are alterations in
biodiversity on coral reefs manifest as alterations in biogeochemical processes,
and do they contribute significantly to changes in ocean- atmosphere fluxes? ***