* 9312052
* The Timing of Drought: Effects on Water Relations of        Himalayan Tree Species, Award in U.S. and Indian            Currencies
* O/D,OISE
* 02/15/1994,06/30/1999
* Donald Zobel, Oregon State University
* Continuing grant
* Marjorie Lueck
* 06/30/1999
* USD 51,318.00

9312052 Zobel Description: This project supports travel and field expenses for
Dr. Donald Zobel of Oregon State University, Corvallis, OR and Dr. S. P. Singh
of Kumaun University, Nainital, India, to collaborate in a project to study the
moisture stress in Himalayan tree species under various conditions. The study
has three goals: to determine the degree to which forest types in Kumaun, in the
Indian central Himalaya are differentiated by their degree and seasonal pattern
of moisture stress; to determine mechanism of adaptation to drought by forest
trees in Kumaun forests, and; to improve general understanding of the place of
water relations in physiological ecology of forest trees, by providing data from
forests in a climate seldom studied, and through exchange of information among
scientists working in different climates. Measurements will be made of the
degree of morning moisture stress across a range of forest types from 1000-2200
m elevation, and of the components of water potential and the degree of stomatal
opening, during leaf development before the wet season begins, for mature leaves
during the wet season, and for mature leaves during the dry season in fall and
winter. Scope: This project complements research being made in other parts in
the world on different climates, and provides information, not available, for
temperate areas with a wet- summer, dry winter climate, and is necessary to
eliminate the regional bias in models of adaptation to water availability. The
work involves close collaboration, and division of work by the U.S. and the
Indian scientists. It meets the objectives of this collaboration. ***