* 9312748
* Genetic Optimization of Cellular Encodings for Neural       Networks
* CSE,IIS
* 04/01/1994,09/30/1997
* L. Darrell Whitley, Colorado State University
* Continuing Grant
* Larry H. Reeker
* 09/30/1997
* USD 187,600.00

9312748 Whitley A grammar tree encodes a cellular developmental process that can
develop whole families of Boolean neural networks. The development process
resembles biological cell division. A single cell executes a program specified
by a grammar tree and undergoes cell division to develop a complete neural
network capable of computing specific target functions. A genetic algorithm is
used to find a grammar tree that yields both architecture and weights specifying
a particular neural network for solving specific Boolean functions, such as
parity and symmetry problems. Because cellular encodings include recursive
descriptions, the resulting "genetic code" is much smaller than the neural
networks that are developed from these codes. Preliminary research has also
shown the effectiveness of very simple Hebbian learning for speeding up the
evolution of grammar trees. The proposed research will continue to develop
grammar trees that specify neural networks for a wider variety of applications
as well as to develop more sophisticated learning models to use in combination
with cellular development. The specification of nonBoolean networks must be
investigated so as generalized the types of networks that can be generated by
cellular development. Genetic algorithms are being used to evolve the grammar
tree for the cellular development process; as a result, learning algorithms that
have minimal computational requirements will be investigated