* 9312695
* JGOFS: Bacterial Cycling Of Dissolved And Particulate       Organic Carbon In Oligotrophic And Eutrophic Production     Regimes Of The Arabian Sea
* GEO,OCE
* 07/01/1994,06/30/1997
* Farooq Azam, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Continuing Grant
* Phillip R. Taylor
* 06/30/1997
* USD 370,000.00

9312695 Azam This is a joint research proposal (F. Azam and H. Ducklow, co-PIs)
to perform quantitative studies on the significance of bacteria in mediating and
regulating biogeochemical fluxes of carbon and nitrogen in the Arabian Sea, as a
component of the US JGOFS Arabian Sea Process Study. We propose a program of
core measurements to quantify carbon and nitrogen pools and fluxes as well as
mechanistic studies to understand the response of the bacteria-mediated
processes to dramatic changes in many primary production that occur regularly
due to monsoonal reversals in the Arabian Sea. The JGOFS core measurements will
include bacterial abundance and biomass, bacterial production (by both 3H
thymidine and 3H leucine incorporation methods), DOC, POC and PN. Our research
is design, further, to address two key questions concerning microbial
heterotrophic processes identified by US JGOFS: 1) How do the community
structures which occur during the oligotrophic vs eutrophic periods
differentially impact carbon storage and export fluxes? 2) Does the
decomposition of sinking particles slow down in the suboxic zone and result in
enhanced vertical flux though this layer? We hypothesize that sequential
occurrence of highly eutrophic and oligotrophic productivity regimes creates a
uniquely robust microbial loop during the oligotrophic period at the expense of
slow-to-degrade DOM which accumulates during the eutrophic period. We predict
that the strong dominance of the microbial loop renders the oligotrophic period
net- heterotrphic and this has implications for spatial and temporal patterns of
carbon oxidation and exchange. The 'stored' DOC may also support high bacterial
carbon demand (higher than would be supported by particle flux) below the mixed
layer following shoaling of the pycnocline. A second hyothesis we wish to test
is that sinking particles in the surface waters are rapidly solubilized by
hydrolytic ectoenzymes of colonizing bacteria but t he enzymatic solubilization
is greatly reduced in the suboxic layer resulting in much slower depth-
dissipation of POC.