* 9312648
* CISE Educational Infrastructrue: Integrating Computer       Science Research Results Into an Interdisciplinary          Undergraduate Curriculum
* CSE,CNS
* 02/15/1994,06/30/2000
* Barbara Smith, Evergreen State College
* Standard Grant
* Anita La Salle
* 06/30/2000
* USD 364,016.00

9312648 Cushing Under this project, the Evergreen State College, Oregon Graduate
Institute of Science & Technology, and the Washington Center for Improving the
Quality of Undergraduate Education will integrate into undergraduate curricula
at Evergreen State recent research results in object-oriented databases,
scientific data management and visualization, higher order logics, and neural
networks. These curricular innovations specifically target non- Ph.D. granting
institutions. Two interdisciplinary Evergreen programs will serve as prototypes:
(1) the software engineering of scientific applications, and (2) advanced
studies in theoretical computer science, mathematics and cognitive science.
Expected outcomes of the work are three-fold: (1) Course materials such as
syllabi, workshops, and case studies; (2) A model for non-Ph.D. granting
institutions for initiating programs of excellence in advanced computer science;
and (3) A model for disseminating computer science curricular innovation.
Incorporated in the project are a number of activities designed to increase the
participation of women and minorities, including special efforts with Native
Americans. Dissemination is effected through workshops, designed in conjunction
with the Washington Center and conducted jointly by OGI researchers and
Evergreen faculty. Workshops addressing course materials will be offered first
on a regional basis, using proven methods for curricular innovation. Later,
national workshops will address the curricular innovations developed as well as
the development, assessment and regional dissemination of those innovations. ***