* 9312150
* Democratic Values and the National Forum on Science and     Technology Goals
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/1993,01/31/1995
* Gary Chapman, Computer Professionals for Social Responsibility
* Standard Grant
* Rachelle D. Hollander
* 01/31/1995
* USD 24,998.00

9312150 Chapman Supplemented by complementary work funded by Rockefeller Family
Associates, this planning project will begin to develop a process whereby a wide
variety of public organizations can participate in a democratic dialogue about
the aims of publicly funded scientific and engineering research and development
and the establishment of a new National Forum on Science and Technology Goals.
The idea for a Forum grew out of a recent proposal from an expert panel under
the auspices of the Carnegie Commission on Science, Technology, and Government.
The National Academy of Sciences is now pursuing this idea. This project will
contribute to these efforts, by focusing on the question of how to optimize
democratic values such as diversity, representation, equity, access, and
reasoned dissent within an institution such as the National Forum. This project
involves representatives from a number of public organizations that are
concerned about participation in science and technology policy making, in
planning for broad-based meetings and related efforts to initiate that dialogue.
In this planning period, the sponsoring organization and representatives from
several others will assemble a diverse group of people interested in the
National Forum. These people will meet in fall, 1993, to plan a larger, follow-
on meeting and a process through which diverse constitutencies can be heard on
the character, charter, and configuration of the National Forum. The planning
meeting will identify persons and organizations to invite to the larger meeting
and develop the content and structure for it. The planning group will consider
and select case studies of successful public participation in deliberations
about and resolution of science and technology issues to use at the larger
meeting. The final plan will be presented in a report to the Ethics and Values
Studies program of the National Science Foundation, and in proposals to public
and private funding sources. ***