* 9312811
* U.S.-Switzerland Cooperative Research:  Stochastic          Simulation of Transport Phenomena
* O/D,OISE
* 05/15/1994,04/30/1999
* Juan De Pablo, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Mark A. Suskin
* 04/30/1999
* USD 14,850.00

9312811 DePablo This award supports Dr. Juan DePablo and two graduate students
of the University of Wisconsin to collaborate in theoretical chemical
engineering research with Professor Hans C. Oettinger of the Polymer Institute
of the Swiss Federal Institute of Technology in Zurich. Professor Oettinger is a
world-renown authority in the mathematical aspects of stochastic methods, and
his institution has some of the world's fastest supercomputers. The Department
of Chemical Engineering at the University of Wisconsin is one of the world's
foremost centers for the development and application of the theory of transport
phenomena to the solution of chemical engineering problems. These complementary
strengths are well suited to the goal of their collaboration, which is to
develop stochastic methods to the point where they become a standard tool for
the solution of problems in transport phenomena. They will do this by
investigating the mathematical foundations of such methods and by applying these
to a wide variety of engineering applications, beginning with the rheological
behavior of polymer melts after cessation of different types of flows. They will
compare their theoretical work with experimental data generated by colleagues of
Professor Oettinger at ETH-Zurich. Stochastic methods are playing an
increasingly important role in the solution of complex, multidimensional
problems. They were first developed and are now widely used in physics and
mathematics, but this sophisticated mathematical approach has not been fully
exploited in chemical engineering. Stochastic methods are remarkably simple
compared to some other methods, and they appear to work in some complex problems
resistant to traditional analytical treatment. On the other hand, they are not
always superior to numerical methods. Substantial work, such as that proposed
here, is necessary to explore the advantages and practical applications in
chemical engineering. ***