* 9312584
* Survey of Academic S&amp;E Research and Development Expendituresand Management of the NSF Academic Survey Database for      FY93-FY95
* SBE,NCSE
* 04/29/1993,10/31/1996
* George Nozicka, MACRO INTERNATIONAL
* Contract
* John Jankowski
* 10/31/1996
* USD 948,590.00

The objectives of this procurement are two-fold. First, the contractor shall
perform all functions related to the conduct and data processing of the annual
"Survey of Scientific and Engineering R&amp;D Expenditures at Universities and
Colleges." The contractor shall provide support for all activities related to
survey and sample design, survey conduct, data tabulation, and production of
diskettes and data tapes for general dissemination. The contractor shall also
provide technical support for analytical, descriptive, and comparative purposes
for data maintained in the system. Second, the contractor shall provide
maintenance and support of the academic Integrated Data Base (IDB). The IDB
includes the survey mentioned above as well as two additional academic surveys
conducted under separate contracts within the Division of Science Resources
Studies. Under the IDB task, the contractor will produce summaries of
institutional data, as well as perform systematic edit checks across surveys to
assess the relationship of financial and personnel resources and the validity of
the data as reported. As part of its statutory charge to provide a central
clearinghouse for the collection, interpretation, and analysis of data on the
current and projected availability of scientific and technical resources in the
United States, NSF collects and disseminates statistical data on detailed
characteristics of science and engineering resources in colleges and
universities. The annual survey that is the subject of this study as well as
other academic surveys in the IDB provide statistical data and analytical
reports for dissemination to users including internal NSF management and the
National Science Board, other science and technology policy makers,
institutional researchers, and private organizations interested in higher
education.