* 9312875
* In-situ Phosphatizing Coatings
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/1993,01/31/1998
* Chhiu-Tsu Lin, Northern Illinois University
* Continuing Grant
* RAUL MIRANDA
* 01/31/1998
* USD 330,000.00

Lin Abstract The goal of this effort is to develop an environmentally and
economically sound single-step phosphate/paint system. Relationships between
performance and chemical formulation are examined for systems that incorporate
the phosphatizing compounds into the coating formulation. Issues addressed in
this study include system stability as related to resin/crosslinker
polymerization and pigment dispersion; mechanisms and behavior of thermal curing
and the influence of the diffusivity of the phosphatizing agents and their
reaction with the metal surface; molecular level behavior of the phosphate as
related to polymer adhesion and corrosion inhibition; optimal formulation ranges
for components of paints; and verification of protection performance. Optical,
analytical, surface-characterization, and electrochemical techniques are used to
examine system stability and compatibility, the composition, structures,
adhesion, and nature of bonding at the coating interface, and the corrosion-
inhibition and barrier effects of the finished coatings. A consortium of
industrial collaborators including Finishes Unlimited, Cargill, Pre-Finish
Metals, and G.J. Nikolas &amp; Co. has been formed to perform the testing and
verification of coatings developed at Northern Illinois. The combination of the
phosphate, primer, and topcoat into a single-step process offers significant
reductions in time, energy, materials, and labor. More importantly, the unicoat
phosphate/paint system reduces environmental contamination by elimination of
primer and pretreatment steps, eliminating wastes containing hexavalent
chromium, and drastically reducing volatile organic compounds (VOCs) lost in
curing and drying. m &lt; ÕLL 7 vF d ÕAL F7 L i ÕAL AN | ÕAC 7 W ÕICKS 7 X . ÕOH
7 E ; ÕIC F7 { ÕAVIS 7 T ÕCH T E ÕAR ANA g{ Lin Abstract The goal of this effort
is to develop an environmentally and economically sound single-step
phosphate/paint sys 9 9 ! ! ! ! F 9 9 ( Times New Roman Symbol &amp; Arial h h h
, " h p p 1 abstract Mary Keemer Mary Keemer