* 9312067
* The Evolutionary Role of Epistasis for Fitness in           Chamacrista Fasciculata
* BIO,DEB
* 10/15/1993,08/31/1998
* Charles Fenster, University of Maryland, College Park
* Continuing Grant
* Allen Moore
* 08/31/1998
* USD 242,749.00

9312067 Fenster The central theme of the proposed research concerns determining
the type of gene action which is responsible for genetic differences among
populations of the common native legume, Partridge Pea. Genes may act
independently of one another so that genetic divergence may simply reflect the
accumulated effects of artificial or natural selection acting on single genes.
However, it is just as likely that important differences among organisms may
reflect selection on combinations of genes. Selection acting on combination of
genes means that gene interaction or epistasis is important. The type of gene
action can be determined by following the survivorship and reproduction of
progeny derived from crosses between parents that are separated from one another
by increasing distance.%%% Results from this project using Partridge Pea as a
model system may have important implications for a number of different
disciplines including evolution, crop and animal breeding, and conservation
biology. If organisms are adapted to their environment because of interactions
among genes, then our models of evolution will need to be more complex. In
addition where gene interactions occur different breeding strategies than those
presently employed may have greater efficacy for crop and animal improvement.
Strategies for maintaining or preserving genetic diversity in endangered species
will also be influenced by whether gene interaction determines traits associated
with survivorship, reproduction, or yield.***