* 9312468
* RUI:  Molecular Dynamics Studies of Ion-Surface and         Cluster-Surface Collisions
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/1993,01/31/1998
* Mark Shapiro, CSU Fullerton Auxiliary Services Corporation
* Standard Grant
* G. Bruce Taggart
* 01/31/1998
* USD 85,800.00

9312468 Shapiro This theoretical and computational research is funded under the
Research at Undergraduate Institutions and Research Enhancements for
Undergraduates programs. Multiple-interaction molecular dynamics simulation
techniques and computer visualization techniques will be used to study: (1)
electronic excitation and inelastic energy loss effects in ion-surface
collisions; (2) fragmentation properties of cluster-surface and cluster-cluster
collisions and their sensitivity to interatomic potentials; (3) material
modification and thin-film deposition effects caused by cluster impacts with
energies in the electron-Volt to kiloelectron- Volt per atom range; (4) isotopic
sputtering effects from liquid alloy targets; (5) dimer ejection in sputtering
from alloy targets; (6) collisional de-excitation effects following energetic
ion bombardment of alkali-halide surfaces; and, (7) differences in surface
topography effects initiated by single-ion and cluster-ion bombardment. This
work will be carried out at California State University at Fullerton in
collaboration with the Basic and Applied Science Group at Caltech and the
Surface Physics Group at the National Institute of Standards and Technology. The
research will extend the fundamental understanding of ion-surface and cluster-
surface collision phenomena, guide future experiemntal work and involve
promising young undergraduate students in the process. %%% ***