* 9312139
* Research Planning Grant:  Global Partners?  Environmental   Organizations in India and the U.S
* SBE,SES
* 06/01/1994,08/31/1995
* Priscilla Weeks, University of Houston - Clear Lake
* Standard Grant
* Linda Layne
* 08/31/1995
* USD 17,710.00

9312139 Weeks This research planning grant will allow the investigator to refine
the theory and methods with which to examine the effect political and economic
inequalities in the world system have on the construction of a shared
understanding of environmental problems. The study itself will use ethnographic
interviews, analysis of written materials, and basic organizational analysis to
make two sets of comparisons: between World Wildlife Fund India and World
Wildlife Fund U.S.; and World Wildlife Fund India and Bhopal Gas Affected
Working Women's Union. The first pairing allows comparison of the nature of
transnationally shared analytical and normative socio-scientific systems; the
second, study of the nature of national affiliation on construction of
environmentalism to determine whether there are analytic categories unique to
Indian environmentalism. The goals of this fifteen month planning grant are: 1)
develop the interview schedule; 2) refine the theoretical framework; 3) refine
methods to analyze textual and interview materials; and 4) to write a full
research proposal. Planning activities included in this request are: the
collection of background materials on organizations to be studied; travel to
India to work with the Indian collaborator to plan field work in India;
identifying potential interviewees; consulation with a political scientist and a
linguist to refine the theoretical framework and methodology. The reserach
should provide new insights on the conditions under which a cross-culturally
shared understanding of environmentalism arises, and alternately, the conditions
under which it is thwarted. ***