* 9312521
* Dissertation Research:  The Evolution of Complex Social     Systems in the Quibor Valley, Northwestern Venezuela
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/1993,06/30/1996
* Robert Drennan, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 06/30/1996
* USD 10,000.00

9312521 Drennan Under the direction of Dr. Robert Drennan, Ms. Lilliam Arvello
will collect data for her doctoral dissertation. Coordinating her work with that
of a larger project she will conduct archaeological research in the Quibor
Valley of northwestern Venezuela. This area is of interest because of both the
rich prehistoric remains it contains and the archaeological attention which, in
the past, has been directed to it. Ms. Arvello will determine the exploitable
resources in the region and how these varied through time and space, and also
examine how human settlement patterns changed in size and structure over time.
She will survey a total of 30,000 ha. of the valley using standard techniques.
On the basis of aerial photographs and maps, the area will be divided into
survey units, each of which will be 100% covered by pedestrian survey. All
surface scatters and sites identified will be plotted. Surface collections will
be made at each site and systematic intensive surface collection and test pit
excavations will be done in selected locations. On this basis it will be
possible to determine spatial changes in settlement pattern over time and to
examine the degree of both inter and intra site variability in different
periods. Although Northeastern South America has received less archaeological
attention than the Mayan region to the North or the Incan culture of the Andes,
this area is important because the same basic processes which led from simple to
complex societies took place here as well. Archaeological evidence indicates a
progression from small unstratified social groupings to larger and more
stratified chiefdom level societies. The Quibor Valley has rich agricultural
lands and archaeological sites in this region preserve paleobotanical
information. Researchers have postulated that the introduction of maize and the
supposed increase in population density which this allowed is responsible for
the emergence of complex societies in this area. However th e data are scanty
and Ms. Arvelo's work should provide a more convincing test of this hypothesis.
This research is important for several reasons. It will provide data of interest
to many archaeologists. It will increase our understanding of how complex
societies developed and will contribute to the training of a promising young
scientist. ***