* 9312241
* Travel for U.S. Participants to 2nd International           Colloquim on Modern Quantam Field Theory, TIFR, Bombay, Jan.5-11, 1994, Award in Indian and U.S. Currency
* O/D,OISE
* 12/01/1993,11/30/1994
* Cumrun Vafa, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Osman Shinaishin
* 11/30/1994
* USD 24,750.00

9312241 Vafa Description: This is a group travel proposal for nine U.S.
physicists to attend the Second International Colloquium on Modern Quantum Field
Theory, at the Tata Institute of Fundamental Research, Bombay, India, January 5-
11, 1994. This is a unique gathering at India's premier institution where some
of the world's most eminent physicists will be discussing topical areas in
modern theoretical physics. Cumrun Vafa, Lyman Laboratory, Harvard University,
and Sumit Das, Tata Institute of Fundamental Research, Bombay are the principal
organizers. Subjects to be covered at the meeting include String Theory, Quantum
Gravity, Lattice Field Theories, Stochastic Processes, Field Theoretic Aspects
of Condensed Matter Physics and Mathematics and Quantun Field Theory. In each of
these areas, a growing number of Indian physicists are making important
contributions in a sustained manner. Scope: There is a high level of interaction
between Indian physicists and their U.S. colleagues, many of which have resulted
in fruitful exchanges of ideas and collaborations, and are likely to continue to
foster significant developments in the future. The colloquium will serve the
dual purpose of getting together leading experts in a given area and fostering
interaction across areas. The meeting will benefit students and researchers from
India and neighboring countries and is likely to foster significant
collaborations between U.S. and Indian scientists. ***