* 9312448
* RUI:  Stability of Spacetimes with Mild                     Singularities or Cauchy Horizons
* MPS,PHY
* 03/15/1994,08/31/1996
* Deborah Konkowski, United States Naval Academy
* Continuing Grant
* Richard Isaacson
* 08/31/1996
* USD 28,860.00

Professor Konkowski plans to continue her mathematical study of mild
singularities and Cauchy horizons in spacetime models. Mild singularities
include quasiregular and nonscalar curvature singularities. In the former,
particle paths may end with no accompanying physical catastrophes, while in the
latter, some particles moving near the singularity will feel infinite tidal
forces, but not all do. In most cases the spacetime models examined satisfy
Einstein's equations. It is important to study relativistic spacetimes with mild
singularities, together with the behavior of particles and fields in these
spacetimes, in order to better understand the nature of mild singularities. The
nature of singularities which occur in the classical solutions of Einstein's
equations is largely an unexplored area. The singularity theorems which predict
the occurrence of singularities in broad classes of spacetimes give little clue
to their nature. In order to better understand them, it is important not only to
study their mathematical structure but to study the behavior of physical
processes in singular spacetimes. Such a study will lead to a fuller
understanding of the relevance of spacetimes with different types of
singularities both within the mathematical structure of Einstein's equation and
within the physical universe.