* 9312543
* Development of a Beamline for Condensed Matter Physics and  Materials Research at the Advanced Photon Source
* MPS,DMR
* 09/15/1993,02/29/2000
* Robert Birgeneau, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* None
* 02/29/2000
* USD 1,575,000.00

9312543 Mochrie The United States is building a "third generation" synchrotron
x- ray source with a total project cost in excess of $1 billion: The Advanced
Photon Source (APS) at Argonne National Laboratory. At the APS, one may expect
an improvement in the source brilliance by three-to-four orders of magnitude. As
a result, it will become possible to pursue experiments using techniques
completely novel to the x-ray regime such as intensity fluctuation spectroscopy.
In addition, current techniques, such as surface x- ray scattering, time-
resolved scattering, and x-ray magnetic scattering will be further refined to
yield insight that is beyond the scope of current sources. It is essential that
high quality, NSF supported, university groups play a leadership role in the
research carried out at the APS most especially because of the role that the
facility can play in graduate education. This project will develop a beamline at
the APS to carry out forefront research in condensed matter physics and
materials science. The scientific program involves: (a) intensity correlation
fluctuation using coherent x-rays; (b) scattering studies of surface phase
transformations, structure, kinetics and growth; and (c) x-ray magnetic
scattering studies of novel magnetic systems, including disordered magnetic
systems. This beamline will be shared by scientists from Massachusetts Institute
of Technology, IBM, and McGill University, and will be available to other
scientists, as well. ***