* 9312606
* Low Energy Implications of Strong Electronic Correlations
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/1993,10/31/1998
* Steven Kivelson, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing Grant
* G. Bruce Taggart
* 10/31/1998
* USD 426,000.00

9312606 Kivelson This proposal concerns the low energy implications of strong
electronic correlations. The PI proposes to continue studying: 1) The collective
properties of the two-dimensional electron gas in a strong magnetic field,
especially the nature of the insulating state (which the PI previously
identified as a "Hall Insulator"), and the experiments which have sought to
measure the charge of the quasi particles in the fractional quantum Hall effect.
2) The implications of frustrated phase separation for the properties of the
cuprate superconductors. 3) The effects of intramolecular correlation effects in
molecular solids with particular reference to the alkali-doped fullerenes. 4)
The properties of very dirty superconductors especially in two dimensions. %%%
This proposal involves the theoretical investigation of, and the new physics
involved in, condensed matter systems in which the electrons interact with one
another in non-standard ways - that is in ways in which the usual averaged-
electron methods break down. The PI proposes to examine such systems - so called
"strongly correlated systems" - as follows: a) an electron gas in two dimensions
in strong magnetic fields, b) the tendency of certain magnetic materials
(antiferromagnets) to phase separate c) possible intramolecular mechanisms for
superconductivity in the newly-found alkali-metal doped fullerenes and d) the
properties of dirty or disordered superconductors. This type of work is at the
forefront of issues in contemporary condensed matter theory. ***