* 9312528
* Special Migration Data Tabulations From the 1990 Census
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/1993,01/31/1994
* Curtis Roseman, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 01/31/1994
* USD 3,620.00

9312528 Roseman A persistent problem in carrying out research on spatial aspects
of internal migration has been the lack of data at a sufficiently disaggregated
spatial scale in order for meaningful analyses to be conducted. The increasingly
differentiated nature of subpopulations means that age-specific or sex-specific
migration streams, for example, are evident only at very fine scales of spatial
resolution. In addition, theoretical explanations for migration behavior are
based on characteristics of migrants. Existing migration data, whether survey
based or archival, are either too geographically coarse or lacking in sufficient
detail on migrant characteristics to allow for comprehensive analysis and
testing of migration theory. The U.S. Census Bureau will prepare a special
tabulation of the 1990 Census of Population which contains county-to-county
internal migration counts broken down by migrant characteristics for the entire
United States. This award permits a consortium of social scientists, including
geographers, to purchase the data at a special price at this time so as to make
this data set available to the largest possible number of scholars doing
research on internal migration in the United States. For spatial analysis of
migration these data are especially valuable. The data will be distributed free
of charge to interested researchers by the Population Studies Center at the
University of Michigan, and its availability on a wide basis will facilitate
research on general migration theory, spatial differences in migration behavior,
analyses of population redistribution, and on detailed aspects of the migration
behavior of particular subgroups within the population. The timely compilation
and distribution of this important data set on population migration at the
county level will permit researchers to examine and test a number of theories
related to population movement which heretofore had not been facilitated by
existing data. The futur e availability of these data to a large number of
individual researchers will accelerate research on internal migration, and it
will provide them with the ability to carry out research using the 1990 Census
much earlier than anticipated. Migration research will be greatly enhanced as a
result. ***