* 9312630
* Producer Services Linkages Among New York State             Manufacturers:  An Assessment of Technological and          Commercial Impact
* SBE,BCS
* 05/01/1994,04/30/1996
* Alan MacPherson, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* Daniel B. Hodge
* 04/30/1996
* USD 90,585.00

9312630 MACPHERSON The purpose of this project is to assess the role of
specialized producer services in the innovation and market performance of
industrial firms using New York state as a case study. While considerable
research has been directed at producer services and towards manufacturing, a
significant gap exists in our knowledge of how manufacturers develop connections
with and use producer services. The expectation is that those firms which are
better able to tap into appropriate producer services will perform better and be
more innovative. This project tests several hypotheses regarding factors that
influence the ability of manufacturing firms to connect with and benefit from
producer services. A major hypothesis is that those industrial firms which are
more peripherally located are less likely to have well developed relationships
with producer service firms and to perform at lower levels. Other factors
expected to influence the intensity of producer service-manufacturing firm
interaction include whether or not firms are part of a larger organization, the
firm's position in the product life cycle, and size of firm. A large mail survey
will be conducted for firms in upstate and downstate New York, followed by in-
depth interviews with a small number of representative firms. This research will
contribute important new insights into the relationship between manufacturing
firm productivity, efficiency, and competitiveness and the factors affecting the
degree and type of producer service interactions. As such, the project will make
substantial contributions to theories related to industrial and producer service
location, organization, and performance as well as to issues of intense interest
to regional and economic development policy.