* 9313739
* Support of US/Japan Workshop on High Temperature            Superconductivity; Houston, TX; December 7-8, 1993
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/1993,07/31/1994
* David Shaw, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* David Nelson
* 07/31/1994
* USD 12,000.00

9313739 Shaw The purpose of US-Japan Workshop on High Tc Superconductivity are
to bring together specialists from both countries to exchange information on
recent advances, and to identify the problem areas that are particularly suited
for international cooperative programs. The 6th US-Japan Workshop will be held
in Houston, Texas, hosted by the Texas Center on Superconductivity at the
University of Houston on December 7-8, 1993. The Workshop is organized to
address research problems in four technical areas, they are: wire and coil
development; phase equilibrium and processing issues for bulk materials; thin
films and new materials; and vortex dynamics and pinning. Participants are
invited to the Workshop, and they are selected from university, industry, and
national laboratories. %%% This project is for the 6th US-Japan Workshop to be
held in Houston, Texas, and hosted by the Texas Center on Superconductivity at
the University of Houston on December 7-8, 1993. The Workshop is organized to
address research problems in four technical areas. they are: wire and coil
development; phase equilibrium and processing issues for bulk materials; thin
films and new materials; and vortex dynamics and pinning. Participants are
invited to the Workshop, and they are selected from university, industry, and
national laboratories. The objectives of US-Japan Workshop on High Tc
Superconductivity are to bring together specialists from both countries to
exchange information on recent advances, and to identify the problem areas that
are particularly suited for international cooperative programs. ***