* 9313703
* Exploratory Research:  Towards a Social Geography of the    Pyrenees Magdalenian
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/1993,07/31/1994
* Margaret Conkey, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Jonathan S. Friedlaender
* 07/31/1994
* USD 7,267.00

9313703 Conkey With National Science Foundation support, Dr. Margaret Conkey and
her collaborators will conduct a survey to locate Magdalenian archaeological
sites in the Pyrenee Mountains of the Ariege region of France. The group has
selected a 45 km. stretch between 600 and 900 meters above sea level and will
walk this region in a systematic manner to look both for potential caves and
rock shelters which may contain archaeological remains and also to examine
fields and other open areas where materials may be exposed on the surface. They
will make collect exposed material and, if permission can be obtained, excavate
small test trenches to determine if in situ deposits are present. The project
will be conducted in collaboration with a French geomorphologist with the goal
of setting the cultural component into a broader environmental context. Samples
for palynological (pollen) and sedimentological analysis will be collected. On
this basis one can determine when these upland areas first became ice-free at
the end of the Pleistocene (Ice Age) and how vegetation communities developed.
The term "Magdalenian" refers to a culture which flourished in Western Europe at
the end of the Pleistocene ca 14,000 years ago. The level of Magdalenian
achievement is marked by painted caves such as Lascaux and Altimera, by highly
developed bone industry and by a intensive subsistence specializations on minor
highly seasonal resources such as migrating salmon. It is likely that the stage
was set during this period of the domestication of plants and animals. The
research proposed by Dr. Conkey is important because it examines the level of
Magdalenian technical competence. While several caves with paintings are known
from the Pyrenees region, it is unclear whether Magdalenian peoples had the
ability to occupy this difficult mountainous terrain on a long term basis. Very
little is known about the archaeology of the region and this project will
provide the groundwork for future resear ch. This work is important for several
reasons. It will provide data of interest to many archaeologists. It will also
shed new light on human-environmental interactions and the development of human
competence. Finally, the knowledge gained will provide the base for a larger
long term research project.