* 9313805
* U.S.-Netherlands Cooperative Research on the Role of Phyto- chrome in the Regulation of Mitosis in Pea Epicotyls
* O/D,OISE
* 03/01/1994,02/28/1995
* Stanley Roux, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Christine French
* 02/28/1995
* USD 13,640.00

9313805 Roux This award supports Professor Stanley J. Roux of the University of
Texas at Austin and Dr. Gregory Clark, a postdoctoral associate, to collaborate
in developmental botany research with Professor Richard E. Kendrick of the
Department of Plant Physiology, Wageningen Agricultural University, The
Netherlands. The objective of their research is to gain a better understanding
of the cause of the light-induced increase in the nuclear number among pea
cells, a phenomenon which was recently discovered by Professor Roux and Dr.
Clark. Together with Professor Kendrick and others at his institution, they are
taking a multidisciplinary approach to studying the biochemical basis for the
postulated role of the pigment phytochrome in the stimulation of mitosis. In
particular, they are exploring whether this role is mediated through GTP-binding
proteins. Their research depends on the complementary expertise of the two
groups. Dr. Kendrick is a world leader in the physiological and photobiological
aspects of phytochrome research and a pioneer on studies of G-protein mediation
of phytochrome responses. Others in his institution will contribute expertise in
the cytological and morphological aspects of plant development. Dr. Roux has
worked extensively on biochemical aspects of phytochrome, and is an expert on
enzymes regulated by phytochrome. This research tests the important question of
whether phytochrome can regulate mitosis and whether this regulation requires
the mediation of GTP-binding proteins. Verification of this influence will help
explain the dramatic effects of phytochrome on pea plumule development and will
represent a critically important addition to the impressive list of events
controlled by phytochrome during photomorphogenesis. Verification of a role for
GTP-binding proteins as mediators would be an equally important finding, not
only for plant sciences but for cell biology in general, for almost nothing is
known about the regulation of GTP -binding proteins in nuclei. ***