* 9313671
* U.S.GLOBEC: Seasonal Development of Stratified Water on     Georges Bank: Dynamics of Zooplankton and Larval Fish
* GEO,OCE
* 10/01/1993,03/31/1998
* Cabell Davis, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Continuing Grant
* Phillip R. Taylor
* 03/31/1998
* USD 2,529,280.00

WPC4 2 B V P Z Courier 10cpi ? x x x , { x 6 X @ 8 ; X @ HP LaserJet III-Change
HPIIILAS.PRS x @ , \ , ||X @Courier 10cpi 2 @ Z F P #| x x @ 8 ; X @ HP LaserJet
IIID hange HPLASIII.PRS x @ , \ , MX @ #| x 2 2 9313671 Beardsley Present
evidence indicates that the recruitment and survival of commerically important
fish larvae within the Georges Bank region depends critically on the development
of stratification during the spring and summer period. Predicted climate change
scenarios are likely to significantly influence the evolution of stratification
and thus impact larval survival over Georges Bank. As part of U.S GLOBEC Georges
Bank Study, Dr. Beardsley and collaborators will conduct an intensive field
project during January August, 1995 aimed at better understanding the
development of stratification over Georges Bank and its influence of larval fish
survival. Preliminary studies will be initiated in 1994. The project will have a
moored instrument component will involve deploying meteorological sensors and
instruments throughout the water column, with a heavy concentration in the
surface and bottom boundary layers. The data acquired will be used to resolve
the stratification field and examine factors controlling its development. The
shipboard measurement component will consist of five cruises following a
concentration (patch) of the target species: cod and haddock larvae and their
copepod prey, Calanus and Pseudocalanus. Using a variety of sampling systems,
including drifters, MOCNESS, the Video Plankton Recorder (VPR), plankton pump,
and multiple high frequency acoustical samplers, measurements will be made of:
(1) hydrography, micr oturbulence, and currents, (2) the vertical and horizontal
distributions of the target species in relation to water column stratification,
(3) passive particle motions and the three dimensional swimming behaviors of
individual zooplankton, and (4) the feeding and growth of larval cod and haddock
in relation to water column stratification and prey distribution. The data will
be used together with information from collaborative field and modeling studies
to gain insights into the impact of stratification and turbulent mixing on
growth and survival of zooplankton and fish populations.