* 9313781
* Physiochemical Studies on Xanthine Oxidizing Enzymes
* BIO,MCB
* 05/01/1994,04/30/1998
* Vincent Massey, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Kamal Shukla
* 04/30/1998
* USD 300,000.00

9313781 Massey We have succeeded in isolating milk xanthine dehydrogenase in a
stable state, which can be converted reversibly into the oxidase form, where the
preferred electron acceptor is 02, rather than NAD, as it is with the
dehydrogenase form. Our work to date indicates that the major effects of this
reversible interconversion, which is brought about by oxidation of spatially
vicinal thiol residues in the dehydrogenase to oxidase conversion, involve
conformational changes in the protein which affect mainly the flavin redox
center. However, there are indications from rapid reaction studies that the
molybdopterin redox center may also be affected by the interconversion. The
major thrust of this proposal is to study in detail the physicochemical
properties of the two forms of the enzyme, with the aim of defining the
parameters that give the two forms such different catalytic properties. This
study will involve extensive use of rapid reaction spectrophotometry, EPR and
EXAFS measurements, flavin replacement studies, catalytic properties of the
enzymes with different classes of substrates, and examination of the modes of
binding of potent inhibitors of the enzymes. %%% The enzyme xanthine oxidase is
commonly believed to be implicated in the phenomenon known as oxidative stress,
in which free radical species of oxygen react with many essential components of
living tissues, including proteins, lipids and DNA. Such oxidative damage has
been implicated in cancer, ischemia and the aging process. Xanthine oxidase
exists in two forms, the oxidase, which oxidizes xanthine and a wide variety of
purines and pyrimidines at the expense of reducing oxygen to the superoxide
radical (02-), and the dehydrogenase, which oxidizes the same compounds, but
uses NAD, a coenzyme derivative of vitamin B3, instead of oxygen. We have
isolated the enzyme from cow's milk, and shown that the two forms can be
interconverted in a reversible manner, depending on the oxidation-reduction
state of the protein thiol residues. The two enzyme forms have many different
properties, which are clearly due to different protein conformations. While the
oxidase form has been studied extensively in the past, comparatively little is
known of the dehydrogenase. This study is to explore in detail the differences
in properties of the two forms, in order to provide a firm scientific basis for
concepts regarding their physiological functions. ***