* 9313514
* Renovation of Lennon Hall for the Department of Biological  Sciences
* O/D,OIA
* 03/15/1994,08/31/1999
* Joseph Makarewicz, SUNY College at Brockport
* Standard Grant
* Sherrie Green
* 08/31/1999
* USD 457,369.00

9313514 Makarewicz The Biology Department of the State University of New York
(SUNY) at Brockport occupies Lennon Hall, a classroom building constructed in
1966. Since its construction, the university has made a commitment to faculty
research, but this building is poorly equipped to support research and research
training activities. Most faculty research labs are classrooms in which tables
have been used as lab benches. These labs lack the basic electrical power, fume
hoods, and environmental controls that are necessary for modern biological
research. The university plans an extensive renovation of Lennon Hall which will
provide an upgraded electrical system to the building, installation of fume
hoods, a building-wide replacement of the heating, ventilation, and air
conditioning system, and installation of adequate laboratory benches and
cabinetry. The planned renovation of Lennon Hall will enable faculty and
students to pursue research projects that have previously been impossible due to
building conditions. The renovation will create safe and healthy environments
for work with chemicals and biological reagents, and will provide suitable
support systems for advanced research instrumentation. It will promote joint
faculty- student research projects, and as a result will attract students to the
study of and careers in science. ***