* 9313465
* HVAC Renovation of Riebsomer Wing-Chemistry Facility
* O/D,OIA
* 09/15/1993,02/28/1997
* Fritz Allen, University of New Mexico
* Standard Grant
* Sherrie Green
* 02/28/1997
* USD 1,293,993.00

9313465 Allen This award will provide funding for the renovation of the
chemistry laboratories at the University of New Mexico. The Chemistry
department, is located in a building that consist of two wings, Clark and
Riebsomer, constructed in 1953 and 1968 respectively. The University renovated
the Clark wing last year, and requests funds to renovate the research space in
the Riebsomer wing. Riebsomer is primarily a graduate research building that
houses research laboratories and the departmental X- ray and NMR facilities.
Research activities conducted in the facility encompasses the four divisions of
chemistry: analytical, inorganic, organic and physical, in addition to the
interdisciplinary areas of biorelated chemistry and material science. Major
problems have developed over the years in the safe operation of HVAC,
ventilation and cooling systems. As currently configured, the HVAC and the fume
hood systems cannot handle the makeup and exhaust air loads. Because of the
imbalances in the air flow, the system mixes the air in the building and
promotes cross contamination, creating an unsafe environment. Renovations to the
Riebsomer wing will include an extensive replacement of the HVAC mechanicals,
ductwork, and the installation of new fume hoods and a variable air volume
supply. Successful completion of this project will provide researchers and
students with safe conditions to work and will increase the efficiency of a
productive group. ***