* 9313735
* Ionization of Atoms by Electromagnetic Radiation and        Charged Particles, Award in Indian Currency
* O/D,OISE
* 01/01/1994,12/31/1996
* Pranawa Deshmukh, Indian Institute of Technology Madras
* Standard Grant
* Marjorie Lueck
* 12/31/1996
* USD 23,604.00

9313735 DESHMUKH Description: This research proposes a series of calculations to
explore the ionizing interactions of electromagnetic radiation and charged
particles with atoms and ions. The collaborators are Steven Manson of Georgia
State University and Pranawa Deshmukh of the Indian Institute of Technology,
Madras. During the initial phase of the project, the Indian collaborator will be
supported with travel and living expenses to do developmental work using the
computational facilities at Georgia State University. The proposed research will
study i) the influence of relativistic interactions in the photoionization of
high-z atoms using the RRPA formalism with enough channels to obviate truncation
errors, ii) investigate the inner shell threshold behavior of photoionization
cross sections, iii) explore the photoionization of ions with the RRPA
technology, iv) examine the systematics of generalized oscillator strengths for
neutral atoms, excited states, and atomic ions. Scope: This research will
provide training for graduate and advanced undergraduate students in the methods
of calculating and understanding atomic and molecular structure and collisions.
The techniques and computer codes developed will strengthen the theoretical
physics program at the collaborating institutions. The results will provide
further insight into the basic nature of these fundamental atomic processes
which are important in plasma physics, atmospheric, solar, and astrophysics,
radiation physics and therapy, and for studies of possible x-ray and nuclear-
pumped laser mechanisms. ***