* 9313419
* Renovation of the Robert M. Bock Laboratories at the        University of Wisconsin-Madison
* O/D,OIA
* 03/01/1994,02/28/1998
* Gary Borisy, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Sherrie Green
* 02/28/1998
* USD 1,873,060.00

Borisy This award will support the modernization of the Robert Bock Laboratory
building at the University of Wisconsin-Madison. This building houses the
molecular biology and molecular virology research activities of the campus that
have spun-off world leaders in these fields. Both research and research training
programs take place in this building and the respective activities have made
these departments world class. However, this building was built in 1965 and has
not been renovated since it's inception. The renovation to take place will
replace the heating system, the ventilation system and fume hoods, the distilled
water supply system, and other mechanical support systems that have become
obsolete and worn that now impede the over-all research effort and capability.
Finally, this renovation project will solve a variety of safety-related issues
having to do with the use of hazardous chemicals in fume hoods, the handling and
storage of radioactive materials, and current crowing of incompatible operations
in unsuitable laboratory spaces. A total of 163 faculty, postdocs, and students
will be impacted by this renovation. The renovation project underway will
enhance the research and training efforts in a strategic research area,
biotechnology.