* 9313459
* Renovation of the Engineering Research Center, College of   Engineering, University of Arkansas, Fayetteville
* O/D,OIA
* 02/15/1994,07/31/1998
* Jerry Smith, University of Arkansas
* Standard Grant
* Sherrie Green
* 07/31/1998
* USD 1,029,500.00

Gattis The University of Arkansas, Fayetteville, College of Engineering, offers
programs in seven engineering disciplines, the only institution in the State of
Arkansas that offers a Ph.D. program in engineering. The College of Engineering
occupies three buildings on the main campus and one research complex, the
Engineering Research Center (ERC). All engineering research, in the areas of
Biological and Agricultural, Chemical, Computer Systems, Civil, Electrical,
Industrial, and Mechanical engineering, are housed and conducted in the ERC.
Rapid growth of research programs, coupled with deteriorating conditions of the
ERC building, have placed the College in dire need for modernized research
space. Renovated space is needed immediately for new research programs and for
several federally funded Centers, including the Material Handling Research
Center. Presently, the ERC consists of three buildings that have adequate space,
but lack the infrastructure to allow for the optimum use of the space. Required
renovations will entail modernizing electrical and HVAC systems and roofing. The
renovation of the electrical power distribution system will involve the complete
replacement and conversion of the power feed. A new closed-loop water source
heat-pump system will replace the inefficient HVAC units, boiler and chiller
systems. The roof renovation will involve the removal of old roofing materials
and replacing it with new insulating materials. This renovation project will
facilitate faculty and student research to remain competitive by providing
functional research space. Moreover, it will enhance the College's recruitment
and retention of talented faculty and quality students, including women, persons
with disabilities, and minorities from Arkansas and adjacent states.