* 9313676
* U.S. GLOBEC: Analysis of Short-Term Growth in Copepods and  Larval Fish Using Molecular Markers of Cell Proliferation
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/1993,02/28/1997
* John Stegeman, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Continuing Grant
* Phillip R. Taylor
* 02/28/1997
* USD 338,836.00

9313676 Stegeman Connecting micro- and broad-scale physical factors to growth in
calanoid copepods and larval cod and haddock is essential to the US-GLOBEC
Georges Bank Program. Prior methods to measure growth have involved
morphometrics, life stage durations, egg production, and indirect biochemical
methods, such as the RNA/DNA ratio. Dr. Stegeman will utilize
immunohistochemical, histological and fluorometric methods to detect cell
proliferation, continuing the application of this technique in marine fish and
invertebrates. The method uses monoclonal antibodies to molecular markers of
cells synthesizing nuclear DNA to allow quanitification of such cells. An early
aim will be to establish which cell and organ proliferation rates most closely
reflect overall growth rate, as measured morphometrically in larval fish, and by
stage length in copepods. The time scale over which such differences can be
measured will be studied in a series of laboratory experiments. Subsequently,
they will participate in the US-GLOBEC Process cruises that are being planned,
to develop and apply the method at sea. Participation in this study will
translate physical measurements of vertical mixing and stratification, that
fluctuate as a result of short and long term climatic changes, into an instant
assay for the biological effects of such parameters. ***