* 9313610
* Ballistic Electron Emission Spectroscopy of Heterostructures Using Metal and Degenerately-Doped Semiconductor Tips
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/1993,08/31/1995
* Venkatesh Narayanamurti, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* H. Hollis Wickman
* 08/31/1995
* USD 50,000.00

9313610 Narayanamurti A unique variable temperature, ultra high vacuum (UHV)
compatible Ballistic Electron Emission Microscope (BEEM) apparatus is currently
under development in the PI's laboratory. This exploratory proposal is directed
at fabricating tips for the BEEM to perform spectroscopy on quantum
semiconductor heterostructures and superlattices. Properly prepared, heavily
doped, semiconductor tips should cause a sharply focused and monoenergetic beam
of electrons or holes to be injected into the sample under study. The ability to
perform variable temperature UHV studies using BEEM spectroscopy could lead to
the observation of quantum mechanical tunneling and interface reflection
effects, local determination of dopant density, minority carrier mean free
paths, and single particle charging effects (Coulomb blockade regime) with
possibly the first studies of discrete light emission from the dimensionally
confined pn junction. Development of this technique will be particularly
important for the spectroscopic study of dimensionally small systems such as
nano-scale wires, quantum dots, resonant tunneling devices and narrow bandgap
infrared detectors. %%% A unique variable temperature, ultra high vacuum (UHV)
compatible Ballistic Electron Emission Microscope (BEEM) apparatus is currently
under development in the PI's laboratory. This exploratory proposal is directed
at fabricating probes for the BEEM to perform spectroscopy on complex
semiconductor structures. Properly prepared, heavily doped, semiconductor probes
should cause a sharply focused and monoenergetic beam of electrons or holes to
be injected into the sample under study. The ability to perform variable
temperature UHV studies using BEEM spectroscopy would provide valuable physical
measurements and could lead to a better understanding of the electronic states
in so-called quantum dots and semiconductor heterostructures and superlattices.
It is clear that such studies become increasingly important as characteristic
dimensions of semiconductor devices approach the nano-meter scale regime. ***