* 9313668
* Cavity Quantum Electrodynamics
* MPS,PHY
* 04/01/1994,06/30/1997
* H. Kimble, California Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* C.  Caldwell
* 06/30/1997
* USD 822,252.00

Kimble 9313668 This proposal, "Cavity Quantum Electrodynamics", involves an
experimental investigation of the quantum dynamical processes for a small
collection of atoms strongly coupled to the field of an optical cavity. The
objectives include an exploration of the linear and nonlinear spectroscopic
properties of the atom-cavity system as manifestations of the underlying
coupling-induced structure. The synthesis of "arbitrary" quantum states of the
electromagnetic field will be investigated by adiabatic passage with the vacuum-
field. Because of the strong coupling of the atom and the cavity field, it
should be possible to explore measurement-induced localization whereby the
internal degrees of freedom of the atom-cavity system become entangled with the
atomic center of mass motion. It is also proposed that the coupling achievable
will be sufficient to realize a one-atom laser. Finally, from the perspective of
continuous quantum measurement of open systems, the atom-cavity system should be
capable of investigating the quantum-classical interface. The experiments will
first look at cesium atoms in an atomic beam interacting with the field of a
very high finesse optical cavity. These experiments will be followed by ones
using an optical trap. The experiments are intended to exploit the atom-cavity
system as a paradigm for the investigation of quantum dynamics for open quantum
systems in the regime of strong coupling.