* 9313627
* Dissertation Research:  Differential Resource Access in a   Thule Eskimo Whaling Community
* SBE,BCS
* 03/01/1994,08/31/1995
* Katherine Spielmann, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 08/31/1995
* USD 8,281.00

9313627 Spielmann Under the direction of Dr. Katherine Spielmann, Mr. Peter
Whitridge will collect data for his doctoral dissertation. He has begun and will
continue archaeological excavations at the site of PaJs-2 which is located in
the Central Canadian arctic and was inhabited by Thule Eskimo peoples between
ca. 1100 - 1450 A.D. Preliminary data indicate that the site was occupied
recurrently for six to eight months a year by a group of 100 to 200 people whose
economy centered in intensive harvesting of bowhead whales. Over the course of
excavation, Mr. Whitridge will expose seven domestic dwellings, a ceremonial
house and surrounding activity areas and middens. Because of permafrost
conditions, artifactual material is well preserved and provide detailed insight
into the lives of these prehistoric peoples. Mr. Whitridge will focus on status
differentiation and will examine materials to gain insight into the degree of
differential access to economic resources. Thus valued foods - as reflected in
animal bone - and exotic and scarce commodities will provide a focus for
attention. Archaeologists are interested in the origin and causes of social
inequality and Thule Eskimo from this perspective are of particular interest. It
is widely believed that hunter gatherer societies are basically egalitarian in
nature and because of the rigors of this way of life, status distinctions
between sexes and between families rarely if ever occur. However because groups
such as the Thule specialized in whale hunting, food was often abundant and
based on ethnographic analogy successful hunters often were accorded great
respect. Mr. Whitridge wishes to examine whether such factors in fact resulted
in inequalities. This research is important for several reasons. It will provide
data of interest to many archaeologists. It will increase our understanding of
the processes which led to the emergence of complex society and assist in the
training of a promising young scientist. ***