* 9313677
* US-GLOBEC:  Recruitment and Production Rates of Calanus     Finmarchicus and Pseudocalanus spp. on Georges Bank
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/1993,02/28/1997
* Ann Durbin, University of Rhode Island
* Continuing Grant
* Phillip R. Taylor
* 02/28/1997
* USD 855,000.00

9313677 Durbin The dominant copepod species on Georges Bank, Calanus
finmarchicus, Pseudocalanus moultoni and P. newmani, show strong interannual
variation in abundance that may significantly alter energy flow and larval fish
recruitment in different years. We hypothesize that: (1) Recruitment variability
in the dominant copepods reflects interannual differences in the abundance and
source of the parental stock, and to the effect of food upon the egg laying
rates of adult females; (2) Subtle changes in regional climate strongly
influence processes controlling the abundance and production of the parental
stock of Calanus in the Gulf of Maine (GOM); and (3) Production rates of Calanus
will be food limited on Georges Bank except during the peak of the spring bloom,
whereas winter/spring period. These two species will therefore respond
differently to seasonal changes in food levels on Georges Bank. We propose to
investigate two major aspects of Calanus finmarchicus and Pseudocalanus spp
population dynamics and production on Georges Bank, in relation to the above
hypotheses: (1) The recruitment of Calanus and Pseudocalanus on Georges Bank
during the winter/spring period, as inferred from pump samples to quantitatively
sample nauplii and early copepodites during the broad scale surveys; and (2) The
rates of growth and egg production of Calanus and Pseudocalanus on Georges Bank,
in relation to small scale spatial and temporal variability in the food
environment during the process cruises.