* 9313451
* Renovation of Research Laboratories
* O/D,OIA
* 05/01/1994,04/30/1998
* John Fitch, Texas State University - San Marcos
* Standard Grant
* Sherrie Green
* 04/30/1998
* USD 884,230.00

Cassidy During the past few years, research and research training activities
have increased markedly in the Biology and Chemistry Departments at Southwest
Texas State University. This growth has been hampered by several deficiencies in
the laboratory facilities available to faculty and students: inadequate
electrical power, limited gas lines, antiquated plumbing, and a lack of
appropriate fume hoods and ventilation. The university plans to renovate 8,200
square feet of laboratory space that will provide a suitable environment for
research and research training in polymer and organometallic synthesis,
environmental and industrial science, molecular biosciences, and a fish genetic
stock center. This renovation will enhance the research and research training
activity at Southwest Texas State University in several significant ways.
Faculty research projects will have appropriate environments for new state-of-
the-art instrumentation. Collaborative student-faculty research projects will
have adequate and appropriate laboratory space. Specialized functions such as
the fish genetic stock center will have dedicated facilities with the necessary
environmental quality and controls. New faculty will be attracted to the
university owing to the availability of high-quality research facilities, and
students will be drawn toward careers in the sciences. ***