* 9313391
* Renovation of Materials Laboratories
* O/D,OIA
* 06/01/1994,05/31/1996
* William Wood, Oregon Graduate Institute of Science & Technology
* Standard Grant
* Sherrie Green
* 05/31/1996
* USD 224,622.00

This award will provide funding for the renovation of the specimen preparation
and optical analysis laboratory facilities at the Oregon Graduate Institute of
Science and Technology. The renovation project is part of a large program to
renovate and modernize Materials Science and Engineering research and
educational facilities on campus. Constructed in 1968, the facilities are used
for research projects in the first stages of microstructural and microchemical
analysis. Research and training activities, conducted in these facilities, are
fundamental to Materials Science and Engineering. The specimen preparation
laboratories are a resource for other department and for users outside the
Institute, enabling technology for interdisciplinary activities. The entire
renovation project will establish at the Institute an integrated microscopy
laboratory complex combining optical and electron microscopy facilities, and all
related sample preparation and image processing activities. The renovation will
address the following conditions: ineffective space utilization, health and
safety violations or potential hazardous, and quality limitations which impact
equipment or reduce performance. Existing interior walls and infrastructure,
utilities, and fixed equipment will be replaced and reconfigurated to provide
efficient laboratory space. New fume hood will be installed, improving the
chemical handling and storage capabilities necessary to meet OSHA requirements.
The success of this project will allow the institution to meet research and
educational goals and attract researchers and students by creating an
environment where they can work and learn effectively.