* 9313047
* Dynamics of Semiconductor Surfaces:  Experiment and Theory
* MPS,DMR
* 05/01/1994,12/31/1998
* N. John DiNardo, Drexel University
* Continuing Grant
* H. Hollis Wickman
* 12/31/1998
* USD 285,000.00

9313047 DiNardo Technical abstract: It is proposed to combine temperature-
dependent momentum-resolved electron vibrational spectroscopy with theoretical
calculations and simulations to study the dynamics of reconstructed
semiconductor surfaces and epitaxial interfaces. A new, high-resolution angle-
resolved electron energy loss spectrometer (HREELS) will be applied to the
measurement of the surface phonon band structures of the Si(001) and Ge(001)
surfaces and the heteroepitaxial Ge/Si(001) interface. The surface potentials of
these systems are strongly anharmonic, resulting in dramatic temperature-
dependent structural and vibrational changes that will be probed for the first
time experimentally with electron loss spectroscopy and modeled theoretically.
Non-technical abstract: The detailed characterization of semiconductor surfaces
and interfaces is of a considerable fundamental and technological interest. It
is proposed to study the surfaces of semiconductors by investigating their
surface vibrational properties. The principal experiment tool will be a state-
of-the-art high resolution electron energy loss spectrometer. It is planned to
investigate the vibrational properties of surfaces and interfaces as a function
of temperature in order to provide information about the dynamics of the
surfaces. These studies are likely to have an impact on semiconductor
processing, including growth and etching phenomena. ***