* 9313048
* Mathematical Sciences:NSF/CBMS Regional Conferences in the  Math Sciences-Controlled Topology and the Characterization  of Manifolds; May 24-28, 1994; Knoxville, Tennessee
* MPS,DMS
* 04/01/1994,12/31/1994
* Robert Daverman, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* Jean Thiebaux
* 12/31/1994
* USD 24,328.00

9313048 Daverman A good deal of effort has gone into the recognition problem for
topological manifolds. This is the problem of finding effective criteria for
distinguishing manifolds from other, more singular, geometric objects. The
classical implicit function theorem gives one such criterion, but even when this
fails and the functions describing the geometric object have singularities, the
object itself may nevertheless be a manifold. A compelling example of this
phenomenon is the celebrated Cannon-Edwards theorem, which says that the double
suspension of an homology sphere is a sphere. In 1978, Cannon proposed a simple
set of criteria for recognizing high- dimensional topological manifolds. In
1991, Bryant, Ferry, Mio, and Weinberger showed that Cannon's criteria were
insufficient. In fact, they constructed infinitely many distinct families of
"noncartesian manifolds" - manifold-like objects satisfying Cannon's criteria
which do not have local coordinate descriptions. The detailed geometry of these
spaces is mysterious. The purpose of the proposed conference is to expose this
work to the mathematical public and seek applications of these ideas both within
geometric topology and in other areas of mathematics and mathematical physics.
The conference will be very appealing throughout the Southeastern United States,
a region which boasts a long tradition of interest in the topic. ***