* 9313856
* Many-Body Theory of Charge Transfer in Hyperthermal         Atomic Scattering
* MPS,DMR
* 02/15/1994,07/31/1997
* John Marston, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* G. Bruce Taggart
* 07/31/1997
* USD 90,000.00

9313856 Marston Electronic many-body processes play an important role in charge
transfer between hyperthermal (greater than thermal velocity) atoms and the
surfaces off which they scatter. Many-body correlations are intrinsic to any
theory of dynamical charge transfer which includes electron spin, multiple
charge and excited atomic states. This proposal focusses on these correlations
and tries to model specific real systems. Understanding the roles of Auger
processes, electron-electron interactions in the atom and the substrate and the
limitations of present models and their systematic solution are some of the
principal problems to be addressed. Complicated (more complex than alkali metal)
impinging atoms such as oxygen and semiconducting target surfaces are to be
studied. %%% This work has direct significance in the understanding of
interactions at surfaces - eg the glow of atoms and molecules bombarding the
space shuttle in orbit. It concerns the many-body description of how high energy
atoms scatter off surfaces. The work makes use of recent innovations in field
theory to deal with these dynamical strongly correlated electronic systems. The
proposal concerns treating non-trivial impinging atoms and non-trivial surfaces
- where the qualifiers here mean that their electronic structure has to be
handled by sophisticated methods. ***