* 9313260
* Multidimensional Flow and Transport in Heterogeneous Unsaturated Porous Media: Theory and Experiments
* NONE,NONE
* 06/01/1994,05/31/1997
* Angelos Protopapas, Polytechnic University of New York
* Continuing grant
* Edward H. Bryan
* 05/31/1997
* USD 222,369.00

9313260 Protopapas This is a award to provide support for research, the
objective of which is to advance the macroscopic description of flow and
transport in heterogeneous soils, improve knowledge of the microscale mechanism
of fluid infiltration into soil, obtain a better understanding than now exists
of the effect that small particulates have on field-scale fluid behavior in
soil, and accounting for randomness of the hydraulic properties of soil in
numerical models that are intended to describe flow and transport properties of
porous media. The investigator plans to address these issues both theoretically
and experimentally by developing new experimental techniques for analyzing pore
scale infiltration, validation of existing the existing theory regarding
unsteady infiltration in heterogeneous soils, and improvement of the models that
result from additional theoretical effort and experimental validation. Results
of this project are expected to be utilized in engineering design of water and
wastewater management systems that involve seepage from surface locations
through soil and into groundwater aquifers. The work is also expected to develop
new laboratory methods and techniques for study of fluid behavior in
heterogeneous porous media, thus assisting in applying resultant models in the
engineering design of fluid management systems such as artificial wetlands for
wastewater treatment and cutoff walls for containment of water, wastewater or
hazardous wastes.