* 9313726
* Single Electron Charging Effects in Insulating and          Semiconducting Microstructures
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/1993,07/31/1996
* Venkat Chandrasekhar, Northwestern University
* Continuing Grant
* Jean Toulouse
* 07/31/1996
* USD 99,000.00

9313726 Chandrasekhar This is an experimental research program focused on low
temperature electron transport in nanofabricated systems in which strong
electrostatic interactions between electrons lead to Coulomb blockade and single
electron charging phenomena. The experiments are designed to increase
fundamental understanding of the microscopic mechanism of electron transport in
this regime, with emphasis on modifications introduced by quantum effects. The
structures consist of short insulating wires placed between metallic contact
electrodes. The goal is to understand the origin of the single electron charging
effects that have been observed in this novel system. With an eye to potential
device applications, different methods of increasing the temperature range over
which the Coulomb blockade effects can be observed will be investigated by
exploiting some unique properties of insulators. The project involves graduate
students in research that is at the cutting edge of nanolithographic fabrication
techniques. %%% This experimental project deals with the motion of individual
electrons among ultrasmall structures that are fabricated by tracing patterns
only a few atoms in width using a finely focused electron beam. The resulting
structures show remarkable responses at low temperatures to applied electric and
magnetic fields. The response arises from quantum effects that are only poorly
understood in the structures under study. The ability of detection motion of a
single electron has fundamental interest and is technologically significant as a
route to the smallest microelectronics device currently envisioned. The project
will employ insulating nanostructures which have potential for allowing
operation of the microdevices at higher temperatures. ***