* 9313452
* Renovation of Research Laboratories in the John S. Alfriend Chemistry Building
* O/D,OIA
* 09/15/1993,02/28/1997
* Frank Scully, Old Dominion University
* Standard Grant
* Sherrie Green
* 02/28/1997
* USD 870,273.00

9313452 Scully This ARI award will provide funding for the renovation of
research space in the Alfriend Chemistry Building which houses the Department of
Chemistry and Biochemistry on the campus of Old Dominion University. The number
of graduate and undergraduate students involved in research activities in the
department has grown tremendously since the construction of the building in
1967. The department has experienced an increase in extramural support, making
it the second department to receive the most research funds in the College of
Sciences. Research conducted in the facility encompasses five major areas of
chemistry: analytical chemistry, biochemistry, environmental chemistry, organic
chemistry, and materials chemistry. In addition to awarding the B.S. and M.S.
degrees in chemistry, the department shares a new Ph.D. program in the
Biomedical Sciences with the Biology Department and the Eastern Virginia Medical
School. Increases in research faculty, funding, size and maturity of the
graduate program have reached a level where the department is proposing to
implement a Ph.D. program in Applied Chemistry. In addition to refurbishing
laboratory space, renovations will include: upgrading the electrical power
system, modernizing the fire alarm system to state fire codes, providing a
centralized, deionized water system for the entire building, replacing the
original motors and ductwork for fume hoods, and replacing the air handling
system that is essential to protect sensitive cell lines from contamination
during biochemical experiments. Completion of the renovations will improve the
research and research training enterprise, at Old Dominion University, by
improving the research environment, providing research opportunities for high
school students, and students enrolled at predominately minority institutions,
and in the retraining of military personnel at the graduate and undergraduate
levels. ***