* 9313596
* U.S.-Belgium Cooperative Research:  Temporal Geochemical    Variation of Lavas Erupted from the Kerguelen Plume (0-40   Million Years)
* O/D,OISE
* 08/15/1994,12/31/1998
* Frederick Frey, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Rose Gombay
* 12/31/1998
* USD 7,000.00

9313596 Frey This three-year award supports U.S.-Belgium cooperative research
between Frederick A. Frey of Massachusetts Institute of Technology and Dominique
Weis of the Universite Libre de Bruxelles. Both groups will perform
complementary geochemical analyses of lavas erupted from the Kerguelen volcanic
plume over the last 40 million years. The resulting Kerguelen Archipelago is
considered a mantle "hotspot." The award provides travel support to Dr. Frey's
graduate student for analysis and interpretation of the complementary data sets.
The graduate student will benefit from the expertise of U.S. and Belgium mentors
and have access to specialized equipment. Dr. Frey brings to this collaboration
expertise for trace element analysis using neutron activation. This is
complemented by Dr. Weis' expertise in isotopic analysis using mass
spectrometry. Studies of lavas and volcanism over a period of time have been
very useful in understanding mantle hotspots. Frey and Weis propose to apply
this approach to the Kerguelen Archipelago's lavas. Their study will advance our
understanding of mantle hotspots and more specifically, of the Kerguelen
hotspot's influence in creating the eastern Indian Ocean seafloor. ***