* 9313286
* Optimization Techniques for Problems Arising in Design and  Other Engineering Applications
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/1993,02/28/1998
* Andre Tits, University of Maryland, College Park
* Continuing Grant
* george hazelrigg
* 02/28/1998
* USD 273,331.00

9313286 Tits Generalized use of numerical optimization techniques in design has
been hindered by (i) the difficulty to translate in a faithful manner the actual
engineering design problem into any kind of rigid mathematical optimization
problem, (ii) the inability of classical optimization tools to efficiently take
into account the many distinctive features of optimization problems arising in a
design context, and (iii) the unavailability of software tools offering to the
designer a powerful as well as congenial environment supporting such
capabilities. Previous research developed an interactive optimization-based
design methodology that accommodates the inherent trade-off driven character of
most design problems. This has included the development implementation and
testing of the first optimization algorithms that achieve a superlinear rate of
convergence while forcing feasibility of all the successive iterates (a crucial
property in several engineering contexts) as well as developed, implemented and
tested an extension to problems involving a continuum of constraints such as
constraints on the frequency or time response of a control system. A window-
based, distributed computation environment for interactively exploring tradeoffs
arising in optimal design applications (Console) was developed concurrently. The
research will concentrate on: (1) the development and analysis of new schemes to
enhance the efficiency of the feasible iteration algorithms, with special
attention paid to problems with large numbers of constraints; (2) the production
of a quality implementation of these schemes and extensive testing; (3) the
further development of the interactive optimization-based system (Console).
Numerical optimization is used in the context of almost every engineering
activity. Available methods and software are often inadequate or techniques are
not always relevant to realistic situations. The project addresses this need.
Special attention will be p aid to issues such as those of efficiently handling
problems with large numbers of inequality constraints, or problems involving
functional specifications. The ongoing research continues to make significant
educational and industrial contributions. ***