* 9313472
* Microbiology Faculty Research Laboratory and Support        Facility
* O/D,OIA
* 09/15/1993,06/30/1995
* Carol Barnett, San Diego State University Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Sherrie Green
* 06/30/1995
* USD 134,900.00

9313472 Barnett The Biology Department at San Diego State University is the
second largest academic department in the University. Research expertise in
diverse areas of biology is organized into three major program areas within the
department: (1) cell and molecular biology (2) ecology, and (3) systematics and
evolution. The department plays a key role in providing research training
required for a scientifically literate workforce in the areas of biotechnology,
environmental protection and environmental impact. The microbiology program is
critical for those students enrolled in masters and doctoral programs in
microbiology and cell and molecular biology, as well as those students who
pursue employment in the local biotechnology industry. In addition, the
department has a major role in training teachers for K-12 education and training
personnel for health-related occupations. ARI funds are requested to renovate
laboratory space in the Life Sciences North building to provide a new faculty
research space and to upgrade an existing facility that provides support for
faculty members doing research in virology, immunology, bacteriology and
microbial genetics. The existing space, constructed in 1962, is poorly designed
for current research, and does not comply with health and safety regulations.
The renovation of this space will increase research training opportunities in
microbiology, for a diverse population of undergraduate and graduate students by
providing a modern research laboratory to conduct experiments, and increase the
efficiency and utility of research support for current faculty. ***