* 9313818
* Energy Transfer and Trapping in Hyperthermal Energy Alkali  and Reactive Ion Collisions with Surfaces
* NONE,NONE
* 05/01/1994,04/30/1997
* Barbara Cooper, Cornell University
* Continuing grant
* David Nelson
* 04/30/1997
* USD 360,000.00

9313818 Cooper The central objective of the proposed work is to develop
quantitative models of the scattering and charge transfer dynamics in
hyperthermal ion-surface collisions. The proposed work is focussed on the
scattering of alkali ions from copper surfaces as model systems to study these
dynamics. Both the energy and angular distributions of scattered positive ions
and neutrals are measured. Trajectory simulations will be used to test
scattering models and potentials, and determine energy transfer and trapping
mechanisms. Energy spectra peak widths will be used to study surface atom
binding forces. Additional techniques, including Auger Electron Spectroscopy,
will be used to study trends in the trapping probabilities as a function of ion
and surface species, energy, and geometry. New simulation capabilities will be
developed to determine trapping mechanisms. Comparisons of scattered neutral and
ion fluxes will be used to determine neutralization probabilities and
investigate the role of charge transfer in the collision and trapping dynamics.
New experimental and simulation capabilities are proposed to enable the study of
the collision, charge transfer and trapping dynamics of reactive ion-surface
collisions. Trapping trends and overlayer deposition will be studied with Auger
and scanning tunneling microscopy. The information obtained from these studies
will be useful for modeling the interactions that occur in surface processing
and thin film deposition. Such information could also be used to optimize these
techniques. ***