* 9313493
* Renovation of the Department of Ornithology Research        Laboratories, American Museum of Natural History
* O/D,OIA
* 07/01/1994,09/30/1995
* Joel Cracraft, American Museum Natural History
* Standard Grant
* Sherrie Green
* 09/30/1995
* USD 855,500.00

The Whitney Building, of the American Museum of Natural History, constructed in
1932, consists of eight floors used for research activities, research specimen
storage and public exhibits. In 1971, half of the sixth floor was renovated as a
research facility, housing the Department of Ornithology. Since the Museum has
possession of the largest collection of birds in the Western Hemisphere, it is
the goal of the Department to develop a premier research and training program in
systematic ornithology by upgrading current facilities to increase available
research space and create modern laboratories for ongoing studies in molecular
systematics and evolution. Concurrently, the Museum is establishing a Center for
Biodiversity and Conservation that will expand the Museum's research and
educational commitment to the study and preservation of biological diversity.
The renovation will facilitate the development of a critical component of the
Center's research and training program, the capability to apply modern molecular
systematic methods to conservation biology. Present research facilities used by
the department to conduct ongoing investigative projects cannot support modern
molecular research. Serious inadequacies, such as no climate-controlled and
filter air, lack of purified water, poor space configuration and no safe area to
use radioactive chemicals are some of the impediments researchers and students
confront when performing modern molecular research. This award will provide
support to assist the American Museum of Natural History in its efforts to
modernize the research facilities for the Department of Ornithology. Once the
renovations are completed, the potential to increase research productivity,
interdisciplinary research and graduate and postgraduate training programs in
molecular systematics and conservation genetics will be attainable.