* 9313731
* Analysis of Censored Data, Workshop at University of Poona, Pune, India, December 1994.
* O/D,OISE
* 08/15/1994,07/31/1995
* Hira Koul, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Marjorie Lueck
* 07/31/1995
* USD 9,614.00

9313731 Koul Description: This proposal will support travel for a small group of
U.S. statisticians to participate in a workshop: "Analysis of Censored Data,
University of Poona, Pune, India, December 1994." The Department of Statistics,
University of Poona, is the leading research center among Indian universities
and is second only to the Indian Statistical Institute, Calcutta. Statistical
inference is the thrust area of research in this Department. The workshop will
be hosted by the Department of Statistics at the new IUCAA facility on campus at
Poona University. The organizers are Hira Koul, Michigan State University and
J.V. Deshpande, Head of the Department of Statistics at Poona University. The
purpose of the workshop is to initiate interest in this area of research among
leading Indian inference statisticians. Censored data arise out of industrial,
biomedical and ecological survivorship studies. The stress will be on the need
for analyzing censored data and the most recent methodologies used for the
design of collection and analysis of such data. Scope: This workshop will be the
first international gathering on censoring to take place in India. Life
testing/survival analysis have become critically important as India seeks to
modernize the biomedical and industrial sectors. Improving the quality and
reliability of manufactured products is vital in accomplishing this goal.
Additionally, the opportunity to exchange ideas with leading statisticians from
Germany, Holland, Finland, and Canada will be highly beneficial to U.S.
participants. Post-doctoral and women scientists from the U.S. will be well
represented at the workshop. ***