* 9313529
* Renovation of Facilities for High Resolution Electron Beam  Lithographic Patterning
* O/D,OIA
* 09/15/1993,03/31/1994
* Larry Coldren, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Sherrie Green
* 03/31/1994
* USD 144,575.00

9313529 Hu The University of California at Santa Barbara will use this award to
modernize a research facility in order to appropriately house a custom, high-
resolution electron beam writing machine. The machine (VS1) was made available
to this university by a donation from IBM. It will provide a unique sub-micron
lithography tool capable of registration and alignment over large areas,
commensurate with a "manufacturing" quality machine. The proper operation of the
machine requires precise control of the local environment: temperature and
humidity of the ambient must be kept within a limited range. Appropriate
vibration isolation of this machine is also essential. The situation of the VS1
will be adjacent to the clean room fabrication area which is an optimal location
from the point of view of easy access to and integration with the total
device/structure fabrication process. This award will allow the university to
ensure that this facility gets optimum use by modernizing the structural,
electrical and air handling capabilities required for the operation of the VS1.
This facility will form a critical capability of a research effort that already
encompasses over 100 graduate students, postdoctoral fellows and faculty in the
Departments of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Materials, Physics and
Chemistry. This "in house" capability allows the formation of test structures
that facilitate rapid prove-in of novel device concepts, but also allows rapid
turn-around and adjustment of technology and processes. ***