* 9313857
* Universal Conference Information Server for Distributed     Synchronous Collaboration
* CSE,CNS
* 09/15/1993,08/31/1995
* Hussein Abdel-Wahab, Old Dominion University Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Mark A. Luker
* 08/31/1995
* USD 75,435.00

9313857 Abdel-Wahab Traditionally the Internet has been used for asynchronous
collaboration mostly using email, remote login and file transfer. Recently we
have seen the emergence of computer conferencing as a new Internet application
to allow synchronous collaboration among geographically diverse users working
together as a team on common projects. A process that once would have taken
days, with documents being sent back and forth between users, now can be
completed in a few minutes which increases the productivity and helps in making
decisions quicker. At this time there is no standard protocol and mechanism that
allows computer conferences to register and advertise about themselves.
Therefore users have to depend on personal communications and other indirect
methods to find out and locate ongoing conferences so that they can join and
participate. In this project a system called Universal Conference Information
Server (UCIS) will be designed and implemented to solve this problem. This
implementation of UCIS will stimulate further research in this area and can be
used as a basis for defining and ultimately the adoption of a standard Internet
protocol for computer-based conferencing. The system has three major components:
Announcers, Servers, and Queriers. Announcers send conference information to
Servers, while Queriers retrieve conference information stored at the Servers.
Like most Internet service, UCIS will offer its services in both TCP and UDP
forms. We will define the necessary protocols used by all three components and
provide sample implementation which can be used as a model by computer
conference system builders. The system is designed to be scalable to handle the
expected growth in this form of synchronous collaboration and to provide
reliable, accurate, and fast access to any number of users anywhere in the
Internet. ***