* 9313204
* Unified Constitutive Modelling, Testing and Computer Design for Semiconductor Devices with Emphasis on Interfaces       Behavior
* ENG,CMMI
* 05/15/1994,04/30/1999
* John Prince, University of Arizona
* Continuing Grant
* Delcie R. Durham
* 04/30/1999
* USD 420,000.00

9313204 Desai Competitive and innovative designs for semiconductor and packaging
manufacturing are dependent on the knowledge and understanding of the thermo-
mechanical behavior of materials and interfaces in various chip-substrate and
packaging systems. The currently available constitutive models and computer
software to characterize such behavior are not adequate to allow for various
important design factors such as elastic, plastic and creep strains, damage,
degradation and softening, relative motions (slippage, delamination and
warping), fatigue and cycles to failure under thermal, mechanical and other
environmental (e.g., moisture) loadings. Appropriate laboratory testing devices
and procedures that can allow macro and microlevel measurements leading to
determination of realistic material constants for both solid ( chip and
substrate) and interface materials are also not readily available. The objective
of this research is to develop: (1) a unified constitutive modelling approach
that can permit inclusion of the above factors for solids and interfaces, in a
common mathematical framework that can permit selection of simple to advanced
models depending upon the specific application need, (2) to perform
comprehensive laboratory tests. (3) to determine material constants for the
proposed models using the test data, and to verify the models with respect to
the test results, (4) to implement the models in nonlinear, time dependent
finite element procedures with attention to their robustness and reliability,
and (5) to develop software that can be used for improved and optimized designs
and manufacturing. The availability of the proposed computational tools will
allow the design of more reliable and higher performance packages for
semiconductor devices.