* 9313778
* Laser Studies of Equilibrium and Time Dependent Processes   at Liquid Interfaces
* MPS,CHE
* 12/15/1993,11/30/1996
* Kenneth Eisenthal, Columbia University
* Continuing Grant
* Joan M. Frye
* 11/30/1996
* USD 753,600.00

9313778 Eisenthal In this project of the Physical Chemistry Program of the
Chemistry Division, Prof. K.B. Eisenthal of Columbia University will investigate
the properties of and processes on liquid interfaces using non-linear optical
methods based on second harmonic and sum frequency generation techniques. The
aim of this work is to obtain a molecular level description of equilibrium and
time dependent processes at vapor/liquid, liquid/liquid, and liquid/solid
interfaces. The equilibrium processes include chemical equilibria such as a new
method for measuring acid-base equilibrium constants at interfaces, isomeric
equilibria at interfaces of molecules that are known to be sensitive to
polarity, and the investigation of charged molecules at liquid interfaces.
Ultrafast photochemical and photophysical events such as photoisomerization at
air/ liquid, liquid/liquid, and liquid/solid interfaces as well as the dynamics
of solvation initiated by a large change in the molecular dipole moment
following photoexcitation of interface molecules and other phenomena will be
investigated. %%% Interfaces are the sharply delineated geometric boundaries
that separate different media from one another. The chemical and physical
processes that occur at interfaces differ from those that take place within
either of the media. A common example is the bending of a light beam as it
traverses the boundary between air and water. While moving along a straight line
path in both media, air and water, the beam is bent at the boundary face. Other
examples are the evaporation of a liquid, whereby individual molecules move
across the boundary surface from the liquid to the vapor, and chemical processes
on surfaces which differ from those that take place in the bulk medium. While
these and other common interfacial processes are reasonably well understood on
the basis of macroscopic, phenomenological theories, it is important to know on
a molecular level of description how these come about. It is the purpose of this
research project to investigate interfacial processes in such a way that they
can be understood on the basis of interactions between molecules, and between
molecules and electromagnetic radiation. Though this research will concern
itself with fundamental, basic questions of the chemistry and physics of
interfacial phenomena, it has relevance to major environmental issues of
air/water, oil/ water, and soil (silicates)/water interfaces. ***