* 9313672
* Investigation of Environmental Cues and Physiological       Processes that Regulate Larval Diapause in Calnus           Finmarchicus
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/1993,08/31/1997
* Nancy Marcus, Florida State University
* Continuing Grant
* Phillip R. Taylor
* 08/31/1997
* USD 55,893.00

9313672 Marcus Populations of Calanus finmarchicus constitute a major portion of
the zooplankton biomass in the Northwestern Atlantic, and comprise a fundamental
food source for the cod and haddock that live on Georges Bank. The springtime
arrival of this copepod on the Bank is reportedly due to recruitment of fifth
stage copepodites from the deeper waters of the Gulf of Maine, where they
overwinter in a state of dormancy or diapause. Recruitment success depends, to a
large extent, on the duration of this diapause stage. Knowing the effects of
environmental factors on the timing of diapause induction and termination, and
the internal morphological changes that occur throughout this critical life
stage, will contribute to a better understanding of the physical and biological
factors that regulate the recruitment process of Calanus finmarchicus onto
Georges Bank. The research to be conducted under this project is an in-depth
investigation of ways in which variations of temperature and photoperiod may
influence the physiological processes that control and regulate diapause in
Calanus finmarchicus. A specially designed system for culturing multiple
generations of C. finmarchicus will be used to subject the juvenile stages to
various combinations of temperature and photoperiod. Light microscopy and TEM
will be used to confirm the identity of the cue-receptive organs and
neuroendocrine sites that control the cessation and induction of molting.
Cytological features of gonad development in diapausing and nondiapausing
individuals will be described and compared in both laboratory and field
populations. ***