* 9313388
* 51 Reasons to Build the National Information Infrastructure
* CSE,CNS
* 07/15/1993,09/30/1994
* Eric Hood, Farnet Inc
* Standard Grant
* Priscilla Jane Huston
* 09/30/1994
* USD 47,647.00

9313388 Breeden As the Internet has expanded in recent years, and the Congress
has considered and passed legislation that extends and enhances access to the
National Research and Education Network (NREN), public interest in networking
has skyrocketed. But its potential in many publication arenas, although sensed
by the "early adopters" in fields such as elementary and secondary education and
health care delivery, is not well understood yet. Who is using it? How are they
using it? Can we document the benefits? And what is the case for public
investment in the NREN and the national information infrastructure? The goal of
this project is to collect anecdotal descriptions - "stories" -from a range of
users about how Internet access has improved their access to information and
services. This collection of "stories" will help document the benefits of the
Internet and will create a pools of candidates for further study. It will also
assist the foundation and other Federal Agencies, as well as legislators, policy
makers and Internet users, in locating particular types of users and
application. The stories will be made available in one or more Internet
information servers, using technologies such as Gopher, WAIS, and BRS. They will
also be published in an illustrated booklet which will be distributed at no
charge to a wide audience. ***