* 9313256
* Atmospheric Turbulence and Diffusion in the Tropics, Indo-  U.S. Collaborative Research, Award in U.S. and Indian       Currencies
* O/D,OISE
* 05/01/1994,04/30/1997
* Sethu Raman, North Carolina State University
* Continuing Grant
* Osman Shinaishin
* 04/30/1997
* USD 62,272.00

9313256 Raman Description: This project will support two scientists, Dr. Sethu
Raman, of North Carolina State University, and M.P. Singh, of the Indian
Institute of Technology, New Delhi, and their graduate students, to continue and
complete a collaborative research on the observations and modeling of
atmospheric turbulence and diffusion at low wind speeds. The main objective of
the study is to determine the variation of turbulence and diffusion processes in
the surface layer during daytime convective conditions and nighttime stable
conditions. Another part involves test and development of a reliable model to
predict diffusion in low wind speeds. Scope: This project deals with modeling of
weather conditions in a tropical area, which applies to many of the countries in
South Asia and South East Asia. The two scientists have set up elaborate
facilities in India for measuring atmospheric conditions at all times, and are
developing and adapting computer models that can be tested and modified to best
describe the prevailing conditions in the region. The completion of the work is
important to reach reliable models of dispersion at low wind speeds. Such models
have many applications such as in predicting dispersion of industrial or
chemical pollutants in warm climates. The interaction between the U.S. and
Indian sides is clearly beneficial to the research of the two scientists and in
developing new human resources in the two countries. ***