* 9313170
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:  An Ethnography of the      Development of Thyboronsk
* SBE,BCS
* 10/01/1993,09/30/1996
* Michael Silverstein, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Paul G. Chapin
* 09/30/1996
* USD 10,000.00

9313170 Silverstein The main foci of this project are: (1) documenting the
sociolinguistic profile of a small community constituted over the course of
rapid internal migration within a larger linguistic community; and (2) tracing
the emergence of interdialectisms and hyperdialectisms as functions of factors
such as access and orientation of members to standardizing media, how long they
have lived in the community, and their age. In this project, we apply
quantitative sociolinguistic techniques to fluctuating dialectological phenomena
and thereby attempt to account for hyperdialectisms through examining mechanisms
of regional standardization. We will gather both demographic and other
ethnographic data with the aim of producing a more comprehensive account of the
fluctuating condition of Thyboronsk. The data will enable the P.I.'s to analyze
the development of the dialect from its emergence through the macro-level
processes of its regional standardization. The ramifications if these processes
are evidenced both linguistically and sociologically. The project is intended to
reveal what factors control and/or contribute to the formation and
sustainability of local identities of small transplanted communities. It will
also explore the possibilities for developing quantitative techniques for
evaluating and calibrating the validity of phonetic transcriptions of linguistic
interviews.