* 9313878
* U.S.-Europe Regional Workshop on Non-Stoichiometry in       Semiconductor Heterostructures; Jena, Germany;              October 10-14, 1994.
* O/D,OISE
* 08/01/1994,01/31/1996
* Klaus Bachmann, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Christine French
* 01/31/1996
* USD 10,250.00

9318766 Bachmann This award supports the participation of seven U.S. scientists,
all at early stages of their research careers, in a workshop co-organized by
Professor Klaus Bachmann of North Carolina State University and Professor Hans
Flietner of the Hahn-Meitner Institute in Berlin. The meeting will be held near
Jena, in the eastern part of Germany, in order to facilitate the participation
of scientists from Eastern Europe. The objective of the workshop is to promote
the exchange of information and the initiation of international cooperative
research within the general area of non-stoichiometry in semiconductor
heterostructures. Specific topics to be covered in the workshop discussions
include imaging and characterization, surface induced ordering and stabilization
of growth processes, and electrical methods for detecting deviations from
stoichiometry at heterojunctions. In addition, the participants will examine the
relation of the properties of heterostructures to the composition, structure and
stoichiometry of their interfacial regions. This area of materials research is
of considerable current interest and potential applications to electronic
materials. Innovative research being carried out in Eastern Europe and the
former Soviet Union was not particularly well known in the West. While this
situation is changing, the intentional east-west character of this small meeting
should considerably increase the exposure of that work and greatly facilitate
the development of new collaborative links among U.S., German and Eastern
European experts in this important area. ***