* 9313421
* Renovation of the California Polytechnic State University,  San Luis Obispo, Applied Research and Development           Facitities and Activities Building (ARDFA)
* O/D,OIA
* 09/15/1993,08/31/1999
* Stephen L. Hockaday, California Polytechnic State University Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Sherrie Green
* 08/31/1999
* USD 1,787,277.00

9313421 Hockaday The College of Engineering at the California Polytechnic State
University at San Luis Obispo has undergone dramatic growth in the past ten
years, and it has gained wide acclaim for its program of joint student-faculty
research projects. Applied research projects in the areas of transportation,
aeronautics, computer workstation design, and other engineering disciplines are
constrained by their current facilities. Research and research training are
housed in a metal airplane hangar built in 1946, an annex that has been
renovated in stages, and a variety of small temporary buildings in the immediate
area. The University plans to complete the renovation of the annex and
consolidate all other activities in a single new facility next to the annex,
replacing the hangar and temporary buildings. The annex renovations include
asbestos abatement, building modifications that will provide access for persons
with disabilities, modernize the heating, ventilating, and cooling systems, and
other small improvements. The construction of a building to replace the hangar
and out-buildings will consolidate the research and research training activities
in one site, and will provide an adaptable environment for a diverse array of
engineering projects. The modernization of engineering research facilities at
California Polytechnic State University will have a significant impact by 1)
creating suitable environments for research instrumentation, 2) bringing
together a critical mass of engineering faculty and students, 3) enabling a wide
range of research projects, 4) providing an outstanding atmosphere for research
training, and 5) attracting undergraduate students to careers in science and
engineering. ***