* 9313848
* Continuation of Parkfield Pipeline Experiment
* ENG,CMMI
* 02/01/1994,01/31/1997
* Jeremy Isenberg, Weidlinger Associates, Incorporated
* Standard Grant
* Clifford J. Astill
* 01/31/1997
* USD 42,244.00

9313848 Isenberg This action is for continued support of an experiment in which
underground instrumented pipeline segments were constructed and installed in a
zone of probable earthquake rupture in Parkfield, California. The overall
objective is to investigate the damage experienced by buried pipelines due to
strong earthquake shaking, and to use data measured during strong ground shaking
to evaluate analytical models for predicting this damage. Since 1857, seven
earthquakes have occurred on the San Andreas Fault in the vicinity of Parkfield,
at an average interval of 22 years. The last earthquake was in 1966, and the
United States Geological Survey (USGS) predicts, with a 95% confidence level, a
recurrence before 1993. The choice of the site at Parkfield was made with
assistance from USGS geologists. This experiment is supported in collaboration
with the National Center for Earthquake Engineering Research in Buffalo, New
York, and the Urban Earthquake Hazard Research Institute of the University of
Tokyo in Japan. The first objective of this project is to investigate the
effects of lateral offset on pipelines, a major damage mode, and to provide data
on the relation between ground displacements and pipeline response in order to
evaluate analytical models of this damage mode. The second objective is to
investigate the damage induced by travelling seismic waves, another important
damage mode, and to use measured data to evaluate analytical models. Whereas the
first experiment requires that the surface rupture cross the installed
pipelines, the second experiment is dependent only on the installation being
subjected to strong ground shaking. ***