* 9313895
* Research Enhancement for Minority Scientists
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/1993,01/31/1996
* Winston Anderson, American Society For Cell Biology
* Standard Grant
* Eve Ida Barak
* 01/31/1996
* USD 103,179.00

9313895 Wyche Many reasons account for the underrepresentation of minorities in
important fields of biological sciences. A major contributing factor has been
the paucity of opportunities for significant numbers of competent minorities to
receive high caliber educational training at the best academic institutions, and
insufficient exposure to high caliber scientists and research laboratories. In
an effort to correct some of these deficiencies, the Minorities Affairs
Committee (MAC) of the American Society for Cell Biology (ASCB) has set forth
the following objectives: 1, to provide travel grants to underrepresented
minorities from minority and majority institutions to attend the annual meeting
of the ASCB, which provides recipients with the opportunity to attend symposia,
workshops, poster sessions, and to interact with peers and leading ASCB
scientists; 2, to provide tuition, laboratory fees, housing and travel support
to minority students and scientists to attend academic and/or technical courses
and workshops at high quality academic sites such as the Marine Biological
Laboratory and Friday Harbor Laboratory summer courses; 3, to support summer
trainees and visiting professors in research laboratories offering state-of-the-
art programs in cell and molecular biology; 4, to support orientation meetings
of the ASCB minorities attending the annual meeting, mini-scientific symposia
and workshops, and an annual ASCB breakfast meeting during the annual meeting;
5, to provide funds to support essential secretarial and managerial services
provided by the ASCB executive office and printing costs to inform the
scientific community of opportunitites for underrepresented minorities. ***
9313895 Wyche Many reasons account for the underrepresentation of minorities in
important fields of biological sciences. A major contributing factor has been
the paucity of opportunities for significant numbers of competent minorities to
receive high caliber educational trainin g at the best academic institutions,
and insufficient exposure to high caliber scientists and research laboratories.
In an effort to correct some of these deficiencies, the Minorities Affairs
Committee (MAC) of the American Society for Cell Biology (ASCB) has set forth
the following objectives: 1, to provide travel grants to underrepresented
minorities from minority and majority institutions to attend the annual meeting
of the ASCB, which provides recipients with the opportunity to attend symposia,
workshops, poster sessions, and to interact with peers and leading ASCB
scientists; 2, to provide tuition, laboratory fees, housing and travel support
to minority students and scientists to attend academic and/or technical courses
and workshops at high quality academic sites such as the Marine Biological
Laboratory and Friday Harbor Laboratory summer courses; 3, to support summer
trainees and visiting professors in research laboratories offering state-of-the-
art programs in cell and molecular biology; 4, to support orientation meetings
of the ASCB minorities attending the annual meeting, mini-scientific symposia
and workshops, and an annual ASCB breakfast meeting during the annual meeting;
5, to provide funds to support essential secretarial and managerial services
provided by the ASCB executive office and printing costs to inform the
scientific community of opportunitites for underrepresented minorities. ***