* 9313813
* Replacement of a 15 Year-Old X-ray Microanalysis Unit
* BIO,DBI
* 03/15/1994,08/31/1996
* Richard Zeyen, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Michael K. Lamvik
* 08/31/1996
* USD 68,300.00

9313813 Zeyen Replacement of a 15 year old energy dispersive X ray
Micronanalysis Unit (XRMA) on an existing scanning electron microscope, and
addition of a detector and remote workstation to a newly acquired analytically
configured transmission electron microscope are the proposal objectives.
Replacement instrumentation is for campus wide research and student training on
the St. Paul Campus of the University of Minnesota. The XRMA replacement sought
is a workstation based analyzer capable of simultaneous energy dispersive X ray
microanalysis from two light element detectors installed on existing instruments
located in separate rooms. The replacement instrumentation would also provide
for electronic image capture and storage, image analysis capabilities, and have
a networking interface with Ethernet. The requested replacement instrument is an
integral part of current and future campus wide biological and life science
research needs. On going student training and research capabilities would be
greatly enhanced by "state of the art" replacement instrumentation. Current
research efforts, with state and national priorities, benefiting immediately
from the proposal for a replacement instrument are: a) Wood decomposition and
bioprocessing of lignin removal for paper products; b) Disease and pest
resistance in plants; c) Elemental distribution research in plants aimed at
reducing fertilizer needs; d) Forest water quality and applied ecology of lakes,
streams and rivers; and, e) Atmospheric acid deposition and pesticide residue
research in soil chemistry and physics. Replacement instrumentation is to be
located in the Cooperative Electron Optics Facility (CEOF) in the Christensen
Laboratory building on the St. Paul Campus. This multiple user facility has been
in operation since 1969, is supported by the Minnesota Agricultural Experiment
Station, and serves campus wide needs in analytical electron microscopy and
XRMA. The CEOF is centrally located on the St. Paul Campus, has 11 rooms, 2
ultramicrotomes, vacuum evaporators, darkrooms and preparation laboratories. No
renovation or remodeling is necessary to accept the proposed instrument
replacement. u ~ s t # # # # # # # # # # # # # e# # # #!#"###$#%#&amp;#'#(#)#*#+
#,#-
#.#/#0#1#2#3#4#5#6#7#8#9#:#;#&lt;#=#&gt;#?#@#A#B#C#D#E#F#G#H#I#J#K#L#M#N#O#P#Q#R
#S#T#U#V#W# Y#Z# #\# #^#_#`#a#b#c#d# f#g#h#o# # m#n# p#q#r#s#t# y# # # # # # # #
# # 9313813 Zeyen Replacement of a 15 year old energy dispersive X ray
Micronanalysis Unit (XRMA) on an existing scanning electron 6 8 ! ! ! ! ! F 3
Times New Roman Symbol &amp; Arial 1 Courier : " h e e e * = abstract Deseree
King, BIR Deseree King, BIR