* 9313552
* Infrastructure Renovation of Materials Science and          Engineering Research Facilities
* O/D,OIA
* 03/01/1994,10/31/1999
* Paul Holloway, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Sherrie Green
* 10/31/1999
* USD 1,000,000.00

Abbaschian This award will support the modernization of the Materials Science
and Engineering Department at the University of Florida. This department is
housed in Rhines Hall, a building that was constructed in 1950 as a physical
plant shop and renovated in 1968 to provide research space for materials
science. The scope of this renovation project will: 1) develop three quasi-clean
rooms; 2) develop a furnace room; 3) replace the electrical system; 4) add a
closed-loop instrument cooling water system for 22 rooms; 5) upgrade the air
conditioning and air handling systems; and 6) replace a number of fume hoods.
This project will modernize 20,844 square feet of research and research training
space which will enhance space utilization and provide up-to-date laboratories
for several principal research areas in materials science and in an
interdisciplinary research affiliate, the MICROFABRITECH Program. This thorough
renovation of the research infrastructure will have its major impact on the
quality, quantity and efficiency of research and research training. The goal is
to shorten the time delay between fundamental research and applications, enhance
the development of university-industry partnerships. This project will impact 25
faculty, more than 20 research and technical staff, 157 graduate students and
120 undergraduate students.