* 9313318
* Enhanced Monitoring of Polymer Processing Operations via    Infrared Pyrometry
* ENG,CMMI
* 05/15/1994,10/31/1997
* Tim Osswald, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Delcie R. Durham
* 10/31/1997
* USD 300,000.00

9313318 Rietveld The accurate and precise measurement of process stream
temperatures during polymer processing operations is generally a problematic
procedure. Current techniques to measure process stream temperatures during a
typical manufacturing operation (in both industrial and academic settings) are
either ignored, misused, or highly deficient, and there is a great need to
advance the science and technology behind the in situ measurement of an
important process stream variable such as the polymer temperature. In terms of
the manufacturing process, temperature is the most important process parameter
as it directly influences the processability, properties, and performance of the
plastic product. A primary objective of the research work is to develop a
reliable methodology for applying infrared pyrometers to the measurement of
polymer temperature during the manufacture of plastics resins and plastic
articles, whereby such a measurement could then be used to optimize the
manufacturing operation. The methodology will provide for an non-invasive
procedure to obtain bulk temperature information as well as detailed temperature
information about the process stream. Several key advantages that IR pyrometers
have over conventional thermometry techniques are: response times on the order
of milliseconds, capacity for in situ real-time measurements, and potential for
detecting subsurface temperatures in a non-invasive fashion. The research plan
will utilize commercially available instrumentation installed on an injection
molding machine, an extruder, and in a calibration apparatus so that data will
be collected and analyzed data from both complex and controlled temperature
environments. Collaborations with industrial partners will provide a forum for
where and how the findings can be applied to the optimization of plastics
processing and manufacturing. The research project may lead to improved control
of polymer processes, such as injection molding and extrusion, which will allow
high quality, faster processing and more predictable properties for the products
of these processes.