* 9313786
* Delocalization and Phase-transition in Quantum Hall         Devices
* NONE,NONE
* 02/15/1994,04/30/1997
* Hong-Wen Jiang, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing grant
* Jean Toulouse
* 04/30/1997
* USD 247,000.00

9313786 Jiang Transport experiments will be carried out on the GaAs/AlGaAs two-
dimensional electron gas in the quantum Hall regime at low temperatures and high
magnetic fields. The proposed experiments include study of the transport
properties of the Anderson insulator in a magnetic field, investigation of the
critical exponents of the phase transition between the insulator and the quantum
Hall liquid, and study of the global phase diagram of the quantum Hall effect in
the magnetic field-disorder plane. The delocalization processes and general
scaling properties of the transitions are likely to be important to the
understanding of other low dimensional quantum systems. %%% Very thin sheets of
electrons can be created in artificially layered semiconductors. Such electronic
two dimensional (2D) conductors have significant device potential but can also
serve as ideal systems for testing recent theoretical predictions. A gate
electrode can alter the character of the electron gas from that of a conductor
to an insulator. An applied magnetic field can revert an insulating phase to a
conducting phase. It is proposed to study the 2D electron gas as a function of
applied bias and as a function of magnetic field at low cryogenic temperatures.
The results will be compared to a recently published comprehensive theory. The
results are expected to have an impact on the understanding of other low
dimensional electronic systems. ***