* 9313657
* Ab Initio Calculations on Proton Transfers
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/1993,01/31/1998
* William Saunders, University of Rochester
* Standard Grant
* Kenneth M. Doxsee
* 01/31/1998
* USD 54,000.00

9313657 Saunders Proton transfers from acids in which the ionizing proton is
attached to carbon will be studied by quantum chemical methods. The energies and
other properties of the separated reactants, the ion-dipole complexes, and the
transition state structures for proton transfer will be calculated for a number
of carbon acids that yield delocalized anions of the sort widely used in organic
synthesis. A study will also be made of a prototype for oxygen acids that yield
delocalized anions, acetaldehyde enol, and a comparison will be made to the
carbon-centered acid, acetaldehyde. The aim of the research will be to explore
the factors that influence barriers to proton transfer: acidity, heavy-atom
reorganization, charge transfer, and polarizability. These gas-phase
calculations will be compared to literature experimental results in both the
gas-phase and solution. Calculations of isotope effects will be done on selected
systems, including deprotonation of propene by hydroxide ion and elimination
reactions in order to establish what level of calculation is necessary to give
reasonable isotope effects, and to compare the results with experimental data in
solution. %%% This grant from the Organic Dynamics Program supports the work of
Professor William H. Saunders at the University of Rochester. The transfer of a
proton from an acid is one the most common and most important reactions in
chemistry. This work will study proton transfers reactions by computational
methods and compare the results to experimental data. The individual factors
that control the energy barrier to proton transfer will be probed in these
calculations. Deuterium substitution, which alters the rate of proton (or
deuterium) transfer and is important in determining the mechanism of proton
transfer, will be calculated and compared to experimental results. ***