* 9313826
* I/UCRC Planning of Center for Advanced Control of Energy/   Power Systems
* ENG,EEC
* 05/15/1993,08/31/1994
* Rahmatallah Shoureshi, Purdue Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* alexander schwarzkopf
* 08/31/1994
* USD 9,999.00

A reliable energy source is an essential infrastructure support component for
any type of manufacturing system. Approximately 30% of the world's fossil fuels
and 25% of the world petroleum are consumed by the United States alone. In order
for the United States manufacturers to be competitive in the international
market, the effectiveness of the energy utilization should be improved. Because
of the pollutant emission considerations, electricity is displacing natural gas
as an energy source. Therefore there is an increased demand for electric power
by manufacturing and material processing industry. An Industry/University
Cooperative Research Center on Advanced Control of Energy/Power System at Purdue
University could establish a better mechanism to advance the development and
application of basic research on power and energy system. A planning meeting
will study if industry will support an Industry/University Cooperative Research
Center on Advanced Control of Power/Energy System to be headquartered the Purdue
University. The meeting will assess industry interest and determine if the
Center has sufficient support and merit to meet the Industry/University
Cooperative Research Centers Program criteria. The proposed research projects
will address: 1) power generation and transmission; 2) energy distribution and
utilization; 3) optimal dynamic dispatching; 4) monitoring and diagnostics; and
5) instrumentation and control. The Principal Investigator is recognized as an
eminent researcher and has the resources for the planning meeting. Currently,
the Electric Power Research Institute (EPRI) and four other companies have
committed to support this effort. The Program Manager recommends Purdue
University be awarded $9,999 for four months for this planning meeting.