* 9313126
* Process Technology and Its Implications for Inspection      and Manufacturing of Ceramic Multi-Chip Modules
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/1994,11/30/1997
* Seth Hutchinson, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Delcie R. Durham
* 11/30/1997
* USD 397,787.00

9313126 Lewis The broad objective of the research is to improve the quality,
reproducibility, and speed of ceramic-based multi-chip module manufacturing. An
interdisciplinary effort will simultaneously focus on materials and processing
issues, and on automated visual inspection of tape-cast ceramic layers.
Currently, a scientific understanding of the effects of materials composition on
both suspension rheology and as-cast properties (both macrostructural and
microstructural) is lacking. This will be addressed by an experimental program
which (1) characterizes the rheological properties as a function of suspension
composition and time, and (2) determines the microstructural variations within
the layers. Insights gained from this experimental program will be used to
derive statistical models for defect occurrence, which will then drive the
inspection process. An inspection methodology that combines process knowledge
with computer vision and image processing techniques does not yet exist. The end
result of the research will be improved dimensional control and reproducibilty
and automated visual inspection of tape-cast sheets. In addition, this work will
provide a basic understanding of the relationship between the materials system,
processing parameters, and microstructural development that is readily
applicable to the production of advanced ceramic components. Such understanding
may allow the production of more reliable electronic devices and assemblies.