* 9313042
* Mathematical Sciences:NSF/CBMS Regional Conference in       Mathematical Sciences-Complex Dynamics in Higher            Dimensions; June 13-18, 1994; Albany, New York
* MPS,DMS
* 05/15/1994,10/31/1994
* R. Michael Range, SUNY at Albany
* Standard Grant
* Jean Thiebaux
* 10/31/1994
* USD 25,718.00

9313042 Range Professor John E. Fornaess, a leading international expert in the
area of multidimensional complex analysis, will present a series of ten
lectures, centering around the behavior of classes of holomorphic self-maps of
complex n- dimensional Euclidean spaces and projective spaces. Just as in the
one dimensional case - widely known through stunning computer generated
visualisations - iteration of such maps in higher dimensions reveals surprising
phenomena, and new properties of dynamical systems which need to be understood.
While some of the work in dimension two goes back to classical work of Fatou and
Bieberbach in the 1920's (Fatou, together with Julia, is one of the pioneers of
complex dynamics in dimension one), most of the topics covered in Fornaess'
lectures are based on quite recent work. The field is the subject of many
current investigations, and there are many open problems. The lectures are
intended to make this research area accessible to non-experts in
multidimensional complex analysis, and they should help mathematicians new to
this field to gain a deeper understanding of the major problems and current
directions of research in this new and rapidly expanding research area. The
conference will take place June 13 to June 18, 1994, on the campus of the
University of Albany, State University of New York. Albany is the center of the
Capital District in Upstate New York, a cast region which includes among its
many educational institutions the University of Albany, Rensselaer Polytechnic
Institute, Union College, Skidmore College and Siena College. Multidimensional
complex analysis is an active area of research at the University of Albany, and
many experts in classical function theory, ergodic theory and (real) dynamical
systems work in the region. A special effort will be made to attract interested
participants from neighboring institutions, who may want to enter this research
field. It is hoped that this series of lectures will help to build new
interactions between mathematicians from the different institutions in the
region, and stimulate new research efforts in multidimensional complex analysis
in the region.