* 9313186
* Avoiding Interference Among Subsystems in Architectural     Design:  A Computer Supported Constraint Based Approach
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/15/1993,02/28/1997
* Mark Gross, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* george hazelrigg
* 02/28/1997
* USD 140,000.00

9313186 Gross The project develops a computer aided design method for laying out
subsystems in building designs. By using a CAD program with embedded assembly
rules and spatial layout rules, each subsystem designer can subscribe to this
layout method. The project develops and tests and interactive layout program
based on constraint techniques that can be programmed to manage and enforce
different sets of layout rules. A series of design experiments test and evaluate
the layout method and the program that supports it. A team of designers use the
program to design a series of increasingly complex layouts using residential
wood frame buildings as an example. evaluation includes interviews with the
participants and reviews by external consultants with experience in subsystem
layout. The objective of the method is to support cooperative design by
minimizing spatial interference conflicts among the designers of different
subsystems the pipes, ducts and wires that supply water, electricity, and
ventilation. The method restricts the placement of subsystems into preallocated
spatial zones, restricting interference conflicts to predictable locations that
can be resolved with predetermined fixes. It supports cooperative design by
allowing members of a design team to work independently and in parallel knowing
that their respective designs can easily be integrated.