* 9313062
* Behavior of High Strength Concrete Composites Influenced    by Interfacial Fracture Properties
* NONE,NONE
* 01/15/1994,06/30/1997
* Oral Buyukozturk, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing grant
* John Scalzi
* 06/30/1997
* USD 246,655.00

9313062 Buyukozturk This project will investigate the role of mortar-aggregate
interfaces on the mechanical behavior of high strength concrete composites. the
general objective of the project is to establish the fundamental criteria
governing the strength, stiffness and ductility of high strength concrete
through studies of the material as a composite consisting of a high strength
mortar and aggregate system. the emphasis will be on the role of interface
toughness on the composite material behavior. Fracture mechanics based
laboratory experiments and numerical studies will be performed on concrete
models with high strength mortar matrix and aggregate inclusions having
different material property combinations with controlled interface fracture
characteristics. The required interface fracture toughness data for various
mortar/aggregate systems will be assessed based on the approach developed
through previous research. The variation of interface strength, achieved using
controlled amounts of silica fume, will be implemented in the parametric studies
for the properties. The research is expected to provide a fundamental knowledge
of the effects of mortar-aggregate interfaces on high strength concrete behavior
and to have a direct impact on its production and use in an efficient,
economical, and sate manner. ***