* 9313825
* Dissertation Research:  The Role of School Teachers in      Formal Education in a Pastoralist Society
* SBE,BCS
* 11/01/1993,10/31/1995
* Lois Beck, Washington University
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 10/31/1995
* USD 11,745.00

This dissertation research proposal to study the effects of formal education on
a nomadic pastoralist group in Iran received enthusiastic reviews. Reviewer
Caton mentions that he knew the student, but he was not a faculty member at
Washington University during the time the student was there (Caton taught at
Wash U. for a few years prior to 1988, the student arrived after that date).
There is no justification in the research plan for the domestic travel in the US
or the video camera, and I can't recommend their funding. Otherwise the budget
is reasonable given the field conditions. The student has no other support for
this research. I recommend that the proposal be funded. TIME \@ `MMMM d, yyyy`
September 20, 1993 Beck 9313825 This project involves the dissertation research
of a cultural anthropologist from Washington University, Missouri. Using
archival study, interviews and participant observation the student will study
the effects of state-controlled formal education on the cultural identity of a
nomadic pastoral group in southern Iran. This part of the world has a long
history of local-national state hostility and struggle over domination. The
researcher, a native speaker of the language, will study how the identity of
local school teachers influences the cultural content of the education
experience of their students. The hypothesis to be tested is that the state
hostility to local cultural identity has paradoxically served to strengthen this
local `resistance` identity, and the project will study how this m ight have
happened. This project is important in light of the many local wars and
struggles of local ethnic groups against national states. Increased
understanding of the parameters affecting local resistance and struggle, or
local acceptance and cultural blending, will help us understand and perhaps
prepare for other situations of conflict.