* 9313427
* Replacement of Biological Research Laboratories and         Herpetology Collection Storage Facility
* O/D,OIA
* 06/01/1994,12/31/1996
* Frank Gill, Academy of Natural Sciences Philadelphia
* Standard Grant
* Sherrie Green
* 12/31/1996
* USD 562,714.00

Gill The Academy of Natural Sciences in Philadelphia is one of the oldest
natural history museums in the U.S., and it has a long tradition of research in
biology and environmental science. This long tradition brings with it an aging
facility, and several additions to the building have been constructed over the
years to provide new space for research, education, and public exhibits. The
Academy has recently constructed new space in what was an interior courtyard.
Several new research techniques in molecular biology have the potential to make
significant contributions to the Academy s research programs, but the lack of
suitable facilities has been an obstacle to using these techniques. The Academy
plans to dedicate a portion of the newly constructed addition to research
laboratories with these capabilities. Space modifications will create ideal
environments for the sensitive instruments used in molecular biology and DNA
sequencing. The renovation will also provide: controlled environment growth
chambers for microbial cultures and for ecological experiments; safe storage
areas that are in compliance with fire codes for alcohol-preserved specimens;
adequate ventilation and fume hoods; and capabilities for safe storage, use, and
disposal of hazardous research materials. This renovation project will solve a
variety of safety issues, and will enable researchers at the Academy to broaden
their research programs through the addition of new laboratory techniques.
Irreplaceable specimens in the reference collections will have safer storage
facilities, and sensitive research instruments will be given suitable settings.
The overall research and education productivity of the institution will increase
as a result of this renovation. The Department of Agricultural Engineering,
Oklahoma State University, is recognized as one of the nation's leaders in
Biosystems Engineering research, the application of engineering principles to
biological systems. While agriculture remains an integral aspect of the research
program, Biosystems includes environmental, natural resources and biological
applications. To reflect this broader scope, the Department will be renamed
Biosystems and Agricultural Engineering. In addition to the programmatic
changes, the facilities housing ongoing research activities will be renovated
and replaced to complement the new priorities of the Department as it completes
its transformation to Biosystems and Agricultural Engineering. Existing
facilities were built in an era when agricultural mechanization research
primarily involved the construction of heavy mechanisms and soil and water
research. These facilities are inadequate to perform Biosystems research that
requires high quality labs with special provisions. This award will provide
funding for the modernization of laboratory space that will allow for the proper
support of programs in machine vision, sensors and controls, intelligent
machines and bioenvironmental engineering. The relocation of the shop facility
to the main campus will be adjoined to the research laboratory, providing more
effective and efficient shop services for faculty. Specific renovations will
include upgrading the HVAC, electrical, and mechanical systems. The
modernization of the research facilities at Oklahoma State University will have
maximum impact on the human resources needed for the nation's continued
leadership in science and engineering into the twenty-first century.