* 9313704
* Multi-scale Analysis of the Biogeography, Ecology, and      Genetic Structure of Sand Pine in Florida
* SBE,BCS
* 01/15/1994,12/31/1997
* Albert Parker, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Bernard O. Bauer
* 12/31/1997
* USD 175,000.00

9313704 PARKER Many biogeographers, ecologists, population biologists, and other
scientists have recognized that scale is an important factor to be considered in
their research. Hierarchy theory has highlighted the need to evaluate the
broader spatial scales inherent in regional environmental histories as a context
within which ecological and genetic interactions occur at finer scales of
resolution. In order to identify how regional processes of disturbance and
regeneration relate to spatial patterns, age structures, and genetic composition
of related species, this project will examine two types of sand pine (Pinus
clausa) in Florida. Ocala sand pine occurs in peninsular Florida, while
Choctawhatchee sand pine is present in the Florida panhandle. Both species exist
in both coastal and inland locations, where they occupy similar environments,
but their stands are separated by more than 100 km. The project will be
conducted in two phases. The first will consist of collection of materials and
data on the diameter and tree-ring structure of sample trees as well as soil,
foliage, and other environmental data for 18 representative sites. This
information will be evaluated through detailed allozyme analyses to determine
genetic and ecological variations between Ocala and Choctawhatchee sand pine.
During a second phase of research, the demographic and genetic structure of four
or five representative stands will be mapped in detail. This mapping will permit
assessment of the ways that environmental and disturbance histories have
affected each kind of sand pine. Of particular concern to the experienced team
of geographers and population biologists undertaking this project is degree to
which the dispersion of different trees are related to differences in the scales
of disturbance (such as localized canopy fires vs. wide-spread wind damage from
hurricanes). Attention also focuses on the extent to which these differences are
related to finer-scale variations in g enetic structures within populations.
This focused case study of variations among two species of Florida sand pine
will provide valuable tests of hypotheses related to a broader range of topics.
In addition to providing new insights regarding the possible impacts of
Quaternary sea- level change on the isolation and genetic differentiation of
species, the results of this research will shed light on multi- scale
relationships among site characteristics, disturbance ecology, and the genetic
structure of vegetation. ***