* 9313430
* Consolidation of the Laboratory of Ecological and           Evolutionary Genetics
* O/D,OIA
* 09/15/1993,08/31/1995
* Laura Huenneke, New Mexico State University
* Standard Grant
* Sherrie Green
* 08/31/1995
* USD 150,949.00

- Z Z Z Z Z Z Z h h h h h r | N 4 9313430 Howard The Department of Biology, at
New Mexico State University, established the Laboratory of Ecological and
Evolutionary Genetics, two years ago to improve the department's program in
ecology, evolution, and systematics. The laboratory was envisioned as a common
departmental resource, where any department member, faculty or student, could
learn modern molecular genetic techniques and apply these techniques to the
research problem. The need for the laboratory developed from the rising
importance of molecular genetic techniques in many of the sub-disciplines of
biology, particularly ecology, evolution and systematics. Access to these
techniques can prove to be an insurmountable problem for some researchers and
students due to lack of training or funds. Present conditions in Foster Hall,
home of the Biology Department, have impeded research activities. Researchers
are forced to travel throughout the building to perform different steps of
various techniques, leading to the duplication of experiments. This award will
provide funding for the consolidation of research space that is currently
scattered within Foster Hall. Some of the laboratories that will undergo
renovations were not originally designed as laboratory space and are inadequate
to conduct modern research. Laboratory casework, benches and fume hoods will be
replaced, in addition to modifying the electrical, plumbing and HVAC systems. By
creating a shared facility, the Department will ensure that all of its members
have access to the equipment, methods, and training essential for the successful
incoporations of molecular biological techni ques into a research program.
Fincode Text Only! G N Tms Rmn ` Symbol Helv Chicago 0 Courier Cairo
ZapfDingbats Bookman Palatino ZapfChancery AvantGarde Easy Street Chicago Ridge
Bar Code 39 Chicago LW I Palatino Italic B Palatino Bold BI Palatino BoldItalic
Berkshire Monaco LabelWriter Clock Naro ChiClock MT Extra "