* 9313447
* Renovation of Agricultural Engineering Laboratory at        Oklahoma State University
* O/D,OIA
* 06/01/1994,05/31/1996
* Glenn Brown, Oklahoma State University
* Standard Grant
* Sherrie Green
* 05/31/1996
* USD 320,000.00

Brown The Department of Agricultural Engineering, Oklahoma State University, is
recognized as one of the nation's leaders in Biosystems Engineering research,
the application of engineering principles to biological systems. While
agriculture remains an integral aspect of the research program, Biosystems
includes environmental, natural resources and biological applications. To
reflect this broader scope, the Department will be renamed Biosystems and
Agricultural Engineering. In addition to the programmatic changes, the
facilities housing ongoing research activities will be renovated and replaced to
complement the new priorities of the Department as it completes its
transformation to Biosystems and Agricultural Engineering. Existing facilities
were built in an era when agricultural mechanization research primarily involved
the construction of heavy mechanisms and soil and water research. These
facilities are inadequate to perform Biosystems research that requires high
quality labs with special provisions. This award will provide funding for the
modernization of laboratory space that will allow for the proper support of
programs in machine vision, sensors and controls, intelligent machines and
bioenvironmental engineering. The relocation of the shop facility to the main
campus will be adjoined to the research laboratory, providing more effective and
efficient shop services for faculty. Specific renovations will include upgrading
the HVAC, electrical, and mechanical systems. The modernization of the research
facilities at Oklahoma State University will have maximum impact on the human
resources needed for the nation's continued leadership in science and
engineering into the twenty-first century.