* 9313458
* Renovation of Pearson and Michael Chemistry Complex at TuftsUniversity
* O/D,OIA
* 09/15/1993,02/29/1996
* David Walt, Tufts University
* Standard Grant
* Sherrie Green
* 02/29/1996
* USD 1,987,500.00

- 9 \ Z Z Z Z Z Z Z h h h h h r | 4 R \ \ 9313458 Walt The Tufts Chemistry
Department has undergone a rejuvenation in all aspects of its program during the
last decade. The research program has abandoned the traditional areas of
analytical, inorganic, organic and physical chemistry to pursue the field of
materials, environmental, and biomedical chemistry. These focus areas are
strengths not only of the department, but of the university as well. A
resurgence in research and funding activities, and the recruitment of new
faculty, has made it necessary to renovate and upgrade the department's two
research and training buildings, Pearson and Michael laboratories, constructed
in 1923 and 1968 respectively. Although adequate space exits within the Pearson-
Michael complex to meet the needs of anticipated faculty and students, the space
is presently underutilized due to antiquated conditions. Original laboratories
are unusable because they are contain asbestos, have inadequate electrical and
plumbing systems, and no operable fume hoods. ARI funds have been requested to
renovate laboratory space and the general infrastructure, specifically, the
electrical and plumbing systems, HVAC and fire safety systems. These renovations
will allow faculty to consolidate their research activities that are currently
dispersed over several locations in the two buildings. Modernization of the
facilities will provide a safe, well equipped environment for faculty and
student to conduct research. 9 9 Fincode Text Only! G 9 9 9 Tms Rmn ` Symbol
Helv Chicago 0 Courier Palatino Easy Street Chicago Ridge Bar Code 39 Chicago LW
Berkshire Monaco LabelWriter "