* 9313642
* Mixed-Metal Supramolecular Complexes as Photochemical       Molecular Devices for Photoinitiated Electron Collection
* MPS,CHE
* 12/15/1993,08/31/1997
* Karen Brewer, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Continuing Grant
* Margaret A. Cavanaugh
* 08/31/1997
* USD 247,500.00

This award in the Inorganic, Bioinorganic, and Organometallic Program supports
research on photoinitiated electron transfer reactions by Dr. Karen J. Brewer of
the Chemistry Department, Virginia Polytechnic Institute. Trimetallic complexes
which covalently couple two light-absorbing metal centers to a central metal
section through polypyridyl bridging ligands will be synthesized. In these
complexes, low lying unoccupied orbitals on the ligand are capable of accepting
electrons and mediating the electron transfer between metal sites. The
photophysical and electrochemical properties of these complexes will be studied
in order to find the optimal conditions for promoting electron build-up, as well
as to understand the details of multi-electron transfer. Many important
reactions in nature, such as the reduction of carbon dioxide and nitrogen
fixation, require many electrons. The goal of this project is to investigate a
method for promoting multi-electron transfer reactions. Metal complexes which
can each contribute electrons will be linked together in large molecules. Light
will be used to drive electrons between metal centers so that a number of
electrons can be available for reaction. Although it is concerned with only a
part of the process, this study is expected to provide basic information related
to the development of solar-powered devices which could be used to promote a
variety of chemical reactions.