* 9314266
* The Microeconomics of Transition: Business Starts, Joint Ventures, and the Role of Capitol Markets
* NONE,NONE
* 08/01/1993,07/31/1995
* Sarah Lane, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* Robin A. Cantor
* 07/31/1995
* USD 16,187.00

9314266 Lane The extraordinary increase of joint ventures and small-firm start-
ups in Eastern Europe and the former Soviet Union suggests that these mechanisms
make an important contribution to long-run economic transformation. This
Research Planning Grant (RPG) develops an empirical research program that
addresses the following questions: What factors have contributed to the rapid
increase in joint ventures? What can we learn about the formation and management
of joint ventures from this large sample? Have countries and firms benefitted
from cooperation and the capital, managerial expertise, and production
technology invested? Finally, how does the sectoral distribution of joint
ventures compare to that of new business starts? The focus of the research is on
joint ventures because availability of data is better and the findings are more
generalizable to market economies. The sectoral incidence of joint ventures can
be measured by the number of joint ventures or by the amount of foreign capital
invested. Independent variables test the relative importance of strategic
factors, technological factors, and specific Eastern European factors such as
filling in the gaps in industry distribution that are the legacy of central
planning. Though joint ventures have increased significantly in Western
economies, this increase is dwarfed by the increase in the joint ventures
between Western and Eastern European firms. The large number and variety of
joint ventures provides a unique opportunity to test three important elements
that influence the organizational structure of a firm: technology (demand and
cost complementarities), limitations on contracts caused by idiosyncratic
assets, and incomplete contracts as a result of the inability to contract for
all contingencies. The RPG will develop further the survey data, initial
analysis of the data, and collaboration with Hungarian researchers to prepare a
more extensive proposal to evaluate the benefits to the firms of und ertaking
joint ventures. Future research using actual case studies will be a
collaborative process between the principal investigator and Hungarian
researchers with contacts and expertise in fieldwork. ***