* 9314106
* U.S.-Mexico:  Towards Effective Physics Communication in theAmericas; Cancun, Mexico, September 1994
* O/D,OISE
* 07/01/1994,06/30/1995
* Irving Lerch, American Physical Society
* Standard Grant
* Harold Stolberg
* 06/30/1995
* USD 45,000.00

9314106 Lerch This Americas Program award to the American Physics Society (APS)
will help to support a hemispheric meeting of physics societies in Cancun,
Mexico. The meeting, which has been organized by the APS, the Sociedad Mexicana
de Fisica (SMF), and the Canadian Association of Physicists (CAP), represents a
major first step in a plan designed to strengthen collaboration among all the
physics communities in the western hemisphere. The conference is the first
trilateral meeting of physics societies and furnishes an opportunity to
consolidate links with other physics societies in the hemisphere, including the
Federacion Latinoamericana de Sociedades de Fisica (FELASOFI), an umbrella
organization for Latin American physics societies. At the same time it will help
to advance current plans of the APS and the SMF to develop an expanded directory
of physics programs in the hemisphere, to appoint representatives to
subcommittees of the sister society, and to develop closer collaboration in
educational programs. Furthermore, by bringing together physicists from the
hemisphere and from Europe to participate and report on their work in thirteen
broad areas, the meeting will provide an opportunity for the exchange of
knowledge and the initiation of collaborative projects. The Physics Division and
the Division of Materials Research are cost sharing in this international award.
***