* 9314938
* Equilibrium and Nonequilibrium Phenomena in Condensed Matter
* MPS,DMR
* 01/01/1994,12/31/1999
* Nigel Goldenfeld, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* G. Bruce Taggart
* 12/31/1999
* USD 728,000.00

9314938 Goldenfeld This proposal concerns the study of non-equilibrium
phenomena, primarily in polymeric systems. The PIs have had much prior success
in studying the approach to equilibrium following phase transitions; growth of
complex spatial patterns; and the use of Renormalization Group methods to access
the long time behavior of systems far from equilibrium. They have also developed
a cellular- automata-type numerical scheme, the "Cell Dynamical Systems"
approach, to study mesoscale phenomena. They propose to study 1) spinodal
decomposition in binary alloy systems; 2) descriptions of vibrating powder
systems; 3) chiral symmetry breaking in Langmuir monolayers; 4) Renormalization
Group methods to study the long-time behavior of spatially extended non-linear
systems; 5) theory of vulcanization; 6) Large Deviation approaches to
nonequilibrium systems (both the fundamentals of the method and some concrete
applications). %%% The PIs work in the area of understanding the behavior of
nonequilibrium systems; particularly of complex systems such as polymers,
rubbers, alloys etc. Here, they propose to study what happens to mesoscale
structures of alloys when they are quenched; how best to descibe the state of a
powder when it is vibrated; mathematical methods to understand the time
dependent behavior of systems which have been moved out of equilibrium (and how
they thence may establish spatial patterns as they evolve) and, lastly, a new
(at least to many physicists) theoretical method for describing the
thermodynamics of both equilibrium and nonequilibrium systems which relies on
the mathematical laws governing large numbers. These two PI's are held in the
highest esteem by their community and their work is rated at the very front of
this field. They do a nice combination of fundamental work and "real-world"
problems - for example they have helped experimentalists with the understanding
of their experiments. ***