* 9314018
* Effect of Interface Structure on Transport Properties of    Metallic Multilayers
* MPS,DMR
* 02/15/1994,07/31/1997
* David Baxter, Indiana University
* Continuing Grant
* H. Hollis Wickman
* 07/31/1997
* USD 245,000.00

9314018 Baxter This project will study the effects of interfacial structure on
electron transport in a variety of metallic multilayers. Multilayered materials
with varying degrees of interfacial order will be prepared using both UHV
electron beam evaporation and magnetron sputtering. The effect of structural
changes on interface sensitive transport properties such as the anisotropy of
the electron diffusion constant in non-magnetic multilayers and the Giant
Magnetoresistance (GMR) effect in magnetic systems will be studied. Controlled
changes in the structure of the interface will be made by combining thermal
annealing with in- situ X-ray diffraction studies, and such changes will be
correlated with associated changes in the transport properties. This project
involves a collaboration between researchers at Indiana University and the
General Motors Research and Development Center. %%% The behavior of electrons at
interfaces between two different materials plays an important role in
technologies such as integrated circuits, magnetic recording, and sensors.
Modern technology makes possible the production of thin films in which the
atomic composition alternates periodically few atomic layers, thereby providing
an ideal laboratory for studying the electronic properties of interfaces. The
large concentration of interfaces in such "multilayered materials" can cause
their properties to be quite different from those of the corresponding bulk
materials. An example of this can be seen in the recently discovered Giant
Magnetoresistance effect which holds great promise for the development of new
magnetic sensor materials. Future development of such materials will require
detailed understanding of how their electronic properties depend on the atomic
structure of the interfaces between the individual layers. This project, which
combines research at Indiana University and the General Motors Research and
Development Center, is dedicated to the study of this fundamental an d
technologically important question. ***