* 9314432
* SGER:  Frame-based Ecosystem Modeling
* BIO,DEB
* 09/15/1993,02/29/1996
* Anthony Starfield, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Scott L. Collins
* 02/29/1996
* USD 50,000.00

9314432 Starfield This research project will develop a paradigm for simulating
dynamics of ecological systems. the paradigm models the different states of the
systems separately, using the syntax of frames as borrowed from Artificial
Intelligence. Within each frame, simple models (either numerical or qualitative)
simulate the key processes for the corresponding ecological state. "Demons"
watch to see whether the assumptions underlying the definition of the state are
transgressed, and if so, switch to a different model in a different frame. This
approach greatly facilitates the process of building dynamic ecosystem models.
It makes it possible to rapidly test hypotheses, and leads to models that are
easy to understand and therefore facilitates the communication of ideas. It also
lends itself to models which include interactions between ongoing process (such
as competition and herbivory and sporadic events (such as fires) at a level of
resolution that is simple enough to comprehend but sufficiently complex to give
informative unanticipated results. %%% Ecological systems are exceedingly
complex and ecologist have been pursuing ways to model these systems in
realistic ways. This project is a substantial contribution to the modeling
approach using newly developed computer technology that is an interdisciplinary
application of methods in Artificial Intelligence. This approach could be a
powerful means of understanding important issues, such as conservation of
populations and habitats or long-term dynamic patterns such as climate change,
in realistic ecological contexts. &amp; ( u &amp; G(` i M &amp; G( ) i M " &amp;
! ! ! F N N ( Times New Roman Symbol &amp; Arial " h ; e ; e ; e 9 I 1 Deborah
Johnson Deborah Johnson