* 9314583
* U.S.-France Cooperative Research: Development and           Formalization of Lexical-Semantic Representations for       Machine Translations
* O/D,OISE
* 05/15/1994,08/31/1999
* Bonnie Dorr, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Rose Gombay
* 08/31/1999
* USD 15,250.00

9314583 Dorr This three-year award supports U.S.-France cooperative research in
interactive systems (human/computer) between research groups at the the
University of Maryland and the University of Narbonne, Toulouse, France. The
U.S. investigators are Bonnie Dorr and Martha Palmer, and the French
investigator is Patrick Saint-Dizier. They will collaborate on topics concerning
lexical representations for French and English. The objective of their research
is to develop a conceptual description for thematic roles and argument
structures. They will emphasize cross-linguistic distinctions and the meaning
components which are necessary for lexical selection during machine translation.
Current machine translation systems encounter problems when extended to new
languages or domains. This joint project will not only advance our understanding
of that problem, but is likely to lead to a new lexical based framework that can
be applied to machine translation, information retrieval, and automatic lexical
acquisition. The U.S. investigators bring to this collaboration expertise in
lexical-semantic representation. This is complemented by Dr. Saint-Dizier's
theoretical work in computational linguistics. ***