* 9314732
* Towards Computer-Aided Catalyst Design: Five Effective Core Potential Studies of C-H Activation
* MPS,CHE
* 01/01/1994,06/30/1997
* Thomas Cundari, University of Memphis
* Continuing Grant
* Margaret A. Cavanaugh
* 06/30/1997
* USD 124,000.00

This grant in the Inorganic, Bioinorganic, and Organometallic Chemistry Program
supports the theoretical work of Dr. Thomas R. Cundari of the Chemistry
Department, Memphis State University, on CH activation. Cundari will carry out
five computational projects on the factors affecting the first step in catalytic
methane conversion. Three of the projects involve methane activation by
multiply-bonded Ti, Zr, and Hf complexes. The effect of pi-bond energy and
polarity on the CH activation barrier will be explored, as well the effect of
changing from amide to imide ligands. Other projects will examine metal-methyl
complexes of lanthanides, Sc, and Zr. Oxidative addition and sigma-bond
metathesis mechanisms for some Ir, Re, and W compounds will be modeled. The
fifth project involves analysis of methane activation by electrophilic Pt(II)
and Hg(II) complexes. In all cases, the computational results will be compared
to experimental findings. The main goals of the study are to develop reliable
methods for describing d- and f-block chemistry and to assess how CH activation
is affected by the complex interaction of the metal, activating ligands, and
ancillary ligands. A number of catalysts are available for the conversion of
methane, which is abundant, to other organic products such as methanol, which is
a transportable liquid fuel. For any conversion reaction, a carbon-hydrogen (CH)
bond in methane has to be broken, or activated, and then other steps in the
reaction can take place. Experimental data on a number of catalysts for
reactions involving methane are known, but a common framework for understanding
the role of the catalyst, which consists of a metal and accompanying groups, has
not been developed. By carrying out computational studies on the electronic
structure of the catalysts during these reactions, Cundari will identify
important factors in the reaction and develop a broader view of the reaction
mechanism. The research will aid in the development of more activ e and
selective methane or alkane catalysts.