* 9314202
* 4th International Congress of Vertebrate Morphology,        Chicago, Illinois, July 31-August 4, 1994
* BIO,IOS
* 05/01/1994,10/31/1995
* Philip Ulinski, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Jereatha Coleman
* 10/31/1995
* USD 9,000.00

9314202 Herring The International Congress of Vertebrate Morphology (ICVM)
promotes international communication and cooperation in vertebrate morphology
and other biological sciences. Morphology plays a unique role in organismal
biology in that it integrates and forms the context for observations from a
variety of disciplines. The Fourth Congress will be in North America and is
expected to attract a large number of distinguished scientists from many
countries. The purposes of ICVM-4 are to make the most current research in
vertebrate morphology available to North American scientists and to provide the
syntheses between vertebrate morphology and its cognate fields that will provide
direction through the 90's and into the next century. Holding of ICVM-4 in the
U.S. presents a rare opportunity for a large number of Americans to be exposed
to the work of European and other scholars. Although aspects of morphology are
strongly represented in the U.S., many areas are centered elsewhere. Previously,
only scientists who traveled to European meetings could take full advantage of
new developments in these fields. The scientific focus of the Congress will be
provided by an invited program consisting of (1) plenary lectures delineating
the interactions between morphology and population biology, ecology, physiology
evolution and development; (2) informal, hands-on workshops intended to
stimulate discussion and interaction, and (3) formal symposia directed at major
syntheses of modern research areas, such as integrating molecular findings into
the framework of organismal biology and exploring how physiological and
paleontological evidence can be combined to study evolutionary transitions. The
Congress will also feature contributed paper and poster sessions in a format
intended to enhance social interactions among the participants. ***