* 9314470
* Collaborative Research:  Hydrodynamic Forcing of Metabolism of Coral Reef Algal Communities (RUI)
* NONE,NONE
* 02/15/1994,07/31/1997
* Robert Carpenter, California State University-Northridge
* Continuing grant
* Phillip R. Taylor
* 07/31/1997
* USD 274,308.00

Carpenter 9314470 The current paradigm explaining how coral reefs maintain high
biomass of organisms and extremely high rates of gross primary productivity is
that tight recycling of nutrients and organic matter occurs within the reef
resulting in zones of net autotrophy alternating with zones of net heterotrophy.
Autotrophic upstream communities are thought to support downstream heterotrophic
assemblages with the overall balance resulting in ecosystem P/R ratios near
unity. According to this paradigm, coral reefs are not coupled significantly to
the surrounding oligotrophic ocean. Recent studies suggest that coral reefs may
be much more dependent on hydrodynamic processes than currently believed.
Although nutrient concentrations of tropical waters are very low, an enormous
volume of water is advected across the reef and could result in a large flux of
nutrients to benthic primary producers. The major upstream autotrophic zone is
the reef flat where algal turf assemblages are responsible for the majority of
primary productivity. Previous work has demonstrated that rates of primary
productivity and nitrogen fixation of algal turf are affected significantly by
water flow speed. Furthermore, flow measurements on one reef suggest that algal
canopy height significantly alters the local hydrodynamic regime and as a
result, metabolic processes of algal turfs may be diffusion-limited for a
significant proportion of time. This project will test the hypothesis that rates
of primary productivity and nitrogen fixation of coral reef algal turfs are
diffusion-limited. Measurements of the flow environment on a reef flat will be
made and used to estimate the degree to which algal turfs varying in canopy
height are diffusion-limited. The project will then move on to test hypotheses
about the specific factors that result in diffusion-limitation. The results of
this project should fill a gap on empirical measurements of water flow in coral
reef environments and how wate r flow affects algal metabolism. The results of
this research may lead to a significant paradigm shift in understanding how
coral reefs function. Demonstration that reefs are open ecosystems that are
strongly coupled to the surrounding ocean environment would have important
implications for predictions of the effects of global climate change on these
unique ecosystems. ***