* 9314379
* U.S.-Brazil:  Dissertation Improvement Grant on Mechanisms  of Seed and Seedling Mortality Controlling the Distribution of Two Tropical Trees
* O/D,OISE
* 06/15/1994,05/31/1996
* Henry Howe, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Emily B. Rudin
* 05/31/1996
* USD 13,500.00

Howe 9314379 This U.S.-Brazil Cooperative Science Program award supports field
expenses and purchase of a computer for statistical analysis, to be performed on
site by M. Pacheco, a Brazilian graduate student working on his doctoral
dissertation. The study is being developed in the reserves of the Biological
Dynamics of Forest Fragments (BDFF) project, an association between the
Smithsonian Institution of the U.S.A. and the Brazilian National Institute for
Amazon Research (INPA). In order to complete his work, Mr. Pacheco will spend
400 days in the Amazon forest. The grant also provides for travel expenses to
Brazil for H. Howe, Mr. Pacheco's adviser, who will visit him once, to advise
him and to supervise his research. Mr. Pacheco will perform research to evaluate
the influence of several classes of factors on the distribution and abundance of
two tropical palm tree species in the Amazon forest. One of the species grows
preferentially on flood plains, while the other one's preferential habitat are
plateaus. By studying these closely related species, the research will attempt
to distinguish between the effects of abiotic (water, light, etc.) and biotic
(predation, infections, etc.) factors on the spatial distribution of the two
species. Understanding of these effects will help in predicting the response of
tropical tree species to changes in the regional or global climate, and to human
related activities. It will also contribute to the understanding of the kind of
tropical biology required in conservation and restoration efforts. ***