* 9314152
* The Academic Research Climate and Technological Innovations
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/1993,08/31/1995
* Yong Lee, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Linda Parker
* 08/31/1995
* USD 51,801.00

WPC7 2 B V T W Courier 10 pitch e z N x x x , x @ ; HP LaserJet Series II
HPLASEII.PRS x 6 X @ 8 ; h 0 Õd 2 5 E V S Z #| x Courier 10cpi ? x x x , k x 6 X
@ 8 ; X @ HP LaserJet Series II HPLASEII.PRS x 6 X @ 8 ; , t 0 OpX @ 2 5 9314152
Lee * Since World War II, research universities in the U.S. have achieved world
premier status in basic research. During the last decade, these universities
have been under pressure to contribute to the Nation's economic development. In
particular, they have been asked to translate the results of new scientific
advances into technologies that provide economic benefit. This project is
intended to examine the degree to which universities are making the shift in
their research orientation and to identify the structural and environmental
factors that are associated with, and affect, the accompanying cultural change.
If a basic shift in the university research climate is in progress, it will have
some important implications for the nation's technology transfer strategy. Such
a shift implies that research universities may be better poised than is
generally assumed to play a larger role in the development and deployment of
technological innovations. Equally important, the results of this study will add
a new dimension of knowledge in a search for the ever evolving role of research
universities in contemporary American society. To test this cultural change and
related hypotheses, the proposer intends to: (1) survey a variety of
respondents, including department chairs and members of their departments,
research center and institute directors, vice presidents for research, and intel
lectual property managers; and (2) conduct field interviews to develop case
studies of five institutions that emerge from the survey phase as having shifted
their research orientation notably more or notably less than others in the
survey. Fourteen independent variables will be studied, including regional
differences, land grant status, academic disciplines, and amount of state
research support.