* 9314052
* Glacial History of the Dhaulagiri Himal, Nepal, and the     Implications for Late Quaternary Climate Change,            U.S.-Nepal Cooperative Research
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/1993,02/28/1995
* Gregory Zielinski, University of New Hampshire
* Standard Grant
* Osman Shinaishin
* 02/28/1995
* USD 7,720.00

9314052 Zielinski Description: This project supports participation of the P.I.,
Dr. Gregory Zielinski, of the University of New Hampshire, and a U.S. graduate
student in a research project with the Nepalese Department of Hydrology and
Meteorology. The research is aimed at gathering information on the extent of
glacial deposits in the Chhonbarden Glacier valley of the eastern Dhaulagiri
Himal and to establish a relative chronology of glaciation in that valley and
the adjacent Hidden Valley Region. The results are expected to provide baseline
data for future research to develop a detailed regional chronology of glaciation
in this area of Nepal for comparison with other proposed ice core/snow studies
and tree ring studies by other investigators in the United States. Evaluation of
the weathering characteristics of clasts on moraines, soil development, and
lichenometric techniques will be used to develop the record. Scope: This
research project meets the objectives of the international collaboration with
developing countries. It provides an opportunity to a young U.S. scientist to
start a cooperative activity with a foreign country where both sides will
benefit from the interaction. The proposed research also fits with a broad
research being conducted by U.S. scientists in various areas of the world,
especially in the North Arctic Region to learn about weather conditions during
the period of formation of existing glacial deposits. ***