* 9314660
* U.S.-France Joint Workshop: Evolutionary Genetics of Marine Bivalves, July 17-24, 1994, La Tremblade, and Sete, France
* O/D,OISE
* 05/15/1994,04/30/1996
* Thomas Hilbish, University of South Carolina at Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Rose Gombay
* 04/30/1996
* USD 20,250.00

9314660 Hilbish This award supports a U.S.-France workshop on the evolutionary
genetics of marine bivalves to take place at two locations in France: La
Tremblade and Sete, July 17-24, 1994. The organizers are Thomas J. Hilbish,
University of South Carolina, Francois Bonhomme, University of Montpellier and
Andre Gerard, IFREMER (The French National Institute for Research in Oceans and
Marine Sciences). The objectives of the workshop are to: (1) acquaint U.S.
researchers with the facilities and resources available at La Tremblade and
Sete; (2) discuss the cataloging and establishment of living genetic resources;
and (3) explore topics for collaborative research projects. The specific topics
for discussion are: living genetic resources; molecular genetic resources and
questions related to molecular techniques; genotype-environment interaction; and
the breeding biology of bivalves and its role in quantitative genetic analysis.
Bivalves are important model systems for the study of fundamental issues in
evolutionary biology. They are particularly good models of high gene flow
systems. The project brings together U.S. and French investigators of
complementary expertise. The advantages to the U.S. investigators are
significant. They will have access to excellent French facilities in bivalve
genetic research and in molecular biology and to significant living genetic
resources. ***