* 9314591
* Carbon and Mineral Fluxes from Hydrothermal Plumes:         Biogeochemical Linkages with the Upper Water Column
* GEO,OCE
* 05/01/1994,04/30/1998
* James Cowen, University of Hawaii
* Continuing Grant
* Phillip R. Taylor
* 04/30/1998
* USD 399,761.00

9314591 Cowen Carbon and Mineral Fluxes from Hydrothermal Plumes: Biogeochemical
Linkages with the Upper Water Column Bioaccoustical surveys conducted near
Endeavor Ridge over four consecutive years have revealed intense non-benthic
zooplankton concentrations in a scattering layer immediately above the top of
the spreading hydrothermal plume at depths of 1800 to 1900 m. Most exciting was
the strong evidence for a 10 to 100 fold increase in zooplankton biomass in a 50
to 100 m thick layer immediately above the top of plume. This research project
will examine the hypothesis that hydrothermal venting markedly influences the
vertical distribution and composition of the zooplankton biomass beyond the
limits of the vent field and plume depths. The project will use acoustic sensors
and photographic equipment in combination with simultaneous net tows (1) to
verify the distribution and composition of deep and mid-depth zooplankton
scattering layers in the vicinity of Juan de Fuca Ridge in the North east
Pacific; (2) determine the vertical distribution and composition of "marine
snow" and establish its relation to the scattering layers; and (3) to
investigate the magnitude and characteristics of ascending material fluxes from
the plume depths. The resulting data will be evaluated with respect to the
dynamics of potential carbon and mineral linkages between hydrothermal venting
and the deep and mid-depth ocean water column. ***