* 9314113
* Inorganic Redox Mechanisms in Solution
* MPS,CHE
* 12/15/1993,05/31/1998
* Edwin Gould, Kent State University
* Continuing Grant
* Re-Entered for CGI Processing
* 05/31/1998
* USD 216,000.00

Dr. Edwin S. Gould, Chemistry Department, Kent State University, is supported in
the Inorganic, Bioinorganic, and Organometallic Chemistry Program, for
investigations of solution phase oxidation-reduction reactions which emphasize
less common oxidation states. Three areas will be studied: 1) compromised redox
behavior of 2-electron oxidants in which 2e-reductants react through single
electron paths; 2) superoxide-metal interactions, emphasizing metal catalyzed
reactions with nonmetal reactants; and 3) polynuclear manganese complexes
related to Photosystem II, dealing with hypervalent manganese states which are
thought to be involved in the photosynthetic conversion of water to oxygen.
Reactions in which electrons are transferred between reactants are of enormous
importance in virtually all areas of pure and applied chemistry. One portion of
Gould's research addresses how transfer occurs in some cases when two electrons
leave a reductant through two separate, but closely related, pathways. In a
second part, he studies the electron transfer between superoxide-metal complexes
and non-metal reactants. This is related to the detoxification of superoxide,
which is an important biochemical process. Third, he is determining the role of
manganese ions in photosynthetic reactions, which is related to the way plants
generate oxygen during photosynthesis.