* 9314409
* Particle Acceleration and Wave Turbulence During Ionospheric Modification
* GEO,AGS
* 11/01/1993,10/31/1997
* Martin Goldman, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* Sunanda Basu
* 10/31/1997
* USD 225,015.00

9314409 Goldman Relevant new theoretical research will be performed in support
of current ionospheric modification experiments. The specific focus will be on
acceleration of particles and effects of spatial nonuniformity in connection
with strong Langmuir and ion-acoustic wave turbulence excited in the ionosphere
by an HF modifier. The new theoretical research has been motivated by airglow,
incoherent scatter, and barium release experiments performed during ionospheric
modification over Arecibo, PR. The mean energy and moments of the velocity
distriubtion of electrons accelerated by strong Langmuir turbulence iwll be
computer after systematic development of appropriate and workable theoretical
acceleration models in one dimension. Numerical simulations will be based on
modified versions of existing 2-time- scale fluid codes, and will be calibrated
against kinetic simulations. A goal will be to determine whether or not such
energetic electrons can account for the oxygenic airglowobserved during
ionospheric modification. The general area of theoretical and computational
research is Langmuir turbulence. Research performed under this grant is expected
to be relevant also to laser-plasma interaction physics and to beam-excited
Langmuir turbulence in naturally-occurring space plasmas. ***