* 9314392
* RDP:  Ribosomal Database Project
* BIO,DBI
* 06/15/1994,11/30/1997
* Gary Olsen, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Paul Gilna
* 11/30/1997
* USD 607,585.00

Ribosomal RNA (rRNA) sequences are central to biology from both the basic and
the methodological perspectives. As the key elements in the cellular translation
process they are worthy of detailed structure/function studies in their own
right. In addition, their "evolutionary characteristics" make them extremely
useful as tools in a number of other areas, microbiology in particular.
Comparative analysis of rRNA sequences has (1) provided the secondary structure
of the rRNAs themselves; (ii) led to the inference of the universal tree of life
--a basis for a natural microbial classification--and the discovery of the
Archaea; (iii) provided the basis for new and powerful approaches to microbial
ecology; (iv) defined targets for much of the "probe" development in medical
diagnosis; and (v) provided new methods for environmental impact and
bioremediation assessment. All such studies require large amounts of rRNA data,
and these can be used effectively only in the context of the appropriate
database of rRNA sequences; one that not only provides the raw sequence data,
but also organizes the data into alignments, provides a phylogenetic overview,
makes available programs for data handling and analysis, and (for many users)
offers a suite of services to assist them in their handling and analysis of the
data. In that an rRNA sequence database this useful, this versatile, did not
exist, the Ribosome Database Project (RDP) has been established at the
University of Illinois (with a grant from NSF). Through its E-mail and FTP
servers, the RDP offers aligned and phylogenetically ordered rRNA sequences in a
variety of user-selected formats, as well as various software for handling and
analysis of data. In addition, services such as automated sequence alignment,
probe design checking, user-selected subsets of the sequence data and
phylogenetic trees, and rRNA secondary structures are provided. Major objectives
of this proposal are: (i) provide current alignments of rR NA data; (ii) provide
a phylogenetic tree for those data; (iii) further automate the internal data
updating and data management procedures; (iv) develop a "next generation"
sequence alignment editor; (v) improve and expand the sequence data handling and
analysis tools, including those for probe development, sequence alignment, and
phylogenetic analysis; (vi) add new and improved software and services to the
RDP servers; (vii) add new forms of data access and distribution; and (viii)
increase the types of ribosome-related sequence alignments offered. Given the
present volume of rRNA sequence data (approximately 2000 sequences) and the
estimated future level (some estimates running into the millions), the RDP has
an essential role to play in biological, medical and environmental research in
the future.