* 9314335
* Global Opitmization of Vector Quantizer Based Communication Systems
* NONE,NONE
* 08/01/1994,07/31/1999
* Kenneth Rose, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Continuing grant
* Rodger E. Ziemer
* 07/31/1999
* USD 564,050.00

9314335 Rose This project addresses fundamental problems in vector coding for
digital communication of audio and visual signals. The overall signal
compression problem is reformulated as a generalized vector quantizer design
problem, which incorporates signal decomposition, quantization, and
reconstruction. The main line of attack, using this new paradigm, is to embed
the optimization problem within the probabilistic framework of deterministic
annealing, which is derived based on the principle of maximum entropy and its
generalization, the principle of cross-entropy. This yields two main benefits:
ability to avoid some of the local optima that trap greedy methods, and
extendibility to joint optimization of various objectives by incorporating
additional constraints. The first phase of the project will include optimization
of isolated problems of particular importance to data communications: source-
channel vector coding, entropy constrained vector quantization, structurally
constrained vector quantization, generalized vector quantization, and unbalanced
tree vector quantizer growing. The first phase is expected to yield substantial
improvements over methods currently in use, and at the same time provide the
basis for the second phase which consists of synthesizing the different
optimization problems. The second phase of the project will include joint and
simultaneous optimization of subsets of the problems addressed in the first
phase, thus removing the suboptimality due to independent piecewise
optimization. A particularly important special case to be addressed is the
combined optimization problem of a vector quantizer design for a given source
and noisy channel, subject to encoding complexity and bit rate constraints. A
method addressing these issues simultaneously in a nonheuristic manner is
expected to provide a theoretically exciting yet practically useful solution to
reliable and efficient communications in the demanding context of critically b
andlimited channels, such as the future generation of cellular networks. In
order to validate the new optimization methods developed in this project,
specific speech and image compression targets utilizing these methods will be
tested and simulate. Benchmarks of performance improvement will be determined
with the intent of convincing future designers of practical signal compression
systems of the practical utility of the new techniques. In particular, two
widely studied problems, the quantization of LPC parameters for spectral
modeling in speech coding and low-rate transform coding of images with serve as
targets for benchmarking performance. In one or both cases, a model of channel
errors will be included to assess overall source-channel coding performance. ***