* 9314100
* U.S.-France Cooperative Research: The New Voter:            Franco-American Comparisons
* O/D,OISE
* 03/15/1994,08/31/1996
* Michael Lewis-Beck, University of Iowa
* Standard Grant
* Rose Gombay
* 08/31/1996
* USD 14,701.00

9314100 Lewis-Beck This two-year award supports U.S.-France cooperative research
in political science between Michael S. Lewis-Beck and a research group at the
Center for Studies on French Politics at the French National Center for
Scientific Research. The French principal investigators are Daniel Boy, Jean
Chiche, Gerard Grunberg, and Nonna Mayer. The objective of this project is the
collection of survey data that will allow the the principal investigators to
develop and test comprehensive models of voting behavior in France and the
United States. The survey is timely, taking advantage of the 1992 U.S.
presidential election and national survey, and the French national election in
1995. Among the items to be tested are: party identification and economic
issues, such as personal finances. This award supports Dr. Lewis-Beck's travel
to France and the costs of administering pre- test items for the French national
election survey. The project takes advantage of combined expertise in social
sciences and will provide access to national election data in both the U.S. and
France, which might not otherwise be made available to scholars. Comparative
studies of national elections in the western democracies and cross cultural
analysis will advance our understanding of voting behavior in the U.S. and
France. ***