* 9314024
* Workshop on Extraction of Climate and Other Environment     Signals from Millenial-Aged Tree-Ring Chronologies;         Tucson, Arizona; December 1-3, 1993
* GEO,AGS
* 09/01/1993,08/31/1994
* Donald Graybill, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Herman Zimmerman
* 08/31/1994
* USD 22,811.00

9314024 Graybill There is widespread agreement on the scientific importance of
developing long, high resolution proxy records of climatic and environmental
variation in several recent assessments of directions needed for global change
research. Tree-ring chronologies are consistently referenced as one of the more
important resources that might be used for those purposes. The great majority of
chronologies are however limited in temporal coverage to the last 300-400 years.
This award supports a workshop devoted to the development of millennial aged
tree-ring chronologies that will provide new possibilities for investigating
relatively long-term climatic and environmental changes, i.e. during the past
2000-8000 years. This kind of time depth will permit new information for various
regions on changes in the level as well as the variance of climatic variables
such as temperature and precipitation. The relative frequency of rapid or
extreme climatic change events can also be better estimated than was previously
possible. The full potential of these long chronologies is not yet known. These
are new questions that have arisen and must be considered before that potential
can be realized. One of these concerns the most appropriate fashion for
constructing long series from overlapping chronology segments in order to
preserve the 'true' variance structure of growth-driving environmental
variables. Other concern whether the growth response to climate has been
constant over time, and if not, is this in turn related to natural changes in
stand structure or composition, to anthropogenic activity, or to other factors
yet unknown?