* 9314239
* Mesoscale Magnetohydrodynamic Processes in the Magnetosphere
* NONE,NONE
* 06/01/1994,02/29/2000
* David Southwood, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing grant
* kile baker
* 02/29/2000
* USD 519,418.00

9314239 Kivelson The large scale, time-averaged properties of the magnetosphere
and its interaction with the solar wind and the ionosphere are now well
understood in terms of steady-state theory. The principal challenge that remains
is to understand the dynamics of the system on microscales (<<1RE) and what we
shall refer to as mesoscales ( 1RE). Attention need to be focused on those
processes that transfer the energy and momentum of the solar wind through the
magnetized plasma of the magnetosphere to the ionosphere. In recent years, it
has become increasingly apparent that the dynamics of the magnetosphere are
patchy or bursty in nature. Intermittency appears to be a fundamental feature of
the interactions. Although they are intermittent, the important processes appear
to occur on time scales that are long compared with particle gyroperiods; the
corresponding spatial scales are large compared with particle gyroradii but
small compared with magnetospheric dimensions. Hence, this proposal focuses on
processes that can be characterized as "mesoscale" or intermediate in scale. The
investigators will use spacecraft data sets and new data analysis approaches to
characterize some of the mesoscale structures including: coupling of the solar
wind to the magnetosphere through the process of magnetic reconnection,
striations in density and field magnitude generally interpreted as the signature
of saturated mirror mode waves; the polar cusp which appears to pulsate as
successive bursts of reconnected plasma arrive at the ionosphere; large scale
field- aligned currents (Region 1 currents) that are frequently highly
structured in ways that may arise from bursty reconnection; the magnetotail
plasma flows that are intermittent or bursty; and magnetic signatures of thin
rope-like structures that carry field- aligned currents along their axes and
contain plasma confined by twisted magnetic fields. The investigators will
develop new models and theory with a close tie to observations. The analysis
will begin by using the tools of MHD, but it is probable that full understanding
will require some aspects of plasma kinetic theory. The intent is to develop a
framework for the interpretation of existing observations and also to define
needs for additional measurements. The proposed work addresses processes that
appear to be central to the dynamics of the interacting solar
wind/ionosphere/magnetosphere system, and the new results will illuminate the
elemental coupling processes. Although the problems addressed are those of the
terrestrial magnetosphere, the results are likely to have wider significance as
they will apply to the interactions of magnetized plasmas wherever they may be:
in other magnetoshperes, in the solar corona, or in the laboratory. ***