* 9314879
* NSF Coordination Theory and Collaboration Technology        Grantee Workshop; Arlington, VA.; July 8-10, 1993
* CSE,IIS
* 07/01/1993,06/30/1994
* Gary Olson, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Su-Shing Chen
* 06/30/1994
* USD 82,521.00

This is an award to fund a workshop composed of NSF grantees whose awards were
made in the two years of competitions under the Coordination Theory and
Collaboration Technology (CTCT) Initiative and grantees of subsequent awards in
these fields. The total number of grants involved is thirty-three, an increase
of eight from last year. This year, awardees whose research is in robotic
coordination will also participate. Those awards made from the Robotics and
Machine Intelligence Program constitute evidence of the growth of the field into
other program funding domains. The purposes of the workshop are: First, to
provide a forum for the exchange of knowledge in the form of perspectives,
findings, methods and theory for this young, interdisciplinary field. Second, to
provide an opportunity for the field to coalesce and grow. While certain subsets
of the community of researchers mingle at various professional meetings, as a
whole, these investigators do not have regular contact. The workshop provides an
opportunity to establish an identity for the area of work and to plan subsequent
activities. Third, this provides an opportunity for the research from these
projects to be made more visible to the Washington-based research funding and
policy community. This workshop represents a planning opportunity for the
IT&amp;O Program. The future research agenda for CTCT funding and community-
building is an important part of the workshop program. The workshop will be held
on July 8-10, 1993 in Arlington, Virginia. A workshop report will be prepared
and made available. //