* 9314080
* U.S.-Mexico:  Impacts, Mass Extinctions and the Cretaceous/ Tertiary Boundary
* O/D,OISE
* 03/15/1994,08/31/1997
* Gerta Keller, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Harold Stolberg
* 08/31/1997
* USD 31,122.00

9314080 This Americas Program award will support Professor Gerta Keller of
Princeton University in a research collaboration with Professor Jose Lopez Oliva
of the Universidad Autonoma de Nuevo Leon in Linares, Mexico. The investigators
intend to study the Cretaceous/Tertiary (K/T) transition, which marks one of the
dramatic environmental changes in Earth's history, resulting in the extinction
of dinosaurs, invertebrates and marine plankton. Current faunal, stratigraphic
and mineralogic records suggest that the biotic effects of the K/T boundary
event were most severe in low latitudes and negligible in high latitudes, that
there may have been multiple events, and that long-term oceanic instability
marked the K/T transition. The researchers propose to study whether the mass
extinction was the result of a giant earth-impacting bolide in the Yucatan
region, whether the effects of this impact were more severe or limited to low
latitudes, and whether there is evidence of long-term oceanic instability that
would suggest that the bolide impact was a temporal coincidence, rather than the
primary cause for the mass extinction. For this work, laboratory based
geochemical and quantitative faunal studies will be mostly done at Princeton
University, whereas sediment and stratigraphic analyses will be largely done at
the University of Nuevo Leon in Mexico. ***