* 9314448
* U.S.-Russian Cooperation:  Clearinghouse for Developing     the Infrastructure of Science and Technology in the Former  Soviet Union
* O/D,OISE
* 08/15/1993,01/31/1996
* Sandra Burns, American Association for the Advancement of Science
* Continuing Grant
* Bonnie Thompson
* 01/31/1996
* USD 121,436.00

9314448 Burns The U.S. scientific community has convened numerous meetings to
examine the crisis facing the scientific community in the former Soviet Union
FSU during this crucial period of transition to a market economy. One
recommendation has been to designate the American Association for the
Advancement of Science AAAS as an appropriate organization to house an
international clearinghouse for information and support programs to help
strengthen the infrastructure for science and technology in the FSU. This grant
will enable the AAAS plans to establish such a Clearinghouse to link
professional societies, research activities, private foundations, government
agencies, and foreign assistance agencies supporting FSU scientists and
engineers. The project will make a significant contribution to the development
of a sound infrastructure for science and technology in the FSU. Specifically,
AAAS proposes, over the course of three years, to coordinate information flow
with electronic communications to facilitate widespread, open, and rapid
communication, based on these premises: (a) it will include activities of FSU
universities and government offices in addition to the FSU's various Academies
of Sciences; (b) it will be multidisciplinary, encompassing the biological,
chemical, physical, and social sciences, and engineering; (c) it will aim to
integrate the FSU scientific community into the world community; (d) its
function will gradually be transferred to FSU colleagues. The Clearinghouse will
have six program elements: (1) developing and disseminating resource base
information; (2) allowing FSU scientists and researchers to participate in
international meetings and workshops; (3) conducting an assessment of FSU
libraries; (4) providing fellowships for FSU scientists at U.S. scientific
societies; (5) building a database on FSU science; and (6) continuing to assess
the needs of the FSU scientific and technical community. ##