* 9314750
* A Workshop on the Global Omnibus Environmental Survey; Palo Alto, California; 1993
* SBE,BCS
* 07/15/1993,06/30/1994
* Harold Jacobson, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Brian Holly
* 06/30/1994
* USD 13,000.00

A critical facet of research on the human dimensions of global environmental
change is identification and analysis of public perceptions of and attitudes
toward environmental problems. In order to foster cross-national comparisons of
perceptions and attitudes, the international Human Dimensions of Global
Environmental Change Programme (HDP) has proposed the creation of a Global
Omnibus Environmental Survey (GOES). GOES would be designed for the following
purposes: (1) to gauge public opinion toward the environment, including
measurements of knowledge, attitudes, and behavior; (2) to provide a
comprehensive comparison of public opinion across a range of countries
throughout the world; (3) to monitor changes in public opinion over time in a
systematic way; and (4) to contribute toward the understanding of public opinion
on global environmental issues in its economic, social, and political contexts.
This award will support a planning workshop to be held in Palo Alto, California,
in late May 1993. The workshop will be the first in a series, with following
workshops supported by organizations in other nations participating in the HDP.
A primary purpose of this workshop will be to develop an operational strategy
for planning and implementating GOES. This award will directly enable
participation of a critical group of scientists in this workshop, and it will
ensure prompt and complete dissemination of the workshop results. This planning
workshop will bring together scientists from a number of different disciplines
and nations to assess what data already exist and what strategies might be most
useful as ways to fill critical gaps in information about public opinion
regarding the environment. This workshop will serve as a critical step in
assembling an multi-national, multi-disciplinary group of social scientists to
address critical information needs. Because support for a number of follow-up
workshops has been offered from organizations in other nations, the results of
this workshop will feed directly into an ongoing development process of an
effort that ultimately will provide a systematic and comprehensive understanding
of attitudes toward global environmental change.