* 9314451
* IUPAC Symposium on Natural Products, Karachi, Pakistan,     January 16-20, 1994, Support of Participation by U.S.       Scientists
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/1993,02/28/1995
* Philip Le Quesne, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* Osman Shinaishin
* 02/28/1995
* USD 25,000.00

9314451 Le Quesne Description: This project supports the participation by a
group of U.S. scientists in the 19th International Union of Pure and Applied
Chemistry (IUPAC) Symposium on the Chemistry of Natural Products, scheduled to
be held January 16 to 20, 1994 in Karachi, Pakistan. The Pakistani organizer is
Dr. Atta ur Rahman, director of the H.E.J. Research Institute of Chemistry at
the University of Karachi. The symposium and a Pakistan U.S. Workshop will deal
with frontier areas of natural product chemistry including stereoselective
synthesis, modern spectroscopic techniques for structure elucidation, bioactive
natural products and bioorganic chemistry. The program will consist of plenary
lectures, session lectures and poster presentations. The sessions will be
divided into four parallel sessions covering: synthetic approaches to natural
products, bioactive natural products, structural studies on natural products,
and bioorganic chemistry. Scope: This is the first IUPAC organized symposium to
be held in Pakistan. The H.E.J. Research Institute of Chemistry has organized
several past symposia on natural product chemistry, with participation by
eminent scientists from around the world, and with high quality publications
resulting from these meetings. The project will be beneficial to U.S. and to
Pakistan scientists but also to participants from countries in South Asia and
the Middle East which are usually represented. A pre IUPAC symposium will be
held in Colombo, Sri Lanka, and a post IUPAC will be held in Amman, Jordan. The
project will help many of the scientists in these countries to establish
contacts with scientists from the U.S. for fut ure collaboration. ***