* 9314038
* Novel Techniques for the Solution and Solid Phase Synthesis of Peptide Segments
* NONE,NONE
* 12/15/1993,05/31/1997
* Louis Carpino, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Continuing grant
* Kenneth M. Doxsee
* 05/31/1997
* USD 305,000.00

The focus of this research is the development of generally applicable, reliable
and rapid procedures for the chemical synthesis of longer peptides and small
proteins (range of incorporated amino acids 75-100 or higher). Parallel studies
of the segment condensations and stepwise approaches will be undertaken with a
view to eventual elaboration of the latter technique to allow the quick
synthesis of products of high purity without the need for elaborate
purification. Promising new coupling techniques based on FMOC amino acid
fluorides and 1-hydroxy-7-azobenzotriazole (HOAt) will be emphasized. Because of
neighboring group effects, the latter offers the opportunity of coupling both
urethane-protected amino acids and peptide segments wthout racemization. Stable
FMOC-protected amino acid fluoride derivatives will be made for histidine and
arginine. When the full range of acid fluorides is available, model syntheses of
29-, 41- and 76-amino acid peptides will be examined as tests of the new
methodolgy. The same models will be assembled via HOAt-derived reagents using
both stepwise and segment coupling protocols. %%% With this award, the Synthetic
Organic Program is supporting the research of Dr. Louis A. Carpino of the
Department of Chemistry at the University of Massachusetts Amherst. Professor
Carpino will focus his work on the development of generally applicable, reliable
and rapid procedures for the chemical synthesis of longer peptides and small
proteins. Parallel studies of the segment condensation and stepwise approaches
will be undertaken with the view to eventual elaboration of the latter technique
to allow the rapid synthesis of products of high purity without the need for
tedious purification. Quick, reliable methods for the chemical synthesis of
higher peptides are needed in connection with the increasing use of such
substances in the fields of medicinal chemistry, drug discovery and material
science.