* 9314917
* Digital Image Processing Techniques for Flow Field Analysis and Interpretation
* ENG,ECCS
* 04/15/1994,09/30/1998
* Robin Strickland, University of Arizona
* Continuing Grant
* Vladimir J. Lumelsky
* 09/30/1998
* USD 369,576.00

9314917 Strickland The main objective of this work is to develop computer
analysis techniques for representing and analyzing large, multidimensional
scalar and vector data sets generated by flow visualization experiments. The
fundamental premise is that complex flows can be decomposed into simpler,
physically meaningful flow components, and that doing so facilitates computer
assisted flow analysis. Large 3D regions of the data will be segmented into
smaller, computationally manageable volumes. The interaction between the spatial
distribution of critical points and the order of the nonlinear model will be
studied. Modeling techniques will be tested on experimental 3D vector field
data. Turbulent flows will be modeled using the tools of chaotic dynamical
systems, namely fractals and iterated function systems (IFS). The goal is to
solve the classic inverse problem - given the image of a flow, or the velocity
field, derive an IFS from which reconstruction of the input data is possible.
The dynamical systems models will be used for feature (e.g. vortex)
identification, feature tracking in time sequences, and animation and
visualization. Data acquired from established laboratories will be used to test
the modeling paradigms and their utility in flow analysis. This work will
address the needs voiced by he fluids, aerodynamics, and combustion and heat
transfer communities concerning the automation of computer assisted methods for
processing and interpreting large fluid flow data sets. ***