* 9314674
* Osmium Isotopes as a Paleoweathering Tracer
* GEO,OCE
* 11/15/1993,10/31/1997
* Alan Zindler, Columbia University
* Continuing Grant
* Donald L. Rice
* 10/31/1997
* USD 189,914.00

Broecker 9314674 The potential of osmium isotopic ratios of marine sediments as
a geochemical tracer was demonstrated by Pegram et. al. (1992). They showed that
there has been a large increase in the 187 Os/186 Os ratio of osmium leached
from Pacific red clays over the past 58 million years. They proposed that the
leachable osmium is hydrogenous in origin, and reflects the isotopic composition
of sea water at the time of precipitation. The observed change in 187 Os/186 Os
was attributed to changes in continental weathering rates; higher values
corresponding to increased supply of radiogenic 187 Os via rivers. The presumed
short residence time of osmium in sea water potentially allows it to respond to
rapid (<10 Ka) changes in weathering rates. At present, no tracer with this
capacity exists. Since osmium isotopes have not been homogeneous in the oceans
in the past, inferences drawn from the record at a single site do not
necessarily apply to the whole ocean. However, the heterogeneity of osmium in
the oceans may facilitate evaluation of the importance of local changes and
their effect on mean ocean water chemistry. This study will evaluate the spatial
and temporal variability of osmium in sea water by analyzing the hydrogenous
(leachable) fraction of marine carbonate sediments and elucidate the processes
that control osmium isotope ratios in the oceans on various time scales, and
thus help to lay the groundwork for the use of osmium as a tracer for these
processes.