* 9314221
* Design of Joint Source/Channel Codes for Rayleigh Fading    Channels
* CSE,CCF
* 08/01/1994,01/31/1999
* Costas Georghiades, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Continuing Grant
* Rodger E. Ziemer
* 01/31/1999
* USD 347,587.00

9314221 Vaishampayan We address the issue of combined source and channel coding
for fading channels. It is well-known that channel coding, together with
interleaving, can be used to achieve an improvement n diversity order. However,
these codes have traditionally offered uniform error protection for all bits
transmitted. In reality, for many sources, some bits from the quantizer are more
important than others. We show that unequal error protection schemes can offer
greatly improved performance on the fading channel given a fixed diversity level
in the system. We also provide a method for designing unequal error protection
schemes in order to minimize a distortion criterion, subject to an overall
system diversity level. Additionally, we note that the interleaving delay
required in interleaved systems is very large compared to the diversity orders
that the code provides. In speech coding applications the entire communications
system must be designed to meet a delay budget. The interleaving delay thus
restricts the delay that can be allocated to the source coder/decoder. We show
that the construction of a channel code with a constraint on the interleaving
delay can be treated as a problem of designing a code for a restricted number of
independently slow fading channels in which interleaving is not allowed on any
of the slow fading channels. The diversity order that the code can achieve is
restricted to the number of independent channels available. However, the rate of
the code is then restricted to the reciprocal of the diversity order. In order
to get around this constraint, we use the fact that for continuous alphabet
sources, not every transition probability for the effective channel as seen by
the source coder/decoder need exhibit the maximum order of diversity. This
allows the rate to the code to be increased. We will examine structured
techniques for constructing combined source and channel codes for the Rayleigh
fading channel. ***