* 9314525
* Carbon Fixation and Nitrate Respiration in the Hydrothermal Vent Tubeworm Riftia Pachyptila
* GEO,OCE
* 11/15/1993,04/30/1998
* Horst Felbeck, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Continuing Grant
* Phillip R. Taylor
* 04/30/1998
* USD 370,000.00

Felbeck 9314525 Free-living and symbiotic bacteria at deep-sea hydrothermal
vents use the sulfide formed by geothermal processes as an energy source for
chemoautotrophic processes. In order to describe the flow of carbon in a vent
community, information is required on how inorganic carbon (CO2) is originally
incorporated into organic compounds, and with which energy sources. It's also
important to understand the mechanism by which this carbon is eventually
transferred from vent bacteria to rest of the community, in particular the
hydrothermal-vent tubeworm Riftia pachyptila. Therefore, this project will focus
on three research objectives: (1) quantify the transport of CO2 as organic
molecules in the blood R. pachyptila; (2) trace the fate of succinate, the
molecule transferred from bacteria to their hosts as well as the organic acid
carrying the largest proportion of external CO2 in the blood; and (3) determine
the relative importance of two alternative electron acceptors for sulfide
oxidation, e.g., oxygen and nitrate respiration in R. pachyptila. The results of
this research will delineate the important biochemical pathways and mechanisms
involved in the synthesis of organic matter by vent communities, which is
central to understanding chemoautotrophic processes at deep-sea hydrothermal
vents. ***