* 9314255
* National Student Leadership Conference
* O/D,OECR
* 08/01/1993,02/28/1994
* Raul Alvarado, Society of Hispanic Professional Engineers
* Standard Grant
* None
* 02/28/1994
* USD 30,000.00

ASTRACT Proposal No.: OEO93-14255 PI : Raul Alvarado/CO-PI: Martin Martinez
Organization: Society for Hispanic Professional Engineers Foundation (SHPE)
Title : National Student Leadership Conference Since its inception, the National
Student Leadership Conference (NSLC) has served as a vehicle for developing
within SHPE student leaders the skills necessary to lead in the coordination of
successful chapter events. SHPE student chapters officers from across the
country are brought together for three days of intensive leadership, total
quality management training and skill acquisitions. NSLC '91 was represented by
86 SHPE student chapters; NSLC '92 included 100 SHPE and Mexican American
Engineering Society (MAES) student chapters. NSLC sessions are held throughout
the US and past sites have included the Pacific Gas &amp; Electric Training
Center in San Ramon, California and Xerox International Center for Training and
Management Development in Leesburg, Virginia. Typical course topics include:
Team Building, Situational Leadership, Group Dynamics, Project Management,
Effective Meetings, Conflict Resolution, and Total Quality Management (TQM). The
participants are divided into six tracks which enables them to be scheduled for
all two-hour sessions over the three days of workshops. The workshops are
conducted by corporate representatives who have been so impressed with the
caliber of the participants that they asked to be considered as trainers at any
subsequent NSLC. The NSLC is supported by SHPE's Industrial PartnerSHPE Council
(IPC) which consists of 13 member companies. They are: 3M, Amoco, Apple
Computer, Boeing Company, Chevron Corporation, Dow Chemical, Eastman Kodak,
Hewlett-Packard, Hoechst Celanese, IBM, Kraft General Foods, Pacific Gas and
Electric and Walt Disney Imagineering. Each one of these companies provides a
minimum of $22,600 to support all of SHPE's educational programs. The NSLC is
one of the six educational programs. The IPC contribution to NSLC is $49,440 for
1993. The NSLC 1993 will be held from August 19-22 at the Hickory Ridge
Conference Centre in Lisle, Illinois. Scheduled workshop topics include:
Financial Planning, Leadership/Professionalism. Project manager, Effective
Communications and Team Building. Funding for the event is requested for
transportation and housing of the student participants. This proposal will be
administered by SHPE Foundation and coordinated by SHPE, Inc.