* 9314687
* Surface Ocean Oxygen Fluxes
* GEO,OCE
* 10/15/1993,09/30/1997
* Steven Emerson, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Donald L. Rice
* 09/30/1997
* USD 640,074.00

9314687 EMERSON This study is t determine rates of net biological productivity
and respiration in the oligotrophic ocean and the mechanisms that control this
process. It is hypothesized that oxygen and carbon is cycled at this location in
which about two thirds of the net oxygen production in the euphotic zone is
accompanied by dissolved organic carbon (DOC) production and one third by
particulate carbon formation. Most of the DOC is respired immediately below the
euphotic zone (100-175m) and most of the particulate carbon escapes the upper
ocean. Since DOM has a high C/N ratio, much less nitrite is required to fuel the
biological pump than suggested by the "Redfield" ratio. Dissolved nitrate
appears to be taken up in the region of oxygen respiration below the euphotic
zone. This proposal is designed to test this hypothesis and study the importance
of short term transients of net biological O2 production. Continuous
measurements of net biological oxygen production will be determined by deploying
a device for in situ measurements of total gas pressure and oxygen. The
hypothesis will be tested by detailed simultaneous measurements of biological O2
production and dissolved organic matter at both Hawaii and Bermuda U.S. JGOFS
time series stations, and by determining the rates of respiration and 15N-NO3
uptake below the euphotic zone.