* 9314438
* National Information Service for Earthquake Engineering
* ENG,CMMI
* 12/01/1993,11/30/1997
* Jack Moehle, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* William A. Anderson
* 11/30/1997
* USD 1,600,000.00

9314438 Moehle The National Information Service for Earthquake Engineering
(NISEE) collects and organizes information on earthquake engineering and allied
fields and disseminates it to practicing engineers and related professionals,
students, educators, researchers, government agencies, and the general public.
The NISEE program at the Earthquake Engineering Research Center, University of
California at Berkeley, achieves this purpose through the EERC Library,
Earthquake Engineering Abstracts database, the Abstract Journal in Earthquake
Engineering, computer software distribution, and promotional activities. During
the last three-year grant cycle, the EERC library converted all its
bibliographic records to machine-readable form and began to make its material
available through resource-sharing networks. The NISEE database (renamed
Earthquake Engineering Abstracts) was expanded to include current information in
earthquake engineering. In addition to maintaining availability through the
Internet and via modem connections, the database is now also available to more
users through the University of California online catalog system, MELVYL. The
Computer Applications group continued to distribute over 100 different
microcomputer and mainframe computer software packages. Six volumes of the
Abstract Journal in Earthquake Engineering were published, bringing the
publication schedule up to date. This award provides renewed funding for NISEE
at the University of California at Berkeley. Another branch of NISEE is also
being supported by NSF at the California Institute of Technology. ***