* 9314132
* The Effects of Animal-Sediment Interaction on Geochemical   Processes Near the Sediment-Water Interface
* GEO,OCE
* 02/15/1994,01/31/1998
* Robert Aller, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Continuing Grant
* Donald L. Rice
* 01/31/1998
* USD 375,006.00

9314132 ALLER The activities of marine bottom-dwelling animals dramatically
alter material transport and reaction distributions in surface sediments over
much of the modern seafloor. It is the purpose of this research to continue to
quantitatively examine and conceptualize the effect of these activities on the
rates of diagenetic reactions, sediment-water solute exchange, and storage of
organic or mineral phases in sedimentary deposits. A variety of field and
laboratory observations demonstrate that particle reworking and irrigation
activities of benthic fauna promote the remineralization of organic matter. Of
the many simultaneous factors involved, two may be particularly important: (1)
repetitive oscillation of redox conditions in the bioturbated zone, and (2) low
metabolite build- up. Both factors likely decrease eventual storage of organic
matter, or specific groups of organic compounds, in marine sediments.
Experimental diffusion cells which mimic redox and diffusive transport
conditions in the bioturbated zone will be used to further investigate these
processes and test conceptual models of remineralization in surface sediments.
Macrobenthic bioturbation also enhances the importance of secndary oxidants
sucha s MN O2 and controls relative rates of coupled redox reactions in surface
sediments. These cycles couple strongly with other elements, such as a variety
of trace metals. Detailed experimental measures of Mn oxidation and reduction
rates will be used simultaneously with measures of particle reworking, net
fluxes, and solute profiles to develop a model of Mn cycling and associated
redox balances in bioturbated deposits. The potential semipermeability of
biogenic structures to components of the dissolved organic carbon pool (DOC) has
major implications for models of sedimentary DOC distributions, microbial
activity, and net sediment-water fluxes. Diffusion cell measurements will be
performed to examine possible DOC fractionation across tube and b urrow walls.
The long term goals of this research are a quantitative description (model) of
the types of transport and reaction balances during early diagenesis and the
exploration of the corresponding geochemical and ecological implications.