* 9314371
* Molecular Markers of Iron Limitation: Use of Flavodoxin to  Assess the Iron Status of Phytoplankton
* GEO,OCE
* 12/01/1993,11/30/1997
* Richard Geider, University of Delaware
* Continuing Grant
* Phillip R. Taylor
* 11/30/1997
* USD 360,881.00

9314371 GEIDER This project will examine the iron status of marine phytoplankton
using immunological probes of flavodoxin abundance. Flavodoxin commonly
substitutes for the iron-sulfur protein ferredoxin as an electron carrier in the
photosynthetic electron transfer chain of algae and cyanobacteria under iron
limited conditions. Flavodoxin appears to have the attributes of a good
molecular marker of iron limitation because: (1) it only accumulates when iron
is limiting, (2) it is stable enough to allow isolation and quantification, and
(3) it shows a strong signal in response to iron limitation. In addition,
flavodoxin may be quantitatively accumulated under Fe- limiting conditions
allowing estimation of relative growth rate if the complicating effects of
interactions with irradiance and nitrogen source can be taken into account. An
antibody to a diatom (Phaeodactylum tricornutum) flavodoxin that cross reacts
with flavodoxins from other diatom species has already been developed. The
project will proceed along three related lines. First, flavodoxins will be
extracted from other taxa (cyanobacteria, cryptomonads, prasinophytes,
chlorophytes), to test for cross-reactivity with the diatom antibody, and to
develop taxon-specific antibodies as needed. The antibodies will be used to
develop quantitative immunoassays for flavodoxin in total protein extracts of
marine particulate matter to examine bulk flavodoxin concentrations, and to
develop single cell immunofluorescence assays to examine heterogeneity in the
iron status of natural phytoplankton populations. Second, the project will
examine the ecophysiology of iron limitation in diatoms using flavodoxin
synthesis as a measure of the internal iron status. The project will also use
measurements of the concentration of dissolved "available" iron below which
flavodoxin synthesis is induced to develop a bioassay for measuring "available"
iron. Diatoms will be used for these experiments. Third, the project will u se
immunofluorescent techniques to measure flavodoxin abundance in samples of
opportunity from natural phytoplankton assemblages. In addition, DNA
amplification and sequencing techniques will be employed to examine
heterogeneity in the genes encoding flavodoxin in natural phytoplankton
assemblages. ***