* 9314835
* Japan STA Program:  Growth and Synthesis of High Tc         Superconductors for Bulk Applications
* O/D,OISE
* 08/01/1994,10/31/1995
* Timothy Haugan, Individual Award
* Standard Grant
* Randall Soderquist
* 10/31/1995
* USD 7,400.00

9314835 Haugan This award supports a 12-month Science and Technology
Postdoctoral Fellowship for Dr. Timothy Haugan, Department of Electrical and
Computer Engineering, State University of New York Buffalo, at the International
Superconductivity Technology Center, Superconductivity Research Laboratory,
Tokyo, Japan. During his year-long tenure, Dr. Haugan will work with Dr. Shoji
Tanaka, Director of the Superconductivity Research Laboratory. on a research
project entitled "Growth and Synthesis of High Tc Superconductors for Bulk
Applications." The research project focuses on phase transformations occurring
along different reaction pathways. To study the complicated, sometimes
kinetically fast reactions that can occur in the liquid-solid "melts" during
bulk synthesis, several methods will be used. Solid phase reactions will be
analyzed using real- time high temperature X-ray diffraction (XRD). To study
complicated liquid phase coalescence and reaction phenomena, bulk
superconductors will be quenched from different times in a reaction sequence and
alayzed by several methods, including film surface XRD, powder XRD, surface
scanning electron microscopy (SEM), polished cross-sectional SEM, energy
dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDX) and SQUID. Quantitative percentages of
crystalline, amorphous and quenched liquid-like phases present in the reacted
and quenched superconductors will be determined by SEM image analysis and XRD
methods. These methods are particularly suited for studying melt or liquid-
assisted bulk processing. ***