* 9314691
* Investigation of Past Variations In Surface Ocean           Radiocarbon During The Holocene
* GEO,OCE
* 11/01/1993,10/31/1997
* Ellen Druffel, University of California-Irvine
* Continuing Grant
* Donald L. Rice
* 10/31/1997
* USD 487,502.00

9314691 DRUFFEL The major goal of this continuing research is to construct time
histories of high-precision 14C in past surface ocean water regimes using annual
coral bands from fossil and living corals. These data, when coupled with stable
oxygen and carbon isotope measurements (18 O and 13C), reveal important
information regarding the cycling of 14CO2 in the upper ocean and the exchange
of 14CO2 between air and sea. Four experiments will be conducted 1) To determine
whether decade time-scale variations in 14C were present in ancient oceans using
fossil coral sequences that have been absolutely dated using 230 Th by thermal
ionization mass spectrometry. Two time periods will be studied in corals from
Vanuatu and from Biscayne National Park, Florida. This will allow for the
comparison of 14C in two major ocean currents (the South Equatorial Current and
the Gulf Stream, respectively), during extreme thermal conditions that existed
in the Holocene: the Little Ice Age and the Hypsithermal. 2) To determine the
presence or absence of decade time-scale variations in 14C in the North Pacific
during the late Little Ice Age (AD 1680-1730), and compare this record to that
obtained from the southwestern Pacific where large 14C variations correlated
with ancient El Nino events. Corals from the North Atlantic will also be
studied, to examine the extent to which the 14C variability was world-wide. 3)
The Suess effect (lowering of 14C due mainly to 14C-free fossil fuel CO2 since
late 1800s) will be measured at three sites in the northern Pacific, where no
measurable Suess effect was found 4)Collection and high-precision 14C analyses
are proposed for a coral from Fernando de Noronha. The equatorial Atlantic is
presently the only location in the temperate and tropical oceans for which a
post-bomb 14C record is not available. Its importance for parameterizing tracer
penetration into the Atlantic cannot be overstated. A limited number of high-
precision 14C analyses will b e made using Accelerator Mass Spectrometry (AMS)
techniques, with multiple graphite target analysis for each sample. The
remainder of the samples (75%) will be measured to high- precision at the UCI
Radiocarbon Laboratory using conventional, gas-counting techniques.