* 9314576
* U.S.- France Cooperative Research: NEMO 3: A Double Beta    Decay Experiment Searching for Massive Neutrinos to 0.1eV
* O/D,OISE
* 04/15/1994,03/31/1998
* C. Sean Sutton, Mount Holyoke College
* Standard Grant
* Rose Gombay
* 03/31/1998
* USD 16,250.00

9314576 Sutton This three-year award supports U.S.-France cooperative research
in nuclear physics involving C. Sean Sutton and Howard W. Nicholson of Mount
Holyoke College and S. Jullian of the University of Paris (Orsay) and others at
CNRS laboratories in Bordeaux, Caen and Strasbourg. The U.S. group will join
NEMO-3 (Neutrinoless Experiments with Molybdenum), a French, Russian and
Ukrainian ongoing collaboration in search of neutrinoless double beta decay.
Neutrinos are considered a prime candidate for the missing mass (dark matter) in
the universe. One way to probe neutrinos is to search for double beta decay.
Using the next generation of detectors in double beta decay, the U.S will
participate in the experiments in the Frejus tunnel under the French Alps and in
the data analysis in Paris. The U.S. experimentalists have just completed an
intensive search for double beta decay in the isotope molybdenum. In this
collaboration, they will develop methods to purify the molybdenum samples and
study problems of identifying radioactive impurities in the double beta decay
source materials. The French bring their considerable expertise in low
background engineering and extensive measurements on natural radioactivity
content of these materials. The Russian and Ukrainian contribution consists of
large quantities of molybdenum with very low radioactivity which is critical for
the double beta decay experiments. ***