* 9314915
* U.S.-Japan Cooperative Research:  Analysis of All-Sky       Camera Data Acquired at South Pole Station using the        ARSAD Image Processing System
* O/D,OISE
* 04/15/1994,03/31/1996
* Frank Berkey, Utah State University
* Standard Grant
* Alexander P. DeAngelis
* 03/31/1996
* USD 10,250.00

9314915 Berkey This awards supports a two-year cooperative research project
between Professor Frank T. Berkey, Center for Atmospheric and Space Sciences,
Utah State University, and Professor Takeo Hirasawa and Dr. Takayuki Ono,
National Institute of Polar Research (NIPR), Tokyo, Japan. The purpose of the
project is to obtain quantitative information on the spatial extent and temporal
development of auroras observed at Amundsen-Scott South Pole Station. The data
to be analyzed have been acquired using a film-based all-sky camera system that
has been operated at South Pole Station since 1965. The data are to be processed
using a sophisticated all-sky camera image processing system developed at the
NIPR for the analysis of data acquired at the Japanese Antarctic bases. The
analysis system enables the user to display data in a geophysical coordinate
framework and to analyze images acquired over short or long time intervals in a
manner not possible with individual photographic images. Dr. Berkey has
responsibility for the all-sky program at South Pole Station, and Dr. Hirasawa
and Dr. Ono have had extensive experience in auroral studies, each having spent
more than one winter season in Antarctica. NIPR is a national laboratory
responsible for conducting research both in the Arctic and Antarctic regions.
***