* 9314437
* U.S.-Korea Cooperative Research On Autoclave Resin Transfer Molding (ARTM) in High Performance Polymeric Composite      Recycling
* O/D,OISE
* 08/15/1994,07/31/1999
* James Seferis, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Gerald Edwards
* 07/31/1999
* USD 21,416.00

9314437 Seferis This award provides funds to permit Dr. James C. Seferis,
Department of Chemical Engineering, University of Washington, to pursue with Dr.
Ki-Jun Lee, Department of Chemical Engineering, Seoul National University,
Korea, for 24 months, a program of cooperative research on autoclave resin
transfer molding (ARTM) in high performance polymeric composite recycling.
Specifically, the proposed research will focus on (1) ARTM feasibility studies
and process development, (2) resin flow modeling and processing parameter
characterization, (3) void formation phenomena in ARTM processing, and (4) ARTM
composite recycle studies. This project will be integrated into an overall
processing-structure-property characterization methodology facilitating
composites technology transfer in aerospace, automotive, and electric/electronic
industries. Composite recycling has recently emerged in aerospace industries as
a critical issue resulting from serious concerns for cost savings and
environmental health problems. The expertise of Dr. Lee's team at Seoul National
University in polymer rheology and porous media transport phenomena will be
combined, for mutual benefit, with that of the PI's research team which is
studying process induced stresses in laminated polymer composites and related
problems in composite manufacture. The collaborators are recognized as experts
in the field of the proposal. This project is relevant to the objectives of the
U.S.-Korea Cooperative Science Program which seeks to increase the level of
cooperation between U.S. and Korean scientists and engineers through the
exchange of scientific information, ideas, skills, and techniques and through
collaboration on problems of mutual benefit. Korean participation in the project
is supported by the Korea Science and Engineering Foundation (KOSEF). This
project adds an international cooperative dimension to the PI's research under
NSF Grant No. DDM-9245052. ***