* 9314265
* SGER:  Effects of Hurricane Andrew on Subtropical Hardwood  Hammocks of Everglades National Park, Florida
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/1993,12/31/1994
* William Platt, Louisiana State University
* Standard Grant
* Scott L. Collins
* 12/31/1994
* USD 15,299.00

Hurricanes disrupt forest canopies, resulting in increased light levels both in
gaps and beneath overstory trees. Because such increases are likely to be
transient in forests in which advance recruits and resprouting trees grow
rapidly, study of the responses of vegetation to hurricanes must occur within a
short period of time following impact. On August 24, 1992, the south eyewall of
Hurricane Andrew impacted patches of subtropical hardwood forests (hammocks)
imbedded in slash pine savannas on Long Pine Key in Everglades National Park,
Florida. Mapped plots in which all tress &gt; 2 cm dbh had been tagged and
measured had been established at the time of the hurricane in both burned and
unburned hammocks. First, the project will measure damage and mortality of trees
in burned and unburned subtropical hammocks and examine patterns of recovery of
trees in burned and unburned subtropical hammocks and examine patterns of
recovery of trees over the year following the hurricane. Second, it will assess
effects of the hurricane on epiphytes by censusing plants in plots located in
both burned and unburned hammocks. These data will be used to explore whether
the trees and epiphytes respond similarly (and in what ways) to the large-scale
disturbances of fires and hurricanes. %%% Ecological systems must constantly
respond to stresses on several temporal &amp; spatial scales. This study
provides quantitative assessment if the damage &amp; patterns of recovery of
populations of tropical trees in subtropical hammocks. Results of this study
will be directly comparable to others in the impacts of severe hurricanes on
subtropical forests. In addition, by comparing the impact of Hurricane Andrew on
trees in burned &amp; unburned hammocks, this study provides a rare opportunity
to compare the effects of two major disturbances.