* 9314725
* Source Attribution Methods for Modeling Aquatic Pollution   From Non-Point and Atmospheric Sources
* ENG,CBET
* 04/15/1994,09/30/1997
* Erik Christensen, University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee
* Continuing Grant
* Edward H. Bryan
* 09/30/1997
* USD 366,554.00

9314725 Christensen This is an award to support research to find effective
methods for determining the sources of diffuse aquatic pollutants. The
investigator plans on developing a chemical mass balance model and factor
analysis models for analyzing sedimentary records of pollutants including
consideration of errors in both the measured historical record of a substance
and its known source functions. The models will be evaluated using existing data
sets for sediment-associated deposits of polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons in
existing dated sediment cores and polychlorinated biphenyls in sediments from
freshwater Lake Michigan estuaries. In addition, an experimental program will be
conducted focusing on polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons and polychlorinated
dibenzo- p-dioxines in Lake Michigan, Green Bay and the lower Fox River of
Wisconsin. The goal of this project is to develop source-attribution methods for
potential use in management of aquatic water quality. These methods, previously
extensively used in characterizing sources of air pollutants, may prove
especially effective in dealing with non-point sources of pollution. While
point-sources of water pollution are generally readily identifiable, non-point
sources such as those attributable to deposition from the atmosphere are not.
Results of this research are expected to lead to improved models that can be
utilized in engineering design of pollution control facilities and remediation
of polluted aquatic resources. ***