* 9314804
* Dissertation Research:  Feeding and Ranging by the          White-Handed Gibbon (Hylobates Lar) in Northern Thailand
* SBE,BCS
* 05/01/1994,10/31/1995
* Robert Sussman, Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Mark L. Weiss
* 10/31/1995
* USD 6,735.00

ABSTRACT P.I. Robert Sussman/Thad Bartlett SBR - 9314804 Monogamy is relatively
rare among our primate relatives, as well as mammals generally, and its
determinants have not been clearly established. Typically, monogamy is argued to
result when certain ecological constraints impinge - that in certain
circumstances, males may be unable to monopolize more than one female, and
ultimately, that males may not be able to control a sufficient resource base to
support more than a single female and her dependent offspring. In larger Old
World species, particularly gibbons, the argument has generally been that
monogamy is a response to their dependence on small scattered resources that are
presumably unbable to support larger social groups. However, there is a paucity
of information on gibbon foraging behavior in relation to resouce availability,
partially because most of the data have been collected in equatorial rain
forests where there is little seasonality of resources, and plant diversity is
high. This study will take place in a simpler habitat, with distinct wet and dry
seasons, where gross changes in food availability will be more apparent, and
where monitoring the variation in food resources can be related to ranging and
social behaviors of the gibbons. It will permit a clear evaluation of current
hypotheses concerning the interrelationship between resource distribution and
social structure. This study will be supported partially by a Fulbright award.
*** P\anthro\jfried\9314804.abs ~ Z _ | ~ ! ! ! ! D ~ ~ ( Times New Roman Symbol
& Arial " h F eG e = Jonathan Friedlaender Jonathan Friedlaender