* 9314338
* Development of a New Technique for Quantifying Selective    Ingestion of Diatoms by Deposit Feeders
* GEO,OCE
* 06/01/1994,11/30/1995
* Marilyn Mayer, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Phillip R. Taylor
* 11/30/1995
* USD 9,100.00

9314338 MAYER Deposit feeders typically dominate benthic communities in soft
bottom sediments. Because they feed on the organically dilute mixture (typically
&lt;5% organic matter) of mineral grains, micro- organisms, and detritus, they
process large volumes of sediment to obtain sufficient nutrition. Selective
ingestion of the more nutritious components of sediment (e.g., diatoms) is a
potentially important part of their feeding behavior. It also has profound
ramifications for decomposition of organic matter, sediment stratigraphy, and
the transport of organic matter and pollutants in sediment. However,
quantification of selective ingestion by de- posit feeders is hampered by
methodological problems. The goal of this research project is the development of
a new technique for quantifying the degree to which deposit feeders selectively
ingest diatoms, an important nutritional component of sediments. The technique
to be developed by this project involves labeling an essentially inert component
of diatoms (the frustule) with the radioactive isotope 68Ge(a metabolic analog
of Si) such that incorporated 68Ge becomes a conservative radiotracer for
diatoms. Consequently, selective ingestion of diatoms can be quantified by
comparing the concentration of the radiolabel in fecal material with that in
test sediment. This project will develop protocols for labelling diatoms and
preparing samples for scintillation counting. Also, the degree to which the 68Ge
activity of diatoms acts as a conservative radiotracer and the sensitivity of
the technique will be evaluated. Finally, the developed method will be applied
to quantify the selective ingestion of diatoms by one species of deposit feeder.
***