* 9314821
* Third International Seminar on Bulk Power System Voltage    Phenomena, to be held in Interlaken, Switzerland August     23-27, l994
* ENG,ECCS
* 04/01/1994,03/31/1996
* Lester Fink, ECC Incorporated
* Standard Grant
* Vijay Vittal
* 03/31/1996
* USD 37,560.00

9314821 Fink This Seminar will be a successor to those presented in 1988 (which
was jointly sponsored by NSF, EPRI, and the Engineering Foundation), and in l991
(which was jointly sponsored by NSF and ECC, Inc.), and will be addressed to the
same audience. However, in view of the strong international interest and
participation in the previous seminars (19 in 1988, 18 in 1991, from Europe,
Asia, and Australia), it is proposed to hold this next on in Europe. The purpose
of the Seminar will be to discuss the best current understanding of voltage
phenomena on large scale electric power systems, in a way that will be helpful
both to the experienced power system engineer seeking to cope with the new
phenomena which his system is experiencing, and to the academic investigator
seeking to probe deeper into those phenomena. The Seminar is intended to enhance
understanding of the phenomenal involved, to stimulate research and development
on algorithmic tools adequate to the needs of the industry, and to encourage
advancement of the state of the art in practical applications. A specific
emphasis in this Seminar will be technology exchanges between young university
professors and post-doctoral fellows, through explorations of basic phenomena
and state-of-the-art analytical techniques. This has been a major function of
this Seminar since its inception. This is demonstrated by the 1988 and 1991
sessions, with international technical exchanges initiated at and continuing
after the sessions, particularly as they have provided opportunities to young
investigators. The previous sessions have included participation by
investigators from Australia (University of New South Wales), Belgium
(University de Liege), England (Imperial College, London), Germany (Aachen
University of Technology), Italy (Politecnico di Torino, Universita di Bari),
Japan (University of Tokyo, Meiji University,Kawasaki, Hiroshima University,
University of Tokyo, Waseda University, South Korea (Seoul Natio nal
University), and Sweden (Royal Institute of Technology, Stockholm). In all. over
a dozen young graduate students and assistant professors attended these
sessions. ***