* 9314253
* Basic Evaluation and Design Techniques for High-Speed       Communication Networks
* CSE,CNS
* 03/01/1994,08/31/1999
* Bruce Hajek, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Dwight D. Fisher
* 08/31/1999
* USD 306,346.00

9314253 Hajek The principal investigator (PI) will focus on performance
evaluation and design of communication networks of the future with emphasis on
large, high-speed networks, both optical and electronic. The main topics are 1)
Spectral Response of Queues and Diffusion Approximation, 2) Continuous Traffic
in Packet Switches, 3) Multirate Circuit Switches, and 4) Optical
Interconnections. The approach will be to perform modeling, analysis, and
design. Models will be based on current and anticipated future technology and
cover a broad spectrum of networks with circuit-switched to datagram packet
networks at the extremes. Analysis will consist of a mixture of exact
probabilistic methods and simulation. Design will be motivated by modeling and
analysis and aided by optimization tools of both combinatorial and linear types.
Finally, inequalities from information theory, mathematical physics, decision
theory and combinatorics will be applied to yield new performance bounds,
providing a bridge between design and performance evaluation. Successful
completion of the proposed research would provide new network topologies and
control strategies for high performance networks, improved means to predict
performance to support the offering of guaranteed service, and techniques to
extrapolate accurately performance observed for small experimental networks to
large-scale networks. ***