* 9314605
* Quasi-Low-Dimensional Reduced Transition Metal Oxides:      Synthesis and Characterization
* MPS,DMR
* 03/01/1994,08/31/1997
* Martha Greenblatt, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Continuing Grant
* David Nelson
* 08/31/1997
* USD 416,068.00

9314605 Greenblatt Experience shows that materials with novel behavior are
likely to be discovered when competing electronic interactions exist. In low-
dimensional materials, the interplay of competing electronic interactions is
enhanced. The object of this project is the synthesis and characterization of
new reduced transition metal compounds with quasi-low-dimensional properties.
Systems of interest include: (1) transition metal (Nb, Ta and W) bronzes and (2)
molybdenum, niobium, and rhenium cluster compounds. The focus of the
experimental program is to synthesize new materials of strongly-correlated
electron systems that are on the verge of electronic and structural
instabilities, and to fine tune the competing electronic interactions through
the unstable region in a controlled way. Particular emphasis will be placed on
the preparation of single crystal specimens to study the structural and
orientation dependent physical properties. Single crystal measurements of the
electrical resistivity, magnetic susceptibility, specific heat as a function of
temperature, DTA, ESR, FTIR, optical and XANE spectroscopies will be used to
characterize samples of interest. Structural and physical property relationships
will be stressed. Transitions associated with the onset of charge density waves
(CDW) and/or superconductivity will be sought and characterized. These studies
are expected to yield novel materials, provide fundamental insights into
correlated electronic behavior and uHimately allow the enhancement and control
of electronic instabilities that lead to interesting and useful macroscopic
properties. ***