* 9314935
* Synthesis and Characterization of Bipolar Phospholipids for Use as Organizing Media in Spectrofluorometric Analysis
* MPS,CHE
* 12/01/1993,11/30/1997
* Sharon Neal, University of California-Riverside
* Continuing Grant
* Fred M. Hawkridge
* 11/30/1997
* USD 283,750.00

9314935 Neal This three-year continuing grant in the Analytical and Surface
Chemistry Program to Professor Sharon Neal at the University of California at
Riverside supports an investigation of the synthesis and characterization of
unique bipolar lipids. These phospholipids will be incorporated into monolayer
vesicles as specific analytical reagents designed to sequester nonelectrolyte
solutes in a controlled environment, for subsequent characterization by
fluorescence spectroscopy. The vesicles constructed from these bipolar lipids
will be studied using steady state, lifetime, and polarization luminescence
spectroscopy, as well as classical and dynamic light scattering. With these
techniques, the location of the solute within the vesicle will be elucidated. By
varying the nature of the bipolar lipid used to make the vesicles, the effect of
pocket size and vesicle capacity will be determined. The long term goal of this
research is the development of analytical methodology that is sufficiently
selective to accomplish the analysis of complex, biologically relevant samples
through selective complexation within vesicles using multiparametric,
microenvironment- sensitive spectroscopy. %%% This research aims to design new
lipid molecules that will enable a particular analyte to be trapped for
subsequent analysis. These bipolar lipids consist of two polar ends, and a
nonpolar interior. These molecules spontaneously assemble into spherical
assemblies, called vesicles. The chemical characteristics of the lipids are
tailored to enclose specific molecules within the vesicle. This will provide a
highly selective analysis method for compounds of biological or environmental
significance. One difficulty in trying to identify and quantify chemical
compounds in many real systems is that the responses obtained from the
instrument are susceptible to interferences from numerous interfering compounds.
The research undertaken by Professor Neal shows real promise for solving t his
fundamental analysis problem. ***