* 9314453
* Nonlinear Power System Behavior Using Normal Forms:         Extension of Linear System Analysis Via Higher Order        Correction
* ENG,ECCS
* 04/15/1994,09/30/1996
* A. Fouad, Iowa State University
* Continuing Grant
* Saifur Rahman
* 09/30/1996
* USD 139,998.00

9314453 Fouad Today's heavily loaded and stressed power transmission networks
exhibit very complex dynamic system behavior, when subjected to small or large
disturbances. Several aspects of this complex behavior are alarming to the power
system analyst, since they are likely to reflect structural weakness in the
power network. When subjected to small disturbances, the main concern is the
power system conditions which lead to the phenomenon known as the interarea mode
of oscillation. When subjected to a large disturbance, a stressed and heavily
loaded interconnected power network may experience a system split involving
generators far away from the location of the disturbance. Analysis of the
fundamental modes of oscillation play a crucial role in power system dynamic
performance. Controls are tuned to mitigate lightly damped modes. The analysis
is usually done using a linearized system model. If fundamental modes interact
due to nonlinearities, then it becomes important to understand the nature of
these interactions and to incorporate them in the analysis and design procedure.
The proposers intend to study the dynamic power system behavior under stressed
(e.g., heavy load) operating conditions, using normal forms of vector fields.
The approach to be used is to obtain nonlinear corrections to the linear
behavior through normal form analysis, i.e., through incorporating higher order
(polynomial) terms. The objective is to obtain a more precise understanding of
the local and "almost global" behavior of a system via polynomial approximation,
invariant manifolds (stable, unstable and center manifolds), unfolding via
bifurcation parameters, sensitivity analysis and incorporation of random
perturbations. This approach, which is a standard approach in the theory of
dynamical systems, has not been used for the analysis of large electrical power
networks, and we propose a systematic study of normal form analysis for these
systems to assess the us e of information from higher order nonlinear analysis
for power systems operation. ***