* 9314743
* Directed Mutagenesis of a Photosystem II Extrinsic Protein
* BIO,MCB
* 02/15/1994,01/31/1998
* Charles Yocum, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Gary Cecchini
* 01/31/1998
* USD 304,000.00

9314743 Yocum Photosystem II is a complex enzyme system that harvests light and
uses this energy for a series of reactions, one of which is the oxidation of H2O
to O2. A cluster of hydrophobic membrane proteins provide ligation sites for the
inorganic cofactors (Ca2+, C1, Mn) required for minimal levels of O2 evolution
activity. However, stable ligation of these cofactors and kinetically efficient
H2O oxidation minimally requires the presence of an extrinsic 33 kDa polypeptide
known as the Manganese Stabilizing Protein, or MSP. A critical function of this
protein in vivo and in purified photosystem II preparations is to confer
stability to the site that ligates the Mn atoms that catalyze oxidation of H2O.
Although one site of binding to photosystem has been identified for MSP, the
protein's mode of action, whether purely structural or in addition as a possible
contributor of metal ligands, remaining unsettled. The question of MSP function
in photosystem II will be addressed by site-directed mutagenesis. Expression of
mutagenized MSP in E. coli will be used to obtain amounts of protein sufficient
for reconstitution, structural and spectroscopic investigations in a system
using purified photosystem II preparations from Arabidopsis and spinach.
Residues targeted for mutagenesis have been selected on the basis of their
possible contributions to the tertiary structure of the protein or to binding of
MSP to photosystem II. Analyses of reconstituted preparations are designed so as
to reveal modifications in inorganic ion cofactor binding, alterations in the
structure of the manganese cluster that catalyzes H2O oxidation, and defects in
the ability of preparations reconstituted with mutagenized MSP to bind other
extrinsic proteins that area also essential for long-term sustained activity
under physiological conditions. The proposed experiments will provide a better
understanding of the structure of an important photosynthetic protein and its
contributions t o both the organization and catalytic function of the site of
photosynthetic O2 evolution. %%% Photosynthesis produces the oxygen that
sustains life on earth. The enzyme that carries out this process is called
photosystem II, and is found in all plants and algae. Although, it is known that
certain ions (manganese, calcium and chloride) are needed for oxygen production
to occur, the role of photosystem II proteins in oxygen production is not well
understood. This project will examine a photosystem II protein, called the
Manganese Stabilizing Protein, that is essential to oxygen production, if it is
removed, oxygen production is impaired and exposure to light begins to destroy
the enzyme. To examine how Manganese Stabilizing Protein protects photosystem II
and enhances oxygen production, the genetic code for the protein is first
transferred to a bacterium, E. coli, which can be induced to produce the native
protein or alternative versions containing mutations in large amounts. Once
isolated, these protein will be examines for mutation-induced changes in their
structure and, when they are added back to photosystem II, for changes in their
ability to affect the activity and stability of oxygen production. The method to
be employed permits the investigator to produce many mutations in the protein.
By systematic modifications, it will be will be possible to determine which
parts of the protein are important in stabilizing photosystem II, and which
parts of the protein are involved in promoting the chemical reactions that
produce oxygen. Although these experiments are directed at understanding a very
fundamental biological reaction, they also will provide new information that may
prove useful in 2 areas: first, when the mechanism by which model plant system
such as Arabidopsis and spinach produce oxygen is fully understood, this
knowledge may point the way to new chemical methods for carrying out
oxidation/reduction reactions that are at present very energy-inte nsive.
Second, determination of protein features that are required for efficient oxygen
production can provide information on methods that may prove useful in
protecting plant life from environmental factors such as global warming. ***