* 9314079
* Astronomical Research with the Owens Valley Millimeter Array
* MPS,AST
* 11/01/1993,10/31/1996
* Anneila Sargent, California Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Robert L. Dickman
* 10/31/1996
* USD 4,890,000.00

AST-9314079. California Institute of Technology. PI: N. Z. Scoville Astronomical
Research with the Owens Valley Millimeter Array This award supports research,
technological development and student education at the California Institute of
Technology's Owens Valley millimeter array. The array is made up of 6 precision
10.4m- diameter antennas, which currently can be positioned out to maximum
spacings of 220m north-south and 200m east-west. All the telescopes are equipped
with dual-channel (2.6 and 1.3mm) cryogenic SiS receivers. At the shorter
wavelength, the highest angular resolution attainable by the array is 1
arcsecond. Approximately 50% of the array's observing time is presently devoted
to investigations by non-Caltech astronomers. During the tenure of the past
three year grant, the Owens Valley array has obtained aperture synthesis images
of molecular emission in domains ranging from the envelopes of evolved stars, to
star- forming regions in the Galaxy, as well as the spiral arms and active
nuclei of other galaxies; carbon monoxide emission has been detected in high
redshift quasars and ultraluminous galaxies at redshifts as high as 3.2. During
the last grant period, the observatory also made a number of technical advances,
including the construction and placement in service of 3 additional antennas,
installation of new beam transport optics, implementation of fully remote
receiver tuning capability, construction of a new digital correlator and fiber-
optic transmission and delay line system. In the next three year grant period
the observatory's scientific programs will include studies of high-redshift
galaxies and protogalaxies, infrared-luminous galaxies, the large-scale
structure of the Universe, protostars and protoplanetary nebulae, the structure
of the Milky Way Galaxy, collimated outflows from young stars, interstellar
chemistry and a variety of solar system objects. Planned technical developments
in the 1994-1997 period include the intr oduction of sideband separation
receivers with integrated first-stage IF amplifiers, doubling the interferometer
baseline, introduction of a second continuum channel for each baseline, and the
development and testing of low-noise stable radiometers on each telescope to
measure and compensate for short- term atmospheric fluctuations in phase which
reduce the sensitivity of the array, particularly over large baselines.