* 9314695
* Ocean Bottom Seismometer Modifications for Surface          Wave Studies
* GEO,OCE
* 10/01/1993,09/30/1996
* Spahr Webb, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Standard Grant
* H. Lawrence Clark
* 09/30/1996
* USD 222,379.00

9314695 Webb Funds are provided to modify and upgrade a suite of general purpose
oceanographic instruments that are used in long-term deployments on the sea
floor. The Marine Physical Laboratory at Scripps Institu- tion of Oceanography
maintains a number of adaptable, instruments to record seafloor seismic and
other signals for intervals of many months at high data rates. Modifications
will involve the development of three component, broad band sensors for
obtaining long-period surface wave records from the seafloor. The short period
geophones in the existing ocean bottom seismometers (OBS) are useless for
surface wave studies because of poor sensitivity and high self-noise at periods
longer than 10s. This limitation may be overcome by installing displacement
sensors on the OBS geophones. A modified sensor is planned that is more than 50
dB quieter than the standard sensors and will be adequate to readily detect Love
and Rayleigh waves. Studies of the propagation of Rayleigh and Love wave using
arrays of seafloor instruments will provide important information on the
structure of the oceanic mantle. The new displacement sensors will be installed
in ten existing OBS's. Once upgraded, this suite of instruments will be capable
of long-term deployments required of experiments such as those proposed in the
Global Change RIDGE program and other individual research projects. ***