* 9314694
* Effects of Hydrodynamic Forces, Sub-lethal Herbivory, and their Interaction, on the Mortality, Morphology and Composition of Kelps
* NONE,NONE
* 04/15/1994,09/30/1997
* James Eckman, Skidaway Institute of Oceanography
* Continuing grant
* Phillip R. Taylor
* 09/30/1997
* USD 460,000.00

Eckman 9314694 The species composition of kelp assemblages and the abundances of
plants assemblages are influenced significantly by two major types of
disturbance - attacks on plants by herbivores, such as urchins, and forces
imposed on plants by moving water which may dislodge or break them. These two
forms of disturbance may interact significantly, because sub-lethal mechanical
damage of plants by herbivores (a typical result of herbivore attack on larger
sporophytes) can weaken a plant's resistance to fluid forces. This study will
examine these effects by carrying out an extensive series of measurements and
experiments on kelps of several species and morphs in situ, working at several
sites along a gradient of flow energy in both the San Juan Archipelago,
Washington, and Barkley Sound, British Columbia. This study will: (1) make long-
term measurements of current and wave energy simultaneously at a series of
permanent sites and microhabitats within a site to characterize forces imposed
by seawater; (2) measure probabilities of kelp mortality and frequencies of sub-
lethal damage of plants by herbivores; (3) measure forces applied to kelps by
flow; (4) measure forces required to break or dislodge kelps, the location of
kelp failure, and the functional (allometric) dependence of breaking force on
plant size and shape; (5) measure the variability in (2-4) among species, sites
and microhabitats, and (6) conduct experiments to determine the impact of
herbivores on breaking force and probability of mortality. ***