* 9314252
* Collaborative Research: Physiology, Ecology and             Biochemistry of Nitrogen Fixation by Marine                 Planktonic Microorganisms (ABR)
* GEO,OCE
* 01/01/1994,12/31/1996
* Douglas Capone, University of Maryland Center for Environmental Sciences
* Continuing Grant
* Michael R. Reeve
* 12/31/1996
* USD 223,713.00

Capone 9314252 This project continues studies into the ecology, physiology and
biochemistry of Trichodesmium and other planktonic N2 fixers, undertaking
several cruises in more widespread areas of tropical North Atlantic, W
Caribbean, NE &amp; NW Australia than pervious efforts. One objective is to
assess Trichodesmium population abundance and N2 fixation along with concurrent
assessment of phytoplankton population abundance and N assimilation, new and
regenerated nitrogen. Species distinctions will be done using ultrastructure and
nifH gene sequencing. This will involve protein labeling and ultrastructural
studies and molecular biological approaches. The next objective is to determine
whether the phenomenon of diel periodicity in nitrogenase activity is a common
characteristic of these populations as well as further examining the basis for
this periodicity and the mechanisms of O2 protection. The project will continue
to examine the fate of Trichodesmium C and N, determine the release rates of
labile organics (glutamate and other amino acids) and the grazing rates by
harpacytacoid copepods. With respect to grazing, the project will to assess the
importance of the presence of toxins, which inhibit grazing as a function of the
species of Trichodesmium. In addition, the project will examine the mechanisms
of Trichodesmium buoyancy reversals, along with field research on adaptational
significance, and the use of isotopic and biochemical "biomarkers" for tracking
the fate of Trichodesmium biomass. Finally, Trichodesmium population
measurements will be coupled with biooptic measurements with the goal of
developing remote sensing algorithms. Overall, the project will provide
information to assess critically the inference that Trichodesmium is a
quantitatively significant input of new N. This informantion will contribute
substantively towards obtaining a complete understanding of the ecology,
physiology and biochemistry of planktonic N2 fixers and their role in C and N
fluxes in the oceans. ***