* 9314376
* Pragmatic Issues in Semantics-Based Transaction Processing
* CSE,IIS
* 05/15/1994,06/30/1997
* Krithi Ramamritham, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Continuing Grant
* Maria Zemankova
* 06/30/1997
* USD 200,000.00

9314376 Ramamritham Although powerful, the transaction model and correctness
criterion adopted in traditional database systems is found lacking in
functionality and performance when used for applications that involve reactive,
long-level and collaborative activities. It has been recognized that by
utilizing the semantics of complex objects, transaction models, and correctness
requirements during management and processing of such activities it is possible
to achieve better performance and functionality. This leads to the notion of
semantics-based transaction processing. Our prior work with the ACTA framework
has helped us understand and analyze the basic concepts underlying extended
transactions and relaxed correctness criteria. Building upon this foundation we
plan to investigate the pragmatic considerations related to semantics based
transaction processing: The lack of comparative performance evaluation of
extended transaction models correctness criteria prompts us to conduct and
empirical evaluation of their performance. The need to provide programming
language support for designing extended transaction models and for expressing a
desired correctness criterion motivates us to develop flexible language
primitives that allow a designer to express different transaction models and
correctness criteria. Even where extensions to the traditional approach are
required, it may still be feasible to use some of the standard transaction
concepts and implementation mechanisms to develop the underlying system support.
So we plan to investigate synthesis-base implementation approaches that can
benefit from established mechanisms and concepts. The need for extended
transactions and relaxed correctness criteria emerges from the demands of
applications, such as CAD/CAM, software development environments, object-
oriented databases, and distributed operating systems. By focusing on the
practical issues in providing transaction support for such application work pr
oposed here will produce results that will those information-intensive
application areas.