* 9314783
* Studies of Nuclear Structure and Nuclear Processes at       Intermediate Energies
* MPS,PHY
* 02/01/1994,07/31/1998
* Robert Bent, Indiana University
* Continuing Grant
* Stephen Steadman
* 07/31/1998
* USD 26,794,840.00

9314783 Cameron The Indiana University Cyclotron Facility is a national user
facility for research in nuclear science. This grant provides funds for the
operation of IUCF, for support of its user program, for the research of the
Indiana University staff, and for the training of graduate students in nuclear
science, accelerator physics, and related fields. The facilities at IUCF include
a 200 MeV cyclotron and a 500 MeV booster synchrotron with electron beam
cooling. Experiments are possible with the extracted cyclotron beam in several
experimental areas, and using ultra-thin internal targets in the Cooler ring.
Polarized beams are available in all areas, and polarized gas targets can be
used in the Cooler ring. A new high-intensity polarized ion source (HIPIOS) will
provide a twenty-fold increase in beam currents. A wide variety of detectors can
be used, including magnetic spectrometers, neutron time-of-flight systems,
recoil detector, and large scintillator and wire chamber arrays. The K600
spectrometer with focal plane polarimeter and Beam Swinger neutron detection
system will be used in a broad range of spin transfer reactions aimed at
studying effective nucleon-nucleon interactions. Studies will be carried out in
threshold meson production, few-body reactions, nucleon-nucleon scattering,
nucleon-nucleus reactions, all directed towards improved understanding of the
hadronic substructure of nuclei, the underlying role of meson degrees of
freedom, and tests of fundamental symmetries. Graduate students and
undergraduates are integrated into all aspects of IUCF research, including
instrumentation development, and their training is a prominent aspect of IUCF
activities.