* 9314426
* U.S.-France Cooperative Research: Defects in Grafted        Molecular Films
* O/D,OISE
* 05/01/1994,12/31/1997
* David Allara, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Rose Gombay
* 12/31/1997
* USD 14,850.00

9314426 Allara This two-year award supports U.S.-France cooperative research in
surface science between David L. Allara of Pennsylvania State University and
Francis Rondelez of the Institut Curie, Paris, France. The objective of their
research is to investigate the quantitative correlations between molecular
structures in monolayer assemblies of alkysiloxane films and conditions for
preparation of these films. The correlations will be used to determine film
properties, in particular, surface wetting. Parallel, independent experiments at
Penn State and the Institut Curie are aimed at determining the temperature for
film preparation; the role of substrate/film bonding in film ordering; and the
role of water in film formation. The U.S. investigator brings to this
collaboration considerable expertise in organic thin films and molecular
characterization of their structure. This is complemented by French skills in
synthesis and characterization of monolayer films. Development of stable
molecular films with minimal defects is the ultimate goal. Such advances are
important to scientific and technological applications cutting across the
disciplines of physics, chemistry, biology and materials science.
Semiconductors, nanoscale lithography and optoelectronic devices are among the
leading technologies that would benefit from improvements in structure of
molecular films. ***