* 9314387
* Exploring New System Concepts of Traffic Modeling and       Network Control in High Speed Networks
* CSE,CNS
* 07/15/1994,06/30/1998
* San-Qi Li, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* Dwight D. Fisher
* 06/30/1998
* USD 257,261.00

9314387 Li The principal investigator will explore a new system of traffic
modeling and network control in high speed networks. The work will build a
foundation for integrating traffic measurement and queueing analysis. The
investigator will consider three stages of traffic modeling. He will 1) use
advanced signal processing techniques in traffic measurement to collect the
traffic power spectrum and distribution, 2) develop a programming approach for
constructing a single Markov chain to match optimally with the power spectrum
and distribution, and 3) evaluate the corresponding queue length and loss rate
performance in a finite-buffer overload- controlled system. The investigator
will design a software package to accomplish all of the three-stage computation
tasks. For the network control, the investigator will use each node in a high
speed network to take on-line measurements. On a local link level, such
measurements will be used for congestion control, input rate control and
simplify greatly the design of network-wide traffic flow control, dynamic
routing, and call admission control. On a link level, the investigator will
introduce a simple effective method for dynamic link capacity allocation based
on the on-line observation of filtered input traffic low in the network. THe key
advantages of such a control scheme are the ability to improve the network
performance by controlling the low frequency traffic flow and the simplicity of
operation by overlooking the queuing process at each node. ***