* 9314116
* Genetic Analysis of Eukaryotic DNA Mismatch Repair          Pathways
* BIO,MCB
* 06/15/1993,11/30/1996
* R. Michael Liskay, Oregon Health & Science University
* Continuing Grant
* Philip Harriman
* 11/30/1996
* USD 285,000.00

In both prokaryotes and eukaryotes DNA mismatch repair plays major roles in
replicative error correction and genetic recombination. Disruption of DNA
mismatch repair has also been proposed as one step in the progression of human
neoplasias. In addition, DNA mismatch repair is likely to impact the DNA
rearrangements and "hypermutation" characteristic of immunoglobulin
diversification in higher animals. Mismatch repair might influence the rate of
expansion of simple sequence repeats that underlies certain forms of human
genetic disease. The overall goal of this study is to determine the roles of
newly discovered yeast genes that encode polypeptides with structural similarity
to bacterial and other yeast proteins known to have roles in DNA mismatch
repair. We have discovered additional genes in yeast (the MLH genes) that show
significant amino acid homology with the MutL gene of the bacterium E. coli, and
the PMS1 gene of yeast (a mutL-like mismatch repair gene). We will determine the
nucleotide sequence of the yeast MLH genes, perform the requisite gene
disruptions and determine initial phenotypes of the mutants in vegetative cells,
e.g. mutator effects. We will examine the role of the MLH genes in genetic
recombination. We will test for functional similarity between the yeast and
mammalian MLH gene products. A study of these newly found PMS1/mutL homologs
should lead to a better understanding of mismatch repair in yeast. Finally,
structural and functional comparisons of the yeast and mammalian MLH genes
should help to guide the more demanding analysis of MLH gene functions in the
mouse. %%% In all organisms DNA mismatch repair plays major roles in gene
recombination and in correcting errors in gene replication. DNA mismatch repair
may also be a significant factor in the development of human tumors and in
certain human genetic diseases; it probably also important in the normal
functioning of the immune system. The overall goal of this study is to determine
the roles of newly discovered yeast genes that encode proteins with structural
similarity to other proteins known to have roles in DNA mismatch repair. This
study should lead to a better understanding of mismatch repair in yeast and
should help to guide the more demanding analysis of the phenomenon in mammals.