* 9314584
* The Quantitative Significance of Saltmarsh Microheterotrophsin Mediating the Flow of Nitrogen and Detrital Carbon to    Higher Trophic Levels
* GEO,OCE
* 04/01/1994,09/30/1998
* Roger Newell, University of Maryland Center for Environmental Sciences
* Continuing Grant
* Phillip R. Taylor
* 09/30/1998
* USD 291,333.00

Newell 9314584 Stable isotope studies have shown that in many salt-marsh
metazoans obtain a large fraction of their carbon from cordgrass, Spartina
alterniflora. However, the ribbed mussel, Geukensia demissa, a dominant metazoan
in eastern salt marshes, has only a limited capacity to digest plant detritus.
Thus, these scientists hypothesize that bacteria and other protists are
important food-web components in mediating the flow of cordgrass carbon, and
nitrogen, to higher organisms. To address this hypothesis, scientists will first
determine the concentration of microheterotrophs, phytoplankton, and cordgrass
carbon near mussel populations over seasonal and geographical scales and then
integrate this information in a model with measurements of the metabolic carbon
and nitrogen demands, feeding activity, and assimilation efficiencies of G.
demissa. Such a model will allow these scientists to determine if the
microheterotrophs are sufficiently abundant to act as a major food source and to
explore how metazoans exert top- down control on microheterotrophs in salt-marsh
ecosystems. To examine how general this concept is among eastern estuaries,
Newell and Stoecker will transplant mussels from a mid-Atlantic marsh to
northern and southern marshes for stable isotope analyses. The purpose is to
demonstrate fundamental differences in patterns of carbon cycling in spatially
separate salt marshes. When completed, this project will provide a more
comprehensive understanding of food-web interactions in the detritus-based,
salt-marsh ecosystems. ***