* 9314078
* Mathematical Sciences: Conferences: Hard Problems in        Mathematical Physics
* MPS,DMS
* 03/01/1994,08/31/1994
* Joseph Conlon, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Jean Thiebaux
* 08/31/1994
* USD 10,000.00

9314078 Conlon This proposal is to partly fund a conference entitled "Hard
Problems in Mathematical Physics". It is to be held at the University of
Michigan on May 2nd, 3rd, 4th, 1994. The meeting will feature up to 18 fifty
minute lectures together with contributed posters. The conference concentrates
on problems and ideas in mathematics which are motivated by intuitions from
theoretical physics. The unifying theme is the renormalization group philosophy
which emerged in the physics literature in the 1960's. It is a way of analyzing
a physical system by comparing the behavior of the system on different length
scales. Many apparently diverse problems have been analyzed within the framework
of the renormalization group philosophy. Among these are important technological
problems of image reconstruction from radiation data -- in the health field MRI
and CAT scans, in the energy field detection of oil wells. Another example is
the analysis of signals propagating through a random medium such as the ocean.
This is a way of determining average ocean temperature - a key factor for
environmental planning. This conference is unusual in that most of the speakers
have a deep understanding of physics as well as being excellent mathematicians.
It should motivate the mostly mathematical audience to interact with physicists
and other scientists for problems and ideas which are both mathematically
interesting and scientifically important. ***