* 9314082
* Mathematiical Sciences: Mathematical Study of Nonlinear     Materials
* MPS,DMS
* 03/01/1994,08/31/1994
* Itrel Monroe, University of Arkansas
* Standard Grant
* Jean Thiebaux
* 08/31/1994
* USD 8,000.00

9314082 Xu The 1994 Arkansas Spring Lectures in Mathematics will be held in the
Center for Continuing Education on the Square in downtown Fayetteville, Arkansas
from March 31 to April 2. The principal lecturer will be Professor David
Kinderlehrer of Carnegie Mellon University. In addition, talks will be given by
a number of other scholars studying mathematical systems which, it is believed,
will be useful in the study of nonlinear materials. One of the foci of
considerable research in both the sciences and mathematics is how local or micro
behavior affects global or macro behavior. In general, it is often very
difficult to predict the properties of a large structure when only the
properties of its constituent parts are known. This general problem presents
itself in fields as diverse as economics and solid state physics. Professor
Kinderlehrer will be lecturing on mathematics that addresses the response of
materials to changes in its environment. In general, one knows the properties of
the individual atoms that make up a material and one knows the ways in which
they can fit together. This knowledge can be used to predict, for instance, the
structure of crystals and the magnetic properties of iron. However, when a
material is subjected to changes in its environment, for example changes in
temperature. pressure, or electromagnetic fields, the atoms begin to realign
themselves in sometimes surprising ways. The phenomenon has already lent itself
to the development of many useful applications such as shape-memory alloys and
liquid crystals. However the mathematical questions that are posed by an attempt
to obtain a detailed understanding of this phenomenon are deep and require the
development of new mathematical machinery. Recent, progress has been made with
some averaging methods which enable one to cope with the rapidly spatially
varying systems involved. Professor Kinderlehrer's lectures will be on the
application of these averaging met hods which promise a more unified theory and
treatment of the subject. The other invited speakers for the conference have
been selected because of their knowledge of and contributions to this and
related material in order to achieve a rich and productive interaction between
researchers currently active in this area. ***