* 9315653
* The Relationship Between Embryonic and Adult Pattern        Regulation
* BIO,IOS
* 03/01/1994,08/31/1996
* Mark Martindale, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Judith Plesset
* 08/31/1996
* USD 199,971.00

9315653 Martindale Ctenophores are the first extant phylum of metazoan organisms
whose body plan displays bilateral symmetry and evolved prior to the divergence
of the protostomes and deuterostomes. Abundant evidence now exists which
indicates that the major pattern forming mechanisms were in place prior to the
protostome-deuterostome radiation. Ctenophores undergo a highly stereotyped mode
of development in which the normal fate of individual blastomeres can be
precisely predicted. Adult structures derived from deleted blasotmeres are not
replaced by surviving blastomeres during subsequent embryogenesis. Adult
ctenophores on the other hand are capable of regenerating vast regions of their
body, including all pattern elements and cell types. Dr. Martindale's prior work
has shown that ctenophore embryos are not mosaics of individual parts but that
they have "organizing centers" analogous in their function to the dorsal lip in
vertebrate embryos and the D quadrant in spiralian embryos. The deletion of this
organizing center in ctenophore embryos results in abnormal development of
several different structures to which these deleted cells themselves make no
direct contribution. This implies that, as in adult regeneration, the embryo
requires intercellular signaling. The experiments proposed here will advance our
understanding of the mechanistic basis of this pattern regulation both in the
ctenophore embryo and adult. The specific aims are: 1) To generate an accurate
fate map of the ctenophore embryo to identify the origins of all known cell
types, with special reference to the origins of nerve cells, mesenchymal cells,
muscle cells, components of tentacle sheathes, and the pluripotent stem cells
involved in adult regenerative ability, 2) to identify the spatial and temporal
characteristics of inductive interactions which operate to establish global
symmetry properties and cell type determination in the ctenophore embryo, 3) To
finish a systematic study of the r ole of individual cell types on the ability
of ctenophores to regenerate, and 4) To determine the role of cell division in
the ability to regenerate adult pattern elements. Additionally, tools will be
developed for the study of homeodomain transcription factor genes expressed in
ctenophore embryos. ***