* 9315930
* Technical Support: Request for an ICP-MS Technician at the  University of Notre Dame
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/1994,04/30/2000
* Clive Neal, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* Russell Kelz
* 04/30/2000
* USD 119,459.00

9315930 Neal This award provides partial funding to support a technician
assigned to the inductively-coupled plasma mass spectrometry (ICP-MS) laboratory
in the Department of Civil Engineering and Geological Sciences at the University
of Notre Dame. The ICP-MS instrument was recently obtained by Notre Dame
University through matching funds from a grant from the NSF Academic Research
Infrastructure Program. It will be used primarily by students and staff of the
University involved in research and teaching projects in the area of
environmental geochemistry, pollution control, petrology, paleoclimatology,
limnology, and groundwater hydrology. *** 9406684 Johnson This award provides
partial funding for the support of a technician assigned to the Radiogenic
Isotope Laboratory in the Department of Geology and Geophysics at the University
of Wisconsin, Madison. The technician will assist in the operation and
maintenance of the laboratory's equipment that includes a multicollector thermal
ionization mass spectrometer and associated instrumentation for sample
preparation and data analysis. The laboratory is a resource for mass
spectrometric analysis needed in research and teaching projects in the earth
sciences by a large number of researchers on-campus and off-campus. Research
applications include work on Arctic Ocean sediments, mantle geochemistry,
volcanism, geochronology of carbonates in the Michigan Basin and Wisconsin Arch
provinces, and Archean and Proterozoic granites. The technician will also
participate in the technical developmental work of the laboratory, including the
development of new methods for the quantitative measurement of the isotopes of
hafnium. ***