* 9315015
* Functions of the Acidic Ribosomal Proteins of Maize
* BIO,IOS
* 01/01/1994,12/31/1997
* Julia Bailey-Serres, University of California-Riverside
* Continuing Grant
* Erik T. Nilsen
* 12/31/1997
* USD 236,184.00

9315015 Bailey-Serres Protein synthesis is a multi-step process that is
regulated at numerous levels in maize as well as in all other organisms. The
hypoxic (low-oxygen) stress response of seedling roots involves the rapid
inhibition of initiation, followed by selective initiation and elongation of
mRNA translation. The hypoxic stress response provides a model for studying
modulation of protein synthesis under low energy conditions. This project
focuses on modifications of acidic ribosomal proteins (ARPs) in response to
hypoxia. Three acidic-phosphorylated proteins, known as P0, P1 and P2, are
present as a multimeric structure in the active site of the ribosome where
interactions between mRNA, tRNA and translation factors occur during the late-
initiation, elongation and termination phases of translation. The biochemical
objectives are to identify P0, P1 and P2 of maize, analyze the stoichiometry of
the three-types of ARPs in monoribosomes and polyribosomes of aerobic and
hypoxic roots, characterize the in vivo phosphorylation of ARPs under control
and hypoxic conditions, and analyze other modifications of ARPs in response to
hypoxia. The molecular objectives are to identify and sequence the genes
encoding the ARPs of maize, and to initiate site-directed mutagenesis of the
phosphorylation sites of the ARPs genes. The long-term goal is to test the role
of ARP modification in an in vitro translation system from maize root tips.
These experiments will provide the foundation for the elucidation of ribosome
structure-function relationships in mechanisms of protein synthesis in higher
plants. This project involves a collaboration with Dr. Estela Sanchez de Jimenez
at National Autonomous University of Mexico, Mexico City. ***