* 9315446
* Molecular Chaperones in Chloroplasts
* BIO,MCB
* 05/15/1994,04/30/1996
* William Ortiz-Leduc, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Standard Grant
* Gary Cecchini
* 04/30/1996
* USD 84,000.00

Ortiz-Leduc 9415446 Molecular chaperones are involved in the translocation,
folding, and assembly of polypeptides in chloroplasts and mitochondria. This
proposal is based on the premise that a novel 60,000 Mr polypeptide that
accumulates in chloroplasts of temperature- stressed Euglena gracilis is a
chaperone of the conserved cpn60 family. In this regard, the 60,000 Mr species
appears to be a functional chaperone at the normal growth temperature (23 C) but
nonfunctional at elevated temperatures. Thus, a failed chaperone response could
be at the rootcause for the irreversible loss of chlorophyll (and
photosynthesis) observed at the moderately elevated temperature of 33 C--a
phenomenon known as heat bleaching. Western blot analysis will be used to
confirm the identity of the novel 60,000 Mr species in bleaching Euglena using
commercial antibodies to bacterial and mitochondrial cpn60. We will carry in
vivo and in organello pulse-labeling experiments to study the ability of
chloroplast cpn60 to associate with newly synthesized polypeptides at permissive
and nonpermissive temperatures. We will also isolate cpn60 from Euglena
chloroplast extracts using size- exclusion chromatography and density-gradient
centrifiguration. Finally, we will attempt to show that isolated Euglena cpn60
can mediate the in vitro reactivation of chemically denatured dihydrofolate
reductase at normal and heat-shock temperatures. If, as expected, cpn60 fails to
perform as a chaperone at high temperatures, future works will focus on the
molecular basis of Euglena cpn60 dysfunction using recombinant DNA technology.
%%% The proposed research focuses on a group of proteins--the chaperones--that
play a vital and fundamental role in the cells of living organisms from bacteria
to plants to humans. Chaperones normally assist other proteins during folding,
during transport across biological membranes, and during assembly of large
multiprotein structures. In addition, chaperones appear to protec t cellular
structures against damage from heat stress when organisms experience potentially
lethal temperatures. The process of photosynthesis in plants is notoriously
sensitive to high temperatures. The unicellular alga Euglena gracilis, in
particular, appears to be unusually sensitive to temperature because the algo
loses chlorophyll and chloroplast function when cultures are grown at the
moderately elevated temperature of 33 C. Unfortunately, research on plant
chaperones and their role during periods of heat-stress has received
proportionately less attention than chaperones in bacterial, yeast, and
mammalian systems. Advances in agriculture are intimately tied to the ability of
plants to harvest light energy and convert it to biomass. In this regard,
cereals, an important crop in Plain States, are also sensitive to heat stress
and fail to develop functional chloroplasts when seedlings are grown at 33 C.
Using Euglena as a simple model system, we want to investigate why chloroplasts
are sensitive to high temperatures. The failure of chloroplast chaperones to
function properly at 33C could explain why photosynthetic structures are not
adequately protected from heat- stress.