* 9315209
* Colloidal Semiconductors for Macromolecular Recognition,    Open Framework Structures, and Nonlinear Optical            Applications
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/1993,02/28/1995
* Catherine Murphy, University of South Carolina at Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Karolyn K. Eisenstein
* 02/28/1995
* USD 32,000.00

This award is the starter grant increment of Dr. Murphy's Postdoctoral Research
Fellowship in Chemistry. The research deals with the synthesis of colloidal
semiconductors and their application to molecular recognition by DNA, open
framework structures and tuneable nonlinear optical materials. In the molecular
recognition studies, colloidal CdS and CdSe will be used as an inorganic mimic
of the globular protein histones about which DNA strands wrap themselves. The
luminescence spectrum of the semiconductor cores upon irradiation will provide
insights into the nature and mechanism of DNA wrapping and unraveling that
accompanies DNA replication and transcription. Hollow spheres of CdS and CdSe,
which may exhibit unusual photoluminescence, will also be prepared and embedded
in polymer films and sol-gel glasses. These materials should be attractive for
nonlinear optical applications. Since the luminescence of CdS and CdSe is
sensitive to surface adsorbates, nonlinear optical properties can be tuned by
adsorption of molecules on the encapsulated colloids. %%% Quantum-sized
colloidal semiconductors have size and surface properties which lend themselves
to a variety of diagnostic and optical applications of academic and
technological significance.