* 9315639
* An Investigation of the Relationship Between Community      Composition and Metabolic Capabilities of Coastal           Bacterioplankton Communities
* GEO,OCE
* 12/15/1993,05/31/1997
* James Hollibaugh, San Francisco State University
* Continuing Grant
* Phillip R. Taylor
* 05/31/1997
* USD 329,999.00

Hollibaugh 9315639 The goal of the project is to understand the relationship
between: 1) the taxonomic composition of microbial communities; 2) their
metabolic capabilities and the presence of characteristic metabolic pathways;
and 3) the sources of organic matter fueling bacterioplankton production. To do
this, we propose to continue development and testing of a technique for
describing bacterioplankton community structure based on an analysis of variable
regions of the 16S rRNA gene. We will characterize the metabolic capabilities of
bacterioplankton communities by assessing their abilities to grow on single
carbon sources and by the metabolic fate of exogenously supplied thymidine. The
statistical procedure of principal components analysis will be used to compare
these community characteristics and to develop a matrix of the metabolic
capabilities and phylogenetic characteristics of bacterioplankton population.
The sources of C fueling bacterioplankton production will be assessed by
comparing the C and N stable isotope signatures of bacterioplankton DNA with
those of organic matter fraction form the same location. The work will be
conducted in San Francisco and Tomales Bays, in coastal waters around San
Francisco and in estuaries and coastal water off the East coast over a 3 year
period. ***