* 9315684
* Biocatalytic Conversion of Aromatic Waste into Useful       Compounds
* MPS,CHE
* 01/01/1994,06/30/1995
* Tomas Hudlicky, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Continuing Grant
* George M. Rubottom
* 06/30/1995
* USD 163,000.00

9315684 Hudlicky The focus of this research will be fourfold. New aromatic
substrates will be screened for oxidation by Pseudomonas Putida 39/D to broaden
the applicability of this method. Potassium permanganate oxidation of dienes
will be investigated as an alternative to ozonolysis. Syntheses of sugars,
cyclitols, sphingolipids and alkaloids will demonstrate the efficiency of the
biocatalytic strategy and fourth, mass balance of reagents and waste output will
be assessed for each preparation in order to minimize organic byproducts
produced during manufacture. With this Environmentally Benign Chemical Synthesis
and Processing award, the Synthetic Organic Program is supporting the research
of Dr. Tomas Hudlicky of the Department of Chemistry at the Virginia Polytechnic
Institute and State University. Professor Hudlicky, collaborating with Genencor
International, will focus his work on developing a new strategy for the
reduction of pollution at its source. The strategy rests on the assumption that,
instead of incineration or other means of disposal, homogeneous waste or
solvents would be subjected to microbial oxidation by Pseudomonas Putida 39/D to
produce arene cis-diols which are ideally suited for short and environmentaly
benign conversions to useful organic compounds. ***