* 9315019
* ADCP and Mesoscale Current Observations in the Eastern      Weddell Sea: A Component of ANZFLUX
* O/D,OPP
* 04/15/1994,09/30/1998
* Robin Muench, Leidos, Inc.
* Continuing Grant
* Bernhard Lettau
* 09/30/1998
* USD 252,191.00

9315019 Muench The proposed work is part of an integrated research program
("Anzflux") into the oceanographic structure of upper mixed layer of the eastern
Weddell Sea. It is to be carried out from the RVIB Nathaniel B. Palmer in the
austral winter of 1994. The work proposed here concerns how regional-scale
circulation features affect the smaller-scale turbulence features. This project
consists of two spatially nested experiments. A small scale experiment will use
the ship's Acoustic Doppler Current profiler (ADCP) to measure the fluctuating
current structure at one meter depth intervals in the upper layers of the ocean.
A mesoscale experiment will make use of current, temperature, and salinity
observations to define regional-scale features and to observe their feedback
effects. These measurements, in conjunction with other concurrent experiments to
quantify the energy brought to the underside of the ice, will form the basis of
a regional study of the processes responsible for the relatively thick upper
mixed layer and thin ice cover. It is believed that these conditions are only
marginally stable, and are maintained by a relatively high upward heat flux,
which, if interrupted, could lead to deep vertical convection, and a significant
change in the oceanic climate. ***