* 9315396
* Quaternary Effects in Solute Transport Through Swollen Clay Films in Complex Media Studied by Clay Modified Electrodes  and X-ray Diffraction
* MPS,CHE
* 12/15/1993,04/30/1998
* Alanah Fitch, Loyola University of Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Kenneth L. Busch
* 04/30/1998
* USD 254,000.00

9315396 Fitch This project is in the general area of analytical and surface
chemistry and focuses on the electrochemical investigation of the transport
properties of clays. During the tenure of this three year continuing grant,
Professor Alanah Fitch and her students at Loyola University of Chicago will use
clay-modified electrodes to investigate the diffusion of ions through well
characterized clay layers. The effects of pressure and electrolyte concentration
on the swelling and transport properties of the clay materials will be examined.
Also, the influence of multiple solutes on these properties will be explored to
determine the extent of cooperative or synergistic transport. This experimental
investigation is designed to further our understanding of the soil-based
transport of typical pollutants, including both hydrophobic organic materials
and anionic radiochemicals, through clay containment beds. %%% This research is
expected to provide an enhanced understanding of several important processes
which take place within the clay materials that are used to line chemical waste
disposal repositories. Among the issues to be explored are the effects of
various toxic chemicals on the characteristics of these clay materials,
including their swelling and transport properties. The successful pursuit of the
goals of this project should enable more accurate prediction of the rates of
escape of pollutants from containment sites. ***