* 9315527
* Supplement for Science in Developing Countries Program:     The Systematics and Evolution of the Genus Corpopsis        (Asteraceae) in South America
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/1993,11/30/1994
* Daniel Crawford, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Standard Grant
* Frances Li
* 11/30/1994
* USD 11,250.00

9315527 Crawford This project supports the participation of Dr. Tadesse Mesfin
of Addis Ababa University, Ethiopia, in an ongoing study in plant molecular
phylogenetics, led by Dr. Daniel Crawford of Ohio State University, (NSF Grant
INT-9025030), of the systematics and evolution of the genus Coreopsis
(Asteraceae). Both South America and Eastern Africa represent centers of
diversity for Coreopsis that equal or surpass that found in North America. This
collaborative component will expand the work beyond North and South American
taxa to investigate the relationship of North American Coreopsis to African
plants that have been variously assigned to Bidens or Coreopsis. It is hoped
that the visiting scientist can obtain morphological characters useful in a
cladistic analysis of Coreopsis and selected representatives of the large genus
Bidens and several related genera. The visitor will examine the holdings in
several herbaria in the U.S., and will be introduced to some basic molecular
techniques being used in the host scientist's laboratory to apply to the
problem. These include allozymes, restriction site analysis of chloroplast DNA,
and RAPDs. The cooperation will improve understanding of Coreopsis in each of
the geographical areas where it occurs, and also on a worldwide basis, including
its origin, evolution and biogeography. Improved understanding of this large,
widespread genus is consistent with the Africa Initiative emphasis on
biodiversity research cooperation, and promises benefits to both partners and to
their parent institutions. Moreover, this project will contribute to the
establishment of a longterm research network linking scientists on three
continents, Africa, North America, and South America. ***