* 9315649
* U.S.-Japan Cooperative Research:  Seismic Design and        Nonlinear Analysis of Steel and Composite Structure
* O/D,OISE
* 04/01/1994,03/31/1996
* Gregory Deierlein, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Alexander P. DeAngelis
* 03/31/1996
* USD 8,750.00

9315649 Deierl This award supports a two-year collaborative research project
between Gregory Deierlein, Assistant Professor, School of Civil and
Environmental Engineering, Cornell University, and two researchers in Japan: Dr.
Ryoichi Kanno, Steel Research Laboratories, Nippon Steel Corporation, Tokyo and
Dr. Isao Nishiyama, Building Research Institute, Ministry of Construction,
Tsukuba. During two research visits to Japan, Dr. Deierlein will collaborate
with the Japanese researchers on issues of seismic design and analysis of steel
and composite structures. The project focuses on the physical testing of
building connections and subassemblages, computational research using nonlinear
analysis of building systems, and current design practice. Japanese researchers
have been devoting considerable attention to the development of new types of
structural systems based on composite and hybrid construction. This work
suggests that many changes in construction techniques may be possible to improve
reliability and economy. In particular, Nippon Steel is a world leader in the
development of improved steel materials and products for the building
construction industry and has state of the art research laboratories and
production facilities. ***