* 9315691
* Kinetics of Two- and Three-Dimensional Growth at Surfaces
* MPS,DMR
* 04/01/1994,09/30/1997
* Ian Robinson, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* H. Hollis Wickman
* 09/30/1997
* USD 255,000.00

9315691 Robinson Technical abstract: The kinetics of '2+lD' growth relates to
the evolution of the external shape of a surface. A universal behavior of this
kinetics has been predicted by a recent theory due to Kardar, Parisi and Zhang.
It is proposed to capitalize on the recent advances in surface x-ray diffraction
using synchrotron radiation which now permit the exploration of surfaces and
interfaces in the time domain. The primary aim is to seek out model systems
which provide a test of the universal behavior and to understand the underlying
physics. The kinetics of a simple monolayer on a metal substrate will be studied
using the Pb/Cu(100) system. The Pd2Si/Si (lll) system will be used to study the
complex interface formed by the reaction between metals and silicon in the
formation of thin films of crystalline silicides. Non-technical abstract: This
proposal supports an experimental program that will be based at the National
Synchrotron Light Source in Brookhaven, N.Y. The beamline to be used was
designed for state-of-the-art diffraction experiments on surfaces. The proposed
experiments are aimed at understanding the details of how a surface grows on an
atomic scale and on a time scale of 0.00l seconds. In addition, the work will
have direct application to understanding the formation of thin films of
crystalline silicides. Such materials are increasingly important for
semiconductor interconnects, especially for electronic devices with ultrasmall
dimensions. ***