* 9315753
* The Formation and Analysis of a Longitudinal Data Base on   Cooperative Research Arrangements
* SBE,NCSE
* 09/01/1993,02/29/1996
* Albert Link, University of North Carolina Greensboro
* Standard Grant
* John Jankowski
* 02/29/1996
* USD 78,773.00

9315753 Link The purpose of the research is to assemble a broad base of
longitudinal quantitative information related to collaborative research
arrangements between firms. This information will come from (1) an
analysis/evaluation of Federal Register filings of cooperative research ventures
that are required under the National Cooperative Research Act of 1984 and are
maintained-but not analyzed--by the Office of Technology Commercialization of
the Department of Commerce and (2) survey/analysis of collaborative research
activities from a sample of 250 US manufacturing firms for each of the years
1990-1993. The Principal Investigator has received agreement from the Bryan
School of Business at the University of North Carolina at Greensboro to maintain
(annually resurvey) and expand (at least 50 new firms will be added to the base
each year) the project for at least five years. The data base, which will be
available to other researchers upon request, will be used to identify trends in
the various dimensions of industrial cooperative research arrangements. The
project will be completed in three phases: Phase I will include analysis and
evaluation of the population of Federal Register filings and creation of a data
base of related information. Phase II will consist of the collection of survey-
based information from a sample of 250 U. S. manufacturing firms related to
annual collaborative efforts (quantified in a number of dimensions) for each of
the years 1990-1993 and the creation of a. longitudinal data base. Phase III
represents the expansion of the longitudinal data bases over a five-year period
after the project is completed using institutional resources.