* 9315840
* Maximal Use of Information from Macromolecular X-Ray        Diffractions
* BIO,MCB
* 02/01/1994,01/31/1998
* James Clarage, William Marsh Rice University
* Continuing Grant
* Kamal Shukla
* 01/31/1998
* USD 251,000.00

9315840 Phillips Dr. Phillips proposes to develop a strategy for the complete
refinement of macromolecular structure and dynamics in crystals by utilizing all
of the available X-ray scattering data, namely, the low and high resolution
Bragg reflections, but more importantly the diffuse scattering between Bragg
peaks. In addition to the average structure then, the result of this expanded
refinement will be a picture of the conformational states available to a
macromolecule, knowledge indispensable for correlating molecular structure and
dynamics with biochemical function. Although generally applicable to any
macromolecular crystal, the methods will initially be applied to the oxygen
binding protein myoglobin, the nucleic acid transfer RNA, as well as the enzyme
aspartate aminotransferase where disorder in the molecule's ligand binding
domain can be controlled in crystallum. X-ray diffraction data will be collected
on imaging plates, which afford the dynamic range necessary for collecting the
weak diffuse scattering signal, and for placing this signal on the same absolute
scale as the much more intense Bragg data. Molecular dynamics calculations will
play in integral role in the extended refinement of the Bragg and diffuse
intensities; thus high performance computing technologies will prove a useful
tool. %%% The microscope has always played a role in science, particularly
biology. The more detail visible, the deeper our understanding of the mechanics
of life. Even the most powerful glass lenses cannot image atoms however. To see
what life looks like down at the level of atoms and molecules, X-ray
crystallography is used. In this technique, high intensity X-rays are scattered
off a sample; then sophisticated computer algorithms are employed to analyze the
results, acting as 'mathematical lenses' to form pictures of the arrangement of
atoms in the biological structure. X-ray crystallography has had an enormous
impact on our understanding of the atomic stru cture of the biological world,
from the earliest structure of the genetic code DNA to the structure of enzymes
involved in the replication of the AIDS virus. Nevertheless, until now X-ray
crystallographic researchers have only analyzed part of the signal from their
scattering experiments, namely, the data corresponding to the average, static
picture of a biological molecule. Our atomic views of life are consequently
motionless at present. Watching a butterfly or a ballerina, however, we all know
that what makes living organisms special are their movements. Thus, we propose
developing methods to analyze all of the X-ray data, the traditional part due to
the average atomic structure as well as the part due to atomic movements. This
will lead to dynamic pictures of living processes down at the atomic level. The
proposed study, though primarily motivated by questions in biology, will require
new understanding in the physics of X-ray scattering as well as substantial high
performance computing technologies. The result promise an increased
understanding of life at its most fundamental level. ***