* 9315651
* Isotopic Composition of Early Diagenetic Carbonate from the Ordovician:  Implications for Greenhouse Paleoceanography & Paleoclimate & Pre-Vascular Plant Meteoric Diagenesi
* GEO,EAR
* 02/01/1994,01/31/1997
* Kenneth Walker, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* John A. Maccini
* 01/31/1997
* USD 154,960.00

9315651 Walker The isotopic compositions of early diagenetic carbonate cements
(marine and meteoric) will provide evidence to determine Ordovician
paleoceanography and paleoclimate and the isotopic variation associated with
pre-land plant, carbonate meteoric systems. Careful petrographic,
cathodolumenescence, and trace element studies will allow delineation of the
least altered marine cement phases. Least altered marine cements from two
tropical, platform- marginal buildups located in paleogeographically divergent
localities from the Llanvirn epoch will be compared with data from later epochs
in the Ordovician to determine whether the variation in the 818O composition of
Ordovician fibrous calcite reflects either local variations in sea water
temperature or secular variation in the 818O composition of sea water. The goal
of this part of the research is to determine the 818O composition of meteoric
cement from temperate to polar paleolatitudes, in two paleogeographic divergent
regions, which will be used to assess Ordovician climatic equability. Do periods
of elevated pCO2, such as the Ordovician, correspond with periods of climatic
equability as previously hypothesized? Early meteoric cements from both tropical
and temperate platform carbonate deposits (four regions) will provide
information with regard to the variation of stable isotopic composition (813C
and 818O) associated with exposure surfaces on a landscape lacking vascular
plants. The ultimate goal of this part of the research is to fully develop a
model for the stable isotopic composition of pre-vascular plant meteoric
carbonate from the Ordovician that can be broadly applied to early Paleozoic and
older rocks.