* 9315303
* Modeling of Distributed Neural Mechanisms for Genesis and   Control of the Respiratory Rhythm
* BIO,DBI
* 12/01/1993,05/31/1995
* James Schwaber, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Deborah A. Joseph
* 05/31/1995
* USD 50,000.00

WPC 2 < B P Z < Courier 10cpi #| x x @ 8 ; X @ HP Laserjet (25-in-one, Network)
HPLASEII.PRS x @ , t 0 NX @ # x 6 X @ 8 ; X @# 2 n ~ V #| x ( Courier 10cpi 2 x
x x , x @ 8 ; X @ 2 Z < p F ` HP Laserjet (25-in-one, Network) HPLASEII.PRS x @
, t 0 NX @ # x 6 X @ 8 ; X @# 9315303 Schwaber The project will investigate and
model the neural control mechanisms of the united cardio respiratory control
system. The research specifically proposed for this Small Grant for Exploratory
Research period consists of exploratory development of a series of biologically
realistic models that simulate the structural and functional organization of
this neural control system at several hierarchical levels (from single neuron
level to systems level) and that lead to understanding of the principles of
distributed neural computations which provide for the robust and adaptive
control of respiration. Based on Richter's theory of a network origination of
the three phase respiratory rhythm, the investigators will develop a model of
elementary neural network generator which incorporates the known data on single
neuron properties of neurons of different respiratory groups and the data on
interconnections between them. This model will simulate the genesis of the basic
respiratory rhythm and specific patterns of activity of different respiratory
neurons. At the same time, at the network level, we propose a concept of
computation that is (in some sense) an alternative to the traditional
connectionist approach. It is considered that there are many parallel
interacting and competing elementary local generators in a multistable
distributed network of medullary respiratory neurons. These elementary
generators are able to generate their own respiratory oscillations but interact
via interneural synaptic connections and operate under common feedback control
from the periphery. This feedback synchronizes the elementary generators and
provides the common respiratory rhythm. Thus, the common (adaptive and robust)
respiratory rhythm results from self organization of the system of elementary
parallel generators. Simulation of this process, incorporating realistic neurons
and multiple network generators, will require supercomputing facilities. Special
attention will be focused on analysis of advantages of the considered type of
parallel distributed computations and control. ***