* 9315700
* Cell Cycle Regulation of Microtubule Assembly
* BIO,MCB
* 01/01/1994,06/30/2000
* Kathy Suprenant, University of Kansas Main Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Eve Ida Barak
* 06/30/2000
* USD 572,958.00

9315700 Suprenant The proposed research is an investigation of how microtubule
assembly and function is regulated during the cell cycle. A multidisciplinary
approach will be used to test the hypothesis that a 77 kD echinoderm MT-
associated protein (EMAP) is part of a multi-subunit G-protein complex whose
function is regulated by phosphorylation and GTP- binding. Biochemical methods
will be used to identify EMAP- binding proteins and direct photoaffinity
labeling will determine whether any of these proteins are GTP-binding proteins.
Immunological techniques will be used to characterize EMAP-dynamin interactions
in vitro by immunoprecipitation and in vivo by immunogold labeling for electron
microscopy. In vivo phosphorylation of EMAP and dynamin will be accomplished by
32-P labeling followed by immunoprecipitation. Microtubule assembly dynamics
will be examined in immunodepleted interphase and mitotic extracts by video-
enhanced differential contrast light microscopy. Affinity-purified anti-dynamin
and anti-EMAP antibodies will be microinjected into sea urchin blastomeres to
determine their effects on cell division. Genetically engineered EMAP constructs
in baculovirus will be transfected into insect cells and examined for their
effects on endogenous microtubule and organelle arrays. The completion of the
proposed study will provide insight into the regulation of cellular
morphogenesis during mitosis. %%% Microtubules are essential and dynamic
components of the eukaryotic cytoskeleton, and are the mediators of such
critically important cellular and intracellular motility phenomena as flagellar
and ciliary beating (necessary for such phenomena as spermatozoan or protozoan
swimming, movement of bronchial mucus, etc.), movement of particles and vesicles
from one end of the cell to another (e.g., movement of synaptosomes containing
neurotransmitters from the cell body of a nerve cell, where the synaptosomes are
packaged, down to the tip of the axon, where t he contents are released by
exocytosis) and separation of daughter chromosomes during cell division. The
regulation of microtubules, in terms of their spatial organization, functional
capabilities, and length and stability is not yet well understood, yet obviously
is critical to the proper functioning of the cell. Certain proteins are known to
be associated with microtubules, and are termed MAPs (microtubule-associated
proteins); these are presumed to be involved in the regulation or mediation of
microtubule- associated functions. Working with invertebrate cells as models, a
novel MAP (termed EMAP) was found in sea urchins which, upon analysis, was shown
to be similar to known regulatory subunits of G-proteins (a class of regulatory
proteins in cells which are involved in a wide variety of signal transduction
phenomena) and which was also shown to bind to dynamin, a GTP-ase implicated in
certain microtubule- mediated vesicle movement phenomena. Based on these
findings, a testable model has been developed in which dynamin and EMAP are
postulated to be microtubule linker proteins that associate with each other,
with microtubules, and with vesicles. These associations may in turn be
regulated by GTP binding and phosphorylation. The experiments proposed in this
project will test key parts of the model. The research promises to shed light on
how the microtubule system works in cells. ***