* 9315635
* Stable N-Dopable Organic Polymeric Materials
* NONE,NONE
* 03/01/1994,02/28/1997
* Fred Wudl, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Continuing grant
* Andrew J. Lovinger
* 02/28/1997
* USD 255,000.00

9315635 Wudl We will prepare and investigate a broad class of conjugated
polymers which should exhibit improved environmental stability in the doped and
undoped states and will be easily n-dopable. Some of these polymers, when
processed, will have high strength while retaining the unusual electronic
character of the conjugated polymers. Other members of the class will be
polyelectrolytes based on stable carbanions. Still other polymers will be
n-self- doped polymers. This group of polymers lends itself to the development
of the concept of base-doping of conducting polymers concept which is
complementary to acid doping of polyaniline emeraldine base. Two approaches will
be pursued: (a) preparation of polymers where a number of cyanides are directly
attached to the backbone and (b) preparation of polymers where a Huckel driving
force is the principle for n-doping of the backbone. Once prepared, in
collaboration with Professor Heeger's group in our Institute, the new polymeric
materials will have their optical and electronic properties determined. These
polymeric materials have potential applications as structural materials, as
nonlinear optics substrates, as organic light emitting diode components, as all
polymer p-n junction diodes, and as battery electrodes for all-polymer batteries
and high-energy density batteries. ***