* 9315791
* Search Strategies for Locating Underwater Odor Sources: Robots and Lobsters
* NONE,NONE
* 09/15/1994,11/30/1997
* Jelle Atema, Trustees of Boston University
* Continuing grant
* Norman Caplan
* 11/30/1997
* USD 294,944.00

9315791 Atema Neurobiological and behavioral studies on lobsters have taught us
that turbulent (underwater) odor plumes contain directional information based on
its patchy fine structure. To measure biologically relevant signals, sensor
technology capable of high- resolution (30m, 5ms) chemical signal analysis has
been developed. Lobsters locate odor sources efficiently based on bilateral
sampling with antennules. Chemoreceptor cells in the antennules are capable of
frequency analysis similar to (but slower than) acoustic signal processing. This
research tests the hypothesis that bilateral analysis of pulse features is the
basis for turbulent chemotaxis. Lobsters, computational models and physical
models, i.e., untethered robots, will be employed for this task. Lobster-
generated hypotheses will be tested in robots equipped with search paradigms
that are pre-tested with computational models. Robot failures to locate
efficiently will lead to re-examination and testing of lobsters. Further
advances in our knowledge of signal processing in lobsters will be used to
update computational models and robot search algorithms. 1. Two small underwater
robots will be designed and tested to have the size, mobility and chemical
sensing capabilities of a lobster (the benefit vehicle) and a fish (the free
swimming vehicle). 2. The vehicles will be used to characterize the spatial and
temporal dynamics of underwater chemical plumes in two and three dimensions. 3.
The vehicles will be used to test chemo-sensing algorithms proposed for lobsters
and fish concentrating on algorithms involved with chemical source localization
which is the basic behavior underlying the finding of food and mates.
Significant advances in underwater robotics design and in understanding
chemosensory signal processing is expected. ***