* 9315773
* Photoelastic Effects and the Controlled Introduction of     Strain in III-V Semiconductors by Means of Interfacial      Reactions
* MPS,DMR
* 04/01/1994,03/31/1998
* Silvanus Lau, University of California-San Diego
* Continuing Grant
* LaVerne D. Hess
* 03/31/1998
* USD 240,000.00

9315773 Lau This research addresses fundamental materials science issues
surrounding the concept of utilizing the photoelastic effect for control and
stabilization of stresses in metallic stressor films, which can also serve as
electrodes. The objectives are to introduce controllable and stable strains into
semiconductor systems by means of metal-semiconductor and metal-metal reactions,
and to provide the materials science basis for tailoring films to make wave
guides on binary and ternary substrates such as InP, GaAs, and GaInAs. Two
approaches are being pursued: (l) Introduction of stable strain by metal-
substrate reactions. This approach relies on the volume change in the structure
due to the reaction between the metallic stressor layer and the substrate; the
reaction product is also metallic in conductivity; (2) Introduction of strain by
metal-metal interactions. The stressor is formed by reacting two deposited
metallic layers on the substrate to form a strained epitaxial layer. These
approaches and the basic studies of materials science issues associated with the
chemical and physical processes are expected to provide the basis for
simplifying and improving planarized photonic devices. %%% Light guiding is
commonly experienced when we shine light onto a stream of water and observe that
the light follows the water stream. This phenomenon is very important for high
speed and large volume communication. This project investigates innovative and
efficient ways to make improved and simplified lightguides in the basic
materials used in telecommunications, information processing, and computing.