* 9315056
* Carbonate Cementation in Quiet Water Environments:  Role of Bacterial-Microalgal Films
* GEO,EAR
* 02/01/1994,07/31/1997
* Susan Gaffey, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Continuing grant
* John A. Maccini
* 07/31/1997
* USD 56,261.00

9315056 Gaffey Cementation in modern shallow-water marine carbonate sediments is
believed to be confined to the intertidal zone, restricted environments with
high salinity, and reefs and sand shoals at platform margins. Boring by
microbial endoliths, resulting in micritization or destruction of grains, is
thought to be the dominant diagenetic process in other shallow marine
environments. However, published studies by various workers, and preliminary
work by the investigator, indicate that significant volumes of cement are
precipitating in low to moderate energy, normal marine phreatic environments, a
fact with important implications for cycling and storage of carbonate within
protected settings. It is also widely believed that marine cementation is
largely a physicochemical process, and that the role of microorganisms in
carbonate cementation is restricted to inducing precipitation of carbonate by
changing pH and Eh of pore waters. However, sample collection and preparation
methods commonly used by sedimentologists degrade or destroy organic structures,
so that their role in cementation often goes unrecognized. The proposed work
will assess the role of chasmolithic bacteria, cyanobacteria, and microalgae in
cementation by using techniques designed to preserve the microbial component of
samples intact, and will develop new criteria for recognition of calcified
chasmoliths in ancient sediments. In contrast with high energy, platform margin
settings, calcification of chasmoliths rather than physicochemical precipitation
of carbonate appears to be the dominant cement- forming process in sands from
low energy marine phreatic environments. There also appear to be variations in
cement types and abundance between different subenvironments within low energy
settings. the proposed work will characterize the types and amounts of cements,
and their distribution with bioclastic sands in a low, an intermediate, and a
high energy lagoon on San Salvador Is land. Bahamas, and relate types and
distributions of cements in these three settings to environmental factors such
as sea grass cover, wave and current energy, and degree of bioturbation.
Characterization of cement types and of their distributions in relation to
environmental factors will provide useful criteria for interpreting early
diagenetic environments of ancient shallow marine carbonate sediments.