* 9315048
* Rb-Sr and Pb-U Systematics of Mississippi Valley-Type Ore   Deposits - Sulfides, Gangue Minerals, and Fluid Inclusions
* GEO,EAR
* 01/01/1994,06/30/1997
* Frank Podosek, Washington University
* Continuing Grant
* Sonia Esperanca
* 06/30/1997
* USD 190,000.00

9315048 Brannon We expect to improve the scientific understanding of the origin
of Mississippi Valley-type (MVT) ore deposits through a broad geochemical study
of ore-forming fluids. We will use isotopic information to provide constraints
on the provenance of ore-forming fluids and to provide direct radiometric dating
of ores and associated gangue minerals. We will also use precise isotopic
dilution analysis to provide chemical characterization for several key elements.
fluid inclusions will be mechanically separated from host minerals to allow more
detailed characterization of these components. AN important part of this program
is study of the Rb-Sr system, which provides an important isotopic tracer in the
87Sr/86Sr ratio as well as radiometric age determinations. The major sulfides
ores are specifically targeted for Rb-Sr analysis. We will also use Pb isotopic
compositions as a geochemical tracer, studying not only the minerals in which Pb
is a major or accessory constituent but also those in which it is a trace
element. Analyses of late- stage calcites from several MVT districts in the
midcontinent of North America and detailed studies of the Pine Point district
(Northwest Territories, Canada), the Central Tennessee district, and the
Reelfoot Rift, a proposed fluid channel for MVT deposits in southeast Missouri
will be carried out.