* 9315676
* SGER:  Polarization Near-Field Scanning Optical Microscopy  of Ordered Polymers
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/1993,01/31/1995
* Harald Ade, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* David Nelson
* 01/31/1995
* USD 50,000.00

9315676 Spontak The resolution of a conventional optical microscope, limited by
diffraction in the "far-field," is dictated by the wavelength of the
electromagnetic radiation employed. Recent studies have successfully
demonstrated that a microscope based on a drawn optical fiber and operated
within very close proximity to a specimen (in the "near-field") is limited by
the size of the probe (to ca. 20 nm) and not by considerations. In this work, we
will carry out an exploratory program in which polarization near-field scanning
optical microscopy (PNSOM) is developed and applied as a novel characterization
technique to determine the spatial distribution of local molecular organization
(through birefringence) in a variety of ordered polymeric materials. Several
systems will be targeted for initial studies in this program. Local
birefringence in a liquid crystal/polymer emulsion (for electro-optical
applications) would provide information regarding molecular organization at the
crystal/polymer interface. In-situ studies of thermotropic and lyotropic
polymers will permit determination of local supramolecular organization
preceding mesophase formation and reorganization accompanying thermal treatment.
While these systems will be the focus of our initial studies, we foresee PNSOM
as a high-resolution imaging technique promising to prove beneficial in studies
involving crystallization, surface orientation, localized stress, and phase
compatibilization. This technique is non-destructive and does not require the
capital, maintenance, and high-vacuum needed by several high-resolution imaging
techniques. ***