* 9315715
* Neutron and X-Ray Scattering Studies of Disordered Magnets, Especially Lamellar Copper Oxides
* NONE,NONE
* 03/01/1994,08/31/1997
* Robert Birgeneau, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing grant
* H. Hollis Wickman
* 08/31/1997
* USD 290,000.00

9315715 Birgeneau This experimental condensed matter physics project
investigates (1) lamellar copper oxides, which form the basis of high
temperature superconductors, and (2) model crystalline insulating magnets which
are extremely disordered at the microscopic level. These interrelated materials
represent problems which are at the frontiers of materials physics. For the
copper oxides, understanding of both the normal and superconducting states is
still remarkably primitive; while in the case of disordered magnets, sample
history and irreproducibility of properties require an extension of existing
understanding of equilibrium properties of materials. Neutron and x-ray
diffraction will provide an atomic level picture of the magnetic properties, and
how this picture changes as the structural length scale that is studied is
increased. This research is of both fundamental and technical importance and may
lead to production of new and higher quality superconducting and magnetic
materials. %%% This experimental condensed matter physics project investigates
(1) lamellar copper oxides, which form the basis of high temperature
superconductors, and (2) model crystalline insulating magnets which are
extremely disordered at the microscopic level. These interrelated materials
represent problems which are at the frontiers of materials physics. For the
copper oxides, understanding of both the normal and superconducting states is
still remarkably primitive; while in the case of disordered magnets, sample
history and irreproducibility of properties require an extension of existing
understanding of equilibrium properties of materials. Neutron and x-ray
diffraction will provide an atomic level picture of the magnetic properties, and
how this picture changes as the structural length scale that is studied is
increased. This research is of both fundamental and technical imp ortance and
may lead to production of new and higher quality superconducting and magnetic
materials. ***