* 9315969
* Non-Perturbative Numerical Studies of Lattice-Gas Models in Materials Science
* MPS,DMR
* 02/15/1994,07/31/1997
* Per Arne Rikvold, Florida State University
* Continuing Grant
* G. Bruce Taggart
* 07/31/1997
* USD 156,000.00

9315969 Rikvold The proposed research consists of two main parts: lattice gas
modelling of phase transitions in electrochemical adsorption, and the study of
metastability near first-order phase transitions. Both projects employ non-
perturbative statistical mechanical numerical methods; ie Monte Carlo
simulation, finite-size scaling and transfer matrix calculations. (1) The
electrochemical adsorption of urea, acetic and oxalic acid molecules and of
chloride and phosphate anions onto single crystal platinum surfaces will be
simulated and directly compared with experimental observations. (2)
Metastability near first order phase transitions in simple model systems will be
examined via transfer matrix techniques which produce complex valued free
energies - the imaginary part being proportional (it is believed) to the
lifetime of the metastable state. These lifetimes will be compared with those
obtained by more direct numerical methods. %%% This work involves the
understanding of phase transitions - both at the fundamental level and at the
system-specfic level. In the latter case, the adsorption of molecules and
charged ions at electrodes in solution will be modelled and compared directly to
experiment. In the former case, metastability near abrupt phase transitions (eg
supercooling of water below the melting point) will be studied via a new
mathematical method which gives the lifetime of these states directly. These
lifetimes will be compared with estimates from nucleation theory and from direct
numerical modelling. ***