* 9315645
* Testing Models of Carbon and Oxygen Isotopic Disequilibrium in Planktic Foraminifers
* GEO,OCE
* 12/01/1993,05/31/1996
* Joseph Ortiz, Oregon State University
* Continuing Grant
* Rodger W. Baier
* 05/31/1996
* USD 125,178.00

9315645 MIX This study has two primary goals: 1) To test two recent hypotheses
that seek to explain the apparent disequilibrium of Delta-13C (and possibly
Delta-18 O) in calcitic shells of symbiotic and asymbiotic planktic
foraminifers. The first of these theories arises from laboratory culture work on
Orbulina universa and states that photosynthesis by algal symbionts creates a
light-dependent, but temperature-independent, Delta-13C enrichment in the shells
of symbiotic species such as O. universa, G. sacculifer, and G. ruber, which
issuperimposed on the combined host-symbiont respiratory Delta 13C depletion.
The second theory, based on coral data and abiotic laboratory studies but which
may apply to planktic foraminifers, postulates a linked kinetic disequilibrium
in both Delta-13C and Delta-18 O that depends on calcification rate. 2) To
evaluate the importance of deep calcification on the isotopic composition of
foraminiferal tests. There is considerable evidence from sediment trap and
plankton two studies to suggest that much of the isotopic composition of
planktic foraminifers arises from equilibrium calcification at depths well below
the euphotic zone - between 100m and 1000m depending on the species in question.
It is important to consider both these research topics when attempting to
evaluate the factors that control the isotopic composition of planktic
foraminifers. It is possible for example, that the apparent observations of deep
equilibrium calcification noted above are in fact due to disequilibrium
calcification in the euphotic zone. Alternatively, deep equilibrium
calcification superimposed on euphotic zone disequilibrium calcification could
greatly obscure climatic information recorded in the foraminiferal test. Answers
to these questions will have a profound effect on the climatic interpretation we
place on isotopic results from planktic foraminifers.