* 9315821
* Low Molecular Weight Carbonyls in Seawater:  Formation Via  Photochemical Processes and Role in the Chemistry of        Humic Substances
* NONE,NONE
* 12/01/1993,05/31/1997
* Kenneth Mopper, Washington State University
* Continuing grant
* Rodger W. Baier
* 05/31/1997
* USD 486,269.00

9315821 MOPPER Light-initiated reactions play important roles in chemical and
biological processes in the sea, including redox reactions, carbon cycling and
photoinhibition. Despite the importance of photochemical processes, almost
nothing is known about photochemical pathways and reaction sites within marine
DOM that are responsible for production of reactive sites within Marine DOM that
are responsible for production of reactive transients at the sea surface. The
focus will be shifted from oceanic carbon cycling to the study of precursors and
mechanisms involved in the photochemical formation of LMW carbonyl compounds and
OH radicals form marine DOM and DOM isolates, e.g., humic substances. Some of
the key questions are: Are LMW carbonyl compounds and OH radicals formed mainly
by primary or by secondary photoprocesses? What is the role of oxidants, e.g.,
O2, superoxide peroxides, in the photoproduction of these species in seawater?
Is photobleaching of DOM fluorescence (and absorbance) in seawater accompanied
by an actual loss of humic substances or only of chromophoric moieties? Can the
marine DOM pool be physically fractionated into photoreactive (humic) and photo-
unreactive fractions? What is the nature of the chromophoric sites within marine
DOM? This study will provide new basic information on the photochemical,
chemical, and spectroscopic properties of marine DOM.