* 9315029
* Seasonal Ice Cover and its Impact on the Epipelagic         Community in the Northwestern Weddell Sea:  Long Time-Series Monitoring
* GEO,OPP
* 08/15/1994,07/31/1998
* Kenneth Smith, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Continuing Grant
* Polly A. Penhale
* 07/31/1998
* USD 1,016,453.00

9315029 Smith The annual expansion and retreat of pack ice in the Southern Ocean
are the largest seasonal processes in the World Ocean. This seasonal migration
of the ice cover has a profound impact on the pelagic community in the upper 100
m of the oceanic water column where the interactions between ice cover and apex
predators, such as seabirds and mammals, are most intense. This unique pelagic
community has been mainly studied with ship-based operations. However, there are
well recognized problems associated with shipboard sampling of the epipelagic
community under pack ice and the need to monitor this community on long-time
scales sufficient to examine the extreme temporal variability of this
environment. To examine continuous temporal variability, the project will
develop a vertically-profiling pump sampler for the collections of zooplankton
and micronekton over programmable depth intervals under pack ice in the Weddell
Sea. Once developed and field tested, this instrument will be deployed
concurrently with previously developed upward-looking, vertically-profiling
acoustic arrays for a period of one year. The combined mooring project will
monitor the vertical distribution, abundance and size frequency of acoustically
detectable zooplankton and micronekton in the upper 100 m of the water column in
an area that experiences ice cover during 7-8 months of the year. This project
will also include seasonal shipboard sampling on three cruises over the course
of the one year field study. A successful deployment of these long-term mooring
arrays and retrieval of data from the field will contribute to a greater
understanding of how epipelagic communities function under pack ice in the
Southern Ocean. This is a jointly sponsored project of the Office of Polar
Programs and the Division of Ocean Sciences. ***