* 9315826
* Vertebrate Paleontology of the Triassic to Jurassic         Sedimentary Sequence in the Shackleton Glacier Regions,     Antarctica
* O/D,OPP
* 07/01/1994,12/31/1997
* William Hammer, Augustana College
* Continuing Grant
* Scott Borg
* 12/31/1997
* USD 148,044.00

WPC 2 B P Z Courier 10cpi #| x x @ 8 ; X @ HP LaserJet Series II-DPP
HPLASDPP.PRS x @ 8 ; , t 0 NX @( urier 10cpi 2 C @ . P | x Courier 10cpi Tms Rmn
12pt (Rmn-8) (25inOne!) X @ 01-13-94 10:36a Scott Borg Hammer 9315830 $ 2 0 u X
F ` " m v 5 ^4@@ d 0LLd 0@0ddddddddddd88 d | HX x l @d@dd0dlXld@`l84h8 llllLL@l\
XXXddd dH d ddd@ x @@ d d l d d d d d X d d d dH8H8H8H8 l l l l l l l l l X d l
l l X lxl d d d X X X X l d d d d ` ` ` ` ` ` l lH H H8H X h 8 8 8xx 8 l l l l l
l L L LlLlLlLlL @ @ @ l l l l l l X X X X l 8 l LlL @ X X l l l 0 dNx xx dd@dddd
xdHH d&lt; llx &lt; d x @d8x d &lt;m@ xx dd d xxxxx x xxxxxxxxxx @t 0x x xxxxdd
d x x h x x x xx t x xx x xx x xxx
xxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxx x)
dxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxx 2 x x x , x @ 8 ; X @ p * t C 4 , wX t
4 P oG X P }z X , , x X t G `Eh , x G tati \ + @ @ 3 - K 3 ' 3 ' Standard 3 ' 3
' Standard HPLASDPP.PRS x ( X ` h p x (# % '0* , .81 3 5@8 : &lt;H? A 4 &lt; D 3
' 3 ' Standard HPLASDPP.PRS x 3 ' 3 ' Standard HPLASDPP.PRS x ( 4 &lt; D ` h p x
# x \ P C wX P# 9315826 Hammer 2 # x @ 8 ; X @# This award supports a project to
search for terrestrial vertebrate fossils of Middle Triassic to Jurassic age in
the Shackleton Glacier region of the Transantarctic Mountains. Several sites are
known to contain Triassic vertebrates but, based on occurrences in the Beardmore
Glacier region to the north, the Shackleton Glacier area is expected to yield a
diverse assemblage of both Triassic and Jurassic mammals and reptiles (including
dinosaurs). In addition to collecting fossils, field studies will result in
interpretations of the taphonomic and depositional settings at the fossil sites.
Preparation, description, classification, and interpretation of the material,
including interpretation of paleoenvironmental conditions, will follow the field
work. This research will contribute to a better understanding of both vertebrate
evolution at high latitudes and climatic conditions at high latitudes during
Triassic and Jurassic time. *** # x \ P C wX P#