* 9315308
* Synaptic Interactions Among Neurons of the Hypothalamic     Paraventricular Nucleus
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/1993,02/28/1995
* Jeffrey Tasker, Tulane University
* Standard Grant
* Kathie L. Olsen
* 02/28/1995
* USD 35,146.00

93015308 Tasker The hypothalamus is the brain structure that through its link
with the pituitary gland, is responsible for controlling most of the organism's
basic reproductive and homeostatic functions. Pituitary hormones are released
into the blood circulation on command from the hypothalamus and are carried to
endocrine and muscle targets, where they cause steroid secretion or muscle
contraction. As might be expected from the wide range of functions of pituitary
hormones, there is a diversity of hormone- secreting systems in the
hypothalamus, each activated under different conditions and with different
release profiles. Dr. Tasker is interested in determining whether the distinct
hypothalamic secretory systems interact to alter one another's secretion. For
example, the hormone systems responsible for lactation and for the body's stress
response are both located in the paraventricular nucleus of the hypothalamus.
Empirical evidence points to an interaction between these two systems since
emotional stress can suppress a mother's ability to provide milk to her young,
and breast feeding provided the mother with a temporary feeling of calm and well
being. Dr. Tasker will employ electrophysiological and neuroanatomical technique
to examine integrative interactions among two subpopulations of neurons located
within the hypothalamic paraventricular nucleus. By combining the simultaneous
intracellular and whole-cell patch- clamp recordings, intracellular dye
injection and immunohistochemical, he will detect synaptic intercommunication
between neurons that synthesize and release different hormones. These findings
will provide new insights about the basic functioning of the hypothalamus. In
addition, knowledge about the interdependence of neurosecretory functions and
behavior will increase our understanding of how seemingly disparate
physiological responses of the body influence one another. ***