* 9315964
* Mathematical Sciences:  Some Analytical Aspects of the      Theory of the Integrable Systems
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/1993,01/31/1996
* Alexander Its, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* John V. Ryff
* 01/31/1996
* USD 42,212.00

Its 9300638 The research supported by this award falls into three related areas
in the mathematical theory of nonlinear integrable equations, that is equations
which admit a Lax-pair representation. The work derives from the first use of
inverse scattering methods in solving nonlinear equations and has evolved into
an important branch of mathematical physics. The analytic aspects of inverse
scattering include a wide range of problems arising in the study of the
solutions of integrable equations. For example, a large class of explicit
quasiperiodical finite-gap solutions, as well as the comprehensive description
of the long-time behavior of the solution of the Cauchy problem for an
integrable system, can be obtained by inverse scattering. This project focuses
on the application of the Riemann-Hilbert problem technique to the asymptotic
analysis of the correlation functions of the quantum exactly solvable models.
Continuing work will also be done on the development of the isomonodromy
technique for the investigation of the Painleve-type ordinary differential
equations and their application to the matrix model of 2D quantum gravity. A
third line of investigation will be concerned with boundary value problems of
integrable equations within the framework of the finite-gap integration and
Riemann-Hilbert problem approach. Differential equations form a basis for
mathematical modeling of the physical world. The role of mathematical analysis
is not so much to create the equations as it is to provide qualitative and
quantitative information about the solutions. This may include answers to
questions about uniqueness, smoothness and growth. In addition, analysis often
develops methods for approximation of solutions and estimates on the accuracy of
these approximations. The work represented in this project has close
relationships with theoretical physics as well as the traditional synergisms
with studies of wave phenomena ***