* 9315541
* U.S.-Japan Cooperative Research:  Immigration and Settlementof Paralichthid Flounders; a Potential Source of RecruitmentVariation
* O/D,OISE
* 04/01/1994,03/31/1996
* John Burke, National Marine Fisheries Service
* Standard Grant
* Larry H. Weber
* 03/31/1996
* USD 28,000.00

9315541 Hoss This award supports a two-year cooperative research project between
Dr. Donald Hoss, Chief of the Coastal and Estuarine Ecology Division, National
Marine Fisheries Service, and Professor Masaru Tanaka, Department of Fisheries,
Kyoto University, Kyoto, Japan. The project combines field observations and
laboratory experiments on paralicthid founders in Japan. In addition to Dr.
Hoss, Dr. John Selden Burke, a fisheries biologist at NMFS, will participate in
the research in Japan. The project involves field sampling to determine vertical
distribution of flounder larvae immigrating to nursery areas in Wakasa Bay,
Japan (Japan Sea) and Onslow Bay, North Carolina in relation to tidal stage.
Benthic sampling will be conducted to determine age and relative growth rates
(otolith analysis) of settled flounders among shelf, beach, and estuarine
nursery habitats in the two study areas. Laboratory experiments will be
conducted to compare (1) activity patterns of larvae relative to tidal stage,
(2) developmental patterns of levels and production activity of hormones
associated with migration and adaptation to low salinity (thyroxine and
prolactin), and (3) development rates and size at metamorphosis. Although the
study areas are similar in climate, they differ in tidal range, coastal
salinity, and availability of estuarine habitat, allowing comparison of
paralichthids from different physical environments. Similarities and differences
between the species in relation to physical factors should provide insight to
processes of recruitment to nurseries. ***