* 9315998
* Growth of Phosphides and Arsenide Phosphides by Solid SourceMolecular Beam Epitaxy
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/1994,08/31/1998
* Gary Wicks, University of Rochester
* Continuing Grant
* Rajinder P. Khosla
* 08/31/1998
* USD 277,715.00

9315998 Wicks This proposal concerns an advance in the technology of molecular
beam epitaxy (MBE) that the solves the earlier difficulties with the use of
solid phosphorus sources and enables the phosphine-free (and arsine-free) growth
of phosphorus containing materials of quality at least equal to those of the gas
source techniques. Specifically, it is proposed to further preliminary results
obtained on the use of solid charges of phosphorus in valved effusion cells for
the growth of phosphides, and to extend this approach to the use of solid
phosphorus and arsenic valved effusion for the growth of arsenide/phosphide
alloys and arsenide/phosphide heterojunctions. The project will be a
comprehensive study of the influence of solid source MBE growth parameters
(growth temperature, beam fluxes, duration of growth interruptions at
interfaces, group V dimer vs. tetramer species, different vendors of phosphorus,
etc.) on materials characteristics. Materials characteristics will be evaluated
with a variety of electrical and optical measurements. The ultimate
characterization of materials will be the performance of the materials in
devices, such as diode lasers (AlGaInP/GaAs and GaInAsP/InP) and heterojunction
bipolar transistors. Most of these materials and device characterizations will
be done in-house, however a significant amount of collaboration will occur with
researchers from other universities and industrial research laboratories. A
second aspect of the project is concerned with MBE hardware issues such as
pumping; dealing with flammable deposits in the MBE machine; and beam control,
stability, and switching. Iterations on hardware configurations and designs will
be required to optimize the operation of the system with solid phosphorous
sources. Success in this proposed program would establish that valved, solid
source MBE has equivalent (or perhaps even superior) capabilities to those of
gas source MBE (GSMBE) and organometallic vapor phase epitaxy (OMPVE), thereby
eliminating th e need to use arsine and phosphine. The resulting improvements in
safety and cost would benefit those already in the important field of
phosphorous-containing semiconductors, and open up the field to those who are
not presently willing or able to use toxic gases. ***