* 9315959
* Molecular Studies of Homologous Recombination in Xenopus
* BIO,MCB
* 06/01/1994,11/30/1998
* Dana Carroll, University of Utah
* Continuing Grant
* DeLill Nasser
* 11/30/1998
* USD 405,000.00

Abstract 9315959 Carroll DNA molecules injected into Xenopus oocytes are subject
to very efficient homologous recombination, providing that they are linear and
have appropriately placed homologous sequences. This process has been
demonstrated in nuclear extracts from oocytes, and it is known to depend on the
action of a 5' - 3' exonuclease. It is proposed to purify this exonuclease from
oocyte nuclei and to characterize its properties, particularly with respect to
recombination. Partial amino acid sequences of the purified enzyme will be
determined and antibodies that recognize the protein will be raised. cDNA clones
representing the exonuclease mRNA will be isolated and sequenced, allowing
comparisons with nuclease sequences from other organisms. Expression of the
exonuclease from a cDNA clone will be engineered in bacteria (or in yeast) to
allow isolation of larger quantities of the enzyme for enzymatic and
immunological studies. Anti-nuclease antibodies will be used to determine where
and when during development the enzyme is present. Particular attention will be
paid to stages of oogenesis and early embryogenesis in which a role for the
exonuclease in DNA metabolism has been hypothesized. Functions of the
exonuclease will be examined directly by using antibodies that block its
activity. The consequences of injecting such antibodies into fertilized eggs
will be determined, with the expectation that defects in DNA replication and
chromosome integrity may be found. Some effort will also be expended in
identifying other activities that are necessary for recombination in oocytes.
They will be sought by fractionation of nuclear extracts and assayed by
reconstitution of recombination activity. Anticipated activities include DNA
ligase, DNA polymerase, and a catalyst of the annealing of complementary single
strands. *** Recombination events very like those demonstrated in Xenopus
oocytes have been documented in cells of other organisms, including mammal ian
cells. Thus, information of the oocyte exonuclease and other recombination
proteins which should result from this work will have wide applicability,
perhaps even in approaches to targeted gene manipulation. In any case, we will
be more informed as to the critical parameters of homologous recombination in
Xenopus oocytes. %%%