* 9315698
* Melt Transport from Mantle Plumes:  Integrated Studies of   Xenoliths and Associated Basalts from Oceanic Islands
* GEO,EAR
* 06/01/1994,05/31/1996
* Erik Hauri, Carnegie Institution of Washington
* Standard Grant
* David Lambert
* 05/31/1996
* USD 100,000.00

9315698 Hauri This new proposal will apply detailed textural, thermobarometry,
ion microprobe, and Sr-Nd-Pb and Os isotopic analyses to suites of ultramafic
xenoliths hosted by alkali basalts on the oceanic islands of Savai'i (Western
Samoa), Tubuai (Austral Islands), Tahiti and Tahaa (Society Islands), Hiva Oa,
Ua Huka and Nuka Hiva (Marquesas Islands), Oahu (Hawaiian Islands) and Aitutaki
(Cook Islands). The relationship of these xenolith suites to volcanism at these
islands will be examined by undertaking Sr, Nd, Pb and Os isotopic studies of
stratigraphically controlled basalt sections from Tubuai, Oahu (Koolau and
Honolulu Volcanics) Mauna Loa, and Tahaa. We propose extensive use of Os
isotopes as tracers of compatible elements in peridotites and mantle-derived
magmas in order to distinguish melt interaction with lithospheric versus plume
derived mantle sources. Research will focus on specific issues such as: 1)
mantle plume versus lithospheric origin for OIB-hosted xenoliths, 2)
contribution of the oceanic lithosphere sources to isotopic variations in
oceanic island basalts, 3) contrasting styles and products of magma-mantle
beneath individual islands, as a function of lithospheric age, thickness, and
temperature, and 4) the extent to which the physical and chemical
characteristics of magma migration are controlled by variations in texture and
grain size of the mantle.