* 9315572
* Novel Implants for the Spinal Cord Injured Patient
* NONE,NONE
* 05/01/1994,05/31/1998
* Ioannis Yannas, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing grant
* Gilbert B. Devey
* 05/31/1998
* USD 732,477.00

9315572 Yannas The inability of damaged or severed nerve axions to reconnect
following spinal cord injury causes paralysis, a condition amenable to
restorative treatment. However, the recent availability of chemical analysis of
extracellular matrices (ECM) has enhanced understanding of environmental
preferences of growing peripheral axons. This in turn has led to the fabrication
of prostheses which have induced rapid and almost complete recovery of function
of transected sciatic nerves in small rodents. The goal of this research program
is to synthesize, characterize and optimize the composition and pore structure
of chemical analogs of ECM (based on graft copolymers of type I collagen and
chrondrotin 6-sulfate) that may facilitate optimal elongation of spinal cord
axions. The knowledge gained will be used to design implantable prostheses that
will facilitate reconnection of axons of the spinal cord. Support for clinical
studies will be sought from other sources. This research, if successful, is
expected to improve the quality of life of individuals with spinal cord injuries
and effect a significant cost savings in health care. This program, supported
under the Cost Effective Health Care Technology Initiative, is a collaborative
interdisciplinary effort involving materials scientists and health care
practitioners from the Fibers and Polymers Laboratory as well as the Department
of Biology and Brain & Cognitive Science at the Massachusetts Institute of
Technology, the Department of Neurosurgery @ Deaconess Hospital, and the
Orthopedics Laboratory @ Brigham and Women's Hospital. ***