* 9315968
* VLSI Design '94 Conference, Calcutta, India January 5-8,    1994 Group Travel Award in U.S. and Indian Currencies
* O/D,OISE
* 12/15/1993,11/30/1994
* Donald Bouldin, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* Osman Shinaishin
* 11/30/1994
* USD 11,000.00

9315968 Bouldin Description: This project supports participation of U.S.
scientists in a conference in Calcutta, India: The VLSI Design'94, January5-8,
1994. The Indian chairman is P. Pai Chaudhuri, of the Department of Computer
Science and Engineering, Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur. The
conference is a forum for researchers and designers to present and discuss
various aspects of this emerging field. Topics of interest include: analog
devices, application specific devices, CAE/CAD systems, DSP applications, design
for testability, economic issues, fault modeling and simulation, fault tolerant
computing, high level synthesis, logic and circuit simulation, logic synthesis,
microarchitecture, mixed A/D VLSI, multi-chip modules, placement and routing,
regional/global perspectives, technology CAD, test generation, timing
verification, VLSI architectures and algorithms, and VLSI neural networks.
Scope: This is the seventh such conference held in India starting with 1985 in
Madras, and then in Bangalore, New Delhi and Bombay. These meetings were open to
scientists from the developing countries, and were also well attended by
scientists from Europe, Japan, and North America. It is expected that the 1994
conference also will be well attended. The U.S. Principal Investigator, Dr.
Donald Bouldin will prepare a summary report on the highlights of the
conference, to be published in the IEEE Circuits & Devices Magazine. ***