* 9315928
* Posttranslational Regulation of Pep-Carboxylase Activity in Higher Plants
* BIO,MCB
* 05/01/1994,04/30/1998
* Raymond Chollet, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Continuing Grant
* Susan Porter Ridley
* 04/30/1998
* USD 424,000.00

9315928 Chollet The experimental plan is composed of three areas of research on
the control of higher plant phosphoenolpyruvate carboxylase (PEPC) activity in
vivo by regulatory phosphorylation and allosteric metabolite effectors. Specific
research objectives include (i) the continued scrutiny of the highly regulated
PEPC-kinase signal- transduction chain by in situ studies with intact C4 and CAM
plants using an integrated biochemical, immunological and/or molecular- genetic
approach, and the further elucidation of the complex C4 PEPC-kinase signal-
transduction chain by in situ studies with intact C4-mesophyll cells and
protoplasts. The outcome of these objectives could strongly affect our basic
understanding of the regulation of PEPC activity by L-malate, the negative
allosteric effector. Conversely, project (ii) will focus on the opposing control
of C4/CAM PEPC activity exerted by positive phosphorylated effectors (e.g.,
glucose 6-P, triose-P) by mapping this activator binding domain with
photoaffinity-labeling and site-directed mutagenesis techniques. Finally,
project (iii) will critically assess the possible regulatory phosphorylation of
nonphotosynthetic PEPC in leaves and root-nodules from C3 plants by integrative
in vivo (detached leaves and nodules), in situ (intact leaf protoplasts), and in
vitro (isolated PEPC and PEPC-kinase) analysis. Results from these three
projects will not only delineate important details of the control of C4- and
CAM- photosynthesis, and details of general C/N metabolism in plants at the
level of cytosolic PEPC, but at the same time will provide much needed insight
into enzyme regulation in higher plants by reversible protein phosphorylation.
%%% This project is focused on the posttranslational regulation of the carbon
dioxide (CO2)-fixing enzyme phosphoenolpyruvate carboxylase (PEPC) in higher
plants. While this enzyme is best known for its role in CO2 fixation during C4
photosynthesis and Crassulacean acid metabolism (CA M) in crops as maize,
sorghum, sugarcane, and pineapple (CAM), it also functions in general plant
carbon/nitrogen metabolism. Besides these important physiological and functional
considerations, the PEPC enzyme represents one of the few well- known examples
in higher plants of an enzyme that is controlled by the opposing action of a
protein phosphatase and a protein-serine kinase. Consequently, this complex
regulatory phosphorylation cycle forms the central focus of many of our present
studies. Understanding about how the cycle operates is important in regulation
of CO2 assimilation and in plant metabolism in general. It can form the basis
for biotechnological engineering of plants to improve growth and productivity.
This project is supported jointly by Metabolic Biochemistry Program, MCB and the
Plant Integrative Biology Program, IBN. ***