* 9315326
* U.S.-Japan Cooperative Ressearch:  Fluorescence and         Scattering Studies of Polyelectrolytes-Colloid Systems
* O/D,OISE
* 04/01/1994,09/30/1997
* Paul Dubin, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Larry H. Weber
* 09/30/1997
* USD 11,450.00

9315326 Dubin This award supports a two-year cooperative research project
between Professor Paul Dubin, Department of Chemistry, Indiana University-
Purdue University at Indianapolis, and Professor Mikiharu Kamachi, Department of
Macromolecular Science, Osaka University, and Professor Yotaro Morishima,
Department of Macromolecular Science, Osaka University. The joint research
focuses on the complex formation between polyelectrolytes and oppositely charged
colloids of two types: micelles and proteins. In the former case, there is
particular interest in the critical conditions for polyelectrolyte binding,
inasmuch as this system provides a unique test of theories for polyelectrolyte
adsorption. The Osaka group has pioneered the use of dye- labeled
polyelectrolytes to probe the electrostatic potential in the vicinity of the
polyion, and these will be used to establish and understand the fundamental
relationship among colloid surface charge density, polyion charge density and
ionic strength at critical binding conditions. The second topic of investigation
is polyelectrolyte-protein complexation, an area of considerable potential
significance in bio- separations and enzyme immobilization. A key question is
the conformation of the protein in the complex. Fluorescence quenching methods
refined in Osaka will be used to answer this question. For both this system and
the polyelectrolyte-micelle system, transport processes will be explored using
dynamic and electrophoretic light scattering in Indianapolis and forced
Rayleight scattering and nanosecond fluorescence spectroscopy in Osaka. ***