* 9315307
* Identification of Encephalic Photoreceptors
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/1993,02/28/1995
* Pierre Deviche, University of Alaska Fairbanks Campus
* Standard Grant
* Kathie L. Olsen
* 02/28/1995
* USD 14,651.00

9315307 Deviche It is well established that a wide variety of organisms have
internal biological clocks that are instrumental in allowing them to maintain
synchrony to both daily (i.e., circadian) and annual cycles of environmental
change. Plants and animals routinely experience small adjustments in these
rhythms, often triggered by intensity of light, to synchronize their internal
clocks with the passing seasons or changes in the environment. Indeed, precisely
timed bursts of bright light can stop the daily cycle of the human biological
clock. A major question is how photic signals are transduced into physiological
responses. Two structures in the brain that have been identified as playing a
role in this response are the suprachiasmatic nuclei of the hypothalamus and the
pineal gland. These structures receive neural input from the retina of the eye
when it is stimulated by light. It has been proposed that some vertebrates also
may possess extra-pineal, extra-retinal photoreceptors, referred to as deep
brain photoreceptors, which are capable of entraining circadian rhythms. At this
time we do not know the location, sensitivity, or most importantly the neural
connections of these putative receptors. This project awards Dr. Deviche a small
grant for exploratory resesarch to address this important problem. He has found
a model system in a species of highly photoperiodic arctic bird that possibly
could provide the answers. Using an antibody that identifies rhodopsin-like
photopigments in the retina and the pineal, he will locate cell bodies and
terminals in the brain. Light conditions will be manipulated to determine
whether light exposure stimulates the expression of these photopigments in these
brain cells. If successful, this will be the first demonstration that some cells
deep within the central nervous system are photosensitive. These results would
open new avenues towards understanding the mechanisms by which light stimulation
reaches and alters th e nervous system to influence biological timing, and will
have impact also beyond neuroscience to arctic biology and ornithology.
Understanding the basic neural mechanisms for timing could lead to treatment of
problems such as impaired attentiveness that affect human performance during
work shifts from day to night, or jet lag, or other factors that make the
internal clock out of sync with the environment. ***