* 9316179
* U.S.-Australian Joint Workshop on Helioseismology and       the Internal Structure of the Sun
* O/D,OISE
* 12/01/1993,11/30/1995
* John Leibacher, Association of Universities for Research in Astronomy, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Charles Wallace
* 11/30/1995
* USD 31,050.00

9316179 Leibacher This award will support the participation of ten U.S. senior
and junior scientists to participate in a workshop on helioseismology and the
internal structure of the Sun to be held in Sydney, Australia in mid-January
1994. The American coordinator is Dr. John Leibacher from the National Optical
Astronomy Observatories / National Solar Observatory. The Australian coordinator
is Prof. Peter Wilson of the University of Sydney. This workshop is being
conducted under the U.S. - Australia Cooperative Science Program and support in
Australia is provided through the Department of Industry, Technology and
Regional Development (DITARD). Helioseismology, the study of acoustic
oscillations trapped in resonant cavities within the Sun, is a new and exciting
field that promises to provide a means of measuring the characteristics of the
internal structure and dynamics of the Sun. The NSF - sponsored Global
Oscillation Network Group (GONG) project will deploy a network of six
oscillation observing stations around the world beginning in 1994. These
stations will keep the Sun under surveillance 24 hours each day over a three
year period. One of these stations will be located at the Learmonth Solar
Observatory in Western Australia. The object of this workshop is to increase the
participation of Australian scientists in helioseismology and to initiate
cooperative research programs. The workshop will be divided between tutorial
presentations by recognized experts and traditional research presentations. The
principal topics will be the physics of solar oscillations, solar internal
models, convection, dynamos, and helioseismic inversions. ***