* 9316155
* Industry/University Cooperative Research Center for         Composites Design
* ENG,EEC
* 08/15/1993,01/31/1998
* Stephen Tsai, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* alexander schwarzkopf
* 01/31/1998
* USD 225,000.00

9316155 Tsai The use of composite material in complex engineering structure has
generally been limited to high-cost and handmade traditional multidirectional
laminates substructure. The design and manufacturing processes of structured
composites have also been dominated by try-and-error approach. For civilian
applications, cost estimation and durability of design must be emphasized.
Today, industry is lack of innovative design and construction methodology for
design and manufacturing of composite structure for low-cost civilian
applications. Nearly all manufacturing methods used today are by batch rather
than continuous process. An Industry/University Cooperative Research Center for
Composites Design at Stanford University could provide a better mechanism to
achieve efficiency and economy in design and manufacturing in terms of energy
consumption, dual-use technologies, and friendliness to the environment. The
Center will focus on the integrated composite design and manufacturing
technology such as grid structure of thermoplastic composites and continuous
manufacturing processes for low cost civilian applications. A planning meeting
was funded by NSF to study if industry would support an Industry/University
Cooperative Research Center for Composites Design at Stanford University. A
number of companies have committed to support this effort. Currently, there are
six sponsors for the Center committing approximately $360,000. The Principle
Investigator/Center Director and his colleagues are internationally recognized
in this area and have the knowledge and facilities to run this Center. The
proposed research projects will address: 1) optimization of grid panel and shell
composite design; 2) process modelling of thermoplastic tape; 3) research in
methodology of testing, inspection, maintenance, and repair of composite
material; 4)manufacturing of thermoplastic composites. This Center has been
coordinated with Dr. John Scalzi, Program Director of L arge Structural &amp;
Building System, Division of Mechanical and Structural Systems at the NSF. The
Program Director recommends Stanford University be awarded $50,000 for the first
year of a five-year continuing award. Near the end of each 12-month period the
Program Manager and/or the Division Director of the engineering Education
Centers Division will review the progress of the Center on a number of renewal
criteria, including the following: 1) the extent to which the university-
industry interaction is developing; 2) the extent to which the support base is
developing; and 3) the extent to which a robust research program is developing.
If the review is satisfactory, the Program Manager will recommend support for
the next period of this continuing award.