* 9316939
* Synthesis of Carbocyclic and Heterocyclic Natural Products
* MPS,CHE
* 12/01/1993,11/30/1997
* James White, Oregon State University
* Continuing grant
* Kenneth M. Doxsee
* 11/30/1997
* USD 415,000.00

9316939 White The focus of this research is the discovery of new synthetic
methods and their application to the synthesis of certain carbocyclic and
heterocyclic compounds of natural origin. Five natural products are identified
for the purpose of defining the specific goals of the project. They fall into
two groups, one consisting of a set for which bond reorganization involving a
cyclobutane is the focal step, and another in which elaboration of a
heterocyclic subunit plays a pivotal role. The first group contains rubratoxin
B, verrucarol, and huperzine A. The second group contains the alkaloids
cylindrospermopsin and koumine. The major emphasis in all of the syntheses is
the ability to complete efficient routes to structures containing a high degree
of complexity. %%% With this award, the Synthetic Organic Program is supporting
the research of Dr. James D. White of the Department of Chemistry at Oregon
State University. Professor White will focus his work on the discovery of new
synthetic methods and their application to the synthesis of certain carbocyclic
and heterocyclic compounds of natural origins. The molecular architecture of the
designated target compounds presents a significant challenge to contemporary
methods of synthesis which will be addressed by exploring unconventional and, in
several instances, unprecedented approaches to their construction. ***