* 9316815
* Conference on Breakthroughs in Karst Geomicrobiology        and Redox Geochemistry
* GEO,EAR
* 01/15/1994,12/31/1994
* John Hess, Karst Water Institute
* Standard Grant
* L. Douglas James
* 12/31/1994
* USD 12,000.00

9316815 Hess The Karst Waters Institute proposes to sponsor a conference on
Breakthroughs in Karst Geomicrobiology and Redox Geochemistry February 16-19,
1994 in Colorado Springs, Colorado. The conference will bring together karst and
other scientists with hydrological, biological, geological, chemical and
geomorphological backgrounds focusing on the role of microorganisms in both
geological and biological processes with an emphasis on karst. Topics to be
covered include: 1) Redox Environments in Karst, 2) Role of Microorganisms in
Karst Processes, 3) Energy, Chemoautotrophy, and Thermodynamics in Microbial
Systems, 4) Sulfate/Sulfide/Carbonate Speleogenesis, 5) microbial Mediation of
Carbonate Precipitation and 6) Comparison of Microbial Systems in Karst to those
Elsewhere and in the Fossil record. Twelve karst and other scientists have been
invited from around the world to give keynote addresses and chair the various
sessions. The conference will be three days in length. The first and third days
will be devoted to keynote addresses and invited and volunteered papers. On the
evening of the first day there will be a post1er session and reception. The
second day will be devoted to a field trip and workshops on field and laboratory
techniques in geomicrobiology. Keynote speakers, session chairs and most
presenters have been personally invited to participate in the conference. The
conference is being advertised in several professional outlets including
Geotimes, GSA Today, EOS and The Bulletin of the Ecological Society of America.
All abstracts will be published in the conference program. Contributed papers
are planned to be published in a special issue of Geomicrobiology. Meeting
summaries will be submitted to various appropriate professional outlets. ***