* 9316065
* Folding Mechanism of a Conus Toxin
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/1994,08/31/1998
* David Goldenberg, University of Utah
* Continuing Grant
* Marcia Steinberg
* 08/31/1998
* USD 214,000.00

Goldenberg 9316065 The goal of this project is to determine what factors
influence the folding and disulfide-bond formation of a small peptide toxin
found in the venom of a marine snail, Conus magus. The venoms are composed of
small peptides, typically 12 to 30 residues long, most of which contain two or
three disulfide bonds. Although these molecules are much smaller than typical
globular proteins, they fold into well-defined three-dimensional structures. The
small size of the peptides and the high degree of sequence variability suggests
that information in addition to that found in the mature toxin may be necessary
to direct correct folding. This information may be provided by recently
identified pro-peptide sequences. Folding may also be influenced by the enzyme
protein disulfide isomerase (PDI) or other cellular components. In order to
determine the role of the pro-peptide sequence, the in vitro folding and
disulfide formation of the mature toxin will be compared with that of the pro-
toxin form produced in E. coli. Comparing the rates of folding and the
distribution of intermediates with and without the pro-peptide will indicate
whether the pro-peptide can increase the rates of productive folding. The
folding kinetics of the mature and pro-toxin forms will be examined in the
presence of PDI. An in vitro translation-translocation system will also be used
to study the folding of the toxin precursor. Comparison with results obtained in
vivo will indicate how well the in vitro reactions mimic folding in vivo and may
reveal the presence of other components of the endoplasmic reticulum that are
important for folding. %%% Proteins are long linear molecules made up of amino
acids linked together by chemical bonds. In this regard, proteins resemble
synthetic polymers such as nylon. Proteins differ from most other polymers,
however, because the chains are able to fold into unique three-dimensional
structures. The shape of the folded protein and the distribution of chemical
groups allow proteins to interact with other molecules with high specificity.
Most proteins known to fold into a unique structure contain a minimum of about
50 amino acids. A very interesting exception to this generalization has been
discovered in peptides found in the venoms of snails in the genus Conus. This
genus is made up of about 500 species of cone-shaped marine snails. These snails
are predators and are able to paralyze their prey by injecting highly potent
venoms containing mixtures of small peptides. These peptides are typically only
12 to 30 amino acids long, but have been shown to be folded into well-defined
three-dimensional structures. The different peptides interact strongly and
specifically with components of the nervous system. The high specificities of
these interactions have made the Conus toxins powerful tools for studying the
molecular components of the nervous system. The goal of this project is to
determine what molecular and cellular factors enable the Conus peptides to fold
into their specific conformations, in spite of their small size. In addition to
helping to elucidate the details of this unusual biological system, the results
of these studies may be useful in the design and production of artificial
peptides with novel biological activities. ***