* 9316803
* Electron Tunneling Studies of Variable Range Hopping        Conductors
* MPS,DMR
* 04/01/1994,03/31/1998
* Mark Lee, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Continuing Grant
* H. Hollis Wickman
* 03/31/1998
* USD 240,000.00

9316803 Lee Technical abstract: Many materials that are barely on the insulating
side of a metal-insulator transition conduct electricity by variable range
hopping (VRH), for which the conductivity depends on temperature as
exp(T0/T)1/n, for integer n &gt; 1. While VRH by non-interacting electrons is
well understood, recent experiments have shown that VRH at low temperatures in
the presence of magnetic perturbations leads to new and unexpected phenomena,
including the possibility of a new spin-charge coupled quasiparticle. It is
planned to investigate the many-body density-of-states and elementary excitation
spectrum in VRH conductors using electron tunneling and magneto transport
experiments at low temperatures and high magnetic fields. The goal is to
directly measure the proposed energy gap structure inferred from conductivity
data and to elucidate the effects of magnetic scattering on hopping conduction.
Non-technical abstract: A fundamental problem in condensed matter physics is
concerned with the mechanism of electrical conduction in a solid. While the
understanding of common metals and semiconductors is highly developed, many
materials exhibit unusual, often poorly understood electrical behavior. A
commonly observed form of unconventional electrical conduction is known as
variable- range hopping (VRH). Since many diverse technologically important
solids are VRH conductors, it is of practical importance to develop a more
profound physical understanding of this process. Recent experiments have shown
that VRH conduction can yield complex and completely unexpected behavior. In
order to elucidate the fundamental principles which underlie this electrical
conductiom it is proposed to study directly rhe microscopic properties of the
charge carriers in different VRH conductors. ***