* 9316130
* SGER: Memories of a Life Threatening Event: An Integration of Cognitive and Personality Perspectives
* NONE,NONE
* 08/01/1993,07/31/1995
* David Pillemer, University of Massachusetts Boston
* Standard Grant
* Guy Van Orden
* 07/31/1995
* USD 25,989.00

9316130 RIERDAN On May 15, 1993, three gunmen robbed a restaurant and held ten
people hostage. The hostages were bound and gagged and, with guns held to their
heads, their lives were threatened. Although the hostages were not physically
harmed, their terrifying ordeal lasted for almost two hours. The willingness of
the hostages and their families to participate in this research study provides a
rare opportunity to examine memory for an extraordinarily stressful personal
event that occurred in a natural context. The hostages will be interviewed about
their memories of the robbery at two time periods, one month and six months
following the event. Hostages will be asked to recount the event in their own
terms. Then, they will be asked a series of specific questions about the
robbery, including information about the gunmen, other hostages, and the rescue.
Finally, they will be asked about their own psychological reactions to the
event, including persisting visual or sensory images, feelings, and thoughts.
Hostages also will complete several personality tests. Memory accuracy will be
evaluated by comparing hostages' reports to available objective information
about the robbery. Memory consistency will be evaluated by comparing event
descriptions provided by the different hostages, and also by comparing
individual hostages' memories across the two time periods. Memory integration,
the degree to which the memory has been incorporated into a stable sense of
self, will also be assessed. Relationships between memory and personality test
scores will be examined in order to determine if certain psychological
attributes make it easier for a person to integrate the memory of a horrifying
event into his or her ongoing life and sense of self. In addition to the
hostages themselves, one male and one female member of each hostage's family
will be interviewed. The interviews will assess the family members' memories of
learning about the robbery from the hostages. The family members also will
complete several personality tests. As with the hostages' memories, the
accuracy, consistency, and organization of family members' memories will be
evaluated. In addition, family members' own psychological reactions to the
hostages' trauma will be assessed. This study is unique in examining memories of
both the people directly experiencing a life-threatening event and also their
close family members. Evaluating memories of an extraordinarily stressful event
will not only inform the scientific study of basic cognitive processes, it
should also deepen our understanding of the psychological processes affecting
eyewitness testimony and successful adaptation to life-threatening events. ***