* 9316426
* Sources and Functions of Defenses Against Solar UV Radiationand Photooxidative Stress in Sea Urchins
* NONE,NONE
* 01/01/1994,06/30/1998
* Walter Dunlap, University of Maine
* Continuing grant
* Zoe Eppley
* 06/30/1998
* USD 360,129.00

9316426 Shick The regulation of defenses against solar ultraviolet radiation-
induced photooxidative stress will be studied in sea urchins. Like other marine
organisms, sea urchins contain mycosporine-like amino acids (MAAs) which absorb
environmentally relevant wavelengths of UV. Various seaweeds eaten by sea
urchins are rich in MAAs, and preliminary chromatographic analyses indicate
concordance between the MAA levels in seaweed and in sea urchin tissues,
especially ovaries. Controlled maintenance of sea urchins on seaweeds lacking or
rich in MAAs confirms dietary accumulation of MAAs in the urchins' ovaries, and
provides an experimental means to fortify the eggs with these presumptive UV
defenses. Published documentation of a UV-protective effect of MAAs is largely
circumstantial. Thus, a major objective of the proposed research is to test
directly whether MAAs protect echinoid eggs and larvae from exposure to natural
and simulated solar UV. If the hypothesis that MAAs do confer protection against
UV radiation is correct, dietary fortification of sea urchin ovaries should
confer a greater resistance to UV in eggs and larvae; therefore, effects of
acute UV exposure on pyrimidine dimer formation in DNA, fertilization,
development, and larval survival will be assessed in MAA-rich and MAA-deficient
individuals. A comparative study in this project is aimed at determining whether
different exposures to solar UV radiation are associated with qualitative and
quantitative differences in MAA content. MAA composition and content in a Maine
species of sea urchin will be compared with those in a sympatric sand dollar.
The sea urchin species matures and spawns in late winter; thus gamete maturation
and larval development take place under relatively low levels of UV exposure. In
contrast, the sand dollar is mature and spawns repeatedly from June through
October, so its eggs and larvae are exposed to higher seasonal UV radiation than
the winter- spawning se a urchin and may require more robust photooxidative
defenses. The results of this study will have implications for the mechanism of
accumulation and effectiveness of natural photooxidative defenses in marine food
chains. This is a genuine concern because of deterioration of the protective
ozone layer, where boreal marine organisms have evolved under relatively low
solar UV exposure. The research may also have importance in the search for
natural (dietary) antioxidants, some of which may be active as inhibitors of
tumor promotion in human cells. ***