* 9316168
* Regulation of Sister-Chromatid Segregation by the mei-S332, Grauzone, and Cortex Genes
* BIO,MCB
* 04/15/1994,09/30/1997
* Terry Orr-Weaver, Whitehead Institute for Biomedical Research
* Continuing Grant
* DeLill Nasser
* 09/30/1997
* USD 375,000.00

Abstract 9316168 Orr-Weaver The Drosophila gene mei-S332 has been shown to be
critical for maintaining sister-chromatid cohesion in meiosis because mutations
in the gene cause the sister chromatids to prematurely disjoin late in the first
meiotic division. The defect in mei-S332 mutants is manifest at a time when the
sister chromatids are held together only at their centromere regions, suggesting
that the product of this gene acts at the centromere or kinetochore to promote
cohesion in mitosis. The molecular mechanisms by which mei-S332 controls sister-
chromatid cohesion will be elucidated by isolating the gene, identifying the
protein it encodes, and analyzing where that protein is localized on the
chromosomes. The nature of unusual sex-specific mutations will be determined.
Experiments will investigate whether the mei-S332 protein is modified at the
metaphase-anaphase transition, the time at which sister-chromatid segregation
will be identified by their interaction with the mei- S332 protein, using
biochemical and genetic approaches. Two maternal effect mutants have been
identified in Drosophila, grauzone and cortex, that have the opposite phenotype
as mei-S332 mutants. In these mutants meiosis is arrested at metaphase II, prior
to the separation of sister chromatids. These genes may act in a regulatory
manner to signal the metaphase-anaphase transition, or they may promote the
separation of sister-chromatids, possibly by causing the loss of cohesion.
Genetic and cell biology experiments will define the role of these genes in
meiosis and mitosis and their relationship to mei-S332. The grauzone gene will
be isolated in order to understand the molecular basis of its action in sister-
chromatid segregation. *** The proper segregation of chromosomes is essential to
ensure that a complete complement of genetic information is transmitted to
progeny or daughter cells. Prior to chromosome segregation a copy of each
chromosome is replicated. During mitosis th ese sister chromatids segregate to
daughter cells. In the first meiotic division the sister chromatids migrate as a
unit to the same pole as the homologous copies of each chromosome segregate; the
sister chromatids do not segregate until the second meiotic division. One aspect
of chromosome segregation that is poorly understood is how the sister chromatids
remain attached until their separation in mitosis or meiosis. Sister-chromatid
cohesion is likely to be mediated through structural functions that hold the
sister chromatids together and regulatory functions that time their
dissociation. The control of sister-chromatid segregation will be investigated
using Drosophila as a model system because it affords the combined approaches of
genetics, cell biology, and molecular biology. %%%