* 9316644
* Mechanism and Function of Polyadenylation
* BIO,MCB
* 01/15/1994,06/30/1997
* J. Scott Butler, University of Rochester
* Continuing Grant
* karen kindle-hartsuyker
* 06/30/1997
* USD 309,000.00

9316644 Butler We have identified and characterized an isolate of the yeast
Saccharomyces cerevisiae having a conditional defect in the pathway for the
production of mature mRNA. The recessive, lethal mutation (pap1-1) lies in the
gene encoding poly(A) polymerase and results in thermolabile mRNA
polyadenylation activity in vitro and in vivo. Shift of pap1-1 cells to the
restrictive growth temperature results in a rapid loss of polyadenylated mRNA
and the eventual death of the cell. We intend to exploit this mutation and the
clone of the normal copy of the gene we obtained to pursue several lines of
investigation designed to gain a better understanding of the function and
mechanism of polyadenylation. This novel mutation and the strength of the
genetic and biochemical techniques offered by this system put us in a unique
position to bring new insights to this area of molecular biology. First, we will
continue to characterize the pap1-1 mutant to determine why lack of
polyadenylation kills the cells, thereby providing insight into the role of
poly(A) tails in the cell. Second, we will search for and characterize
suppressor mutations restoring the ability of pap1-1 cells to grow at the non-
permissive temperature with the aim of identifying and understanding genes whose
products interact with poly(A) polymerase, or play a role in mRNA metabolism.
%%% This research has as its central aim the understanding of how cells modify
the chemical structure of genetic messages, called messenger ribonucleic acids
(mRNAs), and how these modifications affect the function of these molecules.
Specifically, we are using to use baker's yeast as a model organism to study how
the cell adds a series of nucleosides called adenosines to the end of mRNAs and
to what degree this modification affects the ability of these messengers to
translate their genetic information into proteins. During the period of our
previous NSF award we isolated and characterized a yeast mutation that allows us
to control, in living cells, the activity of the enzyme required to carry out
this modification. Our approaches therefore feature the use of this mutation
under conditions that allow us to study the synthesis and function of the
modified mRNAs. Baker's yeast has proved to be an invaluable tool to study basic
processes in cells because it is easy to grow and is amenable to biochemical and
genetic analyses. Importantly, the basic molecular details of how cells grow and
differentiate appear to be remarkably similar in yeast and humans, thus implying
that basic biochemical research in yeast will shed light on the nature of basic
molecular biological processes in many organisms as well. ***