* 9316332
* Support for the Symposium "Calcium Regulation:  Mechanisms  and Control in Crustaceans and Lower Vertebrates
* BIO,IOS
* 10/01/1994,09/30/1995
* Michele Wheatly, Wright State University
* Standard Grant
* Barbara K. Zain
* 09/30/1995
* USD 6,000.00

9316332 Wheatly This proposal is a request to support a two-day symposium
entitled "Calcium Regulation: Mechanisms and Control in Crustaceans and Lower
Vertebrates" at the Intersociety Comparative Physiology Meeting to be held in
San Diego, CA from October 29 through November 2, 1994. This meeting is
sponsored by the comparative physiology and biochemistry sections of the
American Physiological Society (primary sponsor), the American Society of
Zoologists, the Canadian Society of Zoologists, the British Society for
Experimental Biology and the German Society of Zoologists. The theme of the
meeting is "Regulation, Integration, Adaptation: A Species Approach". The
proposed symposium, which is the first of its kind, will bring together an
international cadre of researchers using a variety of animal model systems in
which to study basic mechanisms of calcium regulation. The symposium will use a
multidisciplinary approach to discuss calcium balance at levels ranging from
whiole animal processes down through epithelial/subcellular mechanisms and
ultimately to molecular control. Model animal systems will include crustaceans,
fish, amphibians, birds, and reptiles. This integrated approach will have
applicability to a wide range of physiological disciplines. The symposium will
be published in the journal Physiological Zoology. ***