* 9316508
* Role of Messenger RNA Location in Cell Orientation and      Movement
* BIO,MCB
* 06/15/1994,05/31/1998
* Alice Fulton, University of Iowa
* Standard Grant
* Eve Ida Barak
* 05/31/1998
* USD 224,500.00

9316508 Fulton Intermediate filaments in cells are associated with mechanical
strain and the ability to resist forces. The mRNA for vimentin is localized,
changes position during development and in fibroblasts remains around the
centrosome during wound healing. The driving hypothesis behind this proposal is
that correct mRNA location is required for the assembly and location of the
vimentin filaments. The proposal addresses three questions: 1) Is the 3' UTR of
vimentin mRNA sufficient to direct mRNA to the centrosomal region? 2) Does
vimentin mRNA need to be in the centrosomal region to produce vimentin filaments
that permit cellular orientation and movement? 3) Do cells under mechanical
stress have greater requirements for properly located vimentin mRNA and
protein?. Appropriate plasmids will be constructed and transfected into
fibroblasts and the location of mRNA will be shown by in situ hybridization.
Monolayers of transfected cells will be wounded and cell behavior during
orientation and migration will be measured, either with or without mechanical
stress. The mRNA's of several cytoskeletal proteins are localized, suggesting
that synthesis of these proteins may occur at sites appropriate for function or
assembly. The function of location for cytoskeletal proteins will only be known
when cytoskeletal mRNA's are mislocalized. The mechanically demanding behavior
of fibroblasts during cell orientation and movement offers a strong test of the
functional significance for mRNA location. %%% The messages for several
cytoskeletal proteins are concentrated in parts of the cell, suggesting that
these proteins may need to be made at the right place for them to function or
assemble. The function for message location for cytoskeletal proteins will only
be known when cytoskeletal mRNAs are mislocalized. Cells pointing and moving
offer a good opportunity to see the functional significance of message location.
***