* 9316048
* Analysis of G Protein Functions in Arabidopsis
* NONE,NONE
* 05/01/1994,10/31/1997
* Hong Ma, Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory
* Continuing grant
* Barbara K. Zain
* 10/31/1997
* USD 397,000.00

9316048 Ma G-proteins play important roles in the receptor-mediated signaling
processes in eukaryotic organisms. Little is known about the molecular
mechanisms of signal transduction processes in plants, where a variety of
hormonal and environmental signals affect development, maturation and
senescence. Biochemical analyses suggested that G-proteins are also involved in
the signal transduction processes in plants. During the previous granting period
the GPA1 gene (the alpha subunit encoding gene of the heterotrimeric G protein)
was isolated from Arabidopsis thaliana, sequenced and its expression
investigated. since the gene was expressed in most organs during development,
and its level of expression was high in rapidly dividing cells, in cells of
young organs and nutrient transmitting cells, it was suggested that the product
of this gene is required for cell division. Investigations with transgenic
plants further suggested the role of the alpha subunit of the G-protein in the
regulation of differentiation during development. In the present proposal
experiments are described to further test the role of the G-protein in cellular
regulation with transgenic plants, on identification and characterization of
proteins that interact with the GPA1 gene, end of the isolation of the genes
encoding these proteins. These experiments are the logical continuation of the
work, and if successful, will provide detailed information about the function of
GPA1 in plant cells. %%% Dr. Ma's laboratory has successfully studied in the
past the role of G-protein in the development of plant cells, including the
spatial and temporal expression of the GPA1 gene in developing plants, in
transgenic plants containing various constructs of the GPA1 gene,
immunolocalization of the gene product in cells and mapping of the GPA1 gene. In
the present study he will focus on the analysis of GPA1 gene function in
transgenic plants and in tissue cultures, on the in vitro analysis of the GPA1
function and interacting proteins, and will isolate the genes which encode
components of the GPA1 mediated signaling pathway. He will carry out some of
these experiments in collaboration with others. These studies will add
enormously to our understanding of plant signaling responses. The PI's
laboratory is very good at producing the genetic materials and tools that are
needed for success in this work. Dr. Ma is clearly an emerging leader in the
signal transduction area. ***