* 9316057
* Early Ordovician Greenhouse to Late Ordovician Glacial      Transition:  Effect on the Cyclic Sedimentary Record,       Kentucky-Virginia
* GEO,EAR
* 02/01/1994,07/31/1997
* James Read, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Continuing Grant
* John A. Maccini
* 07/31/1997
* USD 181,208.00

9316057 Read This proposal request funds to study superb outcrops and the
extensive core collections of Middle and Late Ordovician rocks in Kentucky so
that we can compare them with the Early Ordovician strata, to search for the
stratigraphic evidence of possible change from low amplitude eustasy of Early
Ordovician greenhouse times to possible higher amplitude eustasy developed
during Late Ordovician Gondwana glaciation. We presently have a very large data
base on Early Ordovician and Middle Ordovician rocks characteristic of
greenhouse conditions, that will serve as a basis for comparison with the
younger units. We propose to log bed-by-bed the later Middle and Late Ordovician
carbonates and shales which appear to have developed on storm-dominated ramps,
documenting any peritidal and shallow to deeper water subtidal cycles, their
degree of lateral continuity, their stacking patterns and relation to
depositional sequences, and bounding surfaces. We will also examine the cycles
for evidence of: 1. long term climate change and 2. evidence of short term
emergence (including paleosols, erosion surfaces, negative departures of stable
isotope profiles, and meteoric cementation); all these might become more
pronounced if glacially driven sea level amplitudes increased into the Late
Ordovician. Using detailed regional cross sections of cyclic lithofacies, we
will define depositional sequences, and document the relationships and timing of
bounding surfaces to the tectonic history of the foreland basin, including
peripheral bulge development and prograding clastic rocks along the tectonically
active proximal margin. Finally, we will computer model the cycles and the
depositional sequences to better constrain the roles of tectonism, low- and
high- frequency eustasy, and sediment supply. Defining the stratigraphic
signature of greenhouse to global glacial conditions appears to hold the key for
a future more detailed global climate subdivision of the Phanerozoic than h as
been attempted.