* 9316938
* Mobility and Disorder in Protein NMR Structures
* BIO,MCB
* 01/01/1994,06/30/1999
* Gerhard Wagner, Harvard University
* Continuing Grant
* Kamal Shukla
* 06/30/1999
* USD 684,750.00

9316938, PI-Wagner: With the proteins flavodoxin and eglin c, basic aspects of
protein mobility will be studied. The research will be based on xeteronuclear
relaxation experiments of 15 N and 13 C and on homonuclear nuclear Overhauser
effect (NOE) measurements. Fully 15 N or 13 C labeled proteins as well as 7 10%
13 C labeled proteins will be used for the studies. While conventional methods
of studying protein structures yield static (rigid) models, this research
focuses on the motions within the structural framework of biological
macromolecules. The technology can be transferred to proteins that are targets
for rational drug design. There it is generally important to know about the
mobility vs. apparent rigidity of surface areas. Studies of side chain mobility
may be particularly important for this aspect. ***Structure, mobility and
structural disorder are important aspects of protein function, and protein
target recognition. This will be studied with the ada protein, a DNA repair
protein, a flavodoxin from Anacystis nidulans and the elastase inhibitor eglin
c. The ada protein repai rs methylated DNA preventing transcription and
replication artifacts. After demethylating DNA phosphate groups it undergoes a
conformational change and becomes a transcriptional activator of its own gene.
Thus the structure and mobility of free N terminal domains of ada, as well as
complexes with DNA will be studied. Since the protein changes conformation while
pursuing its function, studies of the mobility are expected to shed light on the
mechanism of protein function.***