* 9316157
* Conformations and Dynamics of Polymers at Interfaces
* MPS,DMR
* 04/15/1994,09/30/1997
* Miriam Rafailovich, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Continuing Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 09/30/1997
* USD 256,250.00

9316157 Rafailovich Recently, several research groups have demonstrated that due
to the large entropy associated with confining long polymer molecules at
interfaces, the classical wetting theories developed for simple liquids do not
apply. I order to obtain a better understanding of the wetting properties of
polymer films we are employing a variety of complementary techniques (SIMS,
reflectivity, TEM, and AFM) to conduct an three-fold program. 1) Wetting
properties of thin liquid polymer films: We are exploring the role of the chain
dimensions on the film stability, surface diffusion, glass transition, wetting
of rough surfaces, and total density. Modification of mean-field theories to
include new experimental phenomena are being developed. 2) Surface modification
via end- functionalized polymers: The conformations of end-grafted polymers are
being studied both in melts and solutions under steady-state shear. The in-plane
structure of brushes is being studied and compared with theoretical simulations.
3) Surface induced ordering of triblock copolymers: Triblock copolymers have the
unique ability to form surface-induced micelle gel films. We are studying the
penetration and wetting of homopolymer films on these gel surfaces as a function
of the relative molecular weights of the two components and the interaction
energies with the ordering surface. Very thin polymer films are known to have a
large variety of applications such as lubricants, coatings for optical and
electronic components, and adhesives. In order for these films to be effective,
they must wet the surfaces upon which they are spread or penetrate through the
interfaces to provide adhesive strength. ***