* 9316391
* GRGC:  Holocene Paleoenvironments in the Central Midwest:   Vegetation, Climate, and Landscape Evolution
* GEO,EAR
* 03/15/1994,02/28/1998
* Diana Horton, University of Iowa
* Continuing Grant
* H. Richard Lane
* 02/28/1998
* USD 111,000.00

9316391 Baker Studies of Holocene paleoenvironments in the northern tier of
states have relied heavily on palynology, which supplies relatively continuous
and detailed records of vegetational and climatic change. In the central and
southern Midwest, however, sites are relatively rare, and paleoenvironments are
poorly known. The objectives of this study are 1) to sample a series of stream
cutbanks along north-south and east-west transects for plant remains. These
deposit constitute a relatively untouched and unknown source of excellent
paleoenvironmental information; 2) to analyze these samples for pollen and
especially for plant macrofossils, to provide information on past vegetation; 3)
to reconstruct Holocene vegetation and climate for each site, along the
transects, and for the entire central Midwest; 4) to add these data to the North
American Pollen Database and the soon-to-be- formed North American Plant
Macrofossil Database, so that models of Holocene vegetational and climatic
change can be extended; 5) to continue to study the alluvial history and
pedological development of these deposits, so that we can evaluate how the
pattern of lithostratigraphy, soils stratigraphy, and landscape development
(produced by E.A. Bettis) extends from Iowa to adjacent states. The project will
be significant in several fields. 1) The ecological/paleoecological information
will provide the first comprehensive picture of the development of vegetation
across the central Midwest, including the Prairie Peninsula. 2) The
paleoclimatic data will extend greatly the coverage of Holocene climates in the
central United States. 3) The timing and extent of climatic and vegetational
changes will be cross-checked with a completely independent source of evidence;
carbon and oxygen isotopes from cave stalagmites across the same area, as
outline in the accompanying Project Summary of the proposal by Gonzalez et al.
4) Both vegetation and climate will be correlated with soil formatio n and with
Holocene changes in stream behavior over a broad area. 5) Changes in stream
behavior and landscape development are critically important to archaeologists in
locating sites and in understanding how and where to look for sites of specific
ages.