* 9316891
* Structural Requirements for Protein Membrane Assembly
* BIO,MCB
* 02/01/1994,01/31/1998
* Ross Dalbey, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Continuing Grant
* Eve Ida Barak
* 01/31/1998
* USD 320,160.00

9316891 Dalbey The proposed research is focused on how N-terminal tails of
bacterial membrane proteins are transferred across the membrane bilayer. It is
not known whether membrane insertion of these tails will require SecA or SecY,
central components of the sec- machinery, or whether insertion can occur
spontaneously into the lipid bilayer. Most proteins with N-terminal periplasmic
tails conform to the "positive inside" rule with mroe positively charged
residues on cytosolic loops compared to periplasmic loops. However, subunit H of
the photosynthetic reaction center of Rhodobacter sphaeroides, which contains an
N-terminal periplasmic tail, violates this rule and has a highly negatively
charged region at the membrane/cytoplasm border. The aims of this proposal are:
1), to determine whether short N-terminal tails are inserted through the lipid
or through a proteinaceous complex within the membrane; 2), to define the
features (length, charge, or an amphiphilic helix) within N-terminal tails that
are needed to translocate the tails across the membrane; 3), to examine whether
there is a certain length of the N-terminal tails where the membrane proteins
utilize the sec- machinery; and 4), to identify the determinants of the protein
topology of subunit H, a protein that has an orientation that disobeys the
"positive inside" rule. A variety of approaches will be used, including site-
directed mutagenesis, gene fusions, topological mapping, and biochemical studies
with protein- free liposomes. %%% This project focuses on the question of how
bacterial membrane proteins are inserted into membranes. The delicate
architecture of biological membranes, and the fine- resolution accuracy of
placement of membrane proteins in biological membranes, are absolutely critical
to the proper functioning of biological systems. An understanding of the "rules"
that Nature uses to achieve this defined architecture is in turn critical to the
successful exploitation of modern gen etic engineering and bioprocessing
technologies. This research projects will result in better understanding those
rules of Nature concerning how membrane proteins achieve their final topology
and location. ***