* 9316256
* Problems in Membrane Biophysics
* BIO,MCB
* 01/15/1994,06/30/1997
* Harden McConnell, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* Kamal Shukla
* 06/30/1997
* USD 300,000.00

9316256 McConnell This research explores the use of lipid/protein monolayers at
the air-water interface to study specific cell membrane-monolayer membrane
interactions. Fluorescence microscopy is the principle technique used to carry
out these studies. Membrane proteins of special interest are the class II
molecules of the major histocompatibility complex (MHC). These proteins are
incorporated in lipid monolayers. The interaction between MHC- peptide complexes
and peptide specific, MHC restricted T-cell hybridomas is studied by
fluorescence microscopic observations of suitably labeled protein/peptide/lipid,
taking advantage of recently developed knowledge concerning physical properties
of lipid monolayers. Apposition of T-cells to the monolayers is carefully
controlled using cell suspension methods. Detection of the binding of specific
MHC-peptide complexes in monolayers to a population of T-cells is a potential
novel technique leading to the identification of reactive T-cells clones, and to
the eventual sequencing of T-cell receptor genes. %%% The surface of the earth
is approximately 75% air-water interface. In spite of the potential ecological
and environmental significance of this interface, remarkably little is known
about physical and chemical events that are interfacial. This is simply because
so few molecules are present at this interface at any one time. Research in the
laboratory of Harden McConnell at Stanford has brought about a breakthrough in
technique for observing chemical, physical and biological events at this
interface. This technique has involved the application of fluorescent molecular
probes that bind only to the interface--they are not soluble in water, nor do
they vaporize into the air. These probes permit the observation of events at the
interface using a simple fluorescence optical microscope. Many phenomena (phase
transitions, chemical reactions, and bacterial motion) can be observed at the
air-water interface by their eff ects on the spatial distribution of these
fluorescent molecules. Literally dozens of new observations have been reported
in the scientific literature using these techniques. A study currently being
initiated in this laboratory concerns the effects of electrical fields on
biological cells. ***