* 9316278
* Dynamical Diagnoses of the Observed 'Asian Summer-Monsoon   Rainfall - El Nino' Relationship
* GEO,AGS
* 03/01/1994,02/28/1999
* Sumant Nigam, University of Maryland, College Park
* Continuing Grant
* Jay S. Fein
* 02/28/1999
* USD 293,000.00

Abstract ATM-9316278 Nigam, Sumant University of Maryland - College Park Title:
Dynamical Diagnoses of the Observed 'Asian Summer-Monsoon Rainfall - El Nino'
Relationship The project seeks to establish the dynamical basis for an empirical
linkage between interannual fluctuations in the Asian summer- monsoon rainfall
and the El Nino/La Nina episodes through diagnostic modeling of the observed
monthly/ seasonal tropospheric circulation anomalies over the Asian continent
(and global tropics and extratropics) during both the northern summer and the
pre-'monsoon-onset' (March-May) seasons. An understanding of the forcing of the
lower-tropospheric and near-surface circulation anomalies will be emphasized as
these are critical both to the generation of monsoon-rainfall anomalies and
tropical oceanic- circulation anomalies. The project objectives also include
diagnostic modeling/analysis of A) the forcing of the northern-autumn (Sept. -
Oct.) circulation anomalies over the Pacific in order to reveal potential
feedback of the anomalous Asian summer-monsoon rainfall on the subsequent El
Nino/La Nina development, and B) of the potential extratropical forcing of
interannual-variability of the Asian summer-monsoons by Eurasian springtime
snow-cover anomalies. The research-tasks include: 1) Estimation of the
3-dimensional diabatic heating field (and transient eddy-flux convergence) from
the global ECWMWF-analyses data sets for this diagnostic project is based on
operational- analyses rather than GCM simulation of anomalous monsoons. 2)
Linear simulations with a multi-layer global steady primitive-equation model
linearized about a zonally-varying climatological flow -- a necessary first-step
in such dynamical- diagnostic analysis. (Meeting this prerequisite will also
allow identification of the most consistent diabatic-heating estimate.) A
'direct-access' adaptation of an LU decomposition method should permit higher
linear-model resolution than previously possible. 3) Identification of the
characteristic structure of the El Nino-related heating anomalies over the
tropical Pacific and Indian oceans during March - May and June - August periods,
and a computation of their remote response over Asia. The remote impact of just
the Pacific-basin heating anomalies will also be assessed. 4) Calculation of the
'Himalayan-Tibetan orography' - forced anomalous circulation during all recent
summers, and an examination of its phase in the Asian lower troposphere vis-a-
vis that of the remotely-forced anomalous thermal response. This aspect of the
proposed research may help explain the basis for the perplexing threshold-
dependence in the Monsoon-El Nino linkage. Results of a pilot study are
indicative of the potential insight that such dynamical-diagnostic analysis can
provide in improving our understanding of the interactions (and potential
feedback) between anomalous Asian summer-monsoons and El Nino/La Nina episodes--
the two global-scale climate anomalies whose understanding, simulations and
ultimately prediction will be central to the success of the TOGA/GOALS missions.