* 9316863
* A Thermodynamic Scale for the B-sheet Forming Tendencies of the Amino Acids
* BIO,MCB
* 03/01/1994,08/31/1997
* Lynne Regan, Yale University
* Continuing Grant
* Marcia Steinberg
* 08/31/1997
* USD 260,000.00

Regan 9316863 Amino acids have distinct conformational preferences that
influence the stabilities of protein secondary and tertiary structure. The
degree to which different amino acids favor the formation of a particular
secondary structure is important in understanding the relationship between
protein sequence and structure. In the case of a-helices, a number of studies
have determined a thermodynamic scale of the helix-forming tendencies of the
amino acids. There is reasonable agreement among these studies and between these
experimentally determined preferences and the statistically observed preferences
in proteins of known structure. The study of B-sheets, on the other hand, has
not been similarly successful because of aggregation and solubility problems
with the model systems used to date. As a result, there has been only one
published attempt to generate an analogous scale for the B-sheet forming
tendencies of all the amino acids. The experiments proposed here will avoid the
difficulties of aggregation that other groups have encountered by using a small,
soluble, naturally occurring protein composed mostly of B-sheet as the model
system. The protein of choice for these studies is the 56 residue IgG-binding
binding domain of Streptococcal protein G ("B1"). This protein displays an
ideal, reversible two-state denaturation transition and its structure is known
at high resolution. To quantify the B-sheet forming tendency of the amino acids,
each of the amino acids will be substituted into an idealized "guest" position
in this protein. Thermal and chemical denaturation measurements will be made to
determine the free energy difference between each variant and a standard B1 with
Gly at the guest position and it is this difference that is considered to be a
measure of the guest's capacity for the B-sheet formation. These experiments
will provide both workable system for analyzing the factors involved in B-sheet
stability and a comprehensive quantitative sc ale of the B-sheet forming ability
of the amino acids. %%% Proteins are large molecules that perform many important
functions within a living cell. They are formed from 20 different types of
building blocks, called amino acids, the linear sequences of which dictates the
shape of the protein and what its function will be. The amino acids are not
strung together randomly, but rather they first form sub-assemblies, known as
secondary structures, that then associate to give the folded protein. There are
two types of secondary structure: alpha-helices and beta-sheets. This proposal
aims to determine a quantitative scale for how likely it is for each amino acid
to be found in beta-sheet secondary structure. This knowledge is of key
importance to the understanding of protein structure and the rational
modification and design of potentially useful, new proteins. ***