* 9316947
* Cellular Mechanism of Auxin-Induced Proton Excretion
* BIO,MCB
* 01/01/1995,12/31/1998
* Elizabeth Van Volkenburgh, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Barbara K. Zain
* 12/31/1998
* USD 210,000.00

9316947 VanVolkenburgh The PI, Dr. Elizabeth Van Volkenburgh proposes to
investigate the cellular mechanism of auxin-induced proton excretion in
protoplasts from Avena coleoptiles and tobacco plants. The goal of this research
is to determine how the hormone, auxin, activates the ATP-dependent proton-pump
in plasma membranes of growing cells. This hormone stimulates cell enlargement
in plants, and plays a fundamental role in regulating development during the
plants life cycle. It is hypothesized that this ligand initiates cascades of
cellular events that lead to pump activation, proton excretion, membrane
hyperpolarization, solute accumulation and cell growth. Electrophysiological
techniques, primarily whole cell patch clamp methods will be used to determine
the possible roles of suspected components of signal transduction cascades
leading to changes in ion flux across the plasma membrane. Cytoplasmic contents
will be equilibrated with the solution in the patch pipette containing either
substances that might initiate ion flux in the absence of auxin, or substances
that might block the response to auxin. The pH and pCa of the cytoplasm will be
manipulated to determine the effect of these ions of the auxin response. These
experiments will provide direct evidence concerning the role of cytoplasmic
components in auxin induced proton excretion. %%% Protoplasts will be isolated
from the known auxin-sensitive tissue, the Avena coleoptile, and from tobacco
mesophyll which reportedly shows an unusually rapid response to auxin.
Protoplasts will be characterized for responsiveness to auxin by measurement of
auxin-induced protoplasts swelling. The relationship between swelling and proton
excretion will be determined. The effect of auxin on the membrane potential of
tobacco leaf cells will be compared to that of coleoptiles using microelectrode
techniques. Both cell types will be investigated further with patch clamp
experiments, and the results will confirm or reject the reports of auxin effects
on tobacco protoplasts. The results of these experiments will serve as
foundation for further biotechnological manipulation of vascular plants. ***