* 9316698
* U.S.-Australia Cooperative Research: Systematics and        Biogeography of the East Indo-Pacific Orthotylini           (Insecta: Heteroptera: Miridae)
* O/D,OISE
* 03/01/1994,08/31/1997
* Adam Asquith, Bernice P Bishop Museum
* Standard Grant
* W. Y. B. Chang
* 08/31/1997
* USD 17,520.00

9316698 Asquith This award will support the travel expenses for Dr. Adam
Asquith, of the B. P. Bishop Museum Department of Entomology in Honolulu, to
enable him to make one visit each year over the next three years, to conduct
cooperative research with Dr. Gerasimos Cassis of the Department of Entomology
at the Australian Museum in Sydney. The collaborative work will focus on the
Miridae bugs from the Indo-Pacific Region. The Miridae is the largest family of
Heteroptera, containing over a third of all described species in this order. The
Miridae fauna of the east Indo-Pacific biogeographical area, including Australia
and Hawaii, remains largely unknown. This research will initiate a systematic
review of the tribe Orthotylini for this region. The work will provide
descriptions and identification keys for the fauna, hypotheses of evolutionary
relationships, tests of existing biogeographic models of the area, and propose
new hypotheses for Pacific Island biogeography. The collaborators will directly
benefit by combining the facilities and resources of the two largest systematic
entomology research collections in the Indo-Pacific, the Australian Museum and
the B. P. Bishop Museum. Support for Dr. Cassis to visit Hawaii is provided
through the Australian Department of Industry, Technology and Regional
Development.