* 9316488
* Regulation of Coronatine Biosynthesis in Pseudomonas        Syringae
* BIO,MCB
* 02/01/1994,01/31/1998
* Carol Bender, Oklahoma State University
* Continuing Grant
* Philip Harriman
* 01/31/1998
* USD 302,750.00

9316488 Bender The phytotoxin coronatine is an important virulence factor in
several plant disease caused by the phytopathogenic bacterium, Pseudomonas
syringae. Fundamental to understanding the molecular basis of pathogenicity is
to determine how virulence factors are modulated. Furthermore, the organization
and function of genes required for biosynthesis of bacterial phytotoxins has not
been intensively studied. A long-term goal of this research is to elucidate
mechanisms that regulate coronatine production in P. syringae. Coronatine has a
unique structure derived from two unrelated biosynthetic pathways: coronafacic
acid (CFA) is of polyketide origin, whereas coronamic acid (CMA), is an
ethylcyclopropyl amino acid derived from isoleucine. These two components are
substrate feeding studies and complementation analyses have been used to
identify regions of the coronatine biosynthetic cluster required for CFA and CMA
production and the coupling (cpl) gene which catalyze amide bond formation. In
this work, Northern blot analyses and transcriptional fusions will be utilized
to elucidate the transcriptional organization and regulation of the coronatine
biosynthetic cluster. The nature of the cpl promoter and factors which regulated
the cpl transcript will be identified using primer extension, deletion analysis
and gene fusions. The protein product of cpl will be overproduced and used to
study its enzymatic activity in vitro. The results will significantly enhance
our understanding of the regulatory controls and biosynthetic mechanisms
employed in phytotoxin production. This work is part of an international
collaborative effort to understand the mode of action, biosynthesis, and
regulation or coronatine production in P. syringae. %%% This research will aid
in our understanding of how some bacteria are able to infect plants while others
cannot. ***