* 9316321
* Probing the nfrastructure of T4 Deoxycytidylate Deaminase
* BIO,MCB
* 01/01/1994,06/30/1997
* Gladys Maley, Health Research Incorporated/New York State Department of Health
* Continuing Grant
* Marcia Steinberg
* 06/30/1997
* USD 285,000.00

Maley 9316321 Deoxycytidylate deaminase provides a product which is essential as
a substrate for thymidylate synthase and thus DNA synthesis. Any interference
with the expression of either enzyme can result in a severe imbalance (toxicity)
of nucleotide synthesis in the cell. An ultimate goal is to optimize toxicity in
tumor cells and minimize the effect on normal cells. By understanding the
properties and structure of these critical enzymes it may be possible to
rationally design compounds which can achieve the above stated goal. Now, for
the first time two sources (T4 and human) of deoxycytidylate deaminase are
available and have been expressed in large enough quantities to begin x-ray
crystallographic studies on their structure. Since deoxycytidylate deaminase is
an allosteric enzyme very finely regulated within the cell and in vitro by its
positive effector, dCTP, and its negative effector, dTTP, it provides the
opportunity to clarify the mechanism of allosteric regulation. From the
crystallographic data it may be possible to design better inhibitors of
deoxcytidylate deaminase than those already available such as
tetrohydrodeoxyuridylate and pyrimidine- 2-one deoxyribosemonophosphate. In any
case better inhibitors could complement or synergize the action of thymidylate
synthase inhibitors as well. Deoxycytidylate deaminase is a metalloprotein with
2 mols of zinc per subunit of the T4 enzyme and 1 mol of zinc per subunit of the
human enzyme. Mutational studies will determine the binding sites for zinc in
the two enzymes as well as the ligand binding sites. The crystallographic data
will also contribute to location of the zinc atoms and different ligands within
the sequence of the protein. An additional aspect of the current study involves
the possible role of deoxycytidylate deaminase in stabilizing the T4 multienzyme
aggregate, dNTP synthetase complex. %%% Deoxycytidylate diaminase catalyzes the
conversion of dCMP to dUMP and thus provides an esse ntial substrate for
thymidylate synthetase to produce dTMP. Since dTMP is absolutely required for
DNA synthesis, its regulation is essential to cell growth and survival. In
diverse organisms, deoxycytidylate deaminase is allosterically regulated by its
end products, dCTP and dTTP, and plays a central role in determining the
cellular balance of the nucleotides. ***