* 9316148
* Resonance Emission Studies of Intra- and Intermolecular Ultrafast Dynamics
* NONE,NONE
* 12/15/1993,05/31/1998
* Lawrence Ziegler, Trustees of Boston University
* Continuing grant
* Francis J. Wodarczyk
* 05/31/1998
* USD 389,300.00

9316148 Ziegler In this project of the Experimental Physical Chemistry Program
in the Chemistry Divison, Prof. L. Ziegler of Boston University will extend
previous studies of ultrafast dynamics in isolated molecules to the condensed
phase and clusters, so as to study the effects of the embedding bath on
processes in the excited electronic state of the molecule. Spontaneous Raman and
fluorescence light scattering techniques will be used to 1) probe the time
scales, amplitudes and motional character of solvent/bath descriptions and to
determine microscopic details of how these degrees of freedom couple to
electronic excita- tions, and 2) how the bath interactions affect the photo-
chemical dynamics of the quasi-bound excited state photodisso- ciation of these
chromophores. Well characterized molecules embedded in clusters, solutions, and
high pressure gases will be investigated. Resonance lineshapes, depolarization
ratios, and quantum yields will be measured to determine the vibrational and
rotational level dependent dephasing and relaxation rates. Chemical reactions
usually require the elevation of molecules to excited states of energy. Since
the chemistry of molecules under conditions of high pressure, in solution, or
embedded in a solid matrix or in a cluster is affected by their environment, it
is important to know and understand these changes in order improve the
technology based on chemical reactions. The research undertaken in this project
will provide a data base and theoretical model for the reaction kinetics and
dynamics of well characterized molecules which are embedded in a condensed phase
medium. ***