* 9316475
* The ACC Synthase Genes and Polypeptides
* BIO,MCB
* 01/15/1994,12/31/1999
* Athanasios Theologis, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* DeLill Nasser
* 12/31/1999
* USD 500,000.00

9316475 Theologis The specific aims of the proposal are : 1) To isolate and
structurally characterize the rest of the tomato ACC synthase genes. To
characterize the expression characteristics of each tomato gene during growth
and development and to define the type of inducer(s) responsible for their
induction. To characterize the expression characteristics of the Arabidopsis
ACS4 and ACS5 genes in the presence of indoleacetic acid (IAA) and Li+,
respectively. To define the cisacting elements for IAA inducibility of the
Arabidopsis ACS4 and Li+ responsive elements of the ACS5 gene. The elements will
be defined by ExoIII deletion analysis of the promoter regions. Promoter
constructs with the CAT reporter gene will be transiently assayed in Arabidopsis
protoplasts. The functionally of the elements will be verified by stable
transformation experiments. To inhibit growth of rice under hypoxia using
antisense OS-ACs1 RNA and to define the cell types that express two rice genes
OS-ACS1 and 3 under low O2 tension. To define the critical residues required for
enzymatic activity of ACC synthase by in vitro mutagenesis and expression
experiments in E. coli. To perform intermolecular complementation experiments in
E. coli for determining whether ACC synthase is a dimer with two active sites.
To inhibit ethylene dependent developmental processes by overexpression of
dominant negative mutations of specific isoenzymes. To biochemically
characterize the Arabidopsis ACC synthase isoenzymesfor defining their
biochemical diversity. %%% Ethylene is an unique plant signaling molecule. The
hydrocarbon gas, known as the fruit ripening hormone, controls many aspects of
plant growth and development, and its synthesis is highly regulated. Recent
experimental evidence indicates that the key enzyme in the ethylene biosynthetic
pathway, 1-aminocyclopropane-1- carboxylic acid (ACC) synthase is encoded by a
highly divergent multigene family in various mono-and dicotyledonous plant s.
The members of each family are differentially regulated by various inducers and
developmental stages. Studies on the structure and regulation of the ACC
synthase genes in tomato (Lycopersicon esculentum), rice (Oryza sativa) and
Arabidopsis thaliana are proposed here to gain insight into the details of the
biochemical mechanisms that regulate their expression by various hormones and
stress conditions as well as their role in regulating plant growth. Furthermore,
in vitro mutagenesis studies are proposed to obtain fundamental knowledge about
the structure and function of the ACC synthase protein. ***