* 9316059
* Adularia-Gold Vein Systems of the Jarbidge Mountains,       Nevada, and their Relation to Faulting and Volcanism
* GEO,EAR
* 01/01/1994,12/31/1998
* Marco Einaudi, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* David Lambert
* 12/31/1998
* USD 160,000.00

9316059 Einaudi The focus of recent studies of epithermal deposits has been on
sources and physiochemical characteristics of hydrothermal fluids in the context
of geothermal analogy. Less well studied are links between such fluids and
tectonic- volcanic evolution in a given ore district. This link will be studied
in the Jarbidge Rhyolite and associated epithermal Au-Ag veins, Jarbidge mining
district, Nevada. The primary questions to be addressed are: (1) style of
volcanism and relation to tectonics and structural evolution, (2) spatial and
temporal links between hydrothermal activity and the plutonic-volcanic-tectonic
cycle, (3) absolute age, duration, and cyclicity of faulting, volcanism, and
hydrothermal activity, and (4) vertical and lateral changes in hydrology and
hydrothermal fluid characteristics as a function of time, space, and
topographic/recharge characteristics at the paleosurface. Detailed mapping will
document the space-time distribution and relative ages of volcanic rocks,
faults, and hydrothermal veins and alteration. Sample collection, binocular
study of rock slabs and petrographic studies of thin sections will be concurrent
with mapping. Laboratory studies will focus on mineralogical and chemical
characterization of volcanic rocks and hydrothermal alteration products, fluid
inclusion studies of vein minerals, and age dating of sanidine and adularia by
high- precision 40Ar/39Ar techniques. The research will allow further
interpretation of the tectonic and volcanic control of other epithermal
districts.