* 9316443
* Hydrologic, Geomorphic, &amp; Chronologic Record of Paleofloods,Lake-Building Events &amp; Climate Change During the Late Quat- ernary: Analysis of Integrated Fluvial/Pluvial Lake
* GEO,EAR
* 05/15/1994,04/30/1996
* Stephen Wells, University of California-Riverside
* Continuing Grant
* L. Douglas James
* 04/30/1996
* USD 133,606.00

9316443 Wells Climate variations and hydrologic responses are recorded in
numerous sedimentologic and geomorphic features, including lacustrine sequences
and fluvial landforms. Pleistocene Lake Manly in Death Valley was the end point
for river discharges during the Quaternary. The supply of runoff was from three
major sources: The Owens River system draining the eastern slopes of the Sierra
Nevada in response to glacial meltwaters, the Mojave River draining the San
Bernardino Mountains in response to precipitation due to orographic uplift over
the Transverse Ranges, and the Amargosa River which heads in the lower Black and
Timber Mountains. Presently, the Amargosa is the only river to flow into Death
Valley. This project will address 1) how the Amargosa River acquired its surface
flow, from anamolous climatic conditions, or from groundwater, and 2) the
relative role the Amargosa River discharge has in contributing to lake-building
events in Death Valley during the late Quaternary. Understanding the geomorphic
and hydrologic evolution of the Amargosa River system is important for the
following reasons; (1) It contributions a significant 15,540 Km2 to the total
potential drainage area of Death Valley in the late Quarternary (Hunt et al.,
1966) (2) Amargosa River surface runoff comes from a low-elevation drainage
system that may serve as a paleoclimatic indicator of late Quaternary climatic
regimes unaffected by glaciation or high elevation orographic precipitation. (3)
The drainage basin of the Amargosa River lies on the periphery of
climatic/physiographic zones where it has the potential to indicate large-scale
climatic fluctuations preserved in fluvial/lacustrine sediments. (4) it drains
the potential site of the nations's proposed high-level radioactive waste
repository at Yucca Mountain, Nevada. We propose to (a) reconstruct the late
quaternary flood history of the Amargosa River (b) determine the modern
hydrologic and climatic conditions for floo ding (c) reconstruct late Quaternary
lake-building events in Death Valley and (d) the late Quaternary flood histories
of the major drainages and their relationship to paleoclimate dynamics. ***