* 9316197
* Experimental Petrology and Geochemistry of Continental Rift Volcanics:  Petrogenesis of Evolved, Alkaline Magmas
* GEO,EAR
* 06/01/1994,11/30/1998
* Richard Wendlandt, Colorado School of Mines
* Continuing Grant
* David Lambert
* 11/30/1998
* USD 134,000.00

9316197 Wendlandt The proposed research involves experimental investigations of
alkali basalts, demonstrated by previous geochemical and inverse-approach
experimental studies to be parental to voluminous, rift-associated, volcanic
occurrences. High pressure and temperature forward-approach melting experiments
will be used to characterize the processes and the physical and chemical
conditions within the crust necessary for the genesis of these lavas. Specific
experimental objectives are: (1) to determine liquid lines of descent
(fractionation paths) for melts derived by equilibrium partial melting or
crystallization of alkali basalt compositions for a range of mid-crustal to
upper mantle pressures and temperatures; (2) to determine the compositions of
mineral phases present at these pressure and temperature conditions; (3) to
characterize residual phase assemblages (cumulate lithologies); and (4) to
compare compositions of phases from alkali basalt melting experiments with those
documented at liquidus conditions for intermediate composition lavas. The
results of the proposed experimental and analytical studies will provide a basis
for evaluating polybaric paths for melt evolution at crustal conditions and
enable development of integrated models for continental models for continental
rift structure and evolution and for the involvement of crust in rifting
processes.