* 9316767
* The Role of Snow in Antarctic Sea Ice Development           and Ocean-Atmosphere Energy Exchange
* O/D,OPP
* 09/01/1994,08/31/1999
* Martin Jeffries, University of Alaska Fairbanks Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Bernhard Lettau
* 08/31/1999
* USD 450,986.00

The goal of this investigation is to understand the role of snow in sea ice
development processes and air-ice-ocean heat exchange interactions in the
seasonal and perennial sea ice zones of the Ross Sea, the Amundsen Sea, and the
Bellingshausen Sea. Observations and measurements of the characteristics of sea
ice and snow will be combined with numerical models of sea-ice flooding and the
entrainment of snow into the ice cover in order to gain an understanding of the
sea-ice heat and mass balance, and to quantify the energy exchange within the
antarctic sea-ice cover. The snow measurement program, using the RVIB Nathaniel
B. Palmer, will include depth, grain size and morphology, density, temperature,
thermal conductivity, water content, and stable isotope ratio. The ice
measurement program will include thickness, salinity, temperature, density,
brine content, and included gas volume, as well as such structural properties as
the fraction of frazil, platelet, and congelation ice in the seasonal antarctic
pack ice. Differences in ice types are the result of differences in the
environment in which the ice forms: frazil ice is formed in supercooled sea
water, normally through wind or wave-induced turbulence, while platelet and
congelation ice is formed under quiescent conditions. The fraction of frazil ice
is an important variable in the energy budget of the upper ocean, and
contributes significantly to the stabilization of the surface layers. The
numerical models will involve the thermodynamics of phase changes from liquid
water to ice, along with the resulting energy transfer, brine expulsion, and the
modulating effect of a snow cover. The results are expected to have broad
relevance and application to understanding the effects of sea-ice processes in
global change, and atmospheric, oceanographic, and remote sensing investigations
of the Southern Ocean.