* 9316434
* Vertebrate Breathing:  Control by pH and Gas Oscillations
* BIO,IOS
* 04/01/1994,09/30/1997
* Robert Furilla, University of Puerto Rico Medical Sciences Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Stacia A. Sower
* 09/30/1997
* USD 168,734.00

9316434 Furilla Blood passing through the lungs of air-breathing animals picks
up oxygen and eliminates carbon dioxide on inspiration when fresh air enters the
lung, but not on expiration. This process leads to rhythmic oscillations in the
level of oxygen and carbon dioxide in the blood leaving the lungs. Recently, a
relationship was shown between these oscillations and respiration in mammals.
Moreover, the rate at which carbon dioxide rises may be an adequate stimulus in
controlling breathing frequency. These oscillations are not only influenced by
breathing, but are also altered by the state of activity (e.g. exercise).
Therefore, it is the purpose of this study to examine the role of lung and blood
gas oscillations on the control of breathing in birds and reptiles. These
studies are possible because birds and snakes (unlike mammals) have lungs that
are open at both ends, making it possible to pass air through the lung in one
direction only. Oxygen and carbon dioxide will then be made to oscillate in the
airstream. The effect of these oscillations on nerves that respond to these
gases will be recorded. In another series of experiments, the effect of the
oscillations on breathing will be examined. A computer will monitor breathing
and control gas mixing; therefore, the animal can control the gas mixer with its
breathing movements, thereby controlling its blood gases. The contribution of
nerves monitoring lung and blood gases as well as interactions between these
nerves and the central nervous system will be examined. This information will
provide insight into the influence of these dynamic processes in air-breathing
animals, including mammals. ***