* 9316125
* Cytoskeletal Systems and Calcium Pulses, Waves, and         Gradients in Ooplasmic Segregation and Cytokinesis in the   Egg of the Medaka (Oryzias latipes), a Teleost
* BIO,MCB
* 05/15/1994,04/30/1998
* Richard Fluck, Franklin and Marshall College
* Continuing Grant
* Barbara K. Zain
* 04/30/1998
* USD 223,563.00

9316125 Fluck The PI and his students will continue to study the roles of
cytoskeletal systems and cytosolic calcium pulses, waves, and gradients in
ooplasmic movements and cytokinesis in the medaka egg. The objectives of the
research are: a) to describe the spatial and temporal organization of
microtubules during ooplasmic segregation; b) to determine whether microtubules
and a microtubule-associated motor (kinesin) are involved in the segregation of
a specific class of cytoplasmic organelles (oil droplets) toward the vegetal
pole of the cell, c) to determine whether the artificial induction of a
cytosolic calcium gradient will organize ooplasmic segregation, d) to determine
whether there is a causal relationship between zones of elevated calcium and
microtubule organization, e) to determine whether calcium pulses, waves, or
gradients accompany specific mitotic and cytokinetic events, and f) to determine
whether dissipation of cytosolic calcium gradients near the developing cleavage
furrow will inhibit cytokinesis. %%% Dr. Fluck and his students will continue to
study the mechanisms by which structural rearrangements and cell division take
place in fertilized eggs. The egg of the medaka fish provide an excellent system
for these studies. In particular they will study the roles of the internal
skeletal structures of cells (cytoskeletal systems) and pulses, waves and
gradients of intracellular calcium in regulating the movements of the egg's
internal structure, and in the division of the egg into two daughter cells. The
results of these studies will give us important new insight into the
physiological and structural bases of these two critical events in the early
development of a fertilized egg. ***