* 9316161
* Shapes of Protein-Macromolecule Complexes by Solid-State    Nuclear Magnetic Resonance
* BIO,MCB
* 04/01/1994,09/30/1997
* Jacob Schaefer, Washington University
* Continuing grant
* Kamal Shukla
* 09/30/1997
* USD 360,000.00

9316161 Schaefer Dr. Schaefer proposes new solid-state NMR experiments to
determine the structures of big, non-crystallizeable complexes of proteins with
macromolecules, including protein-protein cross-links in insect and plant cell
walls, protein-oligosaccahride complexes, and protein-DNA complexes. The
versatile rotational-echo double- resonance (REDOR) and transferred-echo double-
resonance (TEDOR) analytical methods that he has developed in the last five
years for the accurate determination of internuclear distances (and hence
geometry and structure), and the new combined TEDOR-REDOR and TEDOR-TEDOR
methods which he proposes to develop, are techniques that are directly
applicable to the analysis of big complexes. The sensitivity of solid-state NMR
for this kind of work already has been established in practical applications on
big proteins. Dr. Schaefer now routinely performs long-range distance
measurements on one umole of a 50-kD labeled protein complex embedded in an
ionic glass, an amount of protein commonly used for conventional solution-state
1H multi-dimensional NMR. %%% The practical applications of REDOR solid-state
NMR could lead both to new science and new biotechnology, the latter including
the biorational design of pesticides, herbicides, and drugs. Dr. Schaefer plans
to examine by NMR protein-protein cross-links in insect and plant cell walls,
protein-oligosacahride complexes, and protein-DNA complexes. These complexes
cannot be analyzed by other techniques because they are too big or are part of
too heterogeneous a matrix. He also proposes to use atomic force microscopy
(AFM) to characterize the global structure of some of the same protein complexes
that we examine by NMR. Protein complexes anchored on the undulations of glassy
polymer surfaces will be examined by non-perturbative "tapping-mode" AFM. The
combination of NMR and AFM experiments on the same protein systems will provide
an internal calibration (a self consistency check) and should lead to new
structural insights. ***