* 9316736
* Biochemical, Biophysical and Physiological Characterization of an Ice-Active Substance Released by Sea Ice Diatoms
* O/D,OPP
* 06/01/1994,05/31/1997
* James Raymond, University of South Alabama
* Standard Grant
* Polly A. Penhale
* 05/31/1997
* USD 79,649.00

9316736 Raymond Recently it has been shown that diatoms from sea ice platelets
in McMurdo Sound, Antarctica, release a proteinaceous, ice-active substance
that, at natural concentrations, causes dense pitting on the basal surfaces of
growing ice platelets. At present, only fish, insects and bacteria are known to
produce an ice-active substance. Thus, the ice-active substances associated with
sea- ice algae are of interest because it is the first to be associated with
algae, and it may provide new insights on how biomolecules interact with ice.
The objectives of this project are to biochemically, biophysically and
physiologically characterize the ice-active substance. On a biochemical and
biophysical level, the objectives are to purify the ice-active substance, to
determine its chemical composition and structure, and to characterize its effect
on the growth of ice crystals. On a physiological level, the objective is to
determine the relationship between algal production of ice-active substance and
the environment. More specifically, what is the temporal and spatial
distribution of the ice-active substance in McMurdo Sound, how is its production
influenced by temperature and light, and among which species and habitats is it
found? The long-term goal of project is to understand what role ice-active
substances play in the sea-ice algal community. ***