* 9316288
* The Hydroclimatology of the Continental-US                  Boundary Outflow
* GEO,EAR
* 04/15/1994,09/30/1995
* Konstantine Georgakakos, University of Iowa
* Standard Grant
* L. Douglas James
* 09/30/1995
* USD 40,668.00

19316288 Georgakakos One of the most important problems in hydroclimatology is
to understand the linkage between short period climate variability and surface
hydrologic variability on regional to continental scales. We propose to study
the relation between regional to continental scales. We propose to study the
relation between regional- continental scales hydrologic processes and monthly-
decade atmospheric variations using observed data, large-scale watershed budgets
and conceptual models to test hypothesized physical mechanisms. While data
availability precludes a comprehensive study over all of North America, the
conterminous United States domain includes a well-observed and important segment
of the spatial and temporal variability contained by the continent. Fifty years
of daily outflows through the boundaries of the continental United States have
been determined based on observations recorded by U.S.G.S. stations. By
integrating over monthly, seasonal and annual totals, effects of storage and
diversion are minimized. This newly created database will be used together with
existing climatic databases that span several decades. Primary goals of the
study include: (a) determination of the spatio-temporal scales of the
continental-United States outflow: (b) study sub-continental and regional
hydrologic budgets of the conterminous United States; (c) identification of
forcing/feedback mechanisms active on those scales in the atmosphere-land
system. The proposed research is a two year interdisciplinary effort involving
the hydrology Research group of the University of Iowa and the climate research
group of the Scripps Institutional of Oceanography. The proposed research is in
line with the stated research areas of the NRC report on Opportunities in the
Hydrologic Sciences (NRC, 1991, see also Georgakakos, 1992), as it tackles the
issues of continental and regional scale hydrology and atmosphere/land surface
interaction. Also, the proposed study is hig hly relevant to the GEWEX
(Continental Energy and Water Cycle Experiment) Continental-Scale International
Project (GCIP).