* 9316428
* Tree-Ring Dating of Alpine Fault Earthquakes, New Zealand
* GEO,EAR
* 03/15/1994,08/31/1996
* William Bull, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* John A. Maccini
* 08/31/1996
* USD 112,355.00

9316428 Bull Tree-ring dating of recent New Zealand earthquakes is an important
and robust test of lichenometric dating of regional rockfall events caused by
earthquakes. Lichen studies indicate that about 240 years have elapsed since the
most recent Alpine fault earthquake, and a magnitude 8.1 +0.2 earthquake may
soon rupture about 400 km of the Alpine fault. Verification of lichenometry
earthquake dates would substantiate needs for establishing seismic monitoring
and earthquake hazard reduction programs. Small patches of trees of the same age
are typical of the rain forest between the Alpine fault and the seacoast in the
South Westland district of New Zealand. Partial destruction of the forest canopy
by disturbance events, such as windstorms or earthquakes, allows a new
generation of rimu (Dacrydium cupressinum) to germinate and fill the gaps.
Regeneration patches appear to be larger on poorly drained (seismically
sensitive) soils of the Okarito Forest near the coast where we will make our
study. Increment-core estimates of germination times for even-age patches of
rimu in two plots at a more inland site were made by Boyd Cornere. His M.Sc.
thesis suggests that both plots had a canopy- opening disturbance approximately
250 years ago. These preliminary results encourage us to accurately date forest-
disturbance events through study of times of abrupt increase or decrease of
tree-ring widths. The proposed dendrochronology data set is a by-product of
selective logging in the Okarito sustained-yield forest. An initial phase of our
work will be to develop a model for spatial patterns of tree populations ages.
This important task will allow us to make predictions about the way seismic
shaking will affect tree-ring width. About 1000 mature rimu trees will be
harvested in 1993 and 1994. Departures from a standard chronology for rimu will
be identified by anomalous patterns of tree-ring widths and densities. We will
select, prepare, and analyz e 200-300 sections from basal rimu trunks for dates
of canopy-opening events, tree- damage events, and germination dates. Year 1--
Stand dynamics study of the Okarito Forest; sample collection, shipping, and
preparation; measuring and cross-dating of tree rings. Year 2-- studies and
dating of tree-ring anomalies, analysis of data, and report preparation. Our
project has multidisciplinary significance. Comparison of tree-ring and
lichenometric dates should validate a new surface- exposure dating method that
is more accurate than radiocarbon dating. We expect to determine the earthquake
recurrence intervals for the adjacent Cook and Brunner segments of the Alpine
fault, and the times since the most recent earthquakes. This will test the
hypothesis that a major earthquake is imminent. An ecological end product will
be improved understanding of forest dynamics and microenvironments, and forest-
landforms relations.