* 9316572
* The Macroscopic Theory of Process Control
* ENG,CBET
* 03/01/1994,08/31/1997
* Erik Ydstie, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Continuing Grant
* Maria Burka
* 08/31/1997
* USD 231,486.00

Abstract - Ydstie - 9316572 In systems engineering, computer science and
mathematical physics, there is interest in the study of complexity, global
system structures and macroscopic analysis. This is a consequence of advances
made in the stury of nonlinear dynamic systems. The interest can also be
motivated by industrial and societal needs - large systems must be modelled and
controlled in the face of a changing environment and significant uncertainty.
Interconnections between systems become increasingly complicated and the
decision making processes are integrated. The aim of this research is to develop
a macroscopic theory for process control. The first law of thermodynamics will
be used to develop a reduced complexity description of the process. The second
law will provide a mechanism for dissipation, and Lyapunov analysis will be
applied to establish sufficient conditions for the existence of stabilizing
controls. This theory is valid far from equilibrium and it can be applied to a
wide range of unsteady state control problems. A constructive method for control
system design will be derived. The method can be used to decide which variables
should be measured and manipulated, how nonlinear combinations of measurements
can be used and how equipment and equilibrium constraints limit the control
system performance. The theory will be applied to two systems. First, the idea
of microscopic reversiblity will be used to develop a complete theory for the
control of single stage, well mixed processes. Second, this will be generalized
to processes with several well mixed stages. u } cs, there is int erest in the
study ! ! ! ! F V V R Times Symbol " Helvetica Chicago Tms Rmn " Helv 1 Courier
B Script P London P Athens P San Francisco Cairo @ LosAngeles Palatino Mobile
&amp; Arial Narrow Book Antiqua Bookman Old Style &amp; Century Gothic 5 Courier
New F Monotype Corsiva Monotype Sorts Century Schoolbook Wingdings MT Extra
Apple LaserWriter II NT LPT3: pscript Apple LaserWriter II NT U D o d , X Z e *
@ @ @ " h &lt; \ E \ E O A ydstiabs93 Nichelle T. Coward Nichelle T. Coward