* 9316691
* GRGC:  Examining Isotopic Signals in the Geologic Record    Through a General Circulation Model Approach
* GEO,EAR
* 05/15/1994,04/30/1997
* Christopher Charles, University of California-San Diego
* Continuing Grant
* John A. Maccini
* 04/30/1997
* USD 99,546.00

9316691 Charles An impressive network of oxygen and hydrogen isotopic records
from ice cores, lake cores, deep sea cores and tree rings can now be compiled
for a variety of time periods. These records potentially offer quantitative
insight to past changes in climate processes, but their true climatic
significance cannot be fully realized without knowledge of the fundamental
driving forces for isotopes in precipitation. Simple air parcel models cannot
account for the range of processes which control regional isotope distributions,
and therefore the coupling of isotope tracers to a general circulation model
(GCM) represents a necessary first step towards a more complete understanding of
the isotope signals recorded in the geologic record. We propose to investigate
these isotopic records by means of the Goddard Institute for Space Studies
General Circulation Model (GISS GCM). The major issue we will pursue is how the
changes in sourcewater characteristics, air mass trajectories, and air mass
mixing-- all factors which must have varied over climate cycles with the major
components of the climate system--affect regional isotopic distributions. Over
the next two years, we will conduct a number of paleoclimatic simulations to
determine the sensitivity of the model moisture source contributions and isotope
fields to specific changes in boundary conditions (ice sheets, sea ice, sea
surface temperature, etc.) Results of the paleoclimatic simulations will be
compared to the observations, which we will compile. This data-model comparison
will help identify the components of Northern Hemisphere climate system that are
most important in shaping the isotope records. The comparison will also provide
a test for the reliability and sensitivity of the GCM's hydrological cycle.