* 9316078
* Mathematical Sciences: Cellular Modeling and Dynamical-     Systems Analysis of Spatial Patterns in Sedimentary Systems
* MPS,DMS
* 03/01/1994,08/31/1996
* Richard Moeckel, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Michael Steuerwalt
* 08/31/1996
* USD 68,504.00

9316078 Paola Researchers in various fields have shown that cellular
computational ("lattice gas") models can be of great utility in the study of
complex, spatially extended systems that resist conventional forms of analysis.
In such models the cells of a lattice interact according to rules based on
abstractions of the physics governing a system. This approach examines the
interactions between the parts of a system--interactions that lead to the
behavior of the system as a whole--and allows evaluation of what aspects of the
underlying detailed physics are most import to the overall dynamics. One main
goal of the proposed research is the development of a cellular-computational
model of braided streams that incorporates the basic physics of free-surface
flow over a movable bead. To date such models have usually been evaluated only
qualitatively due to a lack of a quantitative method of comparison between the
models and data from real systems. The second main goal of this project is to
develop new data-analysis techniques base=d on recent advances in dynamical-
systems mathematics that will facilitate quantitative testing of cellular-
computational methods. Our approach is to treat downstream series of
measurements in spatially extended systems like the time series of dynamical
systems. Graphs of spatial "attractors" that characterize the downstream
development of various geometrical variables, and discrete iterative plots that
show how the value of these variables influence the values further downstream,
both quantify the interactions between the parts of a spatially extended system
and characterize the behavior of a system as a whole. Analyses such as these,
applied to data from natural systems, laboratory experiments, and computational
models, will provide a more effective quantitative test of the models that
existing techniques. In the proposed projects such tests will be applied to the
braided-stream model mentioned above and to existing models of aeolian and
subaqueous bedforms, using data collected form laboratory and field examples of
all three systems. ***