* 9316129
* Metasomatic Processes and Platinum Group Element            Deposits in Layered Intrusions
* GEO,EAR
* 02/01/1994,07/31/1998
* Edmond Mathez, American Museum Natural History
* Standard Grant
* David Lambert
* 07/31/1998
* USD 104,200.00

9316129 Mathez The large layered mafic complexes are important because they
contain evidence for fundamental processes in igneous petrology and because
several contain economic deposits of various metals, including the platinum
group elements (PGEs). The essential question addressed by this project is what
is the role of post-cumulus, magmatic processes, in particular metasomatism, in
the formation of PGE-rich horizons. In order to investigate this question, two
related studies will be conducted. The first involves a detailed study of trace
element contents of pyroxene and other major phases of the Merensky reef and
adjacent rocks in the Atok area, northeast Bushveld Complex. A second study
involves the PGE-rich horizon of the Great Dyke. The horizon, which is known as
the MSZ, exhibits a characteristic geochemical stratigraphic profile whereby the
maximum concentrations of Ni, Cu, S and Au are found approximately 15 to 30 cm
higher in the stratigraphy than the maximum concentrations of Pt, Pd and the
other PGEs. A relationship will be sought between the profiles for the
chalcophile elements and incompatible element contents of pyroxene, which again
will be determined by ion probe. Se/S, As/S and Te/S ratios may help to
distinguish whether the sulfides were concentrated by mainly cumulate or
metasomatic processes.