* 9316433
* Neural Simulation Demonstrations July 31-August 7, 1993,    Bethesda, MD, and November 7-12, 1993, Washington, D.C
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/1993,07/31/1994
* James Bower, California Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Karen Sigvardt
* 07/31/1994
* USD 90,665.00

ABSTRACT 9316433 Bower "Neural Simulation Demonstrations at the Society for
Neuroscience Annual Meeting and at the Second Annual Computation &amp; Neural
Systems Meeting" This project is to demonstrate state of the art computer
simulation techniques in computational neuroscience at two major scientific
meetings. One meeting, the second annual Computation and Neural Systems meeting
will be held the first week of August in Washington DC. Approximately 300
scientists are expected to register and present a wide range of research results
in computational neuroscience. The second meeting is the annual meeting of the
Society for Neuroscience and will also be held in Washington, D.C. at the
beginning of November. This meeting will register upwards of 15,000
neurobiologists and represents the premier meeting on neurobiology in the world.
The primary purpose of the demonstrations are to expose large numbers of
neuroscientists to the use of computer simulation techniques in neurobiology. In
addition, the project will provide technical information on the methods used in
these simulations, the range of simulation software currently available, and
demonstrations of several aspects of new computer technology that are relevant
to efforts to simulate and understand the brain. This project is supported by
the Division of Integrative Biology and Neuroscience and the Computational
Biology Activities Program.***