* 9316040
* Delineating Heterogeneous Aquifer Properties:  Coupling     Seismic, Hydraulic and Tracer Data
* GEO,EAR
* 04/01/1994,03/31/1998
* Steven Gorelick, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* L. Douglas James
* 03/31/1998
* USD 346,139.00

9316040 Gorelick Understanding and describing subsurface heterogeneity is an
important problem in hydrology. Typically, data are sparse and yet aquifers have
properties that vary tremendously in space. By simultaneously using different
tyes of data to delineate aquifer heterogeneities and determine hydraulic
parameter values, maps of aquifer properties can be determined that are far more
accurate than maps developed based on analysis of each type of data by itself.
In fact, individual analysis of data sets may lead to maps of aquifer properties
that are inconsistent with each other. In order to develop a consistent imate of
spatially variable aquifer properties we propose to develop a coupled approach
in which cross well seismic tomography is combined with hydraulic head data and
solute tracer data. Measurements from the three independently collected data
sets are incorporated into the inverse method through numerical solutions to the
equations governing seismic wave propagation, groundwater flow, and solute
transport. We match simulated values to measured values using a "coupled model"
inverse approach. Two pilot studies are presented to indicate the logical
starting point for this proposed research effort. We will develop two estimation
approaches for aquifer property delineation and apply them to the Savannah River
Site, which is well characterized. Cross well seismic traveltime data, tracer
test data, and hydraulic head data have all been collected at this site. A
unified approach will be developed based upon the relative success of our two
approaches.