* 9316565
* U.S. -Russia Joint Cooperative Research:  Charge Transfer   and Translocation in Biological Membranes
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/1994,08/31/1997
* William Cramer, Purdue Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Kamal Shukla
* 08/31/1997
* USD 49,000.00

9316565 Cramer The objective of the project is to obtain deeper insight into
physical mechanisms of the charge transfer processes in biological membranes, in
particular electron transfer in membrane-bound cytochromes and polar amino acid
translocation across membranes. Physico-chemical experimental and theoretical
studies of spectra, electrochemistry, and kinetics of model proteins and heme
complexes would be combined with biochemical, biophysical crystallographic, and
molecular biological analysis of the structure-function of photosynthetic
electron transport proteins (cytochromes) and ion translocation of a bacterial
ion channel (colicin). The problems whose understanding will be advanced as a
result of these studies are as follows: the specific features of the dielectric
reorganization of proteins and their surroundings in biological charge transfer
processes; the mechanism of electron transfer in cytochromes including effects
of electrostatic fields on the heme redox potentials, inner-sphere
reorganization, reorganization of dielectric environment (membrane core, lipid
heads), and electronic coupling via alpha-helices; mechanism of docking and
electron transfer in the cytochrome f-plastocyanin system; the physical basis of
the "cis-positive rule," describing orientation of intramembrane proteins;
mechanism of trans-membrane channel formation by colicin and related toxin-like
molecules. %%% The object of the project is to obtain a better understanding of
the mechanism by which electrical charge is transferred or prevented from being
transferred in the membranes that border and contain biological materials. The
processes of charge movement in membranes are closely related to the mechanisms
of cellular energy storage that take place in these membranes, and of the
translocation of proteins across membranes that is associated with in the
assembly of cellular structures and of the membranes themselves. ***