* 9316099
* Physically-Based Simulation of the Evolution and Flow       Characteristics of Natural Fracture Networks
* GEO,EAR
* 03/15/1994,09/30/1996
* David Pollard, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* John A. Maccini
* 09/30/1996
* USD 63,987.00

9316099 Pollard An understanding of the geometry of natural fracture networks is
essential for accurate interpretations of the geologic past and for meaningful
models of seismic wave propagation and fluid flow and transport through
fractured formations. Further, the degree to which the geometry of natural
fracture systems can be accurately simulated directly affects our ability to
deal with such important problems as waste isolation, ore deposit genesis,
natural resource recovery and aquifer remediation. This proposal seeks to
increase our understanding of the parameters which control the geometric
characteristics of natural fracture networks by incorporating well established
physical principles into models for the generation of natural fracture networks.
Previous investigations have demonstrated that physically-based fracture network
simulators (PBNSs) can accurately predict the evolution of experimentally
generated fracture sets. This proposal seeks to identify appropriate values for
the parameters which control the growth of natural fracture networks by
comparing simulated networks to those observed on outcrops. Knowledge of the
appropriate values for these growth parameters is essential for accurate
simulation of natural fracture network geometries. This proposal also seeks to
apply the PBNS in an analyses of the conductivity of simulated networks in order
to discern the critical geometric parameters controlling fluid flow within
fractured formations. The identification of these geometric parameters, when
combined with the appropriate growth parameter values, will result in more
accurate interpretation of, and for, fluid migration through fractured
formations. Models for natural fracture networks which result from this work
will improve our understanding of how fracture systems are created by, and
influence other, geologic features and processes. This understanding will
enhance our ability to accurately model many important sub-sur face processes
and, as such, has application to many problems in earth science. Such problems
include, but are not limited to, seismic inversion, natural resource recovery
and structural mechanics of the earth's crust.