* 9316875
* GRGC: High Resolution (Century to Dacadal) Isotopic         (18O and 13C) Record Preserved in Speleothem  Calcite:      Holocene Vegetation and Climate Change in the Midwest
* GEO,EAR
* 06/01/1994,05/31/1997
* Luis Gonzalez, University of Iowa
* Continuing Grant
* John A. Maccini
* 05/31/1997
* USD 145,000.00

9316875 Gonzalez The eastern portion of Iowa and surrounding states, Minnesota,
Wisconsin, Illinois, and Missouri are characterized by the presence of a well
developed karst in which cave development is extensive. We propose to study the
stalagmite age and isotopic record in three to four different "basins" in a
region encompassing the karsted southern edge of the Prairie Peninsula where the
Holocene history of the peninsula is virtually unknown. This research
compliments current and proposed research by R. G. Baker and others that study
the palynological, plant macrofossil and soil record and attempts to fill
information gaps in the Holocene vegetation and climatic history. We propose to
use the picomole to subpicomole resolution of combined isotope dilution and mass
spectrometry U-Th methods to accurately date speleothems (stalagmites) and the
carbon and oxygen isotopic composition of calcite to extract a record reflecting
climatic change. The goals of these research are; 1) Better define the extent of
the climate-induced vegetation change in the upper Midwest utilizing delta 13C
shifts and U-series dates; 2) Provide a more precise and accurate timing of
climate-induced vegetation change in the region; 3) Attempt to generate a
quantitative record of temperature change at the decadal scale for the Midwest;
4) Attempt to define rates of vegetation change and biomass turnover over the
cave areas using changes in the delta 13C; 5) Attempt to resolve annual and
possibly semi-annual changes in speleothem calcite; 6) Provide a well dated
history of changes in the southern edge of the Prairie Peninsula; 7) Attempt to
estimate precipitation from growth rate changes. Multiple speleothems will be
analyzed within individual basins and caves to replicate and validate timing and
magnitude of isotopic shifts, growth rate changes, or the presence of basin wide
desiccation events. Careful attention will be given to cave selection with
special emphasis in the identificati on of evidence of desiccation and flooding
events which will diminish and validity and utility of isotopic analysis for
climatic inferences. Attempt will be made to find study sites in close proximity
to those being studies by Baker and others so that precise timing for vegetation
changes can be provided.