* 9316006
* U.S.-Australia Joint Workshop: New Directions in            Nonparametric Curve Estimation / Canberra, Australia /      June 1994
* O/D,OISE
* 01/01/1994,06/30/1995
* Iain Johnstone, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Charles Wallace
* 06/30/1995
* USD 24,505.00

9316006 Johnstone This award will support the participation of twelve senior and
junior investigators to participate in a workshop on nonparametric curve
estimation to be held in Canberra, Australia at the end of June 1994. The
American organizer is Prof. Iain Johnstone of the Department of Statistics at
Stanford University. The Australian Co-organizers are Prof. Peter Hall and Dr.
Prakash Patil of the Australian National University in Canberra. This workshop
is being conducted under the U.S.- Australia Cooperative Science Program and
support in Australia is provided through the Department of Industry, Technology
and Regional Development (DITARD). Curve estimation is a vital part of
contemporary statistical methodology. It plays an important role in many
industrial applications and in econometrics. The workshop will address new
directions in curve estimation by bringing together some of the most active and
authoritative workers in the field. The aim of the workshop is to provide a
forum for discussing new developments in the subject with a view to determining
the most appropriate new directions for future research and the most promising
new methods of data analysis. In addition to the Australian and American
participants, statisticians from Canada, Switzerland and the United Kingdom, one
from each nation, will also be taking part in this workshop.