* 9316888
* U.S.-China Cooperative Research: Joint China-U.S.-Japan     Seminar on Mathematical Program Solving, Shanghai,          October 1993
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/1993,02/29/1996
* Jerry Becker, Southern Illinois University at Carbondale
* Standard Grant
* Alice C. Hogan
* 02/29/1996
* USD 15,300.00

9316888 Becker This award supports participation of five US mathematics
educators in a joint US-China-Japan seminar on mathematical problem solving. The
seminar will be held in China in October 1993. Papers and discussion at the
seminar will deal with the present states of problem solving research in the
three countries: comparison of student performance in problems solving,
including word problems and language factors; mathematical model making in
problem solving; students' consciousness of the processes which are used in
solving problems and arriving at solutions; pre and in-service teacher
education; assessment and evaluation of learning in teaching/learning problem
solving; technology use in problem solving; and analyses of the goals of
mathematics education when emphasis is placed on problem solving and technology
use. Factors and issues that promote educational achievement in problem solving
will be identified. This seminar holds promise for advancement of knowledge
since Japanese and Chinese researchers have strong interests in problem solving
research, and have produced important work in the area. The noted success of the
educational systems in Japan and Asia will be explored in the area of math
education, providing a basis for future collaboration and exchange of research
findings.