* 9316659
* RUI: Characterization of Paleoceanographic Disturbances in Haitian Upper Cretaceous/Danian Series
* NONE,NONE
* 03/01/1994,02/28/1997
* Florentin Maurrasse, Florida International University
* Standard Grant
* John A. Maccini
* 02/28/1997
* USD 56,885.00

9316659 Maurasse The Cretaceous/Tertiary (K/T) boundary beds in the Southern
Peninsula of Haiti are of special interest because of the stratigraphic
continuity of the sequences, and because structures in the marker beds may offer
succession of events that will allow for the characterization of oceanic
disturbances that affected the deep basin of the Caribbean Sea. Our most recent
investigation of an extended area of the Beloc Formation suggest that different
outcrops in the area may provide key lithologic and biostratigraphic data
necessary to determine whether or not the disruptive phenomenon recorded at the
boundary is single or multiple. Although the genesis of the marker beds is
unresolved, preliminary correlation of diverse sequences in the area suggests
that some of the structures are caused by extraordinary waves of translation in
deep water rather than from turbidity currents. The hypothesis of such giant
waves is compatible with predicted models of potential disturbances expected to
take place in the water column in conjunction with an oceanic target site (Gault
and Sonett, 1982; O'Keefe and Ahrens, 1982; Ahrens and O'keefe, 1983; Sonett et
al., 1991). This project will focus specifically on the detailed analysis of
amalgamated beds that show physical evidence of poorly understood oceanic
disturbances recorded in the transitional series at several additional locations
in the Peninsula. The results will provide additional data to: 1) further
characterize the oceanic disturbances(s) that led to the genesis of reworked
marker beds in deep-water basins; 2) find a viable solution for unexplained
fossil mixing in deep-ocean basins observed worldwide at the K/T boundary; 3)
better understand the magnitude of oceanic mixing that could have been caused by
an impact.