* 9316720
* Thermochronologic Constraints on the Formation of the       Transantarctic Mountains, Antarctica
* O/D,OPP
* 05/01/1994,10/31/1998
* Paul Fitzgerald, University of Arizona
* Continuing Grant
* Scott Borg
* 10/31/1998
* USD 286,183.00

9315831 Fitzgerald This award supports a study of the thermal evolution of the
Shackleton Glacier region of the Transantarctic Mountains using fission track
and 40Ar/39Ar thermochronology. The goal is to use the thermal history of the
rocks (temperature-time data that dates the time of cooling) to infer the timing
and rate of uplift and denudation of the region. This information will, in turn,
allow constraints on mechanistic models for uplift of the range on the
southwestern edge of the Ross Embayment. The first year of the award will be
used to analyze rocks from existing collections and to prepare for field work in
the second year. The Shackleton Glacier region is the focus of new field work
because it represents a substantial crustal block that is between two segments
of the Transantarctic Mountains which have already been extensively studied. The
sampling strategy is to collect vertical profiles from basement rocks at regular
intervals across, and along the length of, the Transantarctic Mountains. This
strategy minimizes the potential for complications and ambiguities which can
result from unmapped faults in the region and maximizes the potential for a good
estimate of the cooling history. This new field work will test the hypothesis
that the Transantarctic Mountains is segmented, with each segment having a
distinct uplift history. The data on the time of cooling at each of several
vertical profiles is basic information on the geologic development of the
region. These data will be used to infer the uplift and denudation history for
each locality. The geographic patterns that emerge will help to constrain the
tectonic evolution of the central Transantarctic Mountains and they will place
constraints on a diversity of geologic problems from Gondwana breakup and
development of the Ross Embayment to development of the Cenozoic ice sheets of
Antarctica. ***