* 9316416
* RUI: Metabolism of Carbofuran: cloning and characterization of the hydrolase and hydroxylase genes
* BIO,MCB
* 04/15/1994,09/30/1997
* G. Rasul Chaudhry, Oakland University
* Standard Grant
* Robert Uffen
* 09/30/1997
* USD 188,000.00

Chaudhry 9316416 Carbamates and benzofurans are toxic pesticides that may be
slowly biodegraded by microorganisms. This occurs as a hydrolytic process in
some cells and as an oxidative process in others, and sometimes results in the
release of more toxic intermediates than the pesticides themselves. We have
chosen to study degradation of carbofuran
(2,3-dihydro-2,2-dimethyl-7-benzofuranyl methylcarbamate) as a model compound to
investigate the biochemical pathways and genetic determinants involved in the
microbial degradation process. In previous studies several microorganisms were
isolated that can utilize carbofuran as sole source of carbon or nitrogen. One
of these, Pseudomonas sp. 50432, has the unique ability to metabolize carbamate
by utilizing both hydrolytic and oxidative degradation pathways. Carbamates are
hydrolyzed by a constitutively synthesized enzyme, while oxidation of the
compound occurres only after the induction of the oxidative pathway. In the
present research plan, we will: 1) isolate and purify the hydrolase involved in
carbofuran degradation; 2) perform biochemical and molecular comparison of the
Pseudomonas sp. 50432 hydrolase with enzymes in other microorganisms; and 3)
clone the carbofuran hydrolase gene. The results of this study are expected to
improve our understanding of the microbial catabolism of carbofuran and other
carbamates. In addition, these findings should provide the basis for developing
microbial agents capable of decontaminating soil and water polluted with
carbamates, as well as in devising strategies for improving the efficacy and
environmental safety of this group of pesticides. %%% Use of pesticides is vital
for agricultural productivity. However, some pesticides, in particular the
carbamate pesticides, are also toxic to animals and, although they may be slowly
removed from the biosphere by microbes, this process is slow. The pesticides are
now being found polluting ground water. In our laboratory, we will study how a
microbe, which we named Pseudomonas sp 50432, can degrade carbofuran, one of the
toxic polluting pesticides. To do this: 1) we will isolate and purify a key
enzyme, the hydrolase, involved in degrading carbofuran; 2) we will determine if
this enzyme is unique, or similar to enzymes in other related microbes; and 3)
finally, we will clone and sequence of hydrolase gene. The results of this study
are expected to improve our understanding of microbial destruction of carbofuran
and other carbamate pesticides. In addition, these findings should provide the
basis for developing microbial agents capable of decontaminating soil and water
polluted with carbamate pesticides, as well as in devising strategies for
improving the efficacy and the environmental safety of this group of pesticides.
***