* 9316045
* Support for Preparation and Curation of the Exxon Valdez    Collection
* BIO,DEB
* 12/15/1993,05/31/1996
* Sievert Rohwer, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Leonard Krishtalka
* 05/31/1996
* USD 95,000.00

9316045 Rohwer The support will allow preparation and curation of 1500 frozen,
oil-soaked carcasses salvaged in 1993 from the Exxon Valdiz oil spill under a
previous NSF award. These spring sea birds represent a unique series, as does
the presence of a number of threatened and rare species and ones poorly known in
collections. Graduate and work-study students will carry out the necessary
preparation and curatorial tasks, and at the same time receive training in bird
systematics and biodiversity studies. These salvaged pelagic birds will be
extremely important for systematic, developmental and ecological study of
plumage maturation, molt and skeletal variation. %%% In 1993, ornithologists at
the University of Washington salvaged 1500 pelagic birds that had perished in
the Exxon Valdiz oil spill. These birds are all spring sea-birds, and thus
represent a unique series for studying avian development, plumage maturation,
molt patterns and other seasonal life-history phenomena. Preparation and
preservation of these oil-soaked carcasses will take special expertise and
techniques that have been perfected at the University of Washington. These
specimens will then be made available for ongoing and future research and
educational projects involving avian systematics, biodiversity and conservation
in the Pacific northwest. ***