* 9317425
* Selective Gene Regulation by Manganese and Iron in          Bacillus subtilis
* BIO,MCB
* 01/15/1994,12/31/1996
* John Helmann, Cornell Univ - State: AWDS MADE PRIOR MAY 2010
* Continuing Grant
* Philip Harriman
* 12/31/1996
* USD 285,000.00

9317425 Helmann This project seeks to define the role of two environmentally
important elements, iron and manganese, in gene regulation in the genetically
well-characterized soil microbe Bacillus subtilis. In preliminary studies, gene
fusions repressible by iron or manganese or both were identified. Three of these
metal-regulated genes were cloned and analyzed using molecular genetics. In B.
subtilis, iron regulation appears to involve a regulatory protein similar in DNA
binding specificity to the enteric Fur protein. There have been no Fur homologs
described to date from any gram positive organisms. Unlike the enteric Fur
protein, the B. subtilis iron-regulatory protein appears to discriminate against
manganese. In the enteric organisms manganese can mimic iron and repress
siderophore biosynthesis and other iron-regulated functions. In contrast,
production of sideropheres in B. subtilis is insensitive to manganese
repression. Conversely, our detection oh highly sensitive manganese-specific
transcriptional control suggests the presence of a novel type of
metalloregulatory system. This system may account, in part, for the many
striking effects of manganous ion on production of secondary metabolities in
Bacilli and other gram positive organisms. In Bacilli, iron and manganese appear
to control distinct, but overlapping regulons. For example, we have identified
sets of promoter fusions that respond selectively to iron but not manganese or
to manganese but not iron. In one case, we have genetically separated the iron
and manganese responses. These results suggest that these elements exert
specific and independent transcriptional control. However, the mechanisms
allowing cells to selectively detect these elements and mediated appropriated
transcriptional responses are largely unknown. We will define the global effects
of iron and manganese on gene regulation and determine the molecular basis of
selective gene regulation. Using protein gel electrophores is, we will identify
sets of metalloregulated proteins and determine the extent of cross-talk among
the different metal ion regulons. Metalloregulated genes will be isolated using
transposon Tn917-lacZ and the DNA sequence determinants of metalloregulation
defined. This will provide the tools necessary for the genetic and biochemical
identification of the relevant metalloregulatory proteins. Characterization of
these regulatory proteins promises to shed light on how proteins can
discriminate chemically similar metal ions to effect selective transcriptional
control. %%% This grant provides information on how bacteria respond to their
environment, especially as regards the presence of metals. ***