* 9317625
* Acquisition of an Automated DNA Sequencer
* BIO,DBI
* 01/01/1994,06/30/1996
* Michael Donoghue, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Michael K. Lamvik
* 06/30/1996
* USD 89,040.00

9317625 Hartl Five senior faculty at Harvard University are applying for an
Applied Biosystems Model 373A-01 Automated DNA Sequencer with associated
hardware and software. Harvard is in a unique position to lead a new synthesis
of molecular biology and evolutionary biology because of its long tradition of
excellence in both fields. Indeed, among the priorities for academic growth and
development in the life sciences is the overlap between molecular biology and
evolutionary biology. The Department of Organismic and evolutionary Biology
(OEB) at Harvard is already expanding with new faculty representing this type of
integration. Among the five OEB faculty participating, four (Hartl, Donoghue,
Kellogg, and Pierce) are new to Harvard, and three (Hartl, Donoghue, and Pierce)
are senior appointments. The need for automated DNA sequencing in the
participating groups is immediate and acute. There is no automated DNA sequencer
available for shard use. Among the applicants, no group alone is large enough or
its needs extensive enough to justify purchase, maintenance, and exclusive use
of an automated sequencer. However, in the aggregate, the groups can make use of
an automated sequencer essentially to full capacity (estimated sequencing needs
approximately 1 million bp per year). The automated DNA sequencer will be set up
in the Hartl laboratory, which is centrally located among the participating
users, and will be supervised by Dr. Elena Lozovskaya, a member of the Hartl
group who has extensive practical experience in automated DNA sequencing. Most
of the participating groups have already had relevant experience using automated
DNA sequencers and their projects are funded and ready to be implement.
Therefore, the automated DNA sequencer is a familiar piece of equipment that
will be set up in a central location among the users, supervised by an
experienced investigator, and used immediately to essentially full capacity. OEB
will contribute to the purchase of the instrument and support of the major
portion of the recurring service contract. at Harvard University are applying
for an Applied Biosystems Model 373A-01 Automated DNA Seq ! F $ $ ( Times New
Roman Symbol &amp; Arial " h E E E + &lt; ! = abstract Deseree King, BIR Deseree
King, BIR