* 9317281
* Mechanisms of Retrotransposon Replication
* BIO,MCB
* 01/15/1994,06/30/1997
* Abram Gabriel, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Jerry D. Johnson
* 06/30/1997
* USD 274,000.00

9317281 Gabriel Trypanosomal CRE1 and human L1 are members of the little
understood family of mobile genes known as non-LTR retrotransposons that are
widely distributed in mammals, insects, plants, trypanosomatids, and fungi.
While evidence suggests that this class of transposon is involved in such
diverse and fundamental processes as insertional mutagenesis, genetic disease
initiation, pseudogene formation, and genome evolution, almost nothing is known
about the mechanisms by which these elements transpose other than that they use
RNA intermediates. Most non- LTR retrotransposons are dispersed throughout their
host's genome. However, CRE1 and related elements in other trypanosomes have the
unusual feature that they are inserted at a specific, conserved site within a
set of tandemly duplicated genes. We propose to utilize a novel yeast expression
system to study the biochemistry of the reverse transcriptase encoded by human
L1 and to identify the basis for CRE1 site-specific insertion. Accomplishment of
our specific aims will advance knowledge of the mechanisms involved in the
replication of this poorly understood but biologically important class of
retrotransposons. On a broader scale, the results will be relevant to questions
concerning eukaryotic genome organization and evolution, as well as the
pathogenesis of human genetic disease. %%% A variety of transposable genetic
elements ("jumping genes") are found within the DNA of all organisms. Over 10%
of human chromosomal DNA is made up of sequences that were copied from RNA into
DNA using the enzyme reverse transcriptase (RT). This enzyme, first found in
retroviruses, is now known to be essential for a large class of transposons to
copy themselves and move to new genomic locations. We have shown that a
functional gene for RT is normally found in human DNA as part of the transposon
L1. We propose to study the biochemical properties of L1 RT to determine how it
recognizes its own sequences and how it can copy other RNA back into DNA.
Further, we propose to study an unusual property of a similar transposon, CRE1,
from a protozoan parasite. CRE1 is only found inserted in a single region of its
host's chromosomes, and the basis for site-specificity may give clues to the
mechanisms it employs in its jumping. Our studies will help elucidate the
workings of a poorly understood class of genetic elements which have been
implicated in creating mutations, causing genetic disease, and stimulating
species evolution. ***