* 9317466
* New Applications for Atomic Force Microscopy of DNA
* BIO,MCB
* 04/01/1994,09/30/1997
* Helen Hansma, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Continuing Grant
* Kamal Shukla
* 09/30/1997
* USD 390,000.00

9317466 Hansma DNA can now be routinely and reproducibly imaged with the Atomic
Force Microscope (AFM) in air and in a variety of fluids, including aqueous
buffers. Building on this demonstrated capability, the following 5 research
areas are proposed: (1) To image the effects of drug-binding on DNA
conformation, using distamycin and other peptides that induce conformation-
changes in AT-rich regions of DNA. (2) To increase the resolution of DNA-imaging
by using new improved tips and imaging environments selected for minimizing both
adhesion and repulsion. Tips will be fabricated with a new AFM-SEM (scanning
electron microscope) combination that is currently being built. (3) To label DNA
with a variety of reliably distinguishable labels for AFM-mapping of DNA at a
resolution of several dozen nucleotides. (4) To improve the quality of imaging
of single- stranded DNA. The ultimate goal of this technology is the high- speed
sequencing of single DNA molecules. (5) To image processes involving DNA-protein
interactions in real time, such as the cleavage of DNA with a restriction enzyme
and the interaction of single-stranded and double-stranded DNA with RecA
protein. %%% The Atomic Force Microscope (AFM) s a new microscope, invented in
1986, that can feel surfaces with enough sensitivity to map the size and shape
of DNA and other biological molecules. For many applications, the AFM combines
the convenience and versatility of optical microscopy with a resolution
comparable to electron microscopy. Since this high resolution can be obtained
even in aqueous solutions, the AFM can image molecules that are biologically
active and has the capability of imaging these molecules in action. Atomic force
microscopy of DNA has progressed rapidly in the last 2 years. New research can
now build on this foundation. ***