* 9317963
* RUI: Structural and Functional Analysis of Bovine           Ceruloplasmin
* BIO,MCB
* 02/15/1994,07/31/1998
* Christina Goode, CSU Fullerton Auxiliary Services Corporation
* Standard Grant
* A Berry
* 07/31/1998
* USD 224,000.00

Goode 9317963 Ceruloplasmin is a serum protein that is believed to be involved
in the transport of copper to specific extra-hepatic cells. This process is
mediated by cell surface receptors which have been identified in tissues such as
brain, heart, placenta and aorta. Using the bovine system, we will attempt to
isolate the ceruloplasmin receptor from brain and placenta. The isolated
receptor will be characterized using standard techniques including size-
exclusion chromatography, SDS-PAGE, N-terminal sequence analysis and peptide
mapping. Use of antibodies against the receptor in preventing cellular uptake of
copper from ceruloplasmin will also be investigated. In addition to studies on
ceruloplasmin receptor, we will also characterize two isoforms of bovine
ceruloplasmin. This will be accomplished using both biochemical and physical
techniques including carbohydrate analysis, peptide mapping, circular dichroic
and atomic absorption spectroscopies and single crystal X-ray diffraction.
Information on the role(s) and nature of these two forms may aid in our
understanding of the mechanisms by which copper is removed from the protein into
the receptor cell. %%% The average American consumes 1.2-1.7 mg of copper per
day of which roughly half is actually absorbed and enters the blood and tissues.
A key player in copper metabolism is the serum protein ceruloplasmin, which is
believed to be involved in the transport of copper to specific cells such as
brain, heart and placenta. These cells recognize and bind ceruloplasmin through
the presence of cell surface receptors. Our work will study the chemistry and
role(s) of different forms of bovine ceruloplasmin isolated from bovine serum,
using various biochemical and physical techniques. In addition we will continue
to investigate the role of the membrane receptor in copper delivery to cells.
This information will help to clarify the role of ceruloplasmin in copper
metabolism, and perhaps give us a clearer pictu re of the mechanism by which
copper is distributed in the body. ***