* 9317925
* Upgrading the Optical Facilities of the Biology Department  at the City College of the City University of New York
* NONE,NONE
* 09/15/1995,08/31/1997
* Sally Hoskins, CUNY City College
* Standard Grant
* Lee C. Makowski
* 08/31/1997
* USD 29,616.00

Biologists at the City College of New York are requesting matching funds to up-
gradeand provide new optical facilities for their research. Requested are funds
to purchase: 1) a transmission electron microscope (TEM); 2) an inverted
epifluorescent microscope; and 3) a confocal laser scanning microscope. We also
wish to upgrade the stage of a constantly used digital scanning electron
microscope (DSEM).The new TEM will replace the present TEM, a Phillips 300
purchased 21 years ago, which has limited value as a research instrument because
it is not capable of producing images required to answer many contemporary
research questions. At present we have strong need for an inverted
epifluorescent microscope and a confocal laser scanning microscope. The present
stage on our Zeiss digital scanning microscope is a bottle neck for effective
use of this instrument. The present stage takes only one specimen at a time; we
must pump down between specimen changes. The new stage holds 5 stubs (specimen
holders) at a time. It also is automated and digitized. This will allow
researchers to make montages. It will also give researchers, studying small
organisms and cells, the ability to mark positions of specimens of interest by
storage in memory so that the best specimens can be relocated, studied, and
photographed. The research aided by the new equipment is quite broad in aspect,
covering fields such as Neurobiology, Molecular Developmental Genetics,
Immunobiology, Protistology, Molecular Systematics, Endocytobiology, and
Evolution. More specifically the following projects will be aided: 1) Phagosome-
phagolysosomal processing in diatom- bearing endosymbioses in foraminifera;
2)Karyokinesis and systematics of foraminifera; 3) Molecular systematics of
planktonic diatoms; 4) Ce ll surface phenotypes of thymic nurse cells; 5)
Contact between thymocytes and thymic nurse cells; 6) Molecular and genetic
analysis of the Drosophila compound eye; 8) Molecular mechanisms underlying
axonal development and connection specificity in the embryonic and
metamorphosing nervous system of the frog Xenopus Iclevis; and 9) Studies of
growth factors and neurotransmitters involved in the signal cascade by means of
which the retina modulates growth of the sclera which, when awry, can lead to
myopia. The City College is located in theHarlem section of New York City.and
its student body is predominantly minority. Many students are involved with the
proposed investigators in undergraduate and graduate research. Should this
proposal be funded, there is every expectation that minority students will be
involved in the research itself, and the fallout which enters other aspects of
coursework and training.