* 9317286
* The Contractile Vacuole Complex of Dictyostelium            Discoideum: Role of 100-KD V-ATPase Subunit
* BIO,MCB
* 06/01/1994,12/31/1997
* Margaret Clarke, Oklahoma Medical Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Barbara K. Zain
* 12/31/1997
* USD 240,000.00

9317286 Clarke It is proposed to clone and characterize the cDNA for the 100 kD
vacuolar ATPase. Preliminary studies in the PI's laboratory resulted in the
isolation from a Dictyostelium expression library of a 1.1 kb cDNA that encodes
the epitope that is recognized by the anti-100 kD monoclonal antibody. The ORF
of 326 amino acids encoded by this cDNA is 39% identical (77% similar) to the
amino terminus of the 96 kD subunit of the rat coded vesicle/sinaptic vesicle
V-ATPase. The complete cDNA for the 100 kD protein will be cloned, and its
predicted amino acid sequence and protein structure will be compared to those of
the homologous mammalian V-ATPase subunit. Secondly, gene targeting experiments
will be used to explore the function of this protein. Dictyostelium cells will
be transformed with vectors designed to disrupt the gene for the 100 kD protein
through homologous recombination, or to reduce its mRNA levels through antisense
mutagenesis. The resulting mutants will be characterized to determine whether or
not proton pumps are correctly assembled and targeted, and whether the mutant
cells are defect in their ability to cope with hypoosmotic stress. These studies
will help to elucidate the role of a highly conserved and poorly understood
subunit of V-ATPases. They may also reveal functions beyond osmoregulation that
are carried out by the contractile vacuole complex. %%% Contractile vacuoles are
osmoregulatory organelles found in freshwater amoebae and protozoa. The means by
which they accumulate, sequester and expel water remains mysterious. They may
also serve other functions such as regulation of intracellular ion levels, but
this has not been demonstrated. The most distinctive feature of contractile
vacuole membranes is their extremely high content of vacuolar type proton pumps
, which are likely to play an essential role in water accumulation and other
transport activities carried out by the contractile vacuoles. Monoclonal
antibodies are available that recognize two subunits of the vacuolar proton pump
(V-ATPase) in Dictyostelium. One of these subunits is an integral membrane
protein of approximately 100 kD whose mammalian counterpart has been postulated
to be responsible for the targeting of proton pumps to the correct
endomembranes. The present project will employ molecular genetics to explore the
role of this V-ATPase subunit in Dictyostelium. ***