* 9317369
* Structure and Dynamics of Holliday Junctions
* BIO,MCB
* 05/15/1994,04/30/1997
* Walter Chazin, The Scripps Research Institute
* Continuing grant
* Kamal Shukla
* 04/30/1997
* USD 320,000.00

9317369 Chazin The principal goals of this research are to determine the three-
dimensional structure of Holliday junctions, to understand how the sequence at
the junction influences structure, and to determine why the cellular
recombination machinery is influenced by these differences. As a starting point,
the determination of the three-dimensional structures and examination of the
internal dynamics of small (32 base-pair) models of Holliday junctions is
proposed using time-resolved fluorescence and nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR)
spectroscopies. The selected sequences are designed to inhibit migration of the
crossover junction to facilitate analysis by biophysical methods, and the
results are then analyzed with the assistance of computational and molecular
graphics approaches. Our objectives are formulated on the basis of critical
observations indicating that the resolution of HJs in the cell and in vitro
appears to be dependent on the sequence at the site of strand crossover, and
that the spatial arrangement of the branches of Holliday junction is dependent
on sequence. Thus, our objective extends beyond the determination of the
structure of a single HJ at atomic resolution, to analysis of a series of
related HJs having identical branches but different permutations of the bases at
the junction. Selection of specific HJs for in-depth structural analysis is
based on screening using gel mobility, thermal denaturation, and fluorescence
assays. %%% Genetic recombination is a fundamental process of biology leading
the variation and diversity that is essential to life. Most mechanisms proposed
for recombination involve a four-arm branched DNA intermediate termed the
Holliday junction (HJ), which is cleaved by enzymes to generate either parental
or recombinant products. A significant body of evidence has accumulated
indicating that the structure of the HJ has a central role in determining the
outcome of the recombination event. Thus, we seek an understandi ng of the
molecular basis of genetic recombination from detailed knowledge of the
structure of the HJ, and ultimately, of the nature of the interactions with
enzymes critical to HJ recognition and processing. ***