* 9317353
* Dissertation Research:  A Dynamic View of Paleoindian       Assemblages at the Hell Gap Site, Wyoming:  Reconstructing  Lithic Technological Systems
* SBE,BCS
* 10/15/1993,03/31/1995
* David Meltzer, Southern Methodist University
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 03/31/1995
* USD 11,102.00

9317353 Meltzer Under the direction of Dr. David Meltzer, Mr. Frederick Sellet
will collect data for his doctoral dissertation. He will analyze lithic material
collected from the site of Hell Gap Wyoming. Discovered over 30 years ago this
site is crucial for understanding the early prehistory of the Western United
States because it contains well preserved faunal and lithic remains which span
approximately half the recorded length of known human occupation in the New
World. The site has provided an important input into the definition of cultures
and lithic types. Because Hell Gap is located in close proximity to stone source
areas, the assemblage is particularly rich in stone tools and manufacturing
byproducts. Unfortunately because of the untimely deaths of the two main
excavators the materials have not been properly analyzed and published. Mr.
Sellet will help to remedy this problem through his work on one important class
of data: the lithic materials. He will study both the raw materials themselves
in an attempt to determine stone utilization and examine how tools were
manufactured. Taken together, these data will provide insight into Paleoindian
mobility and subsistence strategies and how these changed over time. Stone tools
serve as cultural markers and can often differentiate one group or time period
from another. Traditionally archaeologists have examined lithic materials with
such goals in mind. In recent years however it has been recognized that
additional information such as how people move over the landscape, how they
schedule their activities and whether they curate materials or practice an
expedient technology could also be addressed. Taken together such information
provides insight into cultural adaptation. While techniques to address such
goals are now well developed in Europe, they have been little applied in the
United States. Mr. Sellet's research will both provide information about the
Hell Gap site and potentially serve as a methodological g uide for New World
archaeologists. The project is also important because it will provide valuable
data of interest to many archaeologists and increase understanding of U.S.
prehistory. It will assist in the training of a promising young scientist. ***