* 9317471
* Lipid Phase Transitions and Cuticular Permeability
* BIO,IOS
* 07/01/1994,06/30/1998
* Allen Gibbs, University of California-Irvine
* Continuing Grant
* Elvira Doman
* 06/30/1998
* USD 240,115.00

9317471 Gibbs Epicuticlar lipids serve as the primary passive barrier to water
loss in insects and other terrestrial arthropods. The waterproofing abilities of
cuticular lipids are thought to depend upon their biophysical properties.
According to this hypothesis, lipid melting results in a rapid increase in
cuticular permeability, with subsequent death due to dehydration. This idea has
played an important role in the development of insect physiology, but
experimental support remains sketchy. Recent technological advances have made it
possible to test the lipid phase transition hypothesis in a rigorous manner.
Sensitive water vapor sensors have allowed the accurate measurement of cuticular
water fluxes, and detailed biophysical studies of small quantities of cuticular
lipids can be performed using Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy (FTIR).
The PIs will use FTIR to examine the effects of specific changes in lipid
structure upon lipid physical properties. The permeability of model cuticle
preparations, with lipids of known physical properties, will be examined as a
function of temperature. The results of these experiments will be compared to
those of similar studies using isolated cuticle preparations. The information
gained will provide: (1) better understanding of the function of the cuticular
lipid waterproofing layer; and (2) the foundation for physiological, ecological,
and evolutionary studies of cuticular lipids and water balance. ***