* 9317231
* ANZFLUX (Antarctic Zone Flux Experiment) CTD/Tracer         Program
* O/D,OPP
* 05/01/1994,04/30/1998
* Bruce Huber, Columbia University
* Continuing Grant
* Bernhard Lettau
* 04/30/1998
* USD 909,850.00

9317231 Martinson The proposed work is part of an integrated research program
("Anzflux") into the oceanographic structure of upper mixed layer of the eastern
Weddell Sea. It is to be carried out from the RVIB Nathaniel B. Palmer in the
austral winter of 1994. The work proposed here concerns the collecting of
hydrographic and geochemical tracer data to determine the three-dimensional
oceanic structure on various spatial scales and to provide data for the
validation of oceanic models. The eastern Weddell Sea is a region where a warm
regime, defined by the intrusion of warm circumpolar deep water with
temperatures near +1 deg C, and a cold regime exist side by side. The cold
regime occurs to the west, where deep water is overlain by a thick near-
freezing mixed layer. In both regions however enough heat is seasonally carried
to the sea ice to melt it completely. The objectives of this project are to
allow the reconstruction of the overall configuration of the Weddell Gyre, the
warm and cold regimes, and to determine the large-scale baroclinicity,
upwelling, and ventilation of intermediate water masses. On a smaller scale this
work will characterize the specific differences between the two drift stations
and provide initial conditions for modeling the oceanic processes. The tracer
measurements will complement the direct observations, and will constrain
estimates of the net transfer of warm deep water into the surface layer. These
measurements, in conjunction with the other concurrent experiments to quantify
the energy brought to the underside of the ice, will form the basis of a
regional study of the processes responsible for the relatively thick upper mixed
layer and thin ice cover. It is believed that these conditions are only
marginally stable, and are maintained by a relatively high upward heat flux,
which, if interrupted, could lead to deep vertical convection, and a significant
change in the oceanic climate. ***