* 9317770
* High Resolution Crystallographic Studies Using Synchrotron  Radiation
* MPS,CHE
* 01/01/1994,06/30/1997
* Philip Coppens, SUNY at Buffalo
* Continuing grant
* Joan M. Frye
* 06/30/1997
* USD 447,400.00

9317770 Coppens In this project in the Physical Chemistry Program of the
Chemistry Division, Prof. P. Coppens of the State University of New York at
Buffalo will engage in crystallographic research using the National Synchrotron
Light Source at the Brookhaven National Laboratory and also perform experiments
using advanced conventional facilities. The research consists of several parts:
application of anomalous scattering of X-rays to selectively identify site
ocupancy, to determine the oxidation states of atoms in solids and to identify
spectroscopic transitions; to study the response of crystals to external
perturbations, such as laser-induced molecular excitation; and the analysis of
modulated and composite solids, which are aperiodic in at least one direction.
Very low temperature single crystal techniques are to be used in the analysis of
charge densities in crystals, and in the investigation of the temperature-
dependence of the structure of low-dimensional conducting solids. Area detectors
are to be applied to charge density studies and other fields after new software
development aimed at maximizing accuracy of the area-detector intensity data.
X-ray diffraction by single crystals has been used for many years to study the
structure of organic and inorganic materials. The conventional techniques are
based on the use of x-ray tubes, which emit monochromatic radiation of
relatively low intensity, thereby limiting their use to large size crystals and
strong scatterers. X-radiation emitted by synchrotrons has a continuous range of
wavelengths, a low spatial divergence, is polarized, and is much brighter than
the radiation emitted from conventional x-ray tubes. These properties allow the
determination of the structures of very small crystals, not heretofore possible
with conventional techniques, in a much shorter time and with greater accuracy.
The new methods are, however, partly still in the development stage. The
research to be done in this project i s directed toward improvement of the new
technique and the solution of new crystallographic problems in physics and
materials science. ***