* 9317969
* Age-related Variation in Metabolism and Temperature         Sensitivity in Muscle: Mechanisms and Evolutionary          Implications
* BIO,IOS
* 01/01/1994,06/30/1997
* James Marden, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* John A. Phillips
* 06/30/1997
* USD 213,000.00

9317969 Marden Physiological processes in animal tissues are strongly affected
by temperature, with resultant effects on whole- organism performance and
fitness. The precise manner in which tissue and organismal performance are
affected by temperature is called "thermal sensitivity". Studies of lower
vertebrates have led to an understanding of some of the molecular and cellular
mechanisms that determine thermal sensitivity, and to an appreciation of how
variation in thermal sensitivity among species affects their geographic
distribution and ecology. However, current evolutionary models lack consensus
regarding fitness of variation in thermal sensitivity, with competing models
concentrating on how thermal sensitivity affects niche breadth, aerobic
performance capacity, high-temperature tolerance during peak activity, and
compromises between high- and low- temperature performance capacity. Ability to
distinguish among these competing hypotheses is hampered by the scarcity of
species in which there is both i) variation in thermal sensitivity among
individuals, and ii) ability to observe and measure fitness variation among
animals possessing different thermal sensitivities. This project takes advantage
of the presence of large-scale variation in thermal sensitivity among different-
aged individuals in a dragonfly, and the ability to manipulate and observe these
abundant and highly active animals in a field setting. Results of these
experiments will allow critical tests of the competing models for the evolution
of thermal sensitivity. This project will also make a detailed examination of
the cellular and molecular mechanisms that affect variation in thermal
sensitivity of muscle performance. Preliminary data indicate that a switch from
anaerobic to aerobic metabolism accompanies the age-related change in thermal
sensitivity, and that variation in expression of a calcium regulatory protein,
troponin-t, may be particularly important in determining how mu scle functions
in changing thermal and pH conditions. An opportunity to enhance our
understanding of the basic physiology of troponin-t is particularly significant,
since presence of this molecule in the blood stream has recently become the most
sensitive clinical indicator of severe myocardial infraction in humans(i.e.
heart attack). In summary, this project will examine physiology and ecology of a
model organism in order to provide new data and perspectives that will influence
our understanding of both basic evolutionary processes and muscle physiology.
***