* 9317391
* Artificial Selection of Spectral Sensitivity and Its Effects in Poecilia reticulata
* NONE,NONE
* 02/01/1994,07/31/1995
* John Endler, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Continuing grant
* Mark Courtney
* 07/31/1995
* USD 60,000.00

9317391 Endler Secondary sexual traits are common in animals, and male traits
are sometimes so strongly developed that they appear maladaptive. Numerous
theoretical models of sexual selection attempt to account for the evolution of
conspicuous sexual display traits through female choice. One property common to
most models is that female preferences should determine the direction of
evolution of male traits. However, most studies look only at the single-
generation effects of female choice of males. Dr. Endler will examine the long-
term effects of changes in female preferences. What factors cause sexually
selected traits to evolve in particular directions?%%% One possible evolutionary
bias is in the perception of traits by the sensory system; some traits are more
easily perceived than others, and given that sensory systems are more sensitive
to some aspects of signal than others, discrimination is easier for some aspects
of signal than others. Dr Endler will examine the effects of sensory biases by
means of an extensive artificial selection of female preferences and its
secondary effects on male traits in Poecilia reticulata. These questions are not
only interesting and important from the viewpoint of sexual selection, but also
have important implications for the origin and maintenance of species because
sexually selected traits are often used in species recognition and isolation.***