* 9317538
* Collaborative Research: Bloom Dynamics and Food-Web         Structure in the Ross Sea: The Irradiance/Mixing Regime     and Diatom Growith in Spring
* O/D,OPP
* 07/01/1994,10/31/1998
* David Nelson, Oregon State University
* Continuing Grant
* Bernhard Lettau
* 10/31/1998
* USD 440,056.00

9317538 Nelson The growing season for phytoplankton in polar oceans is short,
but intense. There is an increasing body of evidence that in many Antarctic
habitats, the most active period may be very early in the season, a period that
has not been emphasized in previous investigations. This project is part of an
interdisciplinary program that focuses on the dynamics of the spring
phytoplankton bloom in a highly productive subsystem of the Antarctic, the Ross
Sea. The overall program will test hypotheses related to the initiation of the
phytoplankton bloom shortly after the onset of ice melt, the mechanisms
controlling phytoplankton growth and productivity in spring, the implications
and short-term fate of high productivity in spring, and the transition from
spring to midsummer conditions. This component will test the closely related
hypotheses that: (1) phytoplankton growth is controlled primarily by the
relationship between solar irradiance and mixed-layer depth throughout the
spring (2) diatom growth rates are much higher in spring than at any other time
of year, in response to the more favorable irradiance/mixing relationships, and
(3) persistence of diatom blooms in summer results from the diatoms' ability to
outcompete other groups under the light-limited conditions that develop in
turbid, high-biomass waters. These hypotheses will be tested by (1) obtaining
the first reliable estimates of the Sverdrup "critical depth" in the Antarctic
so that the changing relationship between the critical depth and the mixed-
layer depth in spring can be defined, and (2) estimating diatom growth rates and
the gross and net production attributable to diatoms throughout the spring. The
results will provide information critical to an understanding of phytoplankton
bloom dynamics in the Ross Sea.