* 9317198
* Time-Resolved Spectroscopy of Bulk and Thin Film Structure  and Dynamics
* MPS,DMR
* 05/01/1994,01/31/1997
* Keith Nelson, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* David Nelson
* 01/31/1997
* USD 375,000.00

9317198 Nelson Femtosecond through millisecond time-resolved spectroscopy of
condensed matter will be conducted to understand the dynamics of structural
change in solids and liquids. Structural phase transitions between crystalline
phases and structural evolution in glass-forming liquids and polymers will be
examined. The results will be analyzed in terms of theoretical models of
structural change, which describe the behavior of whole classes of materials and
which therefore transcend individual materials, and in terms of molecular models
which attempt to explain the behavior of specihc materials by taking their
distinguishing characteristics into account. Measurements of the mechanical and
thermal conductivity properties of thin films will also be performed. The goals
will be to understand the relations between the linear mechanical response of
the interface, the nonlinear response (e.g. peeling) measured by destructive
tests, and the interface chemistry and bonding. The work on thin film polymers
will have an immediate practical impact. The proposed method permits noncontact,
nondestructive, rapid in situ determination of mechanical and thermal properties
(elastic and loss moduli, thermal diffusivities) of supported or unsupported
polymer films used in microelectronics, protective coatings, and other
applications. If noncontact adhesion quality assessment proves possible, this
will present a truly revolutionary tool to the applied community. ***