* 9317062
* RUI:  Regulation of Transcription Factor Expression in      Saccharomyces cerevisiae
* BIO,MCB
* 04/01/1994,09/30/1997
* Barbara Hoopes, Colgate University
* Standard Grant
* karen kindle-hartsuyker
* 09/30/1997
* USD 102,961.00

9317062 Hoopes Although it is known that the concentration of the general
transcription factors are important to gene expression in vivo, very little is
known about the expression of the yeast SUA7 gene, which codes for the TFIIB
protein of yeast. Using gene fusions and primer extension assays to assess
promoter activity, we will examine the regulation of SUA7 under a variety of
conditions. This study promises to provide interesting information both on
eukaryotic promoter structure and on the effect of the general transcription
factors on promoter activity. %%% Cellular regulation often involves the control
of RNA synthesis from the DNA template. This type of regulation is essential to
maintaining the normal cell state, and understanding gene regulation is
important to advances in both medical science and biotechnology. Although we
know much about the signals in the DNA that control gene expression, we know
less about the regulation of the expression of the molecules (transcription
factors) that interact with the DNA. Using yeast as an experimental system, I
propose to examine the regulation of a particular transcription factor required
for gene expression. This research will contribute to our understanding of
mechanisms of gene regulation in higher organisms. ***