* 9317754
* The Contribution of New Mutations to Genotype-Environment   Interaction for Fitness
* BIO,DEB
* 05/01/1994,10/31/1997
* James Fry, North Carolina State University
* Continuing Grant
* Mark Courtney
* 10/31/1997
* USD 317,509.00

9317754 Mackay Natural populations of animals and plants typically harbor
considerable genetically-based variation in ability to survive and reproduce in
particular habitats or environments. A common observation is that the fitness of
a genotype in one environment is only weakly predictive of its fitness in
others. This situation, termed genotype-environment interaction, is often
interpreted to mean that there is a "trade-off", so that the natural selection
cannot produce a genotype with high fitness in each set of environments. An
alternative hypothesis that has received little attention is that individuals
carry deleterious mutations that vary in the strength of their effects in
different environments. The latter hypothesis has very different implications
from the trade-off hypothesis for such issues as why ecological specialization
evolves, the factors maintaining genetic variations in populations, and how new
species form. The mutation hypothesis will be investigated using the fruit fly
Drosophila melangaster. Genotype-environment interaction is important in animal
and plant breeding, because it means that lines that perform well under one set
of conditions will not necessarily perform well under other conditions: for
example, a cattle breed that does well in Texas climate may not do so well in
Minnesota. The full practical implications of genotype-environment interaction,
however, depend on which of the above two hypotheses better accounts for it.
Under the trade-off hypothesis, large improvements in performance in any one
environment should be possible, but only at the expense of performance of others
. Under the mutation hypothesis, in contrast, it should be possible to create
lines that perform relatively well in a range of environments. v ~ ! ! ! F (
Times New Roman Symbol & Arial . " h Mc eMc e 4 7 Crystal Blackshear Crystal
Blackshear