* 9317469
* Retroviral Vectors for Gene Transfer Into Zebrafish and     Gene Trap Screens
* BIO,IOS
* 01/15/1994,06/30/1997
* Wolfgang Driever, Massachusetts General Hospital
* Continuing Grant
* Judith Plesset
* 06/30/1997
* USD 390,000.00

9317469 Driever The organisms best suited to study fundamental principles of
vertebrate development should allow the application of large numbers of
different experimental approaches: classical genetic analysis, experimental
embryology, and molecular genetics, especially the generation of transgenic
animals. Zebrafish (Brachydanio rerio), a small tropical freshwater teleost, is
most amenable to the former two approaches, but methods for controlled and
efficient generation of germline transgenic zebrafish have not been developed.
The objective of the proposed research is to optimize methods for the infection
of zebrafish germline cells with retroviruses which are pseudotyped with the
vesicular stomatitis virus (VSV) G glycoprotein. Preliminary experiments have
demonstrated that the VSV-G protein broadens the host range of murine leukemia
virus derived vectors to zebrafish cells and other non-mammalian hosts. These
methods will be applied to perform insertional mutagenesis screens in zebrafish
to identify novel genes that are important for pattern formation and
organogenesis in the embryo. Specific aim 1 is to optimize conditions for
infection of zebrafish germline cells with VSV-G pseudotyped murine leukemia
virus-derived vectors and to study germline transmission of integrated DNA.
Specific aim 2 is to construct viral vectors for a) cell marking experiments to
allow high resolution lineage analysis in the developing embryo, b) over
expression of known proteins to study their function in development, and c) gene
transfer of cloned zebrafish genes back into zebrafish hosts mutant for
developmental regulator genes to allow tests for complementation. Specific aim 3
is to construct promoter trap and enhancer trap retroviral vectors and to
perform initial screens for expression patterns that might reveal integration of
the virus into developmental control genes. Retroviral vectors are superior to
other means of insertional mutagenesis because of the defined s tructure of the
integrated DNA, and the high efficiency at which the vector is delivered into
the host cells. Because the VSV-G pseudotyped vectors infect a broad range of
host cells including fish, Xenopus laevis, and insect cells, the methods and
vectors developed during this project can also be applied to other non-mammalian
developmental systems. ***