* 9317249
* Dark Signaling in Photoperiodic Induction of Flowering
* NONE,NONE
* 01/15/1994,06/30/1997
* Sharman O'Neill, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Judith A. Verbeke
* 06/30/1997
* USD 300,000.00

9317249 O'Neill Flowering involves the developmental transition of the shoot
meristem from vegetative to reproductive growth. In many species of flowering
plants, this developmental transition is regulated by photoperiod. The principal
site of photoperiodic perception is the leaf, where inductive processes are
proposed to lead to the synthesis of a floral stimulus that is translocated to
target cells of the apical meristem where floral evocation is triggered. This
process therefore involves interorgan signaling mediated by a translocatable
chemical messenger of darkness. The biochemical and molecular basis of
photoperiodic perception and signal transduction to the apex, however, remains a
major unsolved problem in plant development. Recently, Dr. O'Neill has
identified N-acetyl 5-methoxytryptamine, or melatonin, in several photoperiodic
plant species and has determined that the concentration of this methoxylated
indoleamine in the photoreceptive tissue of Pharbitis nil is correlated with
dark induction of flowering. Melatonin is a well-known hormone involved in the
regulation of seasonal reproduction in many diverse eukaryotic taxa including
vertebrates, insects, and algae where it functions as a chemical messenger of
"darkness". The detection of melatonin in plants, and the rhythmic cycling of
its concentration, suggest the possibility that melatonin may also be an
important biochemical component of photoperiodic signal transduction in plants.
In related research, Dr. O'Neill has also characterized a set of mRNAs whose
abundance cycles in parallel with photoperiodic floral induction. These results
suggest that photoperiodic responses in the leaf may be mediated by activation
of gene expression. *** 9 : $ ; \ < = , > ? Õ @ b A B C > Z l H T I S K I O \ b
X EU V F F t ^ & ? t + q v$ v" F P F P F V u L v$ v" F" V$ F F u N ^ ^ F & t~ v
& D 9317249 O'Neill Flowering involves the developmental transition of the shoot
meristem from vegetative to reproductive growth P K P ! ! F ! P P ( Times New
Roman Symbol & Arial N " h d `B e^B e V + Dana Brigham Dana Brigham