* 9317842
* Adsorption of Aromatic Ligand Pollutants onto (Hydro)oxide  Minerals in Aquatic Environments
* ENG,CBET
* 06/01/1994,05/31/1998
* Alan Stone, Johns Hopkins University
* Continuing Grant
* Edward H. Bryan
* 05/31/1998
* USD 279,321.00

9317842 Stone This is an award to provide support for a project the objective of
which is to develop conceptual and quantitative bases for models that can be
used in engineering design of adsorption processes for removing aromatic ligand
pollutants from aqueous solution and in determining the fate of these pollutants
when moving through soil and groundwater aquifers. The investigator plans on
studying the physical and chemical factors that influence the relationship
between the substance being adsorbed and the adsorbing medium. The research
involves analyzing results of well-selected experiments designed to provide a
good understanding of the underlying physical and chemical phenomena involved in
the adsorption process and relating this understanding to models that will
potentially displace the empirical, site-specific procedures that now
characterize the design and characterization of adsorption processes. Results of
this project are expected to provide a better basis than now exists for
predicting the fate of water pollutants that move through soil and aquifers that
are subject to adsorption on surfaces of the media through which the water
flows. The results may also provide improvements in the ability of engineers to
design soil remediation systems as well as water and wastewater treatment
processes that are either fundamentally based on adsorption as the physical
process for removal of the pollutants or in which adsorption occurs as a
secondary benefit.