* 9317852
* Instrumentation for Computer-Based Detection and Imaging    of Biological Samples
* BIO,DBI
* 05/01/1994,10/31/1996
* Roy Curtiss, Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Michael K. Lamvik
* 10/31/1996
* USD 56,673.00

Curtiss Computer assisted analysis has evolved to a point that access to several
advanced technologies is, or soon will be, indispensable for the conduct of
modern biological research. Advances in the sensitivity ranges of isotopic
detection and the ability to digitize, record and analyze data has reached the
level where computer assisted acquisition, analysis and storage of data is no
longer a luxury but a necessity required by those wishing to remain current and
competitive. The Computer-Based Electrophoresis Analyzer and Phosphor Imager
will serve as shared equipment to provide the primary functions of data
acquisition, analysis, and storage for members of the Department of Biology.
Increased sensitivity of isotopic detection and digitization of a wide range of
sample media have resulted in the chance to explore questions previously
considered unanswerable due to limitations of detection methods. These
technological advances in turn provide a formidable amount of data which can
often overwhelm manual analysis and even traditional software programs. The goal
of these proposed acquisitions is the efficient use by the maximum number of
participating scientists of instruments which cannot be afforded in individual
laboratories. Funds are requested to purchase (i) an Optical Electrophoresis
Analyzer, consisting of CCD Camera, workstation, and accompanying software, and
(ii) a phosphor imaging system consisting of scanning module, workstation, and
accompanying software. The Department will provide other essential equipment,
including phosphor storage screens, auxiliary software, and installation of the
Ethernet networking system to allow maximum usage of all equipment by those in
the Department. The equipment will be supervised by Drs. Roy Curtiss III and
Robert Landick. Use by graduate students, post-doctoral associates, and faculty
will be scheduled so as to make maximum use of the equipment to advance research
progress by all participants.