* 9317499
* Genetic Interactions in Early Meiotic Development in Yeast, Saccharomyces cerevisiae
* BIO,MCB
* 07/15/1994,06/30/1997
* Mary Clancy, University of New Orleans
* Standard Grant
* Philip Harriman
* 06/30/1997
* USD 120,000.00

9317499 Clancy Sporulation in the yeast, Saccharomyces cerevisiae, is a cell-
type specific response to nutritional signals. Only MATa/MAT alpha diploids can
sporulate; cells that contain only one of the MAR alleles, or mutations at MAR,
cannot do so. Work in several laboratories has identified key regulators through
which the mating type locus controls the sporulation response. Of central
importance are an activator of meiosis (IME1) that is highly expressed in
starved MATa/MAT alpha diploids, and a repressor of meiosis (RME1) that is
poorly expressed in these cells this work is aimed at understanding the
regulation and function of a newly-described activator, called IME4. Like IME1,
IME4 is normally expressed only in starved MATa/MAT alpha cells and not in the
other cell types. Unlike IME1, however, IME4 is not regulated by RME1 repressor.
Rather, a different intermediate is used to transmit mating type information to
IME4. One important goal of this work is to understand the nature and identity
of this unknown intermediate, and the targets at IME4 upon which it acts. IME4
is formally upstream of IME1 in this genetic pathway, because strains that lack
IME4 do not express IME1 and do not sporulate. However, mutations that allow
expression of IME1 without IME4 do not restore sporulation. This suggests that
IME4 plays additional roles in sporulation, apart from stimulating IME1
expression. We plan to define these roles genetically, by identifying
suppressors of this downstream defect and by defining mutation phenotypes more
precisely. To better understand the function of IME4, we will identify proteins
that interact with the IME4 product, and determine the location of the product
in the cells. %%% This research will aid in our understanding of gene expression
in yeast, an organism of important to the biotechnology industry. In addition,
it will help to train a number of undergraduate students in current techniques
in modern molecular biology. ***