* 9317797
* Acquisition of Cryoinstrumentation for Electron Microscopy
* BIO,DBI
* 03/01/1994,08/31/1996
* Robert McGaughey, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Michael K. Lamvik
* 08/31/1996
* USD 103,394.00

9317797 Roberson Cryotechniques for fixation and preparation of biological
specimens for electron microscopy result in superior preservation of biochemical
composition, physiological condition and ultrastructural detail of the cell's
living state. Funds are requested to purchase two items of equipment
representing the state-of-the-art in cryotechnology. The HPF 010 Bal-Tec High
Pressure Freezing Machine provides the only means for cryofixing tissue samples
up to 0.6 mm in thickness with a total volume of 1mm3 without the formation of
damaging ice crystals that occur when samples are frozen at ambient pressure.
The FSU 010 Bal-Tec Freeze Substitution Unit furnishes an automated system for
freeze substitution of cryofixed samples increasing the quality and
reproducibility of the freeze substitution process, allowing low temperature
infiltration and polymerization of resins, and reducing the chances of secondary
ice crystal formation. These instruments do not exist at Arizona State
University. The equipment will be housed in a multi-user electron microscopy
facility where they will be primarily available for use by the principle
investigators of this proposal, as well as by other faculty and students from
three departments (botany, microbiology, and zoology). Because a high pressure
freezing machine is not available anywhere in the southwestern United States,
usage by investigators from other regional institutions will be accommodated to
the best of our ability. Such equipment will support the ongoing research at
Arizona State University and augment our existing instrumentation. The proposed
equipment is essentia l to address timely questions in cell biology such as: 1)
mechanisms controlling fungal growth and development (Roberson), 2) signal
transduction during embryogenesis (Capco), 3) structural organization of
extracellular matrix during fertilization and development (Chandler), 4)
interactions of anti-HIV drugs (McGaughey), and 5) membrane biogenesis during
photosynthesis (Hoober). Arizona State University will match 40.3% of the total
cost for this equipment. of biological specimens for electron microscopy result
in superio ! ! F ? ? ( Times New Roman Symbol &amp; Arial ~ " h " : : ' &gt; 5
Deseree King, BIR Deseree King, BIR