* 9317009
* Three-Dimensional Modeling of Contaminants Transport in     Subsurface Environment: From the Land Surface Through the   Unsaturated Zone and Fully Saturated Aquifers
* GEO,EAR
* 04/15/1994,09/30/1998
* Tian-Chyi  Jim Yeh, University of Arizona
* Continuing Grant
* L. Douglas James
* 09/30/1998
* USD 247,143.00

9317009 Yeh The importance of field heterogeneities in groundwater pollution
problems has been widely recognized during the last decade. Many field and
theoretical studies have been conducted to enhance our understanding of their
impacts and to improve our predictive ability of contaminant migration in the
field. Conditional simulation is generally accepted as the most logical approach
that can improve our prediction of contaminant transport in the field. Many
studies are, however, adopt simplified and unrealistic scenarios such as one or
two-dimensional steady-state flow. Studies have never been conducted where
contaminants move multi- dimensionally through the unsaturated zone to the water
table and propagate through the aquifer. One of the limiting factors is
computational difficulty and the enormous amount of CPU time required for multi-
dimensional numerical simulation. This problem is most severe in the case of
flow and transport in the unsaturated zone due to the nonlinearity of the
governing flow equation. Stochastic conditional simulations are even more
formidable. An approach recently developed by the investigator reduces the CPU
time for simulating transport of solutes in two-dimensional unsaturated
heterogeneous soils by two or three orders of magnitude. This technical
breakthrough allows conditional simulation of solute transport in heterogeneous
porous media under unsaturated conditions. The robustness of the approach
compels us to try it on three-dimensional transport of contaminants from
heterogeneous unsaturated vadose zones to fully saturated aquifers. The overall
objectives of the study are to develop a computationally feasible algorithm for
simulation of contaminant transport in three-dimensional heterogeneous porous
media under variably saturated conditions and to investigate the potential of
our proposed conditional concept for designing sampling procedures that improves
our prediction of contaminant migration in subsurface envir onment. In other
words, we would like to assess the degree of sampling is necessary to predict
migration of contaminants in the subsurface environment.