* 9317660
* Nucleation, Growth, and Structure of Metal-on-Metal Films
* MPS,CHE
* 01/01/1994,06/30/1998
* Patricia Thiel, Iowa State University
* Continuing Grant
* Steven Bernasek
* 06/30/1998
* USD 406,000.00

9317660 Evans This award, made by the Analytical and Surface Chemistry Program,
provides support for a collaborative research project involving Professors Thiel
and Evans at Iowa State University. During the tenure of this three-year
continuing grant, the PIs will investigate nonequilibrium structure in metal-on-
metal films using a well-defined combination of theory and experiment. Professor
Thiel will explore nonequilibrium structures which are formed due to limited
rates of edge diffusion, island dissolution, or escape from islands. Professor
Evans will carry out the complex theoretical modeling of the nonequilibrium
experimental systems. This unique collaboration between a chemist and
mathematician will allow combined experimental and theoretical analyses of size
and density distributions during nucleation and growth of island structures. The
experimental methods to be used include scanning tunneling microscopy and low-
energy-electron diffraction. %%% Professors Thiel and Evans will investigate the
experimental and theoretical aspects of film growth on solid surfaces. The
objective of the proposed research is to enhance our understanding of the growth
of thin films and the chemical factors that control the mechanisms and rates of
growth of these technologically important systems. ***