* 9317569
* Late Quaternary Climates of Western Beringia
* GEO,AGS
* 04/15/1994,03/31/2000
* Linda Brubaker, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Jay S. Fein
* 03/31/2000
* USD 582,429.00

Abstract ATM-9317569 Anderson, Patricia M. Brubaker, Linda B. University of
Washington Title: Late Quaternary Climate of Western Beringia This award
supports a project under paleoclimates in Arctic Lakes and Estuaries (PALE), a
program that focuses on the timing, magnitude, and rates of change in arctic
climates during the late Quaternary. Understanding the complex regional
responses to past shifts in global climate requires: 1) the compilation of
numerous well-dated records of paleoclimate indicators (e.g., pollen); 2) the
calibration of these proxies by defining their modern climatic relationships;
and 3) the comparison of climatic histories inferred from the paleo-data to
qualitative or quantitative paleoclimatic models. Although such data set are
available from lakes in many areas of the North American and European Arctic,
comparable information is virtually absent from northern Siberia. This award
supports a project designed to analyze pollen, spores, plant macrofossils, and
sediment geochemistry of lake cores to reconstruct the late Quaternary
vegetation and climate of Western Beringia (northeast Siberia). These histories
will be reconstructed for six study areas, which today encompass the range of
vegetation and climate in far northeast Russia. Analyses of surficial lake muds
will improve the definition of modern pollen- vegetation-climate relationships
and aid the paleoclimatic interpretation of fossil data. The new Russian data
will allow a more detailed description of trans-Beringian paleovegetational
patterns and inferred paleoclimates. Definition of such broad- scale patterns
will help paleo-data/GCM comparisons for the Arctic, thereby improving the
understanding of high latitude responses to global climatic changes.