* 9317588
* Neotectonic Evolution of Antarctic Peninsula/Scotia         Sea Region:  Multi-Beam, Sidescan Sonar, Seismic,           Magnetics and Gravity Studies
* O/D,OPP
* 08/15/1994,07/31/1997
* Lawrence Lawver, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Scott Borg
* 07/31/1997
* USD 166,504.00

This award supports a marine geophysical investigation of the Bransfield Strait
and the Shackleton Fracture Zone and environs in the Scotia Sea in an effort to
understand the neotectonic evolution of the region. Multibeam swath mapping and
sidescan sonar mapping will be used along with multichannel seismic imaging. The
main goal of this proposal is to collect multibeam and sidescan sonar data to
map the structural character and tectonic fabric of the evolving plate boundary
in Southwest Scotia Sea, Shackleton Fracture Zone, and Bransfield Strait. Follow
up multichannel seismic surveys will be done in the Southwest Scotia Sea. The
secondary goal is to use sidescan sonar reflectivity images to generate detailed
structural maps of the seafloor of these regions and to integrate the new data
with existing seismic reflection, Geosat gravity, Hydrosweep and Seabeam
bathymetric data. Once the base maps are produced they can be used by other
researchers to help interpret multichannel and single channel seismic reflection
records. The neotectonic evolution of the Antarctic Peninsula and Scotia Sea is
extremely complex. Understanding the recent evolution of the Drake-Scotia-
Antarctic-South America plate intersections will provide important information
as to how major plate boundaries reorganize after demise of a long-lived
spreading center and the consequential reduction in the number of plates. The
plate reorganization probably resulted in the uplift of the Shackleton Ridge
which may have effected the sedimentary patterns in both the Scotia Sea and
possibly the Weddell Sea. If the break of the Shackleton transform fault can be
traced with multibeam and sidescan sonar as it intersects the southern end of
South America then the orientation and geometry of the faults, fractures and
deformation as the transform fault intersects the South American continent will
help to interpret the structures in that complex region. Bransfield Strait is
presently undergoing extensi on based on high heat flow, active volcanoes and
inferences from seismic reflection work. Seismic refraction indicates thick
crust similar to the East African Rift or passive volcanic margins of
continents. In contrast, analysis of isotopes and rare earth elements of the
recent volcanics shows seemingly no continental contamination. The active
extension in Bransfield Strait must be related to the plate reorganization but
it is unclear exactly what tectonic processes are occurring. Besides elucidating
the tectonic fabric of Bransfield Strait, the multibeam and sidescan sonar
survey will identify potential dredge targets and DSRV Alvin dive sites.