* 9317587
* Collaborative Research: Bloom Dynamics and Food Web         Structure in the Ross Sea: Primary Productivity, New        Production and Bacterial Growth
* O/D,OPP
* 07/01/1994,06/30/1999
* Walker Smith, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Continuing Grant
* Polly A. Penhale
* 06/30/1999
* USD 366,135.00

9317587 Smith The growing season for phytoplankton in polar oceans is short, but
intense. There is an increasing body of evidence that in many Antarctic
habitats, the most active period may be very early in the season, a period that
has not been emphasized in previous investigations. This project is part of an
interdisciplinary program that focuses on the dynamics of the spring
phytoplankton bloom in a highly productive subsystem of the Antarctic, the Ross
Sea. The overall program will test hypotheses related to the initiation of the
phytoplankton bloom shortly after the onset of ice melt, the mechanisms
controlling phytoplankton growth and productivity in spring, the implications
and short-term fate of high productivity in spring, and the transition from
spring to midsummer conditions. This component will conduct a set of process-
oriented experiments designed to elucidate the controls of phytoplankton
productivity, growth and accumulation as well as the mechanisms which control
bacterial abundance and productivity in Antarctic waters. Specifically, the
relative photosynthetic and nutrient (nitrate, ammonium) characteristics of
diatom- vs. Phaeocystis- dominated assemblages will be examined to test if
Phaeocystis simply grows faster under spring conditions in the Ross Sea.
Phytoplankton and bacterial biomass, productivity and their interactions will be
measured to elucidate the complex physical-chemical-biological interactions
which occur. Substantial understanding of the mechanisms controlling
phytoplankton growth and productivity in spring, the implications and short-term
fate of high productivity in spring, and the transition from spring to midsummer
conditions will result from this research. Finally, because the Antarctic is the
ocean's largest high-nutrient, low biomass system, and hence has the greatest
potential for sequestering carbon dioxide, knowledge of the dynamics of the Ross
Sea phytoplankton will also increase our understanding of the carbo n cycle of
the Southern Ocean.