* 9317949
* DNA Polymorphism and Divergence of Glucose-6-Phosphate      Isomerase in Five Species of Invertebrates
* BIO,DEB
* 03/15/1994,08/31/1997
* John McDonald, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* Therese A. Markow
* 08/31/1997
* USD 138,000.00

9317949 McDonald In several species of animals, the enzyme glucose-6-phosphate
isomerase (Gpi) has differences in allele frequency between northern and
southern locations. Natural selection may be the cause of these geographic
patterns, with one allele being favored in warm environments and another allele
in cool environments. It has been difficult, however, to rule out other
explanations for geographic patterns in allele frequency, such as random drift
of frequencies in isolated populations. The DNA for the Gpi gene in five species
of invertebrates will be sequenced, and several statistical tests will be done
which can determine whether natural selection is important in affecting the
gene. The data will also help determine whether the differences between closely
related species are due to natural selection, or to the accumulation of random
mutations that are not affected by selection. The results of the project will
address two basic questions in the genetics of natural populations: how
important natural selection is in determining gene frequencies within a species,
and how important natural selection is in determining the differences between
species. When differences are observed within or between species in protein and
DNA sequences, it is of obvious importance for a wide range of genetic
researches to understand whether natural selection has caused the variation, or
whether the variation is due to mutations that are unaffected by selection. In
addition, the research may provide insights into genetic and biochemical basis
by which populations of organisms adapt to different environments. This is
importa nt to understanding how species will respond to changing environments,
adapting or going extinct, and in designing new genetically engineered
organisms. R T " $ &amp; ( * , . 0 2 4 6 8 : &lt; ! ! ! ! &lt; &gt; @ B D F H J
L N P R T ! ! F L T &lt; T ( Times New Roman Symbol &amp; Arial g g g " h E c e
c e k 7 Crystal Blackshear Crystal Blackshear