* 9317200
* Collaborative Research: Bloom Dynamics and Food             Web Structure in the Ross Sea:  Dynamics of Dissolved       Organic Carbon
* O/D,OPP
* 07/01/1994,06/30/1997
* Dennis Hansell, Bermuda Institute of Ocean Sciences (BIOS), Inc.
* Continuing Grant
* Bernhard Lettau
* 06/30/1997
* USD 362,047.00

9317200 Hansell The growing season for phytoplankton in polar oceans is short,
but intense. There is an increasing body of evidence that in many Antarctic
habitats, the most active period may be very early in the season, a period that
has not been emphasized in previous investigations. This project is part of an
interdisciplinary program that focuses on the dynamics of the spring
phytoplankton bloom in a highly productive subsystem of the Antarctic, the Ross
Sea. The overall program will test hypotheses related to the initiation of the
phytoplankton bloom shortly after the onset of ice melt, the mechanisms
controlling phytoplankton growth and productivity in spring, the implications
and short-term fate of high productivity in spring, and the transition from
spring to midsummer conditions. The overall goal of this proposal is to
determine the importance and role of dissolved organic carbon (DOC) as an
intermediate in the carbon cycle of the Southern Ocean. It is estimated that
almost 1000 gigatons of reduced carbon reside in this pool globally and that it
has a turnover time 6000 years. The average net oceanic carbon dioxide2 uptake
of 2.1 gigatons (Quay et al., 1992) is only a fraction of a percent of the DOC
pool so a perturbation in the DOC production or sink terms could strongly impact
the balance between oceanic and atmospheric carbon. Yet the dynamics of this
large pool remain an enigma, particularly in high latitude environments where
concentrations of DOC can be very high. The specific objectives of this work are
1) to determine the concentrations of both the total and biologically labile
pools of dissolved organic carbon in the coastal polynya of the Ross Sea during
Phaeocystis- and diatom-dominated spring blooms, 2) to measure the rates of
mineralization and production of DOC during these blooms in the surface mixed
layer, and 3) to infer the export of DOC from the surface waters via deep
mixing. This project will contribute to an improved under standing of DOC
cycling in the Southern Ocean.