* 9317019
* Ozone Depletion, UV-B Radiation and Vascular Plant          Performance in Antarctica
* O/D,OPP
* 12/01/1994,11/30/1995
* James McGraw, West Virginia University Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Polly A. Penhale
* 11/30/1995
* USD 110,000.00

9317019 Day The presence of well-documented stratospheric "ozone hole" events
and enhanced ultraviolet-B radiation levels in Antarctica provide a unique
opportunity to assess the effects of ultraviolet-B radiation on plant
performance. There are several reasons to expect the ultraviolet-B radiation may
be a significant, and increasingly important limitation to the performance of
Antarctic vascular plants: Levels of terrestrial ultraviolet-B radiation in
Antarctica have increased considerably in recent years, and are likely to
continue increasing, particularly in austral spring; Recent research on marine
phytoplankton in Antarctic waters has found that enhanced ultraviolet-B
radiation levels associated with ozone hole events are responsible for
significant reductions in phytoplankton productivity; Research on vascular
plants in other regions has shown that supplemental ultraviolet-B radiation
levels can limit the performance of many plant species; and Recent
investigations have show that the leaves of many grasses and forbs from other
regions are particularly ineffective at screening ultraviolet-B radiation before
it reaches potentially-sensitive mesophyll tissue in the leaf interior. Thus,
one would suspect that the grass Deschampsia antarctica and the forb Colobanthus
quitensis, which are the only two vascular plants native to Antarctica, are
likely to be relatively ineffective at screening ultraviolet-B radiation.
Surprisingly, apparently no research has addressed the impacts of ultraviolet-B
radiation on Antarctic vascular plants. The proposed research attempts to answer
the question of whether ultraviolet-B, particularly ultraviolet-B radiation
associated with ozone hole events, affects photosynthesis, growth, and
reproductive performance of D. antarctica and C. quitensis. The relative
magnitude of this limitation will be assessed by using experimental field
treatments to compare ultraviolet-B radiation to other potential limitations.
Selective filte rs will be used to remove UV components from sunlight over
naturally-growing plants, while additional water or nutrients will be supplied
to other plants. These field experiments will be complemented with more detailed
investigations using supplemental ultraviolet-B radiation treatments in West
Virginia. Recently developed techniques such as fiber-optic microprobes will be
used to examine the UV/visible optical properties of leaves and reproductive
structures in D. antarctica and C. quitensis, and assess how these change in
response to enhanced ultraviolet-B radiation levels. This approach will
elucidate some of the underlying mechanisms responsible for Antarctic plant
responses to ultraviolet-B radiation in the field.