* 9317873
* RUI:  Acquisition of Inverted and Upright Light Microscopes and an Image Processing and Analysis System to Support      Research in Cell Biology
* BIO,DBI
* 04/15/1994,09/30/1996
* Robert Koch, California State University-Fullerton
* Standard Grant
* Michael K. Lamvik
* 09/30/1996
* USD 92,021.00

9317873 Koch Light microscopic studies comprise the cornerstone of cell
biological investigations. No cell biology research laboratory should be without
access to the full complement of modern light microscopy techniques for
analyzing cell structure and function. This proposal seeks matching funds to
purchase one inverted microscope and one upright microscopes each having phase
contrast, epifluorescence and differential interference contrast optics with
still or video photomicrography capabilities all to be coupled to a state-of-
the-art image acquisition and analysis system and a dedicated image processing
computer. This instrumentation will form the nucleus of a new Light Microscopy
Laboratory. Its acquisition continues our effort to enhance research
opportunities for faculty, graduate and undergraduate students studying cell
biology. Microscopes of the types requested are not readily available at
present. Researchers must borrow time on a single research-grade upright
microscope or compete with students in five courses for four student grade
upright microscopes--no research-grade inverted microscope or image
acquisition/processing instrumentation is available at all. The requested
instrumentation will promote studies of cell biology of tunicate sperm and egg
activation, axonal transport of mRNA in sea hare neurons, and protection to UV
damage in plants as well as five other minor projects.