* 9317431
* Collaborative Research: Bloom Dynamics and Food Web         Structure in the Ross Sea:  Phytoplankton Growth and        Sulfur Cycling
* O/D,OPP
* 07/01/1994,06/30/1995
* Giacomo DiTullio, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Continuing Grant
* Polly A. Penhale
* 06/30/1995
* USD 94,313.00

9317431 DiTullio The growing season for phytoplankton in polar oceans is short,
but intense. There is an increasing body of evidence that in many Antarctic
habitats, the most active period may be very early in the season, a period that
has not been emphasized in previous investigations. This project is part of an
interdisciplinary program that focuses on the dynamics of the spring
phytoplankton bloom in a highly productive subsystem of the Antarctic, the Ross
Sea. The overall program will test hypotheses related to the initiation of the
phytoplankton bloom shortly after the onset of ice melt, the mechanisms
controlling phytoplankton growth and productivity in spring, the implications
and short-term fate of high productivity in spring, and the transition from
spring to midsummer conditions. This research will investigate the initiation of
the phytoplankton spring bloom, especially the factors which may be important in
triggering and terminating the Phaeocystis pouchetii bloom. Specific research
will focus on sulfur and manganese cycling processes especially with regard to
possible global climate change processes. Correlations of particulate and
dissolved dimethyl sulfide concentrations will be estimated with respect to
phytoplankton pigment concentrations. Phytoplankton growth rates will be
assessed using pigment labeling techniques. The fate of the dimethyl sulfide
produced will be determined. Measurements will be performed to determine the
relative importance of: (a) bacterial uptake (b) fluxes out of the photic zone
from sediment trap samples and (c) atmospheric emissions. The effects of acrylic
acid production on various components of the food web, such as its bactericidal
properties will be investigated. The overall goal of this component is to
understand the dynamics of the oceanic sulfur cycle during the spring bloom.