* 9317167
* Sondrestrom Facility--Research, Operation, and Coordination
* GEO,AGS
* 01/15/1994,06/30/2000
* John Kelly, SRI International
* Cooperative Agreement
* Robert M. Robinson
* 06/30/2000
* USD 10,498,878.00

9317167 Kelly This award will provide continued support for the Sondrestrom
incoherent scatter radar and lidar facility at Kangerlussuaq, Greenland
(formerly Sondre Stromfjord, Greenland). SRI International will use the funds to
continue operating, maintaining, and upgrading the facility and for the
scientific research efforts of its professional staff. The Sondrestrom facility
is the poleward mainstay of the four-radar chain that extends to the magnetic
equator. The requested funding will be used to accomplish the following tasks
involving both the radar and lidar systems: (1) Schedule and operate the radar
approximately 1200 hours per year, and assist in operating collocated
instruments. (2) Assist users in planning, designing, and interpreting results
from radar and lidar experiments; coordinate their visits, including obtaining
U. S. Air Force and diplomatic approval, and providing logistics support. (3)
Maintain and upgrade the radar and lidar facility, and assist in maintaining
other collocated facilities. (4) Develop and maintain system software for
acquiring, reducing and interpreting data. (5) Carry out World Day observations
and specific research programs. (6) Provide World Day data to the National
Center for Atmospheric Research database and its users, and maintain a
comprehensive data library at Menlo Park. (7) Collaborate with scientists
throughout the world in scientific pursuits concerning the geospace environment.
(8) Be the liaison between the Greenland Home Rule Government, Danish Commission
for Scientific Research in Greenland, and the National Science Foundation on
issue related to the Sondrestrom facility. ***