* 9317380
* Primary Productivity in Antarctic Pack Ice
* GEO,OCE
* 02/01/1994,01/31/1996
* James Kremer, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Phillip R. Taylor
* 01/31/1996
* USD 67,832.00

Kremer 9317380 Models and estimates of primary production and biogeochemical
cycling in the Southern Ocean must account for processes occurring in at least
four distinct regions: the open ocean, the marginal ice edge zones, the pack ice
zone, and the coastal regions. Of these regions, the least studied is the pack
ice zone, where rates of primary production and nutrient cycling remain unknown.
This is due to it's relative inaccessibility and the present lack of remote
sensing technology to evaluate the potential for primary production in ice or
ice covered waters. Therefore, assessing primary production and nutrient cycling
in pack ice requires either ice breaking capabilities and/or the establishment
of temporary remote facilities. During 1992, the first drifting ice station in
Antarctic waters, Ice station Weddell #1 (ISW-1) was established in the
perennial pack ice of the Western Weddell Sea. ISW-1 provided a platform for
conducting the first time-series investigations assessing primary production,
nutrient cycling and net accumulation of biogenic particulate matter in
Antarctic pack ice. During ISW-1 operation, additional ice cores were obtained
by the ice physics group and are now archived at the Cold Regions Research and
Engineering Laboratories (CRREL). Processing these cores for the determination
of biomass (as pigments, particulate organic carbon and nitrogen) and biogenic
silica will compliment the existing ISW- 1 biological data set, and extend the
assessment of the new production/accumulation of biogenic particulate matter to
include additional study sites and ice types that were not analyzed during
routine ISW-1 operations. Additionally, studies of primary production, biomass
distributions and nutrients in pack ice will be extended to the Bellingshausen
and Amundsen seas through a cruise in August and September 1993. This project
will provide the resources and time necessary for processing samples collected
at CRREL and from the Bellingshau sen-Amundsen seas and for the interpretation
of the results. The data sets generated from ISW-1 operations and the
Bellingshausen-Amundsen cruise will extend the knowledge of the relative
contribution of biogenic particulate matter in the Southern Ocean and will be
utilized in the construction of or as verification of pack ice primary
production and nutrient cycling models presently under development. ***