* 9317230
* Transport Physiology of Molecular Biology of the            Invertebrate Electrogenic 2 Na/1 H Antiporter
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/1994,07/31/1997
* Gregory Ahearn, University of Hawaii
* Continuing Grant
* Elvira Doman
* 07/31/1997
* USD 251,017.00

9317230 Ahearn This investigation is a request for funds to study ion transport
processes of the crustacean gastrointestinal tract and compare them to those of
the more thoroughly investigated mammals. In previous studies, we have
identified an apparently unique invertebrate electrogenic cation exchanger on
the brush border membrane of gut and kidney epithelial cells which is involved
in sodium and calcium balance and differs in physiological properties from
analogous transport proteins from vertebrates. The present project will extend
these early studies using the combination of membrane vesicle techniques and
molecular biology procedures to characterize the functional role of this unique
invertebrate protein in important biological activities of crustaceans such as
ion homeostasis and moltin. To accomplish these objectives, purified membrane
vesicles of brush border and basolateral plasma membranes and membranes derived
from specific intracellular vacuoles that are associated with digestive and
calcium regulatory activities will be prepared from lobster (Homarus americanus)
hepatopancreas (paired diverticulum of the posterior stomach) using standard
centrifugation techniques. Transport properties of these vesicles will be
investigated using a combination of radioisotopic and spectrophotometric
techniques. The gene nucleotide sequence of the lobster electrogenic cation
exchanger will be determined using our previously developed monoclonal antibody
as a probe of the genome. From these physiological and molecular studies we
should be able to clarify the functional role(s) of this apparently unique
invertebrate transporter and compare its gene sequence with those of analogous,
but physiolgically distinct, mammalian Na+/H+ antiporter isoforms. ***