* 9317599
* Theoretical Investigation of Turbulent Dynamics             in the Tornado Vortex
* GEO,AGS
* 05/01/1994,01/31/1998
* William Lewellen, West Virginia University Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Stephan P. Nelson
* 01/31/1998
* USD 318,662.00

9317599 Lewellen Tornadoes are among the most powerful of natural disasters.
Over several years of research, general characteristics of the dynamics of
tornado vortices have been described and many aspects of their parent storms
have been defined. Nonetheless, some basic questions still remain as to the
nature of the flow within tornadic vortices and what factors control their
structure. The Principal Investigator proposes to further knowledge of tornadoes
using an advanced numerical model and observational information. The type of
numerical model to be used is called a large eddy simulation model (LES) and
marks the first time this technology has been applied to the study of tornadic
vortices. The major advantage of this model is that its high resolution allows
the resolution of enough of large turbulent eddies to that sub-grid
parameterizations of turbulent transport is not nearly as critical as it is in
lower resolution simulations. Model boundary conditions will be determined from
available field data and numerical simulations of thunderstorms. It is
anticipated that the project will result in better definition of the distinctive
features of the turbulent wind field associated with tornadoes. It should permit
the answers to such questions as: (1) how is the probability of reaching a given
extreme speed at a given height related to values of convergence and vorticity
averaged over this tornado vortex domain; (2) what is the sensitivity of the
tornado wind field to various boundary conditions; (3) what sub-grid
parameterizations for this type flow provide the proper interactions for
simulations over larger domains with lower resolution? ***