* 9317684
* Structural Determinants of the Biological Activity of       Ryanodine
* BIO,MCB
* 03/15/1994,08/31/1998
* William Welch, Board of Regents, NSHE, obo University of Nevada, Reno
* Continuing Grant
* Barbara K. Zain
* 08/31/1998
* USD 375,762.00

9317684 Welch Ryanodine is a plant alkaloid which binds to a specific
receptor,an intracellular calcium release channel, first identified at the triad
junction of skeletal muscle. Subsequently, ryanodine receptors (RyR) have been
found in many non-muscle cells including cells of the central nervous system.
Ryanodine has been shown to be a powerful effector of calcium regulation in
muscle. Although the ryanodine molecule is complex, important stearic and
electrostatic interactions can be localized to relatively small, specific
regions of the molecule. The overall goal of this project is to elucidate the
relationship between ligand structure and the biological activities of the
ryanoids. The aims are to (1) develop biologically active ryanoids with minimal
structure, (2) develop agents which effect specific alterations in RyR
properties, (3)define the mammalian skeletal muscle ryanodine binding site,
(4)lay the groundwork for development of RyR isoform-specific agents and (5)
define endogenous effectors. This project will focus on rabbit skeletal muscle
RyR. Approaches will be: (I) New ryanodine analogs will be developed. (II) The
biological activity of these compounds will be assessed by measurements of
ligand binding to the RyR, the modulation of ion channel activity of the RyR
using ionic flux and planar lipid bilayer single channel measurements, and
functional effects on intact cells. (III) The conformations of the ryanoids will
be deduced from the covalent structures by molecular mechanics, molecular
dynamics and quantum mechanics. The deduced conformations will be compared to
NMR or crystallographic data whenever possible (for example, the X-ray and NMR
structures of ryanodine have been solved). A comparative molecular field
analysis (ComFA) will be produced for selected analogs, and correlations between
the stearic and electrostatic fields computed to discern the relationship
between the biological activities and the structure of the ryanodine a nalogs.
(IV) The results of the CoMFA will be used to design new ryanoids for testing,
refinement and correction of hypotheses. %%% Calcium ion regulates many critical
cellular functions such as muscle contraction. The levels of calcium free in
cells are precisely regulated by physiological control mechanisms. Ryanodine is
a plant alkaloid which has a powerful effect on calcium regulation in cells and
can serve as a useful tool in studying calcium control mechanisms. Ryanodine
acts by binding to a specific receptor, an intracellular calcium release
channel. Ryanodine receptors were first identified in skeletal muscle, but have
also been found in many non-muscle cells including cells of the central nervous
system. Although the ryanodine molecule is complex, its functional interactions
with its receptor can be localized to relatively small, specific regions of the
molecule. The overall goal of this project is to elucidate the relationship
between the structure and the biological activities of the ryanoids. This will
result in the development of important new probes which will enhance our
understanding of cellular calcium regulation. ***