* 9317613
* Studies of Elongation Arrest and Transcript Hydrolysis by RNA Polymerase II
* NONE,NONE
* 01/01/1994,06/30/1997
* Diane Hawley, University of Oregon Eugene
* Continuing grant
* karen kindle-hartsuyker
* 06/30/1997
* USD 360,000.00

9317613 Hawley This project will be a biochemical analysis of the proteins and
DNA sequences that determine the in vitro elongation behavior of human RNA
polymerase II. The major goals of these experiments are to answer questions in
three general areas. First, why and how does pol II become transcriptionally
blocked at arrest sites and what does the behavior of pol II at such sites
reveal about the function and structure of elongation complexes? Initial studies
addressing these questions have focused on the mechanism of transcription arrest
in vitro at the adenovirus major late arrest site. The DNA sequence elements
contributing to arrest at this site are being defined and characterized. These
studies will be extended to several additional sites at which arrest and/or
termination is observed, with a particular emphasis on understanding what
features of the site specify transcript release. The second set of questions
addresses the roles of two elongation factors, SII and TFIIF. SII has been shown
to promote readthrough of arrest sites and to stimulate a 3' --> 5'
exonucleolytic activity of pol II, whereas TFIIF has been shown to enhance the
overall rate of elongation. The biochemical characterization of these activities
will continue, focusing on several specific questions that address possible
physiological roles for the exonuclease activity and the possibility that TFIIF
activity is important for moderating that activity to promote efficient
elongation. Finally, the ability of pol II elongation complexes to translocate
backwards on the template will be used to pose and answer questions about the
structure of the elongation complex, focusing particularly on the possibility
that RNA secondary structures can inhibit the backing up reaction by inhibiting
reformation of the DNA:RNA hybrid and that pol II may respond to termination
sites encountered while backing up. %%% One of the most important and
fundamental questions in biology is how genetically i dentical cells
differentially use the genetic information to become specialized for different
functional and structural roles in the organism. The specific morphology and
function of a cell are determined by what proteins that cell is making; the
information specifying production of all the possible proteins the cell could
make is encoded in the genes. Thus, in each cell type, some genes must remain
"off" (not expressed), while others are turned on (expressed). The first step in
gene expression is the synthesis of a copy of the gene. This copying process,
called transcription, produces an RNA molecule that is then used by the cell's
machinery to direct production of the protein encoded by that gene.
Transcription is performed by an enzyme called RNA polymerase, which must not
only select the genes that are to be expressed in a certain cell but then must
make a complete copy of that gene. Both the initiation and the completion of
transcription are regulated, and this regulation is an important part of the
mechanism by which different cells make different sets of proteins. This
research will focus on understanding how transcription is regulated at the level
of continuation and completion of the copying process. Specifically, there are
signals within some genes that cause transcription to stop, and there are
proteins that have been identified that alter the ability of the RNA polymerase
to respond to or ignore these signals. This project is a biochemical analysis of
the interaction of the RNA polymerase with these signals and proteins and is
directed at understanding the molecular details of these interactions and their
importance to the regulation of gene expression. ***