* 9317476
* RUI: Gene Flow and Hybridization in Milkweeds (Asclepias L.) A Comparison of Two Sympatric Species
* BIO,DEB
* 05/01/1994,04/30/1997
* Steven Broyles, SUNY College at Cortland
* Standard Grant
* Mark Courtney
* 04/30/1997
* USD 65,690.00

WPC 2 B V P Z Courier 10cpi ? x x x , Z x 6 X @ 8 ; X @ HP DeskJet 500
HPDES500.PRS x @ x X , , 0 FX @Courier 10cpi 2 @ V P Z #| x ? x x x , Z x 6 X @
8 ; X @ HP DeskJet 500 HPDES500.PRS x @ x X , , 0 FX @ 9317476 Broyles
Hybridization and long distance pollen movement (i.e. gene flow) are important
processes that are responsible for introducing and maintaining genetic diversity
within plant populations. In the proposed study, I will examine pollen
dispersal, gene flow, and effective hybridization between two common North
American milkweeds (Poke Milkweed, Asclepias exaltata L.; Common Milkweed,
Asclepias syriaca L.). These species occur in the same areas and overlap in
flowering time, share pollinators, form viable hybrids, maintain high levels of
genetic variation, and possess several unique genetic markers. Together these
features make them ideal candidates for examining gene flow and hybridization.
Nevertheless, A . exaltata and A . syriaca differ in several reproductive
features (e.g., asexual reproduction, investment in pollen producing structures,
and inflorescence size) which permits us to examine the effects of these life
history traits on gene flow and hybridization. Specifically, gene flow and
hybridization will be quantified by identifying pollen parents of seed to
examine (1) pollen dispersal, (2) levels of long distance pollen mediated gene
flow, and (3) effective hybridization between these species. The results of this
study will contribute to our understanding of gene flow and hybridization in the
maintenance of genetic diversity in plant populations. These processes are
important to study because genetic var iation provides the necessary material
for adaptation and long term species conservation. I will examine the underlying
pollination mechanisms and plant pollinator interactions that directly affect
these evolutionary processes. In addition, this study should lay the foundation
for more comprehensive studies on the processes and evolutionary consequences of
long distance pollen dispersal and hybridization in natural populations.