* 9317695
* Systematics and Biogeography of the Pempherididae (Pisces:  Perciformes), and Relationships of the Ocean Basins
* BIO,DEB
* 05/01/1994,08/31/1999
* Randall Mooi, Milwaukee Public Museum
* Standard Grant
* Douglas Siegel-Causey
* 08/31/1999
* USD 75,000.00

9317695 MOOI The fish family Pempherididae, known as sweepers or bullseyes, are
a common element of coral and rocky reef fish communities of the Indian and
Pacific Oceans, as well as in the Caribbean. There are about 40 named species,
although the validity of some of these is questionable, and there are records of
what appear to be undescribed species. Many members of the family are known to
possess light organs, but despite this feature and their wide distribution they
have received little attention. The goals of the present research are: (1) to
determine the number of valid species within the family and the distribution of
each of these species; (2) to discover the historical relationships among these
species; and (3) to apply the results of goals 1-2 to the broader question of
how common distributional areas within the ocean basisn are related to one
another. This will be done by examining the external and internal anatomy of
existing species of sweepers found in museums of the United States and around
the world, as well as from specimens sampled from selected field localities
including Thailand and Australia. Such museum and field work should result in
the discovery of a number of new species, as well as accurate maps of ranges of
known species. Data gathered from the museum and field specimens will be
utilized to hypothesize a family tree of sweepers from which relationships can
be inferred. Combining the distributional data with the family tree will provide
an initial picture of historical relationships among various ocean basins of the
Indian, Pacific, and Atlantic Oceans. Comparison of this initial picture with
similar information from previous studies on fishes and other organisms will be
used to produce a comprehensive review of the history of ocean basins. %%% The
results of the study will contribute to our understanding of the processes that
increase species diversity and how species have come to be distributed as they
are today. Such information will help to explain p atterns of biodiversity and
how they have arisen, perhaps influencing approaches to conservation. It will
also have potential applications for fisheries management in terms of
identifying populations with restricted distributions among fish stocks
otherwise considered wide ranging. Geological studies of ocean basins might also
be influenced by the conclusions of this work. ***