* 9317997
* Population Genetics of Carboxylesterases in Drosophila
* BIO,DEB
* 04/01/1994,09/30/1997
* Rollin Richmond, University of South Florida
* Continuing Grant
* Lisa D. Brooks
* 09/30/1997
* USD 313,000.00

9317997 Richmond This research will use fruitflies of the genus, Drosophila, to
study the kind and amount of variation at the molecular level in natural
populations of this organism. The long term goals of this work are to
characterize molecular variation in the structural and regulatory regions of
genes that code for the structure of enzymes that degrade ester compounds. These
enzymes are called carboxylesterases. This work will help to identify the kinds
of changes that occur in DNA and that result in differences in the timing in
expression and the location within the organism of carboxylesterases. The
immediate goals of this research will be to complete precise analyses of the DNA
sequences responsible for the regulation of a specific carboxylesterases gene,
Est-6, in Drosophila melangaster and a related gene, Est-5, in D.pseudoobscura.
We also plan to determine if individuals from natural populations of D.
melangaster differ from each other in the DNA sequences that control the
expression of the Est-6 gene in this species. We will use recombinant DNA
technologies to clone and manipulate esterase gene sequences by transferring
engineered gene sequences into special strains of Drosophila embryos. This work
will help us to determine how the forces of evolution act to mold variation at
the molecular level into adapted complexes of genes. ! / 7 A ! ! F ( Times New
Roman Symbol &amp; Arial : : " h c e c e - X 7 Crystal Blackshear Crystal
Blackshear