* 9317979
* Antarctic Stratigraphic Drilling: Cape Roberts Project
* O/D,OPP
* 09/15/1994,08/31/2002
* Peter-Noel Webb, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Continuing Grant
* Scott Borg
* 08/31/2002
* USD 344,186.00

This award represents participation of the United States Antarctic Program
(USAP) in the Cape Roberts Project (CRP), a multi-national program of scientific
drilling in the southwestern Ross Sea region of Antarctica. The USAP will join
the national Antarctic research programs of New Zealand, Italy, Germany, and the
United Kingdom in sponsoring this project. The New Zealand Antarctic Program
(NZAP) is the lead organization and is joined by the Italian and US Antarctic
Programs as major equal partners. Germany and the United Kingdom are minor
sponsors of the CRP. This award supports the scientific management activities
associated with participation of US investigators in the CRP and along with this
award is a commitment for logistical resources from the USAP in support of the
project. The CRP was conceived to address several diverse issues in geosciences
related to the Cretaceous to Paleogene (100-36 million years ago) history of the
Ross Sea sector of Antarctica as well as early development of the southern
ocean. Four holes are planned to investigate a 1500 meter sequence of the
western Victoria Basin. Drilling is expected to be accomplished over two years.
It would be done from land-fast sea ice early in the Austral summer and the
drill system is expected to produce about 95% core recovery. The scientific
objectives of the project include: 1) establishing the history of the
extensional plate fragmentation of the western Ross Sea part of the West
Antarctic Rift System; 2) determining the subsidence and emergence histories of
the Victoria Land Basin and the Transantarctic Mountains; 3) determining the
erosional and depositional budgets associated with rift margin uplift and basin
development; 4) recovering the first late Cretaceous to Paleogene succession
from the southwest Pacific close to Antarctica and attempting to recover
paleoclimatic and paleoceanographic records for the region; 5) investigating
relationships between uplift of the Transantarctic M ountains and climatic
changes in the region; 6) determining the presence or absence of terrestrial or
marine glaciation in the succession; and 7) documenting the impact of tectonic,
sedimentologic, paleoclimatic, and eustatic oscillations on biotic evolution,
biogeography, and marine circulation between 100 and 36 million years ago. This
interdisciplinary research plan will provide valuable new data for Earth systems
modeling, and it will reinforce global science agendas of projects such as the
Ocean Drilling Program and the International Geosphere-Biosphere Program.