* 9317683
* Problems in Evolutionary Theory
* BIO,DEB
* 02/01/1994,06/30/1997
* Deborah Charlesworth, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Mark Courtney
* 06/30/1997
* USD 145,000.00

9317683 Charlesworth Mutation of genes to alleles with deleterious effects on
survival or fertility occurs in the populations of all living organisms, and the
net rate of mutation summed up over all the loci in the genome of any organism
is now thought to be very high. Severely deleterious mutations are the cause of
many diseases in human populations, and mutations with lesser effects are
probably most important in human disease, though little is known about these as
they are difficult to study. In a preliminary study, the investigators found
that the occurrence of deleterious mutations in a region of the genome affects
the evolution of DNA sequences in the same region. They have found that genetic
variability at nucleotide sites that themselves do not affect fitness can be
greatly reduced in such a region. The investigators will quantify this effect in
relation to distances between the genes on the genetic map, and will extend
studies to sequence differences that do have slight fitness effects. It is
important in interpreting such data to include such biologically important
phenomena as deleterious mutations of loci nearby in the genetic map to those
under study. This has not previously been done in theoretical studies. %%%
Results will have implications for the interpretation of data on variability
within populations and on evolutionary divergence between populations. Such
divergence in DNA sequences has b een used as a "molecular clock" to date the
times of origin of species, and has also been used to infer that natural
selection caused the observed differences. When other loci in the genetic
background are included in the models, in addition to the loci under study, the
inference of natural selection may become less certain, and that the rate of the
molecular clock may prove to be influenced by the locations of genes in the
genetic map, and by the level of inbreeding populations.