* 9317398
* X-Ray Diffraction Resource for Biochemical Sciences
* BIO,DBI
* 03/15/1994,02/29/1996
* William Cleland, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Karl A. Koehler
* 02/29/1996
* USD 125,000.00

9317398 Rayment Funds are requested for an x ray area detector system that will
be used to determine the structures of a wide variety of proteins at the
University of Wisconsin, Madison. The instrument will be located at the
Institute for Enzyme Research and will be used by seven laboratories on campus.
These groups have crystallographic projects ready for x ray data collection and
are currently limited by restricted access to the necessary instrumentation. To
date, x ray crystallography is the most powerful technique for determining the
accurate positions of atoms in proteins and macromolecular aggregates, and thus
should be made available to all studies that are directed towards understanding
the molecular basis of structure/function relationships. Due to major
improvements in x ray data collection hardware and software, it has become
possible, in recent years, for an increased number of investigators to conduct x
ray crystallographic studies. As a consequence, it is now realistic and
appropriate for these techniques to be incorporated into a wide range of
research programs. At the University of Wisconsin there are currently seven
groups who have obtained high quality protein crystals and need access to
suitable x ray data collection hardware. The proteins under investigation in the
above mentioned groups differ significantly in both their physical size and
biological function. At one end of the spectrum, continued studies of myosin
subfragment 1 will provide the structural information necessary for establishing
the molecular basis of muscle contraction (Rayment). The combination of x ray
crystallographic a nalyses with biochemical and kinetic approaches to study UDP
galactose 4 epimerase, biotin carboxylase, and pyruvate kinase will provide a
molecular framework for understanding the catalytic function of these enzymes,
all of which proceed through different classes of chemical reactions (Cleland,
Frey and Reed). Likewise, the proposed studies of peptide inhibitors bound to
pepsin and similar enzymes will provide an opportunity to test and develop
strategies for rational drug design (Rich). Finally, the application of NMR and
very high resolution x ray crystallography to the study of electron transport
proteins will yield unique insight into those structural factors that modulate
oxidation reduction potentials and electron transfer rates (Holden and Markley).
Although most of the investigators are specialized in other biochemical
disciplines, they are all committed to using and supporting the instrumentation
requested in this proposal. Indeed, they have already invested considerable
time, effort, and personnel in the development of these crystallographic
projects as complementary approaches to their research interests. At present,
these programs are severely limited by the lack of access to suitable x ray data
collection hardware. u ~ ~CRD0521TMP A ~MF240B TMP 7N ~CAL2B38TMP 2y ~CRD2523TMP
5y ~CAL0607TMP 9317398 Rayment Funds are requested for an x ray area detector
system that will be used to determine the structures of a wid S U z | ! ! ! ! !
F S S ; CG Times Symbol & Arial 1 Courier 0 MS LineDraw h e e I = abstract
Deseree King, BIR Deseree King, BIR