* 9317903
* Zebrafish Development and Genetics Meeting
* BIO,IOS
* 05/01/1994,04/30/1995
* Terri Grodzicker, Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory
* Standard Grant
* Ralph Hecht
* 04/30/1995
* USD 11,400.00

9317903 Grodzicker Cold Spring Harbor Laboratories proposes to organize the
first open-invitation meeting to be devoted to research on zebrafish. The
meeting will focus on the cellular, molecular, and genetic regulation of
embryonic development and growth. Because the field of zebrafish research is so
new and is expanding so rapidly, this is a perfect time for a general meeting of
all the researchers working on zebrafish to share their ideas and experiences
and to foster future communication. The meeting at which most zebrafish research
laboratories will be represented, will function to educate significantly the
investigators in this field, will serve to facilitate the exchange of materials
and information about evolving technologies and methodological approaches, and
will greatly influence the future directions of research in this field.
Enthusiasm within the zebrafish research community for the 1994 meeting is
extensive: 350 individuals from over 100 labs in 16 countries are expected,
representing both beginning and established investigators. Each participant will
have the opportunity to present their work with a poster or in a talk. The
scientific content of the meeting will focus primarily on the early embryonic
development of the zebrafish. Sessions will be devoted to the following areas of
inquiry: (1) gastrulation, body patterning, and morphogenesis; (2) determination
of cell fate; (3) development of the nervous system; (4) growth control; (5)
organogenesis; (6) genetics and genomics; and (7) gene transfer, gene expression
and new methodologies. In addition, a session on community organization will
serve to discuss common goals of the zebrafish research community and to
establish means for the collection and dissemination of information and research
reagents throughout the community. This meeting on zebrafish will have a
critical function in the growth and development of this exciting area of
vertebrate research. ***