* 9317629
* The Role of Antifreeze Proteins in Freezing Avoidance of    Antarctic Fishes
* O/D,OPP
* 07/15/1994,06/30/1998
* Arthur DeVries, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Polly A. Penhale
* 06/30/1998
* USD 474,953.00

9317629 DeVries McMurdo Sound fishes are the most freeze resistant, and are
exposed to greatest extremes of ice and temperature of any fishes in Antarctica.
The project will focus on the extent of the ice association and its fate within
these polar fishes. The deepest depths of ice exposure will also be determined.
These results will be compared to those obtained for fishes living in less icy,
warmer environments near the Antarctic Peninsula where the influence of ice
shelves is absent. The fate of experimentally introduced endogenous ice will be
determine to find out whether Antarctic fish possess mechanisms for disposing of
accumulated ice. The relationship of structure to function of the antifreezes
will also be investigated by determining the three- dimensional structures of
some of the antifreeze peptides (AFPs) and searching for lattice matches between
their polar residues and their ice adsorption plane. Two-Dimensional Nuclear
Magnetic Resonance and molecular modeling techniques will be used. With the
antifreeze glycopeptides (AFGPs), the importance of size for adsorption to
specific planes will be determined. These studies will indicate what the
important features are which give rise to antifreeze function in structurally
diverse molecules. The investigation of the inhibition of ice growth by the
various antifreezes (AFs) will also be continued on how adsorption to various
ice planes leads to inhibition of ice growth. This question remains thus far
unanswered, which they hope to address by examining the effects of the various
AFs on the growth forms of single ice crystals. The organization and structure
of the antifreeze genes of Antarctic fish will also be investigated by
identifying and sequencing genes that code for the high molecular weight AFGPs
and comparing them to organization of the small AFGPs. The sizes of the AFGP
polyprotein gene family will be determined by fluorescent in situ hybridization.
Information on the organization and struc ture will lead to an understanding of
the factors that lead to the necessarily high levels of AF needed for survival
in this extreme freezing Antarctic environment. ***