* 9317900
* Regulation and Physiological Role of Isoprene Emission from Plants
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/1994,07/31/1997
* Thomas Sharkey, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Erik T. Nilsen
* 07/31/1997
* USD 262,077.00

9317900 Sharkey Isoprene is emitted from plants and animals in significant
quantities. Many plants emit 2% of the carbon fixed in photosynthesis as
isoprene making it a major metabolic pathway in these plants. Isoprene emitted
from plants substantially affects atmospheric chemistry. The metabolic control
of isoprene emission and the advantage to plants and animals which emit isoprene
are unknown. The regulation of synthesis of many isoprenoids is affected by
hydroxymethylglutaryl CoA reductase (HMGR) and it is speculated that most HMGR
activity of isoprene emitting plants is required for isoprene synthesis. This
project deals with the regulation of isoprene synthesis, focusing on HMGR and
the recently discovered isoprene synthase. The location of the HMGR needed for
isoprene synthesis will be determined by chloroplast isolation and by nonaqueous
fractionation of leaf material. The research will exploit recent discovery that
a wound-induced signal in one leaf can travel to a second leaf and reduce the
rate of isoprene emission by as much as 80% within 3 minutes. The activity of
HMGR and isoprene synthase before and after the arrival of this wound signal
will be measured to determine how isoprene synthesis is regulated. The research
will also exploit the discovery that kudzu (Pueraria lobata (Willd) Ohwi.)
leaves do not emit isoprene when grown at 20 degree centigrade but can be
induced to emit isoprene by a 6 hour treatment of 30 degree centigrade. The
physiological role of isoprene emission will be investigated by exploring the
recent evidence of thermal protection for the photosynthetic apparatus provided
by isoprene. The proposed research is needed to determine whether it will be
possible or desirable to modify isoprene emission from plants. Isoprene is an
important raw material for synthetic rubber synthesis. The current market is one
billion dollars per year. Because of carcinogenicity of the common substitute
for isoprene, batadiene, an inexpensive biogenic source of isoprene could have a
large impact on the rubber industry. Finally, the synthesis of free isoprene is
a major metabolic pathway in plants and animals which has been largely
overlooked until now. Understanding the physiological relevance of isoprene
emission may lead to important and useful insights which cannot yet be
predicted. ***