* 9317397
* Retinoids and Homeobox Genes in Pattern Formation:  A       Feather Morphogenesis Model
* BIO,IOS
* 07/01/1994,06/30/1997
* Cheng-Ming Chuong, University of Southern California
* Continuing Grant
* Judith Plesset
* 06/30/1997
* USD 330,000.00

9317397 Chuong Pattern formation is a crucial event in embryonic development.
Identification of molecules and mechanisms involved in pattern formation have
been the central interest of developmental biologists. Dr. Chuong is using
feather morphogenesis as a model to study pattern formation and has focused on
adhesion molecules and homeobox (Hox) genes. Dr. Chuong has shown that there are
two kinds of Hox gradients in the integument: a "macro gradient" across the
feather tract and a "micro gradient" across a single feather bud. The
asynchronous alignment of different Hox macro gradient leads to a unique
repertoire of position specific Hox expression patterns named Hox codes of skin
appendages, which he hypothesizes determine the phenotype of skin appendages.
Retinoic acid (RA) can transform feather phenotypes and alter the anterior-
posterior axis of skin appendages, with concomitant changes in Hox expression.
Epithelial-mesenchymal recombination revealed that the Hox micro gradient may be
regulated by a signal from the epithelium. By the use of RA responsive element-
LacZ- containing F9 cells it has been shown that a wave of endogenous RA
activity propagates bilaterally from the midline. Dr. Chuong now suggests that
1) Hox codes of skin appendages determine the phenotype of skin appendages while
the micro gradient determines the A-P axis of skin appendages, 2) The two
gradients are regulated independently: the macro gradient may originate from the
mesoderm, but the micro gradient is determined later and may be determined by
the epithelium, and 3) RA is an endogenous morphogen in skin morphogenesis, with
a dynamic distribution pattern during feather development similar to that of
morphogenetic furrow in Drosophila eye development. To test these hypotheses,
Dr. Chuong will ectopically express Hox genes on skin appendages in ovo using
retroviral gene delivery. The ontogeny of Hox codes will be traced back to
dermatome stage using DiI tracing and somite transpos ition. To search for the
signals that regulate Hox gene expression, a model using epithelial-mesenchymal
rotation/recombination of skin explants was developed in which the inducing
signal can be analyzed. To test whether endogenous RA is involved in pattern
formation, RARE-LacZ containing cell monolayers will be used to detect the
dynamic RA distribution in developing skin. Aided by the distinct morphology of
feathers, these novel approaches will add new dimensions to our understanding of
pattern formation. ***