* 9317356
* Reproductive Endocrinology of Free-Living Adelie Penguins   at Torgersen Island, Antarctica
* GEO,OPP
* 05/01/1995,04/30/2001
* Teresa Bucher, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Polly A. Penhale
* 04/30/2001
* USD 351,030.00

9317356 Vleck The goal of this research is to understand the physiological and
hormonal basis for individual variance in reproductive behavior and breeding
success in free-living Adelie penguins at Torgersen Island, Palmer Station,
Antarctic Peninsula. Aspects of reproductive demographics and behavior,
including return rate to the colony, reproductive success, patterns of mate
acquisition and nest attentiveness have been monitored in a population of
penguins at Torgersen Island since 1990. Methods will include weighing and
measuring birds in the breeding colonies and collecting blood samples for
hormone analysis from individuals expressing known behaviors. Intensive
behavioral observations of banded individuals will be carried out at every stage
of the reproductive cycle. The hormonal and body mass changes that accompany the
different stages of the reproductive cycle will be determined. The relationship
between those measurements and reproductive success will be determined.
Competing hypotheses concerning reproductive competency and general body
condition will be tested as explanations for why a high proportion of breeders
successful in one year do not breed in following year. The physiological
underpinnings for the long shifts that birds spend in attendance at the nest
will be studied in order to understand the interaction of hormonal and energetic
considerations that influence incubation behavior. Understanding these proximate
causes of individual behavior will shed light on the evolutionary bases of life
history patterns. The effects of stress will be measured in birds at different
stages of the reproductive cycle by determining basal levels of corticosterone
and its maximum rate of increase. The hormonal effects of stress will be
compared in penguins. This research will allow determination of whether human
interference affects penguin reproductive success and whether such effects vary
in degree through the reproductive cycle.