* 9317844
* Development of a Land-Use/Land-Cover Change Science Plan forthe International Global Change Community
* SBE,BCS
* 09/15/1993,05/31/1998
* B. Turner, Clark University
* Continuing Grant
* Bernard O. Bauer
* 05/31/1998
* USD 160,000.00

9317844 TURNER Natural scientists involved in global change research need
improved models of changing land cover because of the role that land cover plays
in dynamic natural processes across the globe. Land-cover change cannot be
adequately modeled or projected, however, without an understanding of the land
uses that affect land cover. Because land uses are largely the product of human
activities, social scientists therefore must contribute to improvement in
understandings of the social, political, and economic dynamics that affect the
use of land and other resources. In recognition of these interconnections and of
the need for both natural and physical scientists to work together to address
these important problems, the International Geosphere- Biosphere Programme
(IGBP) sponsored by ICSU and the international Human Dimensions of Global
Environmental Change Programme (HDP) sponsored by ISSC have agreed to sponsor a
focused scientific research program on global land-use and land- cover change.
This award will provide support for a Core Planning Project Committee (CPPC),
which is developing a formal science plan on behalf of IGBP and HDP. The science
plan will outline strategies for identifying and demarcating common situations
through which various "driving forces" alter land use and land cover. It also
will develop case studies for these situations and frame global land-use and
land-cover models based on these situations and case studies. This award will
complement contributions for support of the CPPC office at Clark University. It
also will help support three international meetings that will bring the broader
scientific community into the development of the science plan. The final product
of this activity will be a formal science plan to guide future international
collaborative research activities dealing with land-use and land-cover change.
***