* 9317598
* Collaborative Research on Bloom Dynamics and Food Web       Structure in the Ross Sea:  Vertical Flux of Carbon and     Nitrogen
* O/D,OPP
* 07/01/1994,06/30/1998
* Vernon Asper, University of Southern Mississippi
* Continuing Grant
* Bernhard Lettau
* 06/30/1998
* USD 261,774.00

9317598 Asper The growing season for phytoplankton in polar oceans is short, but
intense. There is an increasing body of evidence that in many Antarctic
habitats, the most active period may be very early in the season, a period that
has not been emphasized in previous investigations. This project is part of an
interdisciplinary program that focuses on the dynamics of the spring
phytoplankton bloom in a highly productive subsystem of the Antarctic, the Ross
Sea. The overall program will test hypotheses related to the initiation of the
phytoplankton bloom shortly after the onset of ice melt, the mechanisms
controlling phytoplankton growth and productivity in spring, the implications
and short-term fate of high productivity in spring, and the transition from
spring to midsummer conditions. This component will focus on the collection of
vertical flux samples which will be analyzed for carbon, nitrogen and total mass
flux and also provided to the other investigators for their specific analyses.
Profiles of the abundance of large aggregates in the water column using a non-
contact photographic method will be made. These data will be used to complement
other particle determinations, to investigate the role of these aggregates in
particle flux and to determine the mechanisms of particle export as a function
of season and phytoplankton species. The end result will be a better
understanding of the bloom processes and significant contributions to the data
base on aggregates and export mechanisms in this environment.