* 9317368
* Genetic and Structural Analyses of the TMV Movement Protein
* NONE,NONE
* 02/01/1994,07/31/1997
* Roger Beachy, The Scripps Research Institute
* Continuing grant
* Eve Ida Barak
* 07/31/1997
* USD 331,782.00

9317368 Beachy Many plant viruses direct the synthesis of one or more proteins
required for the spread of infection from the initial; site to adjacent cells.
In the case of tobacco mosaic virus the movement protein responsible for spread
of the virus has been identified and extensively studied. Nevertheless, the
cellular and molecular mechanism responsible for the spread are not well
understood. Previous studies have suggested that the ability of the movement
protein to facilitate virus movement is the result of a combination of several
functions or characteristics: 1) association with plasma membranes; 2)
association with cell walls; 3) association with plasmodesmata with or without
the formation of fibrous material in the channel; 4) modification of the
plasmodesmata size exclusion limit; 5) formation of large, soluble complex
perhaps including RNA. The proposed research will determine which functions are
required for biological activity. Complementation of nonfunctional mutants of
the movement protein will be used to identify regions of the protein that may be
responsible for separate functions. A combination of in vitro and in vivo
studies will then be used to identify which functions are associated with the
mutated sequences. %%% The results of the study on the function of the virus
movement protein will lead to a better understanding of how viral infections
spread in plants. In turn this may lead to novel methods in preventing plant
diseases. In addition, because the movement protein interacts with
plasmodesmata, the knowledge obtained will lead to a greater understanding of
intercellular communication in plants ***