* 9317748
* Dimensionality in Artificially Structured Strongly          Correlated Electron Systems
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/1994,08/31/1997
* Ivan Schuller, University of California-San Diego
* Continuing Grant
* H. Hollis Wickman
* 08/31/1997
* USD 450,000.00

9317748 Schuller Technical abstract: This proposal relates to the growth,
characterization, and modeling of the physical properties of strongly correlated
electron systems of varying dimensionality. The systems to be studied are mostly
prepared using state-of-the-art thin film deposition and electron beam and
scanning tunneling lithography techniques. The condensed matter problems studied
include dimensional transitions from zero to one, one to two, and two to three
dimensions in superconductivity and magnetism. A crucial and essential
ingredient proposed here is the structural and chemical characterization of the
artificial structures used in these studies. The materials will be grown using
sputtering and molecular beam epitaxi. The growth techniques will be correlated
with in situ and ex situ structural characterization techniques combined with
simulation and refinement methods developed in the principal investigator's
laboratory. Non-technical abstract: The study of novel materials in restricted
geometries provides the basic research basis and is directly related to
applications in the field of microelectronics, including the development of
novel sensors, devices and recording media. The condensed matter problems
studied include dimensional transitions from zero to one to two and three
dimensions in superconductivity and magnetism. A crucial and essential
ingredient proposed here is the structural and chemical characterization of the
artificial structures used in these studies. The materials will be grown using a
variety of growth techniques. The growth techniques will be correlated with
structural characterization techniques developed in the principal investigator's
laboratory. ***