* 9317449
* Training for Undergraduates in Collections-based            Analyses of Biological Diversity
* BIO,DEB
* 11/01/1993,04/30/1998
* Peter Crane, Field Museum of Natural History
* Continuing Grant
* Elizabeth Lyons
* 04/30/1998
* USD 165,000.00



9317449 Crane

This program targets undergraduate biology students, particularly minorities,
and is designed to direct them toward advanced training and careers in
environmental biology. Student participants will be recruited from predominantly
minority colleges and universities in the area (e.g. Chicago State University),
from the pool of minority students already affiliated with programs at the
Museum, and from major research universities in the local area (e.g. University
of Chicago). Students will be involved in an intensive program consisting of two
phases. In phase one, with funding from the Field Museum, students will be
trained in organismal biology and systematic and collection management
techniques. The focus of this work is the analysis of biodiversity. During the
second phase, students working closely with a research scientist mentor will
create and carry out their own research projects, prepare the results for
publication and present them to the participant group. The Field Museum is a
center for regional research, and students will have access to facilities at the
Brookfield Zoo, The University of Chicago, the University of Illinois at
Chicago, and Northwestern University. In parallel with this academic program the
program will also implement a variety of mentoring and advisory activities to
ensure that all student derive maximum benefit from their experience and receive
appropriate guidance and encouragement on personal and career development.