* 9317082
* Natural and Experimental Weathering of Pyroxenes and        Pyroxenoids
* GEO,EAR
* 02/15/1994,01/31/1998
* Jillian Banfield, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* H. Richard Lane
* 01/31/1998
* USD 210,997.00

9317082 Banfield The research in this proposal aims to bridge the gap between
natural and experimental mineral weathering studies by combining high-resolution
electron microscopic characterization of both sets of reactions with dissolution
kinetic data. Research involves chain silicate minerals. Chain silicates have
been selected because of their geochemical importance and because their
structures are sufficiently similar to those of clay products to allow us to
predict that transformations might, under some conditions, involve some
structural inheritance. Furthermore, through collaborative arrangements, a
suitable selection of experimentally reacted materials and dissolution rate data
are available. We have tested the proposed approach by comparing naturally and
experimentally weathered pyroxenoid minerals. Results reveal sub-nanometer-scale
details of both experimentally and naturally reacted surfaces and provide
insights into reaction mechanisms. Initial results show Si-rich leached layers
on experimentally reacted pyroxenoids. Thus, models to explain measured
congruent dissolution rates must account for the fact that Si entering solution
may be largely derived from the leached-layer-solution interface. We find
preliminary evidence for recrystallization of the gel layer. Thus, rates may
also be limited by transport properties, solubility, and crystallinity of the
gel. Initial data for natural weathering reactions are consistent with at least
partial inheritance of polymerized units by smectite reaction products. Thus, we
hypothesize that rates for pyroxenes may reflect incomplete depolymerization of
the silicate chains under both laboratory and natural conditions. The proposed
work has two major goals. First, we will characterize the compositional,
volumetric, mineralogical, and structural aspects of natural pyroxene reactions
and examine the influence of microstructures (e.g., exsolution lamellae, grain
boundaries, antiphase bounda ries, chain width defects, dilocations) on relative
reaction rates. Second, we will characterize experimentally reacted pyroxenes
and pyroxenoids and combine these data with rate measurements to clarify details
of possible dissolution kinetic models. Through this approach we hope to enhance
current understanding of the mechanisms and products of weathering reactions and
the conditions under, and extent to which, experimentally measured rates apply
to natural processes.