* 9317968
* Relating Nutrient Discharges to Geology and Landscape       Pattern in the Chesapeake Bay Watershed
* BIO,DEB
* 03/01/1994,08/31/1999
* David Correll, Chesapeake Research Consortium Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Penelope L. Firth
* 08/31/1999
* USD 1,000,000.00

9317968 Correll This study explores the effects of geology, land use
distribution, and weather on discharges of water, sediment, nitrogen,
phosphorus, and silicate from watersheds throughout the Chesapeake Bay. Past
measurements of discharges from 29 watersheds in the Coastal Plain and Piedmont
provinces have revealed dramatic differences relating to both geology and land
use. The proposed work will expand the study to include watersheds in the Ridge
and Valley and Appalachian Plateau regions of the Chesapeake watershed, and will
increase the numbers and types of watersheds compared. %%% Relating landscape
structure to nutrient discharges is a primary objective. Computerized geographic
information systems are used to quantify geographic patterns, identify indices
of landscape structure that relate to nutrient discharge, and develop models to
predict discharges. These efforts will be expanded to cover a broader
geographical scale. Results from data at different levels of spatial resolution
will be compared to explore how knowledge from small-scale, fine-grain studies
extrapolates to large-scale. coarse-grain analyses. %%% These watershed studies
and geographic analyses will provide basic knowledge on landscape function and
the factors controlling nutrient fluxes. The study will develop methods for
linking nutrient discharge measurements, GIS, and landscape models to
extrapolate predictions of nutrient flux to regional scales. This will provide
essential knowledge for predicting nutrient discharges to Chesapeake Bay.