* 9317008
* U.S.-Latin America:  Geology, Petrology, and Hazards of     Cerro Negro Volcano, Nicaragua
* O/D,OISE
* 03/15/1994,08/31/1996
* Stanley Williams, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Beverly Diaz
* 08/31/1996
* USD 17,626.00

WPC&lt; 2 B J Z Courier #| x ._ x 6 X @ `7 X @ HP LaserJet 4 (935-Mail)
INTHP4-1.PRS x @ \ E X @ 2 6 F V N Z #| x Courier ? x x x , x 6 X @ `7 X @ HP
LaserJet 4 (935-Mail) INTHP4-1.PRS x 6 X @ 8 ; \ E X @ 2 0 F Z : , h 9317008
Williams This Americas Program award will support a research collaboration
between Dr. Stanley N. Williams, Arizona State University and Dr. Claudio
Gutierrez, Nicaraguan Institute of Earth Sciences. The main objective of the
research is to determine whether Cerro Negro volcano, located in western
Nicaragua, is an unusually long lived cinder cone or the early stage in the
development of a stratovolcano. Mapping and stratigraphic studies will seek to
document the history of the system as the basis for detailed mineralogical,
chemical, and isotopic studies of the products. Ancillary goals of the research
would be to characterize the volcano and its present state of activity and
establish a baseline against which future changes in activity can be analyzed.
The work will include geological, geochemical and geophysical studies of the
evolution and current activity of the volcano. A map of potential hazards likely
to be associated with future eruptions will be prepared. Cerro Negro is one of
the most active and fastest growing volcanoes in Central America. The area
around it is the second largest population center in Nicaragua and of particular
economic importance as a productive farming area. The volcano is a threat to the
population and to the economy of the country and monitoring its activity and
characterizing the significant hazards posed by it will be of positive benefit
to the region. The Nicaraguan Institute of Earth Sciences will collaborate fully
with the research and the transfer of methodology and ideas resulting from this
study will provide them with the necessary tools to undertake similar studies of
the many other active and threatening volcanoes within their country. ***