* 9317454
* UMEB: Scientific Research Experiences for Minority          Undergraduates in the Sevilleta LTER Program: Career        Enhancement and Training in Environmental Biology
* BIO,DEB
* 10/01/1993,03/31/2000
* Robert Parmenter, University of New Mexico
* Standard Grant
* Penelope L. Firth
* 03/31/2000
* USD 245,000.00



9317454 Parmenter

The University of New Mexico Department of Biology will establish a Career
Development Program in Environmental Biology for minority undergraduates that
will bring students into an extended one on one relationship with research
ecologists from UNM, Sandia National laboratory, the US Fish and Wildlife
Service, and the New Mexico Museum of Natural History. Ten UNM Biology
Department faculty members, along with scientists from collaborating
organizations, have pledged their time and expertise to the proposed program.
Students will be recruited in their sophomore year, and will participate in the
program through graduation. As each cohort graduates, they will be replaced by a
new group of sophomores. Each student will select one or more faculty members as
research mentors during their program. The program will include academic and
career counseling, and a structured educational component in addition to
standard coursework. This enhanced curriculum will encompass practical and
theoretical aspects of the scientific method, hypothesis development and
testing, experimental design and statistical analysis, implementation of
independent research projects, computerized data management, and the preparation
of project results for oral presentation and a written journal. Students will
gain personal experience in the area of their specialized interests as well as
in other ongoing ecological research at UNM.