* 9317891
* Development of a VLSI System for Improved Monitoring and    Stimulating Action Potentials of Neuronal Networks
* BIO,DBI
* 10/01/1994,03/31/1999
* Milton Gosney, Southern Methodist University
* Continuing Grant
* Gregory K. Farber
* 03/31/1999
* USD 408,578.00

The prototype of a VLSI multichannel preamiplifier system for recording and
stimulating neural; activity has been developed at Southern Methodist University
as proposed in a two-year grant. A three-year follow-on-grant is proposed to
enable sufficient testing and modification for recreation of the robust proven
system necessary for a production model that could function in the laboratories
of the neuroscience community at large. The objectives are 1) to eliminate
problems in the prototype that might occur when it is used with neural systems;
2) to provide features of control, programming, record-keeping, electrode-
characteristics, and neural-network- characteristics sampling, and convenience
essential to the management of the collection of data form large neural arrays;
3) to provide an improved planar multielectrode array. The objectives will be
obtain 1) by regular and systematic testing in the Center for Network
Neuroscience at the University of North Texas and also at other selected
laboratories as possible; 2) by re-design and/or modification of the VLSI chip
and associated hardware as necessary; and 3) by continued experimentation with
materials and methods to produce the desired improved electrode array.
Production of the system will greatly simplify the task of obtaining the
information from large numbers of electrodes needed for the study of living
neural networks.