* 9317654
* Reproductive Biology and Natural Selection and the Formation and Maintenance of Louisiana Iris Hybrid Populations
* BIO,DEB
* 02/15/1994,07/31/1997
* Michael Arnold, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Mark Courtney
* 07/31/1997
* USD 180,033.00

WPC 2 B V P Z Courier 10cpi ? x x x , Z x 6 X @ 8 ; X @ HP DeskJet 500
HPDES500.PRS x @ x X , , 0 FX @ #| x 2 B V P Z Courier 10cpi ? x x x , x 6 X @ 8
; X @ HP DeskJet 500 HPDES500.PRS x @ x X , , 0 FX @ 9317654 Arnold The study of
natural hybridization between plant species is of fundamental importance for
understanding the evolution of plants. This is due to the fact that an estimated
70% of all plant species have arisen through natural crosses between other
species. Furthermore, almost all food and fiber crops used by humans reflect the
result of natural or manmade crosses resulting in improved productivity and
nutritive value. The studies outlined in this proposal will examine the effect
of pollen tube growth rate, seed abortion and patterns of insect and bird
pollinations on the success of natural crosses between the plant species Iris
fulva , Iris hexagona , and Iris brevicaulis . These plants hybridize readily
under artificial conditions and there are numerous natural hybrid populations
formed by crosses between the species. Therefore, this species complex will
allow a determination of what processes are important in limiting and promoting
natural and experimental hybridization. Such an understanding should allow a
better definition of how natural hybridization has come about in numerous plant
species. In addition, data from these studies will be very applicable to plant
breeders who need to know what mechanisms might restrict their attempts to cross
agriculturally important species and thus limit the efficiency of crossing
programs.