* 9317864
* Molecular Biology and Developmental Functions of Wall       Extension Proteins (Expansins) in Plant Cell Enlargement
* BIO,MCB
* 03/01/1994,08/31/1999
* Daniel Cosgrove, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Eve Ida Barak
* 08/31/1999
* USD 630,610.00

9317864 Cosgrove The PI's laboratory has identified and characterized two
proteins ("expansins") from cucumber hypocotyl walls that appear to mediate the
acid-extension response of isolated plant cell walls. This proposal outlines a
five year plan to investigate the developmental functions of these proteins and
to elucidate the mechanism of their action. The proposal has five major
objectives. These are: a) to clone and sequence the two expansin genes from
cucumbers and one expansin gene from Arabidopsis, and to identify conserved
sequences that may code for the active site of the expansins; b) To analyze the
spatial and temporal patterns of the expansin gene expression at the mRNA level
and to relate these to developmental patterns of growth; c) To construct
transgenic plants with reduced or enhanced levels of expansin expression and to
analyze the resulting alterations in phenotype; d) To map the Arabidopsis gene
and test whether previously identified Arabidopsis growth mutants are deficient
in expansin production; e) to express an expansin gene in E. coli as a means of
verifying gene identity and as source for protein for studies on isolated cell
walls and living cells. %%% This study is important because it will establish
the role of this novel class of proteins in plant growth. Expansins are the only
wall proteins found to date that have the ability to induce extension in
isolated plant cell walls. The growth response these protein mediate seems to be
common in cells with cellulosic walls and it may contribute to auxin-stimulated
growth. The understanding of the role of expansins and their mech anism of
action will most likely lead to important discoveries of the molecular basis of
plant cell wall changes during plant growth. *** { 7 &lt; u { ! Z ! Z Z ! F { {
( Times New Roman Symbol &amp; Arial ` ` U " h % &lt; 5 Dr. Geza Hrazdina Dr.
Geza Hrazdina