* 9317293
* Functional and Evolutionary Analysis of an Inducible,       Phenotypically Plastic Feeding Morphology
* BIO,IOS
* 07/01/1994,06/30/1999
* Dianna Padilla, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Zoe Eppley
* 06/30/1999
* USD 220,000.00

9217293 Padilla Some organisms are able to respond to changing environments
during their lifetime, while others are not; their morphology, physiology, or
behavior may be fixed, not allowing quick responses to their environmental
changes. The objectives of the proposed research are to understand the
conditions favoring the ability of an organism to change the way it is built
(its morphology) during its lifetime as opposed to having a fixed morphology.
This will be accomplished by direct experimentation and observation as well as
the use of mathematical and computer models. The PI will use the feeding
structures of the marine snail, Lacuna, as a model system for this study. The
animal is abundant, easy to breed and use for laboratory and field experiments,
and is known to have a feeding morphology that can change when these snails move
to different environments and eat different foods. The environmental cues that
are used by these snails to induce new feeding structures and measure the
consequences of these changes for an animal's feeding rate, growth rate, and
lifetime reproduction will be determined.. With the use of mathematical and
computer models the PI can make predictions about conditions that would favor
individuals that can change their morphology as opposed to having a fixed
morphology. These would include how often the environment changes (or
individuals move from one environment to another), how long it takes for a new
feeding structure to form, and what the cost (for example in reduced feeding
rate) of having a feeding structure mismatched to the environment. These
predictions will be directly tested on th ese marine snails. The PI will also
determine if there is a genetic basis for differences in these features among
snails, and examine closely related species to determine the evolutionary
patterns associated with being able to change morphology with changing
environments. *** ~ ! ! ! F 4 CG Times Symbol & Arial Tms Rmn " Helv 8 8 h /
Rochelle D Ray Rochelle D Ray