* 9317638
* Theoretical and Numerical Studies in Gravitational          Collapse and Relativistic Astrophysics
* MPS,PHY
* 12/01/1993,11/30/1998
* Charles Evans, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Continuing Grant
* Richard Isaacson
* 11/30/1998
* USD 206,000.00

Several theoretical and numerical studies are proposed in gravitational
collapse, critical phenomena in general relativity and relativistic
astrophysics. The major focuses of this program include: (1) a vigorous
investigation of the critical phenomena recently discovered to be associated
with gravitational collapse in general relativity, (2) an investigation of
several steps toward modeling the orbital decay and coalescence of black hole
binaries, (3) several investigations of the physics of eclipsing pulsars and
relativistic pulsar winds, and (4) numerical studies of magnetohydrodynamic
(MHD) winds and magnetically-confined jets. The objectives of work in critical
phenomena are to understand the connections to critical phenomena in other areas
such as statistical physics, to explore analytic properties of the simplest
examples of critical behavior in collapse, and to discover additional,
physically-distinct examples of critical phenomena through numerical
experimentation. The objectives of work on coalescing black hole binaries are to
develop and explore in two spatial dimensions (2+1) the use of an apparent
horizon inner boundary condition for black holes and to develop algorithms that
efficiently utilize massively-parallel architectures. In both cases, knowledge
developed in 2+1 will be extendible to three dimensions (3+1). Work on eclipsing
pulsars will focus on investigating simple analytic/numerical models of
nonlinear plasma instabilities, which may be relevant for short-period, low-mass
systems, and investigating the interaction between relativistic pulsar winds and
normal stellar winds. Continued development of a general purpose MHD code
(AVATAR), begun in the last grant period, will be pursued, with application to
the study of self-collimation of MHD winds and propagation of magnetically-
confined jets.