* 9317580
* Copper-Silicon Structures for Selective Catalytic Formation of Silanes
* ENG,CBET
* 04/15/1994,03/31/1999
* John Falconer, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* Geoffrey Prentice
* 03/31/1999
* USD 258,000.00

9317580 Falconer This is a study of the mechanism and intermediates of the
Rochow direct synthesis reaction between silicon and methyl chloride catalyzed
by copper. This reaction can serve as a model for understanding the class of
solid-catalyzed gas-solid reactions. When it is run industrially in large
fluidized bed reactors, it forms dimethlydichlorosilane, the precursor to
silicone polymers, with selectivity as high as 90% It is very sensitive to
material properties such as surface composition, the form of the catalyst,
concentrations of promoters, and impurities; the objective of this work is to
determine which materials and properties improve activity and selectivity.
Reaction kinetics are measured at atmospheric pressure in a small reactor
attached to an ultrahigh vacuum system equipped for surface analysis and sample
treatment. Single-crystal silicon surfaces are used so that the planar surfaces
and the pits formed on reacted surfaces can be characterized at various stages
by scanning electron microscopy, energy dispersive spectroscopy, X-ray
diffraction, optical microscopy, Auger spectroscopy, chemical treatment, and
temperature-programmed desorption. The effects of silicon-oxide layers, silicon
crystal face, zinc and tin as promotors, and aluminum, iron, and calcium as
impurities are determined. Parallel studies in a fluidized bed reactor will be
conducted at the Elkem Development Center in Sewickley, PA. Silicone polymers
are ubiquitous in modern technology with wide application as sealants,
lubricants, hydraulic fluids, dielectrics, and other applications. High-quality
polymer requires a pure monomer, in this case dichlorodimethylsilane, and it is
this issue that is addressed here. The contamination of the monomer by other
silanes formed as byproducts in the direct synthesis reaction is presently a
problem. This effort is coordinated with Elkem Corp., a major supplier of
dichlorodimethlysilane. Supplementary support for this effort is provided by
Dow-Corning Corp., a major consumer of dichlorodimethlysilane.