* 9317705
* Supporting primary care:  Building universal Internet accessfor the education of the generalist physician
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/1993,03/31/1996
* Harold Parry, George Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Mark A. Luker
* 03/31/1996
* USD 35,009.00

9317705 Bader This project proposes expanding Internet access from the main
academic campus of The George Washington University to the entire George
Washington University Medical Center (GWUMC) including its affiliated faculty at
primary care sites throughout the greater Washington, D.C. metropolitan area.
GWUMC is committed to the education of the generalist physician and through this
project, which will connect the computer network at the Medical Center to
Internet, can offer universal access to all members of the Medical Center's
extended constituency, those working at the academic hub as well as those in the
more remote primary care sites. The connection will enhance communication and
collaboration between physicians, researchers, librarians, students, and staff
at GWUMC and their colleagues around the world. Students will learn that service
in a primary care setting does not mean isolation from colleagues, access to
information and the latest advances in medical practice. The Internet will be
demonstrated as a bond which can balance the scales between academicians at
universities, major teaching hospitals , and research centers with their
counterparts in community hospitals, urban or rural clinics, and the solo
practitioner's office. The Medical Center as part of its information management
strategic plan is installing an FDDI network named MedNet, which will integrate
the hospital and faculty practice plan information management systems, the
academic computing system (including library, bibliographic and clinical
information systems), and all departmental LANs. Current access to the Internet
for the Medical Center is limited to dial-access to the University computing
center for researchers, physicians, and students based at the School of Medicine
and Health Sciences. This project will establish desktop connectivity with the
Internet for all faculty, staff and students, including connected to the GWUMC
network (MedNet) from all on and off-campus locatio ns with the Internet by
installing FDDI cards which will link its routers to the George Washington
University's fibreoptic network (GWIN) and its Internet gateway.