* 9317927
* An Imaging Polarimeter for the Study of Biological          Principles of Polarized-Light Vision
* BIO,DBI
* 04/15/1994,09/30/1996
* Thomas Cronin, University of Maryland Baltimore County
* Continuing Grant
* Karl A. Koehler
* 09/30/1996
* USD 140,000.00

9317927 Cronin Light in nature frequently becomes linearly polarized due to its
interactions with scattering particles in the atmosphere and under water, and to
its reflection from biological and nonliving dielectric surfaces. Under some
circumstances, these events can produce light that is almost completely
polarized, and partially linearly polarized light is widely present in nature.
Because the interactions of light that produce partial linear polarization are
complex, the actual pattern of polarization in any visual field is similarly
complicated. Animals have exploited the polarization of natural light for a
variety of functions, including navigation, orientation, location of water
surfaces, and enhancement of visual contrast. In fact, it now seems that the
great majority of animal species have visual specializations for the detection
and analysis of partially linearly polarized light, and it is probable that for
many of these species polarization vision plays a similarly significant role as
color vision plays for species like ourselves. However, the study of
polarization vision has been limited by our inability to visualize or analyze
natural fields of polarization. In this proposal, we describe a design for a
new, imaging polarimeter that will be capable of providing complete descriptions
of the distribution of polarized light (e-vector orientation, percent
polarization, and intensity) at single-pixel resolution throughout an extended
visual field. The instrument will be completely portable, and usable both in
terrestrial and aquatic environments. It will obtain polarization images rapidly
and will present the data on line, using false-color displays to convey the
polarization information in a form intuitively interpretable by a human
observer. All data will be stored in numerical form for appropriate mathematical
analysis, making possible transformations into the visual systems of animals. We
believe that such an instrument will open new windows into the sensory worlds of
other species, and will have broad application for studies of biology,
perception, and machine vision.