* 9317227
* Milankovitch Forcing of Continental Monsoons Across         the Equator of Pangaea
* GEO,AGS
* 05/15/1994,10/31/1997
* Paul Olsen, Columbia University
* Continuing Grant
* Herman Zimmerman
* 10/31/1997
* USD 387,243.00

Abstract ATM-9317227 Olsen, Paul E. Kent, Dennis V. Columbia University Title:
Milankovitch Forcing of Continental Monsoons Across the Equator of Pangaea This
award is directed at an examination of Milankovitch forcing of climate in the
equatorial zone of Late Triassic and earliest Jurassic Pangaea. The recording
medium consists of lacustrine rocks laid down in Early Mesozoic rift valleys
preserved in eastern North America that can now be shown to cover a latitudinal
range from 6.5o straddling the paleoequator. These lacustrine rocks consist of
lake level cycles that recorded Milankovitch forcing of monsoonal precipitation
over the interval from about 230 to 199 Ma. This work will extend the high-
resolution cyclostratigraphy, magnetostratigraphy, and paleolatitudinal
framework developed in the Newark basin coring project backward in time and
laterally in geography through the study available cores and outcrop in six
additional rift basins. This will result in a time-geography- climate matrix
which will address three specific problems: 1) regional trends in the climate of
equatorial Pangaea as it drifted northward about 10o; 2) the doubling of the
frequency of precession cycle forcing around the equator; and 3) the apparent
broadening of the humid belts in the latest Triassic-Early Jurassic. The first
and last of these are important for refining tests of global climate models of
Pangaea. The second is of generic interest, reflecting general processes of
Milankovitch forcing expected in tropical regions of any age but most readily
addressed by study of these unique sequences.