* 9317075
* Speciation of Al and Cd in Aqueous Solutions:  Association  Quotients of Oxalate and Malonate Complexes
* GEO,EAR
* 01/15/1994,12/31/1996
* Richard Kettler, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Standard Grant
* John A. Maccini
* 12/31/1996
* USD 70,519.00

9317075 Kettler Despite the importance of Al and Cd chemistry to the geological
sciences there are few measurements of the association quotients of their
oxalate and malonate complexes. The investigator will measure the association
quotients of Al-oxalate, Al-malonate, Cd-oxalate, and Cd-malonate complexes in
solutions with ionic strengths ranging from 0.1 to 5m and at temperatures
ranging from 0-125 C. These measurements will be made using potentiometric
methods by titrating oxalate or malonate solutions into aqueous solutions of Cd
or Al. Na-trifluoromethanesulfonate will be used as a non-complexing supporting
electrolyte. The data obtained during these titrations will be regressed and
equations relating the relevant association constants to temperature and ionic
strength will be derived. Al is the third most abundant element in the earth's
crust. Problems related to the dissolution of silicate minerals and the
environmental and public health effects of acid rain are fundamentally problems
of al speciation in aqueous solutions. Although Cd is a trace metal, its
toxicity and its ubiquity in landfill leachates, sewage sludge, sulfide ore
deposits, and fossil shells give it great environmental and geologic importance.
Oxalate and malonate are difunctional carboxylic acid anions that form strong
complexes with metals. These acid anions are ubiquitous in soils and the by-
product waters produced during enhanced oil recovery and synthetic fuels
operations. They may also be present in large amounts in some sedimentary basin
brines. This work should be of interest to a wide variety of researchers in the
geological and environmental sciences.