* 9317739
* Collaborative Research:  Reproductive Periodicity in        Planktonic Sarcodines:  Implications for Temporal           Variability in Abundance and Flux
* GEO,OCE
* 02/15/1994,07/31/1997
* Anthony Michaels, Bermuda Institute of Ocean Sciences (BIOS), Inc.
* Continuing Grant
* Phillip R. Taylor
* 07/31/1997
* USD 217,271.00

9317739 Michaels The symbiont-bearing planktonic sarcodines (Acantharia,
Radiolaria and Foraminifera) are one of the most conspicuous groups of micro-
/macrozooplankton in the surface waters of oceanic communities. They are also
one of the least studied for their importance in energy flow, nutrient cycles
and vertical fluxes in these environments. Planktonic sarcodines play an
important role in the production of organic material by organisms &gt;70 um in
oceanic plankton communities (via their intracellular symbiotic algae).
Moreover, by virtue of their large size (and consequently their potentially
rapid sinking rates) they also play a greater role in the flux of material out
of the mixed layer than would be predicted by their overall contribution to
planktonic biomass. Previous studies indicate great variability in the surface
productivity and flux of sarcodine material out of the mixed layer that may be
related to the reproductive periodicities of some species of symbiont-bearing
planktonic sarcodines or to episodic events leading to rapid population growth.
This project will test this hypothesis, and determine the extent to which these
periodicities control the temporal changes in the importance of planktonic
sarcodines to primary production in the surface waters of the oligotrophic
Atlantic Ocean near Bermuda, and to their flux out of the surface waters at this
site. *** The symbiont-bearing planktonic sarcodines (Acantharia, Radiolaria and
Foraminifera) are one of the most conspicuous groups of micro- /macrozooplankton
in the surface waters of oceanic communities. They are also one of the least
studied for their importance in energy flow, nutrient cycles and vertical fluxes
in these environments. Planktonic sarcodines play an important role in the
production of organic material by organisms &gt;70 um in oceanic plankton
communities (via their intracellular symbiotic algae). Moreover, by virtue of
their large size (and consequently their po tentially rapid sinking rates) they
also play a greater role in the flux of material out of the mixed layer than
would be predicted by their overall contribution to planktonic biomass. Previous
studies indicate great variability in the surface productivity and flux of
sarcodine material out of the mixed layer that may be related to the
reproductive periodicities of some species of symbiont-bearing planktonic
sarcodines or to episodic events leading to rapid population growth. This
project will test this hypothesis, and determine the extent to which these
periodicities control the temporal changes in the importance of planktonic
sarcodines to primary production in the surface waters of the oligotrophic
Atlantic Ocean near Bermuda, and to their flux out of the surface waters at this
site. ***