* 9317708
* Laser-Induced Explosive Vaporization of Liquids in Contact  with a Solid Surface:  Fundamental Studies and Applications
* ENG,CBET
* 03/01/1994,08/31/1997
* Costas Grigoropoulos, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* ASHLEY F EMERY
* 08/31/1997
* USD 310,760.00

ABSTRACT -- CTS-9317708 Grigoropoulos This proposal is concerned with novel
science and important technological applications of the phenomenon of rapid
nucleation and explosive vaporization of a liquid film in contact with a pulsed
laser-heated surface. The science of the metastability behavior of superheated
liquids is well established only in the near-steady-state regime at the
millisecond time scale. In the much faster regime with a nanosecond time scale,
superheated liquids may have different behavior, with regard to the possible
superheating, bubble nucleation and growth kinetics, and the inhomogeneous
nucleation process at a surface. Such behaviors in the fast regime have not been
investigated until one recent study because traditional experimental techniques
lack the speed and sensitivity. A recent study by the PI provides preliminary
results on the nucleation and growth of bubbles in various liquids in contact
with a pulse-laser-heated solid surface using a new simultaneous
reflectance/scattering monitoring approach. Further quantitative experimentation
and modeling are necessary for understanding the phase change phenomena
involved. Significant applications of these pulse liquid film explosive
vaporization phenomena in industry are possible. Practical implementation will
be pursued with the goal of demonstrating manufacturing yield and productivity
in a high-technology production environment. The first application is in the
area of "laser cleaning" to remove micron and sub-micron particles from critical
parts of modern electronic and data-storage devices. Other applications to be
investigated include photo-acoustic pulse generation for nondestructive
evaluation, enhanced laser-micromachining, and novel patterned-doping of
surfaces.