* 9317772
* GeoCARS A National Resource for Earth, Planetary, Soil and  Environmental Science Research at the Advanced Photon       Source
* GEO,EAR
* 09/15/1994,08/31/1999
* Charles Prewitt, University of Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Daniel F. Weill
* 08/31/1999
* USD 6,000,000.00

9317772 Rivers This award provides support for the design, construction,
equipping and operation of several experimental stations, jointly referred to as
a sector, at the Advanced Photon Source (APS) located at the Argonne National
Laboratory. The APS, a positron storage ring or synchrotron capable of producing
hard x-radiation of much greater flux, brilliance, intensity and photon energy
than previous x-ray sources, provides a revolutionary new tool for research
requiring an understanding of the atomic and molecular structure of matter.
Earth scientists dealing with the characterization of earth materials in
research areas including mineral physics of Earth materials at very high
pressure, environmental geochemistry, and soils science will gain access to APS
x-radiation through the GeoCARS sector at APS, which will be operated as a
national user facility for the entire earth, planetary, soil, and environmental
research communities in the U.S. The GeoCARS sector at APS will include
facilities for high-pressure research with diamond anvil cells and large-volume
presses, diffraction and scattering, absorption spectroscopy and anomalous
scattering, and fluorescence microprobe analysis and microtomography. The
GeoCARS sector will be operated and managed by the Consortium for Advanced
Radiation Sources at the University of Chicago. ***