* 9317938
* Collaborative Research:  Regulation of Rangeland            Grasshopper Populations and Communities: Differing Dominant Mechanisms over Time and Space
* BIO,DEB
* 05/01/1994,10/31/1998
* Anthony Joern, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Continuing Grant
* Scott L. Collins
* 10/31/1998
* USD 143,500.00

9317938 Joern The dominant mechanism promoting the limitation and regulation of
natural populations often varies among sites for the same species, and over time
periods for the same population. Grasshopper populations from the western US
grasslands demonstrate this variability. Based upon independent long-term
experimental studies with grasshoppers, the PI's have found that in Montana
populations are food limited, whereas in Nebraska populations are predator
limited. The purpose of this research is to synthesize these studies with regard
to the changing relative importance of different biotic interactions and density
independent mortality at different sites in different years. The synthesis
suggests that predator limitation will dominate at low food abundance, whereas
food limitation will dominate at high food abundance. The PI's will conduct a
series of field experiments at the Montana and Nebraska sites to test these
hypotheses. %%% From the standpoint of basic research, this project will help to
determine the relative roles of different biotic and abiotic factors on
herbivore populations. In addition, grasshoppers, in particular, are known to be
pests in agricultural systems and rangelands. This study will provide valuable
information regarding population dynamics and mechanisms to control this
widespread group of herbivore species. ***