* 9317755
* Pattern  Formation in Plants: Biophysics and Gene           Expression
* BIO,IOS
* 05/15/1994,04/30/1997
* Paul Green, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* Judith Plesset
* 04/30/1997
* USD 300,000.00

9317755 Green In the normal development of flowers and vegetative shoots of
plants, there is a highly coordinated pattern of gene expression and
morphological change. Dr. Green will study both processes and their mode of
interaction. Expression gradients are postulated to set up physical expansion
gradients which lead to the spontaneous complex folding of tissue. This is a new
proposal for the origin of periodicity and pattern. The morphological change is
postulated to act back on expression via stretch receptors or cytoskeletal
responses. This completes a generative cycle for morphogenesis. Organ pattern on
the sunflower head emerges in strict developmental sequence behind a circular
generative zone which moves from the rim into a central field of
undifferentiated cells. The major aim is to determine the relative sequence of
expression events and of folding events in this meristem. Pattern and tissue
folding are to be followed in detail by a non-destructive SEM replica method.
Expression is to be studied by in situ hybridization. Similar analysis is
proposed for other systems, including morphological mutants. Dr. Green will
study changes brought on by non-invasive physical perturbation. The nature of
the cyclic interaction of expression and morphological response should become
clear. ***