* 9317872
* Collaborative Research:  Late Cretaceous - Early Tertiary   Plate Interactions in the Southwest Pacific
* O/D,OPP
* 04/15/1994,03/31/1998
* Steven Cande, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Continuing Grant
* Scott Borg
* 03/31/1998
* USD 232,753.00

9317872 Cande This award supports a marine geophysical study of the southwest
Pacific between 170 degrees E and 80 degrees W longitude. Recent marine
geophysical cruises in the southwest Pacific and a high-resolution altimetric
gravity field declassified Geosat data have allowed significant progress to be
made towards deciphering the complex history of the rifting between the Campbell
Plateau/Chatham Rise landmass and the Marie Byrd Land margin. A revised history
of plate interactions explains many enigmatic features seen in the magnetic and
gravity fields yet several questions remain that require new data for
resolution. The marine geophysical survey proposed will: (1) elucidate plate
interactions at the evolving triple junction between the Antarctic and
Australian plates and the mosaic of SW Pacific plates; (2) define the boundaries
and interactions of the mosaic of plates that accommodated the rapidly changing
plate geometry associated with subduction of the Pacific-Phoenix ridge outboard
of New Zealand, the rifting of continental and oceanic lithosphere, and hotspot
activity; and (3) map the development of Pacific-Antarctic Ridge and the
assembly of the several small plates into the modern day Pacific plate. This
survey will help to elucidate the dynamics of plate interactions and the plate
tectonic evolution of Antarctica and New Zealand. ***