* 9317456
* A 2 Micron All Sky Survey
* MPS,AST
* 07/01/1994,06/30/2000
* Susan Kleinmann, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Continuing grant
* Wayne Van Citters
* 06/30/2000
* USD 1,500,000.00

ABSTRACT 9317456 Kleinmann, S.G. The Two Micron All Sky Survey (2MASS) will
obtain a uniform map of the entire sky in three near-infrared bands, J (1.25
um), H (1.65 um) and K' (2.17 um), with sufficient sensitivity to detect point
sources having K'14 mag. at 10 confidence. The survey will penetrate more than
25,000 times deeper than the only existing large-scale near- infrared sky
survey, which was carried out nearly 25 years ago (Neugebauer and Leighton
1969), and will enable the detection and accurate measurement of positions and
infrared brightness for nearly 100 million stars and at least 300,000 galaxies.
Because of its great leap in sensitivity and sky coverage, the scientific
potential of this database can only be imagined at present. Obvious applications
are the study of the large-scale distribution of stars in the Milky Way and the
large-scale distribution of galaxies in the Local Universe. More broadly, the
database will enrich analysis of sky surveys carried out over the whole
electromagnetic spectrum, and will vastly expand the scientific potential of new
infrared array technology. The implementation of the p-project involves the
construction of two 1.3m telescopes, one to be built at Mt. Hopkins and one t be
built at Cerro Tololo Interamerican Observatory. The survey is planned to begin
in FY96, and is expected to take 2 years in the Southern Hemisphere and 2-3
years in the Northern Hemisphere. The data will become publicly available
immediately following checkout by the science team, within 1.5 years after the
start of survey operations. The final data products, including a Point Source
Catalog, and Extended Source database of raw data will also be available to the
interested user. ***