* 9317988
* Avian Polyandry: Life-History Strategies in a Model System
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/1994,08/31/1999
* Stephen Emlen, Cornell Univ - State: AWDS MADE PRIOR MAY 2010
* Continuing grant
* John A. Byers
* 08/31/1999
* USD 388,329.00

9317988 Emlen ABSTRACT This research is ultimately concerned with understanding
behavioral differences between females and males, an extremely widespread
biological phenomenon. Evolutionary theory and experimental evidence suggest
that the amount of time and energy invested in the care-taking of offspring may
strongly influence the options available to each sex. Such differences may have
favored the expression of different behaviors in males and females. Among those
animal species that show parental care, females usually provide the bulk of such
care, leaving males free to increase their biological success through additional
matings. Under such conditions, natural selection might be expected to have
favored the development of different strategies in the two sexes. This has led
to hypotheses about why the sexes often adopt different roles during
interactions, why behavioral conflict between mates is so common, and what forms
of behavioral resolution can be expected in such conflicts. These ideas can be
subjected to particularly critical test by studying species in which care-taking
responsibilities are reversed from the "norm". Dr. Emlen is studying an extreme
example of such a species, in which males look after all offspring care and
females increase their biological success by having multiple male mates. This
research will carefully document the behavioral roles adopted by males and
females and the contexts in which different roles are expressed. This will
increase scientific understanding of why particular forms of behavior are
favored by one sex over the other, and of the evolutionary role of the
expression of such behaviors.