* 9317586
* The Mariner Transposons of Insects
* BIO,MCB
* 07/01/1994,09/30/1998
* Hugh Robertson, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* DeLill Nasser
* 09/30/1998
* USD 277,000.00

9317586 Robertson The transposon, mariner, was initially found in Drosophila
melanogaster. It was isolated and characterized. Five major subfamilies of these
elements were found in insects and closely related arthropods using a PCR assay
with primers designed to regions of amino acid conservation in their putative
transposases. Other workers have discovered additional mariners in more diverse
organisms including a nematode and a planarian. We have recently discovered
mariners in other platyhelminthes, hydra and most recently in humans. A
homologous relationship of the mariner family with the Tc-related family of
transposons in nematodes, insects, and fish has also been recently recognized.
On this basis, we postulate that the evolution of these transposons involves
horizontal transfer into new hosts followed by a amplification of copy number,
after which neutral evolution usually results in extinction of the element. The
work proposed here will examine two aspects of the diversity, evolution, and
interactions of these mariners.The PCR survey will be continued and selected
interesting elements, particularly those indicating recent horizontal transfers
across phyla will be cloned and sequenced. Related species will be examined to
test the hypothesis of recent horizontal transfer. Rates of evolution will also
be examined directly by comparison with mariner elements isolated from amber
fossil insects. The interaction of the different mariners and Tc-like found in
some genomes will be investigated by genetically combining active and marked
representatives of the different families and subfamiles into the genome of
Drosophila melanogaster and assaying their ability to mobilize and/or repress
each other. Similar mix-and-match experiments will be done in a comparative
study of the different transposases. %%% The discovery that a specific
transposon, first detected in Drosophila melanogaster, is also present in many
different species and phyla suggests that the horizontal transfer of DNA has
occurr ed. This hypothesis will be tested in various ways and the search for
mariner elements in insects, other arthropods and other animals will be
continued. The proposed work will develop mariners as the best understood
example of molecular evolution of the short inverted terminal repeat class of
transposons in eukaryotes. It will also provide information on horizontal
transfer of transposons necessary for regulatory evaluation of risks of release
of genetically engineered arthropods. ***