* 9317845
* Acquisition of Circular Dichroism and UV-VIS                Spectrophotometers
* NONE,NONE
* 03/15/1994,02/29/1996
* Fred Cohen, University of California-San Francisco
* Standard Grant
* Karl A. Koehler
* 02/29/1996
* USD 69,931.00

9317845 O'Shea This proposal seeks funding for circular dicroism (CD) and UV VIS
spectrophotometers. These instruments will be used in a series of biochemical
and biophysical studies concerned with how proteins fold and how they interact
with one another and with other macromolecules. The proposed research includes
studies in the following broad research areas: (1) protein structure, structure
prediction and protein folding, (2) protein protein and protein nucleic acid
interactions. (1) Studies on protein structure, prediction and folding will
involve both model peptides and a bacterial protease, a lytic protease.
Computational predictions of protein structure will be tested using synthetic
polypeptides. The structure of designed peptides will be studied to investigate
fundamental aspects of protein stability and structure. Structural studies of a
stable intermediate in the folding of a lytic protease will be carried out to
understand the forces which stabilize this intermediate. Conversion of the
intermediate to the native enzyme is catalyzed by an additional polypeptide
sequence. Thus, a further goal of these studies is to understand the mechanism
by which folding to the native state is catalyzed. (2) Studies on protein
protein interactions will involve a group of proteins that play important roles
in transcriptional regulation. These include the glucocorticoid receptor from
mammalian cells and the SYMBOL 97 \f "Symbol" 2, al, MCM1, PHO2, PHO4, and PHO80
proteins from yeast. A goal of these studies is to identify domains that
comprise autonomous folding units, as well as domains that are responsible for
inte ractions between proteins of multisubunit transcription complexes. An
additional goal is to investigate changes in conformation of these molecules
upon interaction with one another. These studies will provide an essential first
step in obtaining three dimensional information on multi subunit protein
complexes. The CD and UV VIS spectrophotometers are essential instruments for
carrying out these studies. CD provides a simple and informative measure of
secondary structure. It also provides a way to assess conformational changes in
mixtures of macromolecules, such as two different proteins (or domains) or a
protein and DNA. The UV VIS spectrophotometer provides a sensitive assay for
measuring protein concentrations, a necessary component of a CD experiment.
Additionally, UV VIS spectroscopy provides a method for measuring the stability
of a molecule by monitoring absorbance. For proteins, the information derived
from such a study is often complementary to that obtained from CD because
changes in the UV spectrum are typically reflections of tertiary structure while
CD is most sensitive to secondary structure. Finally, UV VIS spectroscopy
provides a very sensitive way to monitor changes in nucleic acid stability and
structure. These studies shall be carried out as part of ongoing, active
research programs in which training of graduate students and postdoctoral
fellows is a strong component. u ~ 9317845 O'Shea This proposal seeks funding
for circular dicroism (CD) and UV VIS spectrophotometers. These instruments will
be . / 0 x k m I K ' ) v x ! ! ! ! ! ! F x N x ; CG Times Symbol & Arial 1
Courier 0 MS LineDraw 9 N h = ABSTRACT Deseree King, BIR Deseree King, BIR