* 9317321
* Heat, Salt, and Momentum Fluxes Through the Pycnocline      in the Eastern Weddell Sea
* O/D,OPP
* 04/15/1994,09/30/1998
* Laurence Padman, Oregon State University
* Continuing Grant
* Bernhard Lettau
* 09/30/1998
* USD 325,359.00

9317321 Padman The proposed work is part of an integrated research program
("Anzflux") into the oceanographic structure of upper mixed layer of the eastern
Weddell Sea. It is to be carried out from the RVIB Nathaniel B. Palmer in the
austral winter of 1994. The work proposed here is an effort to measure high
frequency vertical profiles of velocity and temperature using a Rapid Sampling
Vertical Profiler, a tethered sensor system developed by the principal
investigator that free falls through the upper 250 meters of the ocean. The
objective is to study the dynamics of momentum and energy fluxes in the upper
mixed layer, and to investigate the processes that determine the stability of
the pycnocline. Particular emphasis will be placed on the response of the
pycnocline to the mesoscale velocity field, internal waves, and other coherent
turbulence features. These measurements, in conjunction with other concurrent
experiments to quantify the energy brought to the underside of the ice, will
form the basis of a regional study of the processes responsible for the
relatively thick upper mixed layer and thin ice cover. It is believed that these
conditions are only marginally stable, and are maintained by a relatively high
upward heat flux, which, if interrupted, could lead to deep vertical convection,
and a significant change in the oceanic climate. ***