* 9317729
* Workshop:  Research Issues in the Transition of Automobiles from Internal Combustion Engines to Fuel Cells and          Electric
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/1993,07/31/1994
* Vernon Roan, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Paul Werbos
* 07/31/1994
* USD 29,996.00

9317729 Roan This workshop will try to define research issues crucial to the
transition to fuel cell or electric vehicles. Of all known ways to power a car,
these are the technologies which have the highest efficiency by a large margin
in using fossil fuels and electricity, respectively; they also have a potential
for orders of magnitude reduction in pollution. Conceptually, the goal is to
define a research strategy which would have the effect of minimizing the
expected value of the delay between now and the time when such vehicles are
available and attractive to the majority of automobile drivers in the United
States. Because of breakthroughs in membrane and alkaline fuel cells, in
lithium- manganese polymer batteries, and in dissociators which convert natural
gas or methanol to hydrogen, this goal is now tangible enough to be a worthwhile
subject of serious scientific discussion; however, there is a need for
interdisciplinary research, and for greater mobilization of the most advanced
scientific researchers to address these long-range issues. This workshop will
attempt to generate such discussion and interdisciplinary communication,
bringing together expert form industry and government (with existing technology
and problem definitions) with experts from universities and small businesses
(with advanced specialized research capabilities). Topics will include systems
integration and control issues (including advanced learning control using
artificial neural networks), membrane and electrochemistry issues, marketing and
risk management issues, environmental issues, manufacturing issues, battery
research and energy management issues. ***