* 9317543
* Structure/Function Relationship of B2m/Class I Association
* BIO,MCB
* 04/15/1994,09/30/1997
* Maria Nieto, California State University, East Bay Foundation, Inc.
* Continuing Grant
* Barbara K. Zain
* 09/30/1997
* USD 239,441.00

9317543 Nieto The Major Histocompatibility Complex (MHC) class I transplantation
antigens function as restriction elements for the presentation of viral and
foreign antigens to the T cell receptor. Antigen is presented to the T cell
receptor in the form of a peptide which binds within the helical bordered cleft
of the class I molecule. The molecular interactions involved in the presentation
of the peptide receptor are not fully understood. Preliminary results suggest
that the class I molecule is structurally flexible and susceptible to structural
perturbations induced by beta-2 microglobulin, a 12 Kd protein non-covalently
associated with class I at the cell surface. This research is designed to
address the role of class I structural flexibility and the relationship it has
to class I function. Specifically, the role of beta-2 microglobulin in overall
class I structure and function will be investigated. Discerning the role of
beta-2 microglobulin in class I structure will provide insight into the ability
of class I to bind and present a vast array of disparate antigenic peptides to
the T cell receptor. %%% The transplantation antigens were first shown to be
responsible for rejection of tissue transplants in mice. The transplantation
antigens are cell surface protein molecules encoded by a multigene complex known
as the Major Histocompatibility Complex (MHC). The major gene families in this
complex have been designated class I, II, and III. Products of the genes are now
known to play a crucial role in the recognition by the immune system of cells
bearing foreign antigens on their surfaces. The subject of this research is how
the structure of the Class I molecule and an associated protein, known as beta-2
microglobulin, affect their function in recognizing foreign molecules. This
research will be carried out by a new investigator at a predominantly
undergraduate institution. This research, therefore will not only contribute to
our understanding of rec ognition and response mechanisms in immune function,
but also enrich the environment for science education at an institution with a
high proportion of minority undergraduates. ***