* 9318643
* Spatial Competence: The Contribution of Socio-Cultural and Gender Factors in Measures of Differences Between Men and Women
* NONE,NONE
* 04/01/1994,09/30/1996
* Carole M. Self, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Continuing grant
* James W. Harrington
* 09/30/1996
* USD 170,639.00

9318643 GOLLEDGE It is well known that there are significant differences in
performance levels for spatial tasks between men and women. Many scientists have
argued that this difference in performance is an important factor deterring
women from participating more fully in many of the sciences and engineering.
However, it is unclear whether this difference in performance is the result of
innate sex-related differences in spatial "competence" (i.e. physiological
differences) or in gender-related influences, such as experience, training,
attitude, and culture. The goal of this project is to seek a better
understanding of the relative importance of gender-related and sex-related
differences in spatial competence. This project is being undertaken by an
interdisciplinary team that provides the breadth necessary to undertake this
ambitious research. A carefully chosen sample of 80 persons will be thoroughly
studied using a complementary variety of approaches including personal
histories, attitude surveys, behavior surveys, psychological tests, and
laboratory and field tests of spatial competence and behavior. This combination
of research on social/anthropological and human geographic factors, along with
standard psychometric test measurements and performance measures on specific
tasks, will provide an indication of the roles that socially rooted values,
expectations, and pressures play in determining the existence (or lack) of sex-
related explanations of variations in spatial abilities and performance. Results
of the analysis will contribute significantly to better understanding the
factors behind sex and gender differences in spatial ability and to enhancement
of theories related to spatial knowledge in general. As such, the findings will
have major implications for a broad range of theoretical and practical issues
related to gender and sex differences in spatial performance.