* 9318035
* Biodiversity and Climate Changes in East Africa:            Lake Victoria IDEAL Limnology
* BIO,DEB
* 03/15/1994,02/28/1999
* John Lehman, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Alan Tessier
* 02/28/1999
* USD 293,030.00

9318035 Lehman Lake Victoria, the second largest lake on earth, has experienced
striking changes during recent decades. Water transparency, oxygen
concentrations, nutrients, algae, and fish communities have all changed markedly
from historical conditions. The lake now supports an introduced fish fauna of
reduced species diversity than in its indigenous state, and the future yield of
the fishery is in doubt. Three hypotheses have been advanced to account for
these changes: (1) nutrient inputs have accelerated from atmospheric sources and
regional land use, (2) changes in regional climate have altered physical mixing
of the lake, permitting prolonged periods of stratification and deoxigenation,
and (3) the introduction of piscivorous fish has disrupted food webs reducing
total fish biomass. This research will test hypothesis (1) critically, and
provide a basis for subsequently testing the others if this hypothesis proves
false. %%% This research is part of the goals of IDEAL, the International Decade
for East African Lakes. Discrimination of these hypotheses could prompt remedial
action, permit prediction of future states of the lake and its potential to
produce harvestable protein, and provide the data to evaluate and interpret
paleostratigraphic records. The results from this research will be instrumental
in a reconstruction of the changes in Lake Victoria during the past century, and
in calibrating the responses of continental regions to global and regional
climate change over much longer time periods.