* 9318945
* Technical Developments in Scanning Force Microscopy for     Bioimaging Applications.  Studies of the Structure of E.    coli RNA Polymerase
* BIO,DBI
* 03/15/1994,08/31/1997
* Carlos Bustamante, University of Oregon Eugene
* Continuing Grant
* Lee C. Makowski
* 08/31/1997
* USD 390,000.00

9318945 Bustamante This proposal describes a program to develop the applications
of Scanning Force Microscopy (SFM) as a structural method in biology. SFM offers
several advantages over other microscopies as a tool for the structural
characterization of biological samples because: i) It has resolution roughly
comparable to the electron microscope (EM); ii) imaging can be done under
physiologically relevant conditions, i.e. in air and in liquids; iii) It
produces topographic images which are harder to obtain with other microscopes of
equivalent resolution; and iv) It uses methods of sample deposition which are
significantly gentler than those required in EM. During the last two years our
efforts have been concentrated in establishing Scanning Force Microscopy as a
method of direct visualization capable of imaging biological structures at high
resolution and in conditions preserving their native state. In this period we
have: i) Developed reliable methods of deposition of nucleic acids and
protein/DNA complexes on mica and image them in air, under controlled humidity;
ii) Improved the spatial resolution of SFM with biomolecules in air through the
use of sharp carbon "supertips"; and iii) Obtained some of the first images of
biological macromolecules in aqueous and other liquid environments. Party as, a
result of these efforts, SFM imaging of biological samples in air is now routine
and reliable, and various laboratories including our own are now involved in
several applications of SFM to structural biology. However, it is apparent that
the ultimate technical limitations of SFM have not yet been reached and that a
dditional technical developments will be necessary before the potential of SFM
in structural biology can be fully realized. These developments must occur in
three main areas: spatial resolution, control of tip-sample interactions, and
imaging under physiological buffers. This application has two parts. In part A
we propose experiments designed to address each of these important technical
issues based on preliminary data obtained in our laboratory during the last two
years. The specific objectives of this effort are: i) Development and test of
new ultra sharp tips for SFM; ii) Use of non contact modes of operation; and
iii) Design and test of new electrochemical methods of sample deposition for
imaging under liquids. Part B describes the application of successful technical
developments of part A we the structural characterization of E. coli RNA
polymerase DNA complexes during initiation and elongation. u ~ @ This proposal
describes a program to develop the applications of Scanning Force Microscopy
(SFM) as a struc &amp; ? K @ E Ã• ' ' ' ' ' F ; CG Times Symbol &amp; Arial 1
Courier 0 MS LineDraw 3 h n En E = abstract Deseree King, BIR Deseree King, BIR