* 9318126
* Collaborative Research:  New Paleogene Mammal Faunas from   the Andean Main Range, Chile
* BIO,DEB
* 03/15/1994,02/28/1999
* Andre Wyss, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Continuing grant
* Mary C. McKitrick
* 02/28/1999
* USD 105,937.00

9318126 Wyss This proposal requests funding to extend the PIs' study of fossil
land mammal faunas of the Andes mountain chain in central Chile. During most of
the last 80 million years South America drifted as an island continent. The
highly peculiar land mammals that arose as a result of this isolation have
captured the interest of biologists for more than two centuries. The PIs have
recently discovered two new and highly unexpected fossil mammal assemblages in
volcanic sediments of the Chilean Andes. These assemblages help to fill in what
was previously a very poorly understood interval in the history of South
American mammals. In addition, occurrence of these fossils in volcanic deposits
enables the application of various "absolute" geologic dating techniques,
providing a precise calibration for at least the younger of the two assemblages.
The project will focus on three areas in continuation of the PIs' study in this
region. First, field collecting and reconnaissance efforts will be extended to
discover new localities and assemblages of different ages. Second, the PIs will
establish an integrated geological time framework for known and newly identified
assemblages. Third, preparation, description, and analysis of these diverse,
well preserved fossils will be completed. This will help clarify biotic,
environmental, and geologic events during crucial intervals of South American
land mammal history.