* 9318709
* Genetic and Molecular Analysis of Cell-Signaling in         Development in Caenorhabditis Elegans
* BIO,IOS
* 01/01/1994,12/31/1997
* Eleanor Maine, Syracuse University
* Continuing Grant
* Judith Plesset
* 12/31/1997
* USD 325,500.00

9318709 Maine The long range goal of this proposal is to elucidate the molecular
basis of regulatory cell signaling during development of multicellular
organisms. In particular this proposal investigates the mechanisms underlying
two such regulatory interactions in the nematode, Caenorhabditis elegans:
induction of mitosis in the germ line and induction of the anterior pharynx in
the early embryo. Although these two cell signaling processes occur in different
tissues and at different times in development, they share at least one common
component: the glp-1 gene. Extensive genetic, molecular, and immunocytochemical
studies suggest that glp-1 acts as a signal receptor in each of these induced
tissues. Cell signaling pathways mediated by glp-1 related receptors play a
general role in metazoan development and growth control: Drosophila and C.
elegans homologs mediate regulatory cell signaling during development and
vertebrate homologs are proto-oncogenes. Relatively little is known about the
intercellular signaling pathways mediated by glp-1 and related receptors. As a
means of identifying other components of the glp-1 mediated pathway, extragenic
suppressors and enhancers of glp-1 mutation were generated. Suppressors and
enhancers of glp-1 are likely to be mutations in other genes in the
intercellular signaling pathway mediated by glp-1. This proposal focuses on two
genes identified as recessive suppressors, sog-1 and sog-10, and on a set of
recessive enhancer (ego) mutations. Genetic and molecular studies that analyze
the roles of these suppressor and enhancer genes in germline and embryonic cell-
cell interactions are proposed. 1) sog-1 has been well characterized
genetically; it may be a member of a redundant gene family. Here, a molecular
analysis is outlined that will describe the sog-1 product and its expression and
localization patterns during development. 2) A preliminary genetic and
phenotypic analysis of sog-10 has been completed; here, a more det ailed genetic
analysis is proposed that will describe the general role of sog-10 in
development. A subsequent molecular analysis will describe the gene product and
its expression and localization patterns during development. 3) A limited
genetic analysis of a set of ego mutations will be done to identify which ego
gene is most likely to encode a component of the glp-1 mediated intercellular
signaling pathway. This particular ego gene will be genetically analyzed to
determine its role in germline proliferation and other aspects of development.
***