* 9318637
* Mathematical Sciences: 1994 AMS-SIAM Summer Seminar in      Applied Mathematics "Dynamical Systems and Probabilistic    Methods for Nonlinear Waves."
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/1994,12/31/1995
* Philip Holmes, American Mathematical Society
* Standard Grant
* Lloyd E. Douglas
* 12/31/1995
* USD 48,871.00

9318637 Maxwell The American Mathematical Society requests a grant in the amount
of $62,371 for the twenty-fourth AMS-SIAM Summer Seminar in Applied Mathematics,
to be held in the summer of 1994. Previous seminars were held annually or at two
or three year intervals since 1957 for a total or 23 seminars. The 1994 topic,
"Dynamical Systems and Probabilistic Methods for Nonlinear Waves", was selected
by the 1992 AMS-SIAM Committee on Applied Mathematics. Members of the Organizing
Committee for the 1994 Summer seminar are: David W. MCLaughlin (co-chair),
Philip Holmes (co-chair), Percy Deift, James M. Hyman, C. David Levermore, Y.
Sinai, and C. Eugene Wayne. The organizers propose and AMS-SIAM Summer Seminar
in 1994 which would focus on the use of probabilistic and dynamical systems
methods in the study of nonlinear waves. The conference program will be
specifically geared toward advanced graduate students and recent Ph.D recipients
who will soon be participating in these fast developing and important fields.
The 1994 Summer Seminar will be held during a two-week period in June/July 1994,
at the Mathematical Sciences Research Institute in Berkeley,California. The
Society will be responsible for making suitable arrangements for lecture and
seminar rooms, and for coordinating local administrative matters with MSRI
staff.