* 9318745
* RUI: Theoretical Studies of Astrophysical Jets Using 1-D and2-D analytic Models
* MPS,AST
* 07/01/1994,06/30/1999
* Theodoros Koupelis, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Susan M. Simkin
* 06/30/1999
* USD 67,646.00

ABSTRACT AST-9318745 KOUPELIS, Theodoros A two-dimensional analytic model for
outflows (jets) in galaxies will be developed. It will be used in part on the
approach of first finding the integrals of motion of the magnetohydrodynamic
(MHD) equations describing the flow. The development of a one-dimensional
analytic model in which the system of the ideal MHD equations is projected onto
the jet axis (the narrow-jet model) will be completed. Using these models an
investigation of the relative importance of different physical mechanisms on the
collimation and continuous acceleration of outflows from a variety of
astrophysical objects will be conducted. The first objective of this project is
to find the allowed ranges of values of the physical parameters at the jet
origin (e.g., magnetic field strength, density, etc.) for an outflow to be
possible, and to study its evolution as the physical conditions close to its
source change continuously. The goal is to study the physics of the regions at
the origin of jets by using the information provided by observations of the
outflow along its length. The second objective is to examine the effects of
different pressure distributions and magnetic field strengths in the medium
surrounding the outflow on its collimation and evolution. The goal is to study
the propagation and stability properties of outflows in different environments.
Using appropriate values for the parameters of interest or, when available, the
limits imposed by the observations of specific outflows and the environments,
the theoretical results will be compared with numerical simulations, and with
outflows from active nuclei, neutron stars, and prostars. ***