* 9318621
* Infrared Laser Spectroscopy of Jahn-Teller Active Radicals  in a Supersonic Jet
* MPS,CHE
* 01/01/1994,12/31/1994
* Stephen Foster, Florida State University
* Continuing Grant
* Alfons Weber
* 12/31/1994
* USD 94,100.00

In this project in the Physical Chemistry Program of the Chemistry Division,
Prof. S.C. Foster of the Chemistry Department of Florida State University will
conduct a series of investigations in the high resolution infrared spectroscopy
of Jahn-Teller active molecules. A novel high frequency modulated corona-
excited supersonic jet discharge will be used to produce the species of
interest. The methoxy, thiomethoxy, and methyl nitrene radicals will be
investigated. While there have been many investigations of the rotation-
vibration-electronic spectra of polyatomic molecules, there have been relatively
few which deal with the radicals of such molecules. This paucity of such
investigations is generally due to the great reactivity of these species and
thus the difficulties encountered in producing sufficient amounts of them
suitable for experimental study. In radical species which are expected to
possess axial symmetry this is often not the case. The radicals are distorted
away from their expected symmetry due to a special interaction between the
electronic motions and some of the vibrational modes. This is known as the Jahn-
Teller effect. This research is devoted to the study of Jahn-Teller active
molecules with the aim to establish a data base suitable for the development of
appropriate theoretical models.