* 9318003
* Geographic Variation in Costs and Benefits of VAM           Fungi-Little Bluestem (Schizachyrium Scoparium) Associations
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/1994,06/30/1996
* Mark McGinley, Texas Tech University
* Standard Grant
* Scott L. Collins
* 06/30/1996
* USD 68,308.00

9318003 McGinley Vesicular-arbuscular mycorrhizal (VAM) fungi form associations
with many species of plants. These associations are thought to be mutualistic.
Recently, however, the constancy of this putative mutualism has been questioned.
This project examines the geographic variation in the costs and benefits of
vesicular-arbuscular mycorrhizal associations with little bluestem grass. A full
factorial design is used to examine the growth characteristics of grasses and
fungi from four geographic regions grown in a common environment. The growth of
plants and fungi in all combinations of local fungal and grass races and soil
types will be measured. %%% It is important to examine the costs and benefits of
VAM fungi-plant associations in more detail than in previous studies. This study
is novel in providing information on the geographic basis of variation in the
nature of the symbiotic relationship. Results from this research will provide
important information on: 1) geographic variation in the importance of the
mycorrhizal association, 2) the effect of the variation in mycorrhizal infection
and soil characteristics on plant growth and allocation patterns, and 3) the
effects of plant characteristics and soil on fungal morphology and reproduction.
The results of this research will have potential applications in forestry,
agriculture, and conservation biology. *** ! ! ! ! F x x O Times New Roman
Symbol &amp; Arial 1 Courier 5 Pitch 1 Courier 10 Pitch " h H eH e 1 Deborah
Johnson Deborah Johnson