* 9318259
* Instrumentation for High Resolution Capacitance Measurements
* BIO,DBI
* 04/15/1994,03/31/1997
* Richard Bookman, University of Miami School of Medicine
* Continuing Grant
* Lee C. Makowski
* 03/31/1997
* USD 224,858.00

9318259 Bookman Support from the NSF is requested for the development of new
instrumentation to measure rapid changes in the capacitance of biological
membranes with high resolution. These measurements of changes in capacitance
will permit the investigation of a number of biologically important phenomena.
The principal use of this instrument is likely to be the detection of increases
in cell surface area arising from the fusion of one or more secretory vesicles
with the cell's plasma membrane during the process of exocytosis. The study of
secretory vesicle fusion events and the quantitative characterization of the
kinetics of secretion made possible by this instrument can improve our
understanding of a fundamental process in cell biology. An additional component
of membrane capacitance arises from the mobility of charged groups on proteins
lying within the electric field of the membrane. Recent results show that the
detection of such charge movements from voltage-dependent ion channels as a
capacitance signal can provide new information about ion channel gating and its
modification by toxins. Thus it is expected that the proposed instrument can
help to establish new methods for studying conformational changes of membrane
proteins. The project consists of the development of software to implement a
stimulus synthesizer, the development of improved and user-tunable algorithms
for measuring membrane capacitance, their implementation in software,
development of new analysis and data base tools for the data produced by this
instrument, and documentation of the instrument for both users and programmers.
The fundamental assumptions behind this instrument include: 1) that the cell
under study can be represented by an equivalent electrical circuit, and 2) that
a cell under voltage clamp can be driven by a band-limited, arbitrary-frequency
voltage stimulus and the resulting current can be faithfully sampled with high
resolution. Based on these assumptions, the inst rument will be able to combine
traditional transient membrane depolarization with more spectrally complicated
waveforms in order to study processes activated by the cell's electrical
activity. This proposed instrument will attempt to resolve changes in membrane
capacitance that are on the order of 10-1s Farads and to resolve such changes
occurring in a 1kHz bandwidth. This instrument is an example of a new class of
instrumentation made possible by developments in three areas of technology: 1)
high speed general purpose microprocessors, 2) fast, high resolution A/D and D/A
converters, and 3) special purpose digital signal processing algorithms. A key
feature of this project is the reliance upon hardware components that already
exist in most laboratories, i.e., a personal computer and a data acquisition
interface. With the increasing power of the scientist's data acquisition
computer, new types of measurements become possible solely by the addition of
software. With its implementation of appropriate algorithms, the proposed
instrument will provide information that is unattainable with any commercial
instrument and make possible new types of experiments to study membrane
processes. A particular advantage is that the proposed instrument can be widely
and rapidly disseminated to the research community electronically (i.e., through
Internet)) at no additional capital cost to the nation's laboratories.