* 9318205
* A Test of the Dependence of Secondary Production on         Unicellular Algae in Running Water Ecosystems
* BIO,DEB
* 01/15/1994,12/31/1996
* William Lewis, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Richard F. Dame
* 12/31/1996
* USD 280,000.00

9318205 Lewis Studies of salt marshes, seagrass communities, and flood plains
have shown that the consumer food webs of aquatic ecosystems may be strongly
dependent on production of unicellular algae, even when organic matter from
vascular plants is abundant. These findings suggest that the relative importance
of unicellular algae in supporting consumer biomass in running waters, which are
often dominated by organic matter from vascular plants, may have been
underestimated. The proposal outlines a plan for testing this concept over a
broad gradient of physical conditions in two rivers of the Colorado Rockies. The
study plan is based on the application of stable isotope mentodology, which has
been shown by means of pilot studies on the proposed field sites to provide good
discrimination between vascular plant carbon and algal-derived carbon. The
working hypotheses is that the overall contribution of algal carbon to secondary
production is high whenever physical conditions permit sufficient irradiance at
the substrate to support algal growth. The drainage basins, and includes
corollary measurements of secondary production so that relative contributions of
algal carbon to consumer production can be quantified. The study will clarify
the relative importance of algal carbon over a wide range of physical conditions
in the presence of organic carbon derived from vascular plants.