* 9318593
* Regional Networking in New England Proposal No. 6
* CSE,CNS
* 09/15/1993,02/29/1996
* James Bruce, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Mark A. Luker
* 02/29/1996
* USD 110,642.00

9318593 Bruce Massachusetts Institute of Technology requests support from NSF
for connection of nine schools including: the Maine Technical College System
comprising six schools (Washington County Technical College, Southern Maine
Technical College, Northern Maine Technical College, Kennebec Valley Technical
College, Eastern Maine Technical College, and Central Maine Technical College),
Goddard College, Providence College, and Saint Anslem College to the New England
Academic Research Network (Nearnet) which is the NSF mid-level network that
serves the New England area. A primary goal of NEARnet is to facilitate
collaborative projects and sharing of resources between institution, including
those outside the state. NEARnet will provide operations management and
information services and it will give the universities and colleges a connection
to the NSFNET, a high speed (1.5 - 45 million bits per second) National Backbone
network. The each of the universities has written a description of its
organization and a statement of the benefits of Internet access that it expects
including: greater functionality and network speed to be able to access
supercomputers, libraries, and make file transfers along with being able to
implement a more reliable mail system. Students and faculty research will
benefit from the links. This is also a unique opportunity for the schools to
explore innovative educational resources. Their diversity will expose NEARnet to
a broader range of user requirements. Nearnet will use the information obtained
by serving this diverse group for the benefit of New England's academic and
research community. ***