* 9318376
* FAR1, the Effector for a Negative Growth Factor of          Yeast
* NONE,NONE
* 04/01/1994,03/31/1997
* Ira Herskowitz, University of California-San Francisco
* Continuing grant
* Philip Harriman
* 03/31/1997
* USD 270,000.00

9318376 Herskowitz Growth of normal cells is often regulated by growth factors,
either positive growth factors, which stimulate proliferation, or negative
growth factors, which inhibit proliferation. The budding yeast, saccharomyces
cerevisiae, provides an excellent opportunity to study the molecular mechanism
of action of negative growth factors. The yeast mating factors(a-factor and
a-factor) are peptides secreted by each of the mating types, a and a. They cause
cells of opposite mating type to arrest in the G1 phase of the cell cycle and to
differentiate by inducing expression of a variety contains a seven-membrane-
spanning receptor and several protein kinases, which include MAP kinases. Cell-
cycle arrest ensues because activity of the regulatory kinase,p34 CDC28, is
inhibited. A gene, FAR1, has been recently identified whose protein plays a key
role in arresting the cell cycle in G1 in response to the negative growth
factors. Genetic studies led to the hypothesis that FAR1 protein inhibits one of
the G1 cyclins, CLN2. Recent biochemical studies show that FAR1 protein
associates with the CDC28 and CLN2 proteins and that the ability to form this
complex requires that FAR1 be phosphorylated by the MAP kinase, FUS3 protein.
These studies demonstrate that FAR1 is the link between the signal transduction
pathway and the machinery that is involved in regulating the cell-cycle. This
research is employing a combination of molecular genetic and biochemical
techniques to address the following aims: (a) Determine how phosphorylation of
FAR1 by FUS3 (and by p34CDC28-CLN2 ) controls activity of FAR1. Phosphorylation
sites shall be identified by biochemical methods; mutant sites shall be
constructed or otherwise identified to test the role of these sites in vivo and
in vitro. (b) Determine how FAR1 inhibits activity of the p34CDC28-CLN2 complex.
Immune complexes containing CLN2 and CDC28 shall be isolated and assayed for
function in the presence of FAR1 protein; mutant FAR1 proteins (inactive or
constitutively active) shall be identified and analyzed to dertemine their
ability to inhibit CLN2/CDC28 kinase activity in vitro and in vivo. (c) Explore
the role of FAR1 in the mating process of yeast. Mutants of FAR1 defective in a
second function of FAR1 shall be isolated and their mating defect characterized.
(d) Search for homologues of FAR1 in other organisms. Homologues will be
identified by functional rescue of yeast far1 mutants and by nucleic acid
hybridization. %%% These studies are relevant to understanding how cell growth
is regulated by the external environment, a fundamental problem in cell and
developmental biology with relevance to cancer. ***