* 9318594
* Peroxisomes:  Endosymbiotic Organelles without a Genome?
* BIO,DEB
* 04/01/1994,09/30/1997
* Jeffrey Palmer, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Charles Lydeard
* 09/30/1997
* USD 225,000.00

9318594 PALMER The peroxisome is a small, membrane-bound organelle found in the
cells of all animals and other higher organisms. Peroxisomes lack a genome of
their own, but a number of important biochemical reactions and enzymes (coded
for by nuclear genes) occur within the peroxisome, and a large number of human
diseases, mostly lethal, are caused by defects in peroxisomal function. Although
much is known about the function of the peroxisome, we know nothing about its
origin. This project seeks to remedy this situation by gathering evidence to
test the two competing hypotheses for the origin of the peroxisome: 1) that it
arose by internal compartmentation of a subset of metabolic enzymes, or 2) that,
like chloroplasts and mitochondria, it arose endosymbiotically, i.e. by the
permanent uptake of a bacterium (which turned into the peroxisome) by a
primitive eukaryotic cell. In preliminary studies, we have identified four
peroxisomal proteins that show provocatively high levels of similarity to
bacterial homologs, and which thus provide suggestive evidence in support of
hypothesis #2. To provide a rigorous test of the endosymbiotic hypothesis of
peroxisomal origins, we will sequence and phylogenetically analyze the genes for
each of these four proteins from about 20 diverse bacteria and from several
representative eukaryotes. In addition, we will sequence several other genes,
such as those encoding for the heat shock proteins, as they become available to
this project. In the absence of a peroxisomal genome, it is imperative that
congruent data be sought for as many different peroxisomal proteins as possible.
The strongest answer to the question "Is the peroxisome an endosymbiont?" will
come if multiple nuclear genes for peroxisomal proteins all trace back to the
same place within a bacterial phylogenetic tree, a place distinct from that of
both mitochondria and plastids. If such an answer is forthcoming, it would
provide a rationale for reassessing the possibility that a residual perox isomal
genome might still lurk in some eukaryotes. This project is being jointly funded
by the Systematic and Population Biology programs of the Division of
Environmental Biology (DEB) and the Metabolic Biochemistry program of the
Division of Molecular and Cellular Biosciences (MCB). %%% Peroxisomes are small
cellular organelles that are very important to the metabolism and effective
functioning of cells. Several lethal human diseases are attributed to defects in
peroxisomal functioning. This study will investigate the origin of these
important organelles. ***