* 9318076
* Internet Connection:  Georgetown University and Four        Teaching Hospitals
* CSE,CNS
* 09/15/1993,02/28/1997
* Naomi Broering, Georgetown University
* Standard Grant
* Mark A. Luker
* 02/28/1997
* USD 47,500.00

9318076 Broering The Georgetown University Medical Center Library will extend
multicampus network access to four teaching hospitals, Arlington Hospital, DC
General Hospital, DC Veterans Affairs Medical Center and the Georgetown
University Hospital. The network will provide faculty, staff, students and
researchers with access to the Library's Knowledge Network of databases, to the
Internet system, and to E-Mail services on the campus high speed network. The
project will promote collaboration, sharing and information exchange to support
education and related patient care and research. It will facilitate Georgetown's
goals to enhance education at clinical rotation sites and to provide outreach
services in the community. This proposed Internet link is a logical step in
sharing resources generated through the Integrated Advanced Information
Management System (IAIMS) project at Georgetown. The four project objectives are
to 1. Establish a network link to the affiliated teaching hospitals. 2. Share
resources, by providing access to the Library's Knowledge Network of
bibliographic informational, document delivery and full- text databases. 3.
Provide access to the Internet to promote collaboration and information
exchange. 4. Provide E-Mail services to students, residents and faculty to
improve communication in the learning process. The network architecture will
include routers, cables and modems needed to install the link to each hospital.
The project will include (1) a connection via leased telephone lines for
Arlington Hospital (2) a security controlled Internet connection for the
Georgetown University Hospital (3) dial-up access for initial experimentation at
DC General Hospital and the Veterans Affairs Medical Center. Georgetown will
extend dial-up Internet access to local practitioners. Library access is a major
emphasis of the project as the Knowledge Network's bibliographic, informational,
document delivery and full-text databases are a vital element of the clinical
teaching programs. The security control system to be developed by the Georgetown
University Hospital will be shared with the participating hospitals as their
network needs evolve. Collaboration between the hospitals will emerge through
the teaching programs. The project will benefit nearly 5,000 health
professionals at the four hospitals and over 1,000 Georgetown students and
residents. Increased use of the network is envisioned as the potential benefits
are realized.