* 9318823
* Molecular Evolution of hobo Transposable Elements in Drosophila
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/1994,08/31/1997
* Gail Simmons, CUNY City College
* Standard Grant
* Mark Courtney
* 08/31/1997
* USD 92,373.00

9318823 Simmons Transposable elements (TEs) are genetic sequences found in all
organisms that can cause a wide variety of deleterious effects when they move
from one chromosomal site to another. TEs can be transmitted both from parent to
offspring (vertically) and from one host species to another (laterally), so that
their behavior resembles that of a parasite. Dr. Simmons is interested in
determining the pattern and relative frequency of such lateral transfer events
to hobo, a transposable element in the insect genus Drosophila. Her previous
published work showed that active hobo elements have been laterally transferred
among four species within the Drosophila in the recent past. Recent work
indicates, however, that hobo sequences in other Drosophila species may have
been vertically transmitted. Dr. Simmons will perform a more complete analysis
of lateral vs. vertical transmission of hobo in Drosophila by cloning and DNA-
sequencing full-length copies of the element from several species Drosophila.
The sequences will be used to construct a "family tree" for the hobo element in
these species, and the resulting tree will be compared to a tree to be
constructed for the host species. Places where the two trees have the same form
will indicate species in which hobo has been vertically transmitted, while
places where the two trees are not congruent indicate potential lateral transfer
events. These studies will form the backbone of the efforts to understand the
frequency of the mechanisms of lateral genetic transfer events occurring in all
sorts of organisms.