* 9318740
* Dynamics of Electrons and Magnetic Fluxoids in High-        Temperature Superconductors
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/1994,03/31/1997
* Donald Ginsberg, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Jean Toulouse
* 03/31/1997
* USD 100,000.00

9318740 Ginsberg Technical abstract: A praseodymium-doped high temperature
superconductor (yttrium-barium copper-oxide) will be investigated above and
below the superconducting transition temperature. Measurements will include the
electrical resistance, Hall effect, critical current density, and magnetic
irreversibility line. The focus will be on untwinned single crystals to avoid
the effects of twin boundaries and thus allow measurement of the anisotropy of
the electrical and magnetic properties. Such measurements would not be possible
in polycrystalline samples or in twinned single crystals. The information gained
will cast light on inter-layer coupling and magnetic pair breaking in high
temperature superconductors. Non-technical abstract: A fundamental theory of
high temperature superconductors would cast light on the behavior of the
electrons in these fascinating materials. Furthermore, it would facilitate the
efficient development of devices, such as high-speed circuits and sensitive
detectors of magnetic fields or electrical voltages. To provide data for the
development of the theory, we will measure the electrical and magnetic
properties of untwinned single crystals of an important high temperature
superconductor (yttrium-barium- copper-oxide) to see the effects of replacing
nonmagnetic (yttrium) atoms with magnetic (praseodymium) atoms. ***