* 9318044
* Improvement of the Texas A&amp;M University Insect Collection,  Department of Entomology
* BIO,DEB
* 06/15/1994,05/31/1997
* Horace Burke, Texas A&M Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* None
* 05/31/1997
* USD 136,348.00

9318044 Burke Funds will be used for improvement of the Insect Collection of the
Department of Entomology, Texas A&amp;M University. This collection of
approximately 1,290,000 specimens has grown rapidly in recent years and is
particularly rich in material from the southwestern United States and Mexico. It
is the major insect collection in the area. There is a need to reorganize
portions of the collection, sort material to loanable units, raise the
curatorial level of selected groups, rehouse and integrate important donated
materials, and continue basic computerization activities. Funds are specifically
needed to (1) employ students on a part-time basis to assist in curation and
name-capture and (2) purchase cabinets and drawers for storage of the increasing
numbers of specimens generated by inventory and research projects, donations and
other acquisitions. The addition of the Roy O. and Conway A. Kendall Collection
of Lepidoptera of approximately 100,000 specimens with extensive associated
biological data is in progress. Cabinets and drawers will be purchased to
rehouse this collection in TAMU. The visiting specialist program has been very
successful in the past in getting material sorted for use in research projects
and obtaining identifications; this program will be continued. A strong
commitment of new funds ($79,910) has been made to the proposed project by the
Texas Agricultural Experiment Station. The requested support will allow
continued development of the collection as a major regional resource for insect
systematics.