* 9318934
* Interacting Hobo Transposons in the Drosophila Genome.
* BIO,MCB
* 04/15/1994,09/30/1996
* Johng Lim, University of Wisconsin-Eau Claire
* Standard Grant
* DeLill Nasser
* 09/30/1996
* USD 200,000.00

9318934 Abstract Hobo is a transposable element found in the genome of
Drosophila. In the X chromosome, the interaction of these elements has been
found to result in chromosomal rearrangements. This hobo activity can be
repressed by genetic factor(s) present in the genome of the Oregon R (OR) strain
of fruit fly. This repression is complete and our data suggest that zygotic
expression of either chromosomal genes or defective hobo elements, or a
combination of those factors are responsible for the repression. The primary
goal of this proposal is to identify and map these factors. A special genetic
strain with 95 defective hobo elements has been isolated from the OR strain. The
position of defective hobo elements in this strain divides the genome into about
100 cytological regions. Through genetic manipulations, the smallest number of
regions that are associated with the repression of Uc-1 hobo activity will be
identified. Cytogenetic analysis will be used to map the repression to a more
precise section within each region. In addition, specially constructed plasmids
will be introduced into the Uc-1 genome to test if antisense-hobo RNA can
repress hobo activity. %%% Mapping a genetic function with defective
transposable elements as genetic markers is simple in concept; however, it has
not been attempted before. Our attempts to map the repressors of hobo activity
will provide information about the usefulness and practicality of such an
undertaking. It will also help us to understand the process of hobo-mediated
chromosome restructuring. ***