* 9318537
* Applications of Series-Expansion Methods to Many-Body       Physics
* MPS,DMR
* 02/15/1994,01/31/1998
* Rajiv Singh, University of California-Davis
* Continuing Grant
* G. Bruce Taggart
* 01/31/1998
* USD 162,000.00

9318537 Singh This theoretical and computationally-intensive research will use
series expansion methods to investigate a variety of problems of current
interest in condensed matter physics. The principal investigator has developed
the basic methodology to generate series expansions for quantum magnets, for
models of strongly correlated Fermi systems, and for disordered systems such as
spin glasses. For these systems, series expansions have been obtained for
uniform thermodynamic quantities, for static response functions, for wave-
vector dependent equal-time spin and charge correlation functions and for
frequency moments of dynamical correlation functions. A major focus will be to
understand the normal state properties of high temperature superconducting
cuprates. Results will be compared to experiments on these materials such as
nuclear magnetic resonance, neutron and light scattering, photoemission, and
transport phenomena. The Kondo lattice and Hubbard models on non- bipartite
lattices will be studied to gain insight into the electron-correlation driven
metal-insulator transition. Other systems to be studied include critical
phenomena in random quantum systems, ordering in frustrated spin models and
conformal invariance in two-dimensional non-integrable statistical models. %%%
This renewal grant will use series expansion techniques, which were originally
developed for the study of phase transitions, and apply them to problems
involving strongly correlated materials. The approach taken by the principal
investigator is somewhat unique and complements other computational techniques
used to study these problems. The problems to be studied include the high
temperature superconductors, magnetic materials and the metal-insulator
transition. ***