* 9318652
* Quantum Mechanical Studies of Interacting Modes in          Molecular Systems
* NONE,NONE
* 03/01/1994,08/31/1997
* Robert Silbey, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing grant
* Celeste M. Rohlfing
* 08/31/1997
* USD 330,000.00

This three-year theoretical research project is jointly supported by the NSF
Theoretical and Computational Chemistry Program and the Materials Theory
Program. Theoretical models will be studied for the study of: (1) low
temperature thermal and optical properties of glasses, and (2) optical and
electronic properties and electronic and vibrational states of molecular
aggregates. Topic (1) involves computer simulations to generate a large sample
of glass structures using an empirical force field model. Each generated
structure is searched for pairs of neighboring local minima on the potential
energy surface with associated double well potentials (DWP). Tunneling
contributions to low temperature specific heat, thermal conductivity and phonon-
chromophore interactions will be computed using the statistical distribution of
DWP parameters. Topic (2) is a quantum and statistical mechanical analysis of
electronic-vibrational (phonon) coupling in molecular aggregates, chains, and
polyatomic molecules. Theory will be compared with results of optical dephasing
experiments on low temperature glasses. The overall goal of this research is to
understand, and eventually to predict, optical and thermal properties of glasses
and other disordered materials in terms of their atomic structure. At the atomic
level, a glass lacks the regular periodicity of a perfect single crystal. This
disorder requires that one take proper account of the statistical distribution
of relevant structural features. In particular, there exist pairs of structures
of nearly the same energy which can be converted one into the other by a
concerted motion of just a few atoms with small adjustments by the many
surrounding atoms. The double well potential is a mathematical representation of
the change of the potential energy of the glass during this conversion process.
The energy barrier is very small for some pairs of structures, and for these,
interconversion motions persist ev en when the glass is cooled to liquid helium
temperatures, where other atomic motions have been frozen out. Thus low
temperature experiments allow one to study the effects of the tunneling motion
free from complications due to other types of motion. Various measurable optical
and thermal properties of the glass will then be computed from the computed
distribution to test the theory.