* 9318159
* Advanced Computational Approaches to Biomolecular Modelling and Structure Determination
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/1993,02/28/2001
* Jan Hermans, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* THOMAS QUARLES
* 02/28/2001
* USD 3,513,265.00

9318159 Schulten Project Summary High performance computers, in particular
massively parallel computers, and the emergent, high-capacity research network
will be employed to advance modelling and structure determination calculations
in molecular biology and pharmacology. To this end, seven investigators with
expertise in computer science, applied mathematics, molecular biology,
pharmacology, chemistry, and physics will combine their efforts towards four
goals: (i) to develop prototype molecular dynamics algorithms for very large,
very long, and very accurate applications as well as to enhance the efficiency
of such algorithms; (ii) to transfer the above algorithms to a widely used
molecular dynamics program for structural biology (X-PLOR) and to develop,
within the framework of this program, efficient algorithms for computational
crystallography and solution NMR spectroscopy; (iii) to use the computational
test beds of NSF centers and to apply the programs developed to grand challenge
problems in molecular biology and pharmacology, initially for structure
determination and interactive molecular dynamics of membrane-protein-water
systems, of membrane transport of drugs, of DNA-protein-water systems and,
later, for large supramolecular systems like the coat of poliovirus or actin-
myosin strands in muscle fiber; (iv) to develop a graphic user interface which
allows convenient interactive molecular modelling between local graphics
workstations and remote massively parallel computers at NSF centers, to pioneer
the routine use of teleconference communication between the investigators
through use of the National Research Network in its various stages of
completion, and to institute a "teleacademy for computational biology" as a
regular seminar on the video conference facilities of the NSF centers and other
qualified sites.