* 9318032
* Bioinstrumentation for Crop and Animal Genome Analysis
* BIO,DBI
* 06/01/1994,05/31/1996
* John Mullet, Texas A&M Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Michael K. Lamvik
* 05/31/1996
* USD 200,000.00

9318032 Wing The overall objective of this proposal is to acquire instrument
resources for a high throughput automated system for plant and animal genome
analysis. This enabling technology will be used for genetic map construction,
diversity analysis, pedigree construction, analysis of complex traits, map-based
gene cloning and genome database development. The requested system will support
the multidisciplinary research of seven major user research groups and 8
additional research laboratories. The instrument resources required for the
automated system include; a large capacity freeze dryer for sample preparation
and storage, a fluorimeter which can be used in a 96 well format with output
connected via computer for automated sample dilution, a robot for automated
liquid handing and photometric measurement tasks, dedicated PCR instruments for
amplification of DNA markers, an automated DNA sequencer for analysis of
amplified polymorphic DNA and for acquisition of microsatellite, cDNA and other
marker sequences, a gel image for data capture and storage, and a UNIX
Workstation for data analysis and genome informatics. The instrument resources
will be housed in the 2,500 square foot Laboratory for Crop Genome Analysis
which is located in a new Crop Biotechnology Center at Texas A&amp;M University.
The Crop Biotechnology Center will provide for the maintenance and operation of
the instrument resource. The principal investigator, Dr. Rod Wing, will oversee
the operation of the automated genome analysis system. Day-to- day operation and
scheduling of the genome analysis system will be carried out by a staff
scientist provided through the Crop Biotechnology Center.