* 9318749
* Physics of Two-Dimensional Electron Systems
* MPS,DMR
* 04/01/1994,03/31/1998
* Vladimir Goldman, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Continuing Grant
* H. Hollis Wickman
* 03/31/1998
* USD 270,000.00

9318749 Goldman Technical abstract: Two-dimensional electron states (2DES) in
semiconductor microstructures exhibit unique properties associated with strongly
correlated electrons. Such properties include one- dimensional edge states,
Wigner crystallization, and single-charge carrier tunneling. The properties of
the collective ground states of 2DES and size-quantized systems of few
electrons, their excitations, edge states, and the quantum phase transitions
will be studied experimenrally at very low temperatures and very high magnetic
fields via magnetotransport, thermal activation, nonlinear transport, as well as
by resonant and single particle tunneling experiments. Non-technical abstract:
Ultra-thin layers of semiconductors can have significant potential applications
in future high performance semiconductor devices. Such materials systems also
allow the investigation of unique electronic phenomena which are particularly
strikingly exhibited at very low temperatures close to absolute zero and in very
high magnetic fields. The "quantum Hall effect" is one of the remarkable
phenomena which exhibits highly unusual phenomena such as fractional electronic
charge and highly ordered assemblies of electrons. The proposed experiments are
designed to understand the broad theoretical concepts that underlie thses unique
properties. In another experiment the transport of single electrons will be
studied in specially designed ultrasmall semiconductor dots which are initially
unoccupied by electrons. The approach is to measure the changes in electronic
current as electrons are sequentially transferred into such a quantum dot. This
process will be extended to ultralow temperatures and high magnetic fields and
compared with recent theoretical predictions. ***