* 9318231
* Interrelationships of Major Gastropod Clades:  Mathildidae  and the 'Lower Heterobranchs' (Mollusca)
* BIO,DEB
* 03/15/1994,08/31/1997
* Rudiger Bieler, Field Museum of Natural History
* Standard Grant
* Charles O'Kelly
* 08/31/1997
* USD 80,000.00

9318231 BIELER Gastropods (snails and slugs) are the largest group of mollusks,
which in turn are only outnumbered by arthropods (insects, crabs, etc.) in
living species diversity. Gastropods play important roles as food items
(escargot, abolone, conch, etc.) as crop pests, as vectors for human and farm
animal diseases (schistosoma, flukes), and as important elements of the reef
building community in the world's oceans. However, the interrelationships of the
various groups of snails have remained unclear. The present study concentrates
on a group of marine gastropods, the family Mathildidae. Better biological
knowledge of this morphologically "intermediate" group may provide insight into
how the major snail groups (e.g. land snails and sea slugs) are related to one
another. This knowledge, in turn, will provide key information for a variety of
scientific and applied fields. For instance, close relationship of certain
groups may suggest the presence of similar biochemical properties of these
organisms, a knowledge that can be useful in the search for "new" biochemical
components in drug research. The project will involve field collecting, studies
of available material of living and fossil species in museum collections,
anatomical studies, histology, scanning electron microscopy, and computer-
assisted modelling of three dimensional morphologies. %%% This study will
clarify higher level relationships among gastropods (snails, slugs, etc.). Such
informnation could be of utility in identifying relatives of organisms found to
have chemicals of potential pharmaceutical importance. ***