* 9318727
* A Precision Measurement of the Polarization of the 2.7K     Cosmic Microwave Background Radiation
* MPS,AST
* 06/01/1994,05/31/1997
* Peter Timbie, Brown University
* Continuing grant
* Jane Russell
* 05/31/1997
* USD 239,645.00

ABSTRACT 9318727 Timbie Recent measurements of the spectrum and the spatial
anisotropy of the 2.7K Cosmic Microwave Background Radiation (CMBR) have
dramatically improved our understanding of the early universe. The third
characteristic of this radiation, its polarization, has not been measured as
precisely. The amplitude of the linear polarization and its angular coherence
length are extremely sensitive to both the source of anisotropy (density
perturbations or gravitational waves) and the ionization history of the
universe. The predicted polarization amplitude is 10% of the size of the
COBE/DMR anisotropy signals at 7, or T/T110-6. This grant will support o perform
the first measurements optimized for this angular scale and smaller. It will use
new receiver technology with 100 times more sensitivity than previous
polarization experiments, as well as a novel instrument design. It is expected
to reach a factor of about 100 below present upper limits at this scale. An
improved upper limit, or detection of polarization will help to: determine
whether the large-scale anisotrophies were generated by density perturbations or
by gravitational waves determine if recombination was instantaneous determine
the redshift of reionization study the correlation of anisotropy with
polarization constrain possible alternative sources of polarization of the CMBR
such as axions, cosmic strings, and textures The project will measure CMBR
polarization, first at large angular scales (7) and later at smaller scales (1).
Two novel polarimeters optimized specifically for both measurements are being
constructed. They will operate at two different millimeter wavelengths to reject
foreground emission from synchrotron radiation and feature strictly- controlled
systematic effects and the high sensitivity required to reach the expected
signal level. ***