* 9318452
* Interhabitat Transport of Nutrients by Detritivorous Fish:  Impacts on Phytoplankton Communities
* BIO,DEB
* 03/15/1994,08/31/1998
* Michael Vanni, Miami University
* Continuing Grant
* Thomas M. Frost
* 08/31/1998
* USD 219,718.00

9318452 Vanni This research seeks to understand how detritivorous fish affect
lake phytoplankton communities by acting as "nutrient pumps." By feeding on
benthic detritus and excreting nutrients (nitrogen and phosphorus) into the
limnetic habitat, these fish effectively pump nutrients from benthic to limnetic
habitats, where nutrients can stimulate phytoplankton growth and alter
phytoplankton community structure. Animals can affect communities in many ways
and it is well known that in northern lakes fish can have strong effects on
phytoplankton communities through food chain interactions. It is proposed here
that in warm-water lakes and reservoirs, fish affect phytoplankton primarily
through the nutrient pump mechanism rather than through conventional food chain
interactions. The specific objectives are to quantify the community level
effects of detritivorous fish on lake phytoplankton communities. Hypotheses to
be tested include: 1) detritivorous fish affect phytoplankton via the nutrient
pump mechanism, 2) the effects of the nutrient pump mechanism is dependent on
fish population structure, and detrital nutrient content, and 3) detritivorous
fish are a major source of nutrients to phytoplankton in small reservoirs during
times with stream inflows are low. These hypotheses will be tested using a
series of empirical observations, field and laboratory experiments. %%% This
research will advance our knowledge of food web regulation, top down versus
bottom up controls on communities, and benthic-limnetic coupling. Although this
project focuses on community effects, it integrates levels of organization from
individual to ecosystem. In addition, because nutrient pumps may have effects on
the frequency and intensity of nuisance blooms of blue-green algae, the research
has implications for water quality management. ***