* 9318402
* Predator Regulation of Prey Biogeography:  Daphnia and      Planktonic Chrysophyte Algae
* BIO,DEB
* 03/01/1994,08/31/1997
* William Walton, University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee
* Continuing Grant
* Scott L. Collins
* 08/31/1997
* USD 264,794.00

9318402 Sandgren This research will provide a rigorous test of predation as a
primary factor in determining prey biogeography. The PI's will test the
possibility that the biogeographical distribution of many groups of algae, such
as chrysophyte flagellates, is primarily the result of strong predator-prey
interactions with the herbivorous zooplankton, Daphnia. There is a strong
negative correlation between the distribution of Chrysophyte algae and lake
productivity. While Daphnia has been identified as a dominant herbivore in lake
food webs, it has not been previously emphasized as affecting the distribution
of chrysophytes among lakes. Alternative hypotheses, such as competition between
algae for nutrients, will be considered, as well. Predictions from these
hypotheses will be test with a combination of laboratory and field experiments,
modeling competition among algae species, and sampling empirical distribution of
algae, Daphnia, and lake productivity. %%% This research is important because it
will test a novel and important hypothesis regarding the biogeographic
distribution and abundance of species in response to predator densities and
habitat productivity. Because some algal blooms can cause poor water quality in
reservoirs, these results will have important implications for assessing the
biotic factors that contribute to lake water quality. ***