* 9318469
* Biradical-like Reactive Intermediates
* MPS,CHE
* 01/01/1994,06/30/1999
* Josef Michl, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* Kenneth M. Doxsee
* 06/30/1999
* USD 1,411,000.00

9318469 Michl Several different areas of research will be explored. Singlet-
triplet energy gaps of biradical-like molecules will be determined by matrix-
isolation electron energy loss spectroscopy (EELS). Through bond contributions
to spin- orbit coupling and the mechanisms of spin density delocalization in
saturated radicals and biradicals using molecular orbital theory will be
analyzed. New perfluorinated biradical-like species will be prepared under
conditions of matrix-isolation and a new approach to selective reactions in
matrices will be explored. Automerization between the two Kekule structures of
cyclobutadiene will be investigated as well. The results will provide new
understanding of the chemical bonding and properties of reactive intermediates,
and the role they play in thermal and photochemical reactions. %%% This grant
from the Organic Dynamics Program supports the continuing research of Professor
Josef Michl at the University of Colorado. Normally, there are a total of four
other atoms and pairs of electrons associated with carbon. Carbon radicals are
typically reactive intermediates and have a total of three other atoms and pairs
of electrons plus one additional electron. Species containing one and two
radical sites will be studied by sophisticated spectroscopic methods at low
temperatures. Interactions between the two radical sites will be addressed.
Calculations of the structure and energy of these species will be carried out as
well to complement the experimental results. These results will provide a new
understanding of bonding and properties of reactive intermediates, and their
role in thermal and photo-initiated reactions. ***