* 9318433
* Effect of a Seed Bank on the Evolution of Post-Germination  Traits: An Empircal Study of the Desert Mustard Lesquerella fendleri
* NONE,NONE
* 07/01/1994,06/30/2000
* Ann Evans, University of New Mexico
* Continuing grant
* Mark Courtney
* 06/30/2000
* USD 390,704.00

Evans 9318433 Many organisms, when faced with unfavorable environmental
conditions, respond by slowing or arresting growth and development. At one end
of the scale, animals such as bears have the ability to slow metabolism by
hibernating. At the other end of the spectrum, many higher plants have the
ability to more or less arrest growth and development of seeds until favorable
conditions are experienced. This dormancy of seeds has led to the existence of
seed banks--populations of dormant, viable seeds in the soil. Despite the
profound implications for the ecology and evolution of plants, virtually no
information is available on how dormancy affects other traits. Two experiments
will address this question in the short-lived perennial desert mustard
Lesquerella fendleri. The first explores whether past evolution has led to
adaptive syndromes of germination requirements and post- germination traits. The
second asks how evolution could act by performing an artificial selection
experiment. This work has applied value in several regards. Efforts to
understand plant responses to environmental change will remain incomplete (and
perhaps erroneous) until we understand the important, but neglected, seed stage
of the life cycle. Knowledge of the seed stage is also critical for plans to
revegetate human- impacted lands.