* 9318607
* Optimizing Discrimination Networks for Active Database      Systems
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/1994,09/30/1998
* Eric Hanson, University of Florida
* Continuing Grant
* Maria Zemankova
* 09/30/1998
* USD 193,000.00

This project will investigate improved discrimination network structures,
algorithms, and optimization techniques to speed up production rule matching in
active database systems. Rete and TREAT are well-known discrimination network
structures used for production rule matching. The investigator has recently
developed a new discrimination network structure called the Gator network, or
Generalized TREAT/Rete network. Gator networks are general rooted tree
structures with the constraint that every inner node has two or more children.
This is opposed to the binary tree structure of Rete and the degenerate tree
structure of TREAT. Gator has the potential to outperform both Rete and TREAT.
Since the Gator network structure is so general, it is essential that an
optimizer be developed to choose a good network for a rule. Techniques for
building an optimized Gator network for given collection of rules, database, and
update pattern will be developed, and then tested and evaluated using
simulation. The plan is to develop a Gator network optimizer that is similar in
structure to a query optimizer, but with a difference. Unlike a query optimizer,
a Gator network optimizer must consider update frequency in addition to database
size, predicate selectivity, presence of indexes and so on.