* 9318552
* Hurricane Disturbance Regimens in Tropical and Temperate    Forests
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/1994,08/31/1998
* Emery Boose, Harvard University
* Continuing Grant
* Edward T. Elliott
* 08/31/1998
* USD 225,000.00

Foster Hurricanes have been one o the most important natural disturbance
affecting coastal areas from northern South America through the Caribbean to
eastern North America. They regulate the hydrological, energy, and nutrient
regimes of forest and coastal ecosystems, and act as a determinant of landscape-
level patterning of temperate and tropical forests. Recent studies suggest that
human-induced global warming may lead to increases in the frequency, intensity,
and latitudinal extent of hurricanes. If this happens, the impacts on human life
and property and on coastal ecosystems could be dramatic. To improve our
understanding of the ecological impacts of hurricanes, we have developed an
integrative approach. A simple meteorological model (HURRECON) reconstructs wind
conditions during a hurricane, a simple topographic exposure model (EXPOS)
identifies areas exposed to peak winds on a landscape scale, and actual forest
damage is assessed through aerial photographs, archival records, and field
measurements. This approach has been validated in detailed studies of Hurricane
Hugo in Puerto Rico and the 1938 New England Hurricane. We will use this
approach to reconstruct characteristics of hurricanes (1600 to present) that
have affected Puerto Rico and New England. These two regions represent tropical
and temperate forests subject to recurring hurricanes, and are contrasts in
climate, topography, and vegetation. At the continental scale w will examine the
differences between tropical and temperate hurricanes and their impacts on
forest. At the regional scale we will define long-term coastal to inland
gradients in hurricane frequency and intensity. At the landscape scale we will
analyze spatial patterns of exposure to hurricane winds created by local
topography at the Luquillo and Harvard Forest LTER sites. Regional results will
be applicable to other research sites throughout Puerto Rico and New England.
The proposed study represents the first effort to develop a comprehensive unde
rstanding of the disturbance regime imposed in forest ecosystems by hurricanes.
The project will also yield general models of hurricane meteorology and
landscape exposure that will be applicable to other regions, and may be used to
explore the potential impacts of increased hurricane activity under conditions
of global change.