* 9318124
* Identification of Cis-elements and Trans-acting Factors     Involved in the Regulation of Alternative Splicing of       Protein Kinase C Beta
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/1994,07/31/1998
* Duane Eichler, University of South Florida
* Continuing Grant
* Elvira Doman
* 07/31/1998
* USD 180,000.00

9318124 Cooper Biological systems are, in general, very resourceful in
responding to external signals. We have identified such a response in BC3H-1
myocytes, a mouse muscle cell line. These cells are used in research because
they respond to insulin to increase glucose uptake. In this case, the myocytes
rapidly switch the types of proteins they synthesize so that they can enhance
glucose uptake in response to insulin. The protein being investigated is protein
kinase C beta. This enzyme phosphorylates or regulates other enzymes to enhance
or inhibit their function. It is a component of the glucose transport system in
myocytes and its activation is required for the stimulation of glucose uptake.
Protein kinase C beta is interesting because two forms of the enzyme can be
expressed by cells due to alternative splicing of its precursor RNA. Alternative
splicing of protein kinase C beta leads to differences in the C-terminal end of
the protein that is synthesized. This difference means that two different
proteins can be expressed from one primary transcript of RNA. The cell can
respond to hormones such as insulin which control the alternative splicing very
quickly. In this case, protein kinase C beta II is more effective than protein
kinase beta I in enhancing insulin effects on glucose transport. The actual
factors controlling alternative splicing of PKC beta are unknown. We want to
identify these factors and determine how insulin can regulate alternative
splicing so that cells can alter their physiological responses to hormones such
as insulin. ***