* 9318694
* Mechanistic Studies of Electroosmotic Control in Capillary  Zone Electrophoresis
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/1993,05/31/1996
* Cheng Lee, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* VIJAY T JOHN
* 05/31/1996
* USD 167,000.00

CTS-9318694 Iowa State University Cheng S. Lee ABSTRACT The aim of this project
is to understand certain factors in capillary zone electrophoresis (CZE) in
order to develop gradient elution High Performance Capillary Electrophoresis.
The magnitude and polarity of the SYMBOL 122 \f "Symbol" potential strongly
influences protein adsorption as well as the direction and magnitude of
electroosmotic flow. For this project, a radial potential gradient will be
tested as a means of varying the SYMBOL 122 \f "Symbol" potential and thereby
reducing protein adsorption and enhancing the revolving power of the technique.
Dispersion studies under a hydrostatic pressure-driven flow component will be
conducted in a set of tests in which the fractional length of the capillary
under electroosmotic control will be changed. A series capacitance model
combined Gouy-Chapman-Stern-Grahame theory will be evaluated with experimental
results. CZE is a very promising technique that offers the analytical
capabilities of electrophoresis and the convenience of HPLC. Its development
will provide a powerful tool in support of the biotechnology and pharmaceutical
industries. IBMBIO COM' ` IBMDOS COM' ` AUTOEXECBAK s" Ã• FLW K PSFONTS K !
89DECS PRE .N T" AUTOEXECBAT E J BURKA PRE dP #zs SAVERS j " ICONS j " LM Y
CTS-9318694 Iowa State University Cheng S. Lee ABSTRACT The aim of this project
is to understand certa in factors in capi v w 3 5 ! !J ! F ( Times New Roman
Symbol &amp; Arial , 9 9 " h #c %#c % 5 1 Nichelle Coward Nichelle Coward