* 9318333
* Acquisition of SQUID Magnetometer - Susceptometer with      Resistivity and Hall Effect Measurement Option
* MPS,DMR
* 12/01/1993,05/31/1995
* Norman Baenziger, University of Iowa
* Standard Grant
* None
* 05/31/1995
* USD 81,400.00

9318333 Schweitzer The SQUID magnetometer with AC susceptibility, resistivity,
and Hall effect measurement capabilities will be used to study the electrical
transport and magnetic properties of layered sulfide alloys. The research
project will investigate the unusual metal- insulator transition thansition that
we have recently discovered in the BaCo1-xNixS2-y system. This first-order phase
transition is from a semiconducting to a metallic phase with decreasing
temperature. The low temperature phase is a highly correlated metal, while the
high temperature phase appears to be a two- dimensional antiferromagnet. The
transition temperature and hysteresis depend on the chemical composition. The
thermal bistability and positive temperature coefficient of resistivity
associated with the transition suggest that these materials could be useful for
many practical applications in materials research and engineering. The large
resistance change at the transition, the ability to control the properties by
varying the composition, and the stability of the materials are all favorable
for applications. %%% The experimental program will also involve exploratory
synthesis and characterization of related ternary sulfide and selenide alloys
that might exhibit similar phenomena or possibly superconductivity. The
equipment requested will be used to measure the DC magnetization, AC magnetic
susceptibility, resistivity, and Hall coefficient of all phases found. The
existence of this unusual phase transition in certain layered ternary sulfides
is a significant discovery of previously unknown phenomena. Study of these
materials can contribute to our understanding of highly correlated electronic
systems, metal- insulator transitions, and perhaps high temperature
superconductivity. ***