* 9318355
* U.S.-Africa Workshop on Fresh and Brackish Water            Fishes:  Collaborative Approaches to Biodiversity and       Conservation, Nov. 15-20, 1993, Dakar, Senegal
* O/D,OISE
* 12/15/1993,05/31/1995
* Carl Hopkins, American Museum Natural History
* Standard Grant
* Frances Li
* 05/31/1995
* USD 24,998.00

9318355 Stiassny African and U.S. scientists will attend a workshop called
PARADI (Poissons Africains: Role et Applications del la Diversity Biologique),
to be held in Dakar, Senegal, November 15-20 1993, on African fresh and brackish
water fishes. The workshop is sponsored by a coalition of five organizations, in
Senegal, South Africa, and Europe (France and Belgium), with an international
scientific board which includes participants, such as the U.S. P.I., Dr. Melanie
Stiassny of the American Museum of Natural History, from a wide range of
institutions, disciplines, and countries. The purpose of the workshop is to
convene active researchers from a wide interdisciplinary range, to identify
common scientific and conservation themes for African fisheries biology. The
Workshop will review available data from a biological diversity perspective on a
continent-wide basis and map directions for programs and international research
collaborations and education. In all, some 24 African countries are expected to
be represented. NSF funding will support the participation of African scientists
from Nigeria, Sierra Leone, Tanzania, and Madagascar, and US researchers from a
number of institutions throughout the country, including graduate students and
junior faculty members. This workshop will stimulate interchange to establish
needed baseline data on freshwater fauna of Africa, an area which has been
relatively understudied, aside from the rift valley lakes. In addition to its
contribution to biodiversity, such research is vital to sustainable development
in many countries of Africa for maintenance of their fisheries. This project is
likely to serve as a catalyst for the establishment of research networks among
African and US researchers, including some men and women how at early stages in
their careers, who may pursue collaborative efforts for decades to come. ***