* 9318631
* Development and Experimental Verification of the            Distribution-Moment Model of Muscle
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/1994,08/31/1997
* George Zahalak, Washington University
* Continuing grant
* Gilbert B. Devey
* 08/31/1997
* USD 210,488.00

9318631 Zahalak The research proposed in this application concerns a
quantitative understanding of the dynamics of skeletal muscle. The project has
two major objectives: (1) to continue the development of a model of muscle
firmly based on biophysics and biochemistry, and (2) to test and validate the
model in carefully controlled animal experiments. The model is a mathematical
approximation to A.F. Huxley's biophysical cross-bridge theory of contraction.
Current models for a most important element of the neuromuscular control system-
its actuator, skeletal muscle-have tended to be rather crude viscoelastic
analogies with only the most tenuous connection to modern biological concepts
about how the muscle works. A state-variable model of a skeletal muscle fiber as
a direct mathematical approximation to biophysical cross-bridge models of the
type introduced by A.F. Huxley will continue to be developed in this project.
This model is call the Distributed-Moment Model of muscle because it emphasizes
the important role of the moments of the actin-myosin bond-distribution
function. These moments have macroscopic interpretations as muscle stiffness,
force, and elastic energy. Thus it is of particular significance that this model
establishes a direct connection between the macroscopic behavior of muscle and
contractile mechanisms believed to be operating at the molecular level. The
project is a joint effort with Heckman at Northwestern University (grant number
9419528). ***