* 9318495
* Design and Evaluation of System-Level Fault Tolerance       Mechanisms for Parallel Computers
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/1994,06/30/1998
* Douglas Blough, University of California-Irvine
* Continuing Grant
* Yechezkel Zalcstein
* 06/30/1998
* USD 207,487.00

Recent developments have dramatically increased the importance of ultra-
reliable parallel computing. First, parallel processing has moved from a
specialized scientific computation tool to an instrument for general-purpose
computing. At the same time, computers have begun to control virtually every
aspect of human life and are, therefore, increasingly relied upon to provide
continuous service. These trends make the development of general but practical
techniques for fault-tolerant multiprocessing a necessity. This project focuses
on loosely-coupled parallel computers. These systems are ideally suited for
ultra-reliable applications due to their built-in hardware redundancy that can
be used to achieve fault tolerance. The project has both basic and applied
research components. The basic research component studies new models and
algorithms for the problems of multiprocessor system fault diagnosis and fault-
tolerant routing. The applied research component involves the development of an
experimental testbed for fault-tolerant multicomputer systems. A Transputer-
based MIMD multicomputer system provides the testbed hardware and low-level
operating system. Special-purpose software is developed to provide a system-
level fault tolerance framework, a fault simulator, and a data collection tool
for the testbed. The testbed allows experimental evaluation of the system-level
fault tolerance mechanisms developed in the basic research component and is also
made available to other research groups working on multiprocessor system fault
tolerance.