* 9318744
* Statistical Thermodynamics of Polymer Interactions
* MPS,DMR
* 01/01/1994,12/31/1997
* Isaac Sanchez, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 12/31/1997
* USD 243,600.00

9318744 Sanchez There are two broad areas of research: polymer equations of
state and the interaction of polymers with compressed fluids. Previously funded
National Science Foundation research has shown that the compression response of
polymers, solvents, and polymer solutions to hydrostatic pressure satisfies a
strong corresponding states principle. This work will be used as a basis to
develop a new universal equation of state for polymers that will be nearly as
accurate as experimental data. Related computer simulations (Monte Carlo) will
also be carried out. A search for other universal features of polymer
thermodynamics will also be pursued. A specific objective is to determine what
thermodynamic properties of a polymer solution in the vicinity of the lower
critical solution temperature phase boundary are universal. The latter will
require pressure volume temperature and cloud point measurements at temperatures
approaching the critical temperature of the solvent. Previously funded National
Science Foundation research has also shown that the solubility of supercritical
carbon dioxide in a polymer can be modeled. In addition, a semi-quantitative
prediction of the variation of the glass temperature with carbon dioxide is
possible. The simultaneous control of both kinetics and solubility raises the
possibility of a new route to morphological control in certain types of polymer
blends. In principle, using carbon dioxide as a common diluent for an immiscible
polymer pair, followed by controlled removal of the carbon dioxide can yield an
interesting variety of morphological structures. Polymer physical properties are
ultimately related to interactions. Equation of state properties such as
density, thermal expansion coefficient, isothermal compressibility, etc. are
intimately related to polymer self-interaction. Miscibility of polymer pairs
depends sensitively on the polymer-polymer interaction. The solubility of a
polymer in a solvent or the solubility of a gas in a polymer depends on the
small molecule-polymer interaction The goal in the research is to contribute
towards this understanding. It builds on previously supported National Science
Foundation work and involves a combination of experiments, computer simulations,
and theory. ***