* 9318250
* The Role of the Actin Cytoskeleton in Regulation of Auxin Transport
* NONE,NONE
* 05/15/1994,04/30/1998
* Gloria Muday, Wake Forest University
* Continuing grant
* Judith A. Verbeke
* 04/30/1998
* USD 320,513.00

9318250 Muday Recent evidence from this laboratory indicates that the regulatory
or inhibitor binding subunit of the auxin efflux carrier from zucchini is
associated with the actin cytoskeleton. In recent years, the role of the actin
cytoskeleton has been shown to be more than structural. This filamentous network
functions in intracellular movement, polarity development, and integration of
cellular signals in a variety of organisms. Although the role of the actin
cytoskeleton in the growth and development of higher plants has so far received
limited study, the role of actin microfilaments in the environmentally
controlled development of polarity of the brown alga, Fucus, has been elegantly
described. It is likely that changes in the actin cytoskeleton play equally
important roles in the development and environmental responses of flowering
plants. The plant cytoskeleton is uniquely suited to act as the signal
transducer from the membrane and extracellular matrix, which sense external
events, to the auxin transport stream which allows response to these signals.
The experiments in this proposal are designed to test the new hypothesis that
polar auxin transport is regulated by interactions of the regulatory protein of
the auxin efflux carrier with the cytoskeleton. In order to understand the
nature of the regulation of auxin transport, the interaction between the
inhibitor or napthylphthalamic acid (NPA) binding protein of the auxin efflux
carrier and actin must be further delineated. Using molecular probes and basic
biochemical approaches, the interactions between the NPA binding protein and the
actin cytoskeleton during polar development will be examined. These experiments
will be performed using Fucus as a simplified model system. Although it has been
more than one hundred years since Darwin suggested the importance of polar
hormone transport in plants, the mechanisms by which auxin transport is
regulated still remain unclear. The polarity a nd quantity of auxin transported
are controlled at the site of auxin efflux from cells. A regulatory protein has
been identified which binds specific inhibitors of auxin transport that act at
the site of auxin efflux. Characterization of this inhibitor binding protein,
and the mechanisms by which it controls auxin transport, is the critical first
step in the dissection of the regulatory pathway of auxin transport. ***