* 9318233
* Construction of a Step-Scanning Vibrational Circular        Dichroism Instrument
* BIO,DBI
* 05/01/1994,10/31/1996
* Max Diem, CUNY Hunter College
* Standard Grant
* Michael K. Lamvik
* 10/31/1996
* USD 71,400.00

9318233 Sweeney This Proposal requests instrumentation to permit the assembly of
a prototype of a new spectrometer, employing vibrational circular dichroism
(VCD); the optics will incorporate a step-scanning interferometer, based on a
Fourier transform methodology. The spectrometer will be the first of its kind
and will be capable of increasing the sensitivity of VCD measurements by 2 to 3
orders of magnitude. A unique feature of such an instrument will be its ability
to detect solution structures with lifetimes in the nanosecond range --
structures normally invisible in NMR analysis. This will make it applicable to a
broad range of structure problems involving biological macromolecules. One of
the major users, Dr. Max Diem, has extensive experience in VCD, having designed
and built his own instrument with the help of NSF grant funds several years ago.
This instrument is currently being used for polypeptide and polynucleotide
structural studies in the Chemistry Department, but its sensitivity limits its
use to molecules in the range of one kilo-Dalton. Various projects are
described, from laboratories at Hunter and at New York University, which include
investigations of basic aspects of protein and nucleic acid structures in
solution, structures of metalloproteins, and facets of the initiation complex in
protein synthesis, as well as drug-DNA interactions, and the design of metal-
complexed chemotherapeutic agents. It is anticipated that the new instrument
will attract additional users from the Sloan-Kettering Institute for Cancer
Research, the Rockefeller University and other institutions in New York City.