* 9318444
* Transfer of the International Reference Center for Avian    Haematozoa, to the Harold M. Manter Laboratory, University  of Nebraska
* BIO,DEB
* 04/15/1994,09/30/1996
* Mary Pritchard, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Standard Grant
* None
* 09/30/1996
* USD 16,593.00

Pritchard 9318444 This project is a "rescue operation." It will enable the
International Reference Center for Avian Haematozoa, Memorial University of
Newfoundland, Canada, to move to the Harold W. Manter Laboratory, University of
Nebraska State Museum, Lincoln. There, the specimens will be curated, integrated
into the collections, added to the computer database, and serve the
international parasitological community by continuing to receive hapantotype,
parahapantotype, and voucher specimens of avian blood parasites, as well as lend
specimens to qualified investigators. The name will be retained as a subunit of
the Harold W. Manter Laboratory. The International Reference Center for Avian
Haematozoa was established in 1968 by the World Health Organization at Memorial
University of Newfoundland with Dr. Gordon F. Bennett as Officer in Charge.
Acute financial problems forced WHO to close most of its International Centers
in 1974, but Memorial University agreed to support the Center with Dr. Bennett
as Professor and Head. In 1978, this unique Center was designated by the World
Federation of Parasitologists as the international repository for avian blood
parasites. The Harold W. Manter Laboratory is one of three U.S. National
Resource Centers for Parasitology. Having "rescued" other threatened collections
in the past, it offered to serve as repository and curator for the International
Reference Center collection. The invitation was accepted within hours of its
receipt.