* 9318906
* Ecological and Historical Determinants for Body Size        Evolution: Insular/Mainland Contrasts in Three Reptile      Systems in the Sea of Cortez
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/1994,05/31/1996
* Ted Case, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Scott L. Collins
* 05/31/1996
* USD 103,021.00

9318906 Case This project tests the hypothesis that ecological interactions are
responsible for the dramatic body-size changes in three independent island
reptile systems: Sauromalus, Cnemidophorus, and Crotalus in the Sea of Cortez,
Mexico. The history of body size changes is inferred from the phylogenetic
relationships among populations, as reconstructed from nuclear and mitochondrial
DNA sequences. This historical information is used to test hypotheses of the
population genetic response to sympatry with competing species. This research
uses new technques to test long-standing hypotheses about character
displacement. %%% This research is important because it allows re-evaluation of
some of the classic examples of population genetic response to competition
(character displacement) and yields new insights into the roles of competition
vs. predation in the genetic change of populations and structure of communities.
Understanding the effects of ecological interactions of island species can be
applied to conservation and management of small isolated populations (e.g.,
sensitivity to introduced predators and competitors). This research also
provides scientific background for sound implementation of endangered species
legislation. ***