* 9318403
* LTREB: Sustainability of Soil Fertility in Reconstructed    Tropical Ecosystems
* NONE,NONE
* 03/15/1994,09/30/1999
* John Ewel, University of Florida
* Continuing grant
* Scott L. Collins
* 09/30/1999
* USD 470,000.00

9318403 Ewel Maintenance of soil fertility is a major challenge to forest
restoration and sustainable development in the humid tropics, where organic
matter breaks down quickly, weathering of mineral matter is fast, and high
rainfall leaches nutrients essential for plant growth. Among the many factors
that control soil fertility, two are likely to be of great importance: the
number of plant life forms (trees, palms, shrubs, vines, etc.), and the
frequency with which the plant community is harvested or disturbed. Replicated
plantations consisting of fast-growing tropical tree species (Hyeronima,
Cordia,and Cedrela), established in 1991 at La Selva Biological Station in Costa
Rica, will be used to study the controls that these two factors exert on soil
fertility. In some of the plantations, the trees are grown in monoculture; these
will be harvested and replanted at intervals of 1, 4, and 16 years. Other
plantations contain the trees plus plants of other life forms, such as palms and
banana-like herbs. Leaching is determined by characterizing the chemistry of
soil water and by multiplying the concentrations of nutrients in the water by
the rate of its downward movement. Downward movement will be estimated from a
water-balance model that incorporates evaporation from the soil and
transpiration, which is derived from energy balance measurements (solar
radiation, wind speed), the ability of the plants to pass water through their
leaves (stomatal conductance), and the evaporative power of the air (from
temperature and humidity measurements in the tree canopies). Leaching rates are
expected to diminish with increasing time intervals between rotations and with
increasing diversity of plant life forms. The effectiveness with which plant
communities exploit soil resource is also important to sustaining soil
fertility, and it, too, is likely to vary with biotic complexity and frequency
of harvest or disturbance. To assess this effectiveness, efficiencies of
nutrient uptake, recovery, and us e will be obtained from measures of changes in
nutrient storage and turnover in both plants and soil. Coupled with the nutrient
leaching data, comparison of these efficiencies among stands will provide
ecologically sound guides to tropical forest restoration and the sustainable use
of tropical soils.