* 9318543
* A Test of the Trophic Cascades Model in a Speciose          Terrestrial System
* BIO,DEB
* 04/01/1994,03/31/1998
* Deborah Letourneau, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Continuing Grant
* Thomas M. Frost
* 03/31/1998
* USD 240,417.00

9318543 Letourneau Understanding the forces that structure biotic communities is
of fundamental importance in ecology, conservation, biology, and biological
control (agriculture). Yet there is currently no consensus about whether
predators usually control community structure (top-down control), or whether
plant productivity usually controls community structure (bottom-up control).
This research will use an experimental system of one plant species (Piper
cenocladum), several insect herbivore species, one predatory ant species, and
two ant predator species, to test these alternatives for the first time in a
tropical terrestrial ecosystem. The project uses common-garden experiments to
assess the effects of the fourth trophic level (ant predators) on the dynamics
of secondary and primary consumers, and producers (top-down), and to quantify
the effects of nutrient and light enhancement on the plants and on higher
trophic levels (bottom-up). %%% Results from this research will provide
important insights into the relative strengths of top-down and bottom-up
controls in tropical terrestrial ecosystems. The results will advance our
understanding of how terrestrial ecosystems are structured and how ants, plants,
and herbivores interact. The results of this research will also have potential
applications in conservation biology and in the development of biological
control systems for agriculture and forestry. ***