* 9318101
* Shared Instrumentation for Confocal Ion Imaging in Living   Cells
* BIO,DBI
* 03/15/1994,08/31/1996
* Anthony Means, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Karl A. Koehler
* 08/31/1996
* USD 100,708.00

9318101 Nadler This is a request for shared instrumentation to image and
quantitate ion levels and pH in physiological studies on living cells. The
requested Noran Odyssey laser scanning con focal microscope will enhance the
research of five members of the Department of Pharmacol ogy by allowing the use
of novel and innovative experimental approaches. The Noran instru ment has been
optimized for the imaging of living tissue in real time. It will be used to
investigate the following issues: (1) effects of regulatory substances on
stimulus evoked sodium and calcium accumulation in glutamate nerve terminals,
(2) NMDA receptor plastici ty in kindling and ontogenesis, (3) role of axon
sprouting in facilitating or inhibiting seizure discharge and propagation, (4)
role of calcium transients in regulating the cell cycle, (5) role of calmodulin
in regulating insulin secretion from pancreatic SYMBOL 98 \f "Symbol" cells, (6)
mechanism by which excess calmodulin leads to cardiac hypertrophy, (7) effects
of glutamate and GABAA recep tor activation on intracellular calcium and
chloride levels in hippocampal neurons, (8) effects of growth stimuli on
intracellular pH, (9) role of protein phosphatase activity in the regula tion of
cellular calcium levels and DNA synthesis, (10) induction of the protein
phosphatase inhibitor 1 gene by calcium and (11) initiation of seizures by
spontaneous action potential firing in axon terminals. These studies are aimed
at understanding a variety of signaling mechanisms fundamental to cellular
physiology. They will also help explain changes in cellular physiology and cell
cell communication that occur in response to excessive or inju rious stimuli. u
~ -H- ~CAL3118TMP U. ~CRD0F04TMP #U. ~CAL3527TMP b5 ~CRD142ATMP . ~CRD0F38TMP b5
~MF0E37 TMP E: ~DOC085BTMP s9 ~CAL2701TMP T~; ~CRD216FTMP X~; ~CAL3639TMP y&lt;
9318101 Nadler This is a request for shared instrumentation to image and
quantitate ion levels and pH in physiological studi ( 0 &amp; ( !` ! F ( 0 ( 3
Times New Roman Symbol &amp; Arial 1 Courier 9 " h % % = abstract Deseree King,
BIR Deseree King, BIR