* 9318188
* Comparative Ecology of Uncommon and Rare Galling            and Free-Feeding Sawflies
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/1994,06/30/1998
* Peter Price, Northern Arizona University
* Continuing Grant
* Scott L. Collins
* 06/30/1998
* USD 175,000.00

To contribute to the knowledge on uncommon and rare insect herbivores, which are
poorly understood, eight species of sawflies will be studies in a landscape
defined by the watershed of Rio de Flag, Arizona. These sawflies are
particularly valuable subjects for study because they all leave characteristic
damage which can be found and recorded, and even cryptic species can be
discovered by their damage. The distribution and abundance of these species in
space and time will be studied for three years in natural populations on scales
of the landscape, host plant populations, and host individuals. Experiments will
examine female sawfly behavior to determine site preference (plant species, age,
and growth rate) and its impact on larval performance. These experiments will
provide mechanistic explanation for the distribution and abundance of sawflies
in the field to the extent that the bottom-up forces through plant quality, to
female behavior and larval survival, are important. Top-down effects from
carnivores on the distribution and abundance of sawflies will also be examined
in natural populations and experiments. %%% With the understanding gained from
this research on uncommon and rare insect herbivores, the PI can develop a
theory on why species such as these sawflies remain uncommon, and ultimately to
gain understanding on why some insect herbivore species become very abundance
and outbreak species that reach the status of pests.