* 9318654
* Increasing Capacity with Spatial Division Multiple Access   in Wireless Information Networks
* TIP,TI
* 04/01/1995,06/30/1996
* Richard Roy, ArrayComm Inc
* Standard Grant
* Sara B. Nerlove
* 06/30/1996
* USD 299,061.00

Spatial Division Multiple Access (SDMA) is a technology with promising prospects
for increasing the capacity of Wireless Communications Networks (WCN's). By
employing low-cost arrays of antennas and sophisticated signal processing
techniques, SDMA provides directional radio transmission and reception
capabilities which dramatically increase the number of simultaneous links that
can be supported on a single frequency channel. The basic SDMA components -
emitter location estimation, spatially selective transmission and spatially
selective reception - were validated during the Phase I research effort by a
series of half- duplex receive-only and transmit-only experiments. The proposed
Phase II effort is to build a fully functional,full-duplex, SDMA prototype for
analog cellular telephones (AMPS protocol). This prototype will be used for SDMA
algorithm refinement and development, and will serve as a data collection
platform for SDMA radio-frequency environment studies. The Phase III effort will
be to conduct operational tests with the assistance of a cellular service
provider. The market potential for a system that provides increased capacity in
wireless information/communication networks is immense. Over 200 million
domestic and foreign subscribers are predicted by the year 2000 in a $100
billion annual market. Current systems are at or near capacity in a market which
is one-fifth as large, so techniques for increasing capacity are vital to the
industry.