* 9318385
* Experimental Study of Layered Ternary Sulfide Alloys with   Unusual Metal-Insulator Transition
* MPS,DMR
* 04/01/1994,09/30/1997
* Norman Baenziger, University of Iowa
* Continuing Grant
* H. Hollis Wickman
* 09/30/1997
* USD 288,000.00

9318385 Schweitzer Technical abstract: Recent observations have provided
evidence for an unusual metal-insulator (MI) transition in the layered ternary
sulfide compound BaCo1-xNixS2-y. A preliminary interpretation proposes that the
transition is from a two-dimensional antiferromagnetic semiconductor to a metal
with decreasing temperature. This MI transition will be investigated in detail
using resistivity, Hall effect, dc and ac susceptibility, and infrared
absorption techniques. The results will be compared with the ternary compound in
which Ni is replaced by Cu. The materials will be structurally analyzed by x-ray
powder diffraction. Theoretical model Hamiltonians used will be similar to those
employed previously for La2CuO with appropriate parameters for the BaCo1-xMxS2-y
system and with disorder treated within the coherent potential approximation.
Non-technical abstract: An unusual transition has been discovered recently in
material containing Ba, Co, Ni (orCu), and S atoms. The transition is from a
semiconductor to a metal as the temperature is decreased. This unusual
transition will be investigated in greater detail using experimental and
theoretical techniques. The thermal bistability and positive temperature
coefficient of resistivity associated with this transition suggests that the
material could be useful for a variety of electro-optic applications. ***