* 9318640
* Collaborative Research:  Phylogenetic Analysis              Dalechampia (Euphorbiaceae) Using DNA and                   Morphological Data
* BIO,DEB
* 03/01/1994,08/31/1999
* W. Scott Armbruster, University of Alaska Fairbanks Campus
* Standard Grant
* Mary C. McKitrick
* 08/31/1999
* USD 126,238.00

9318640 Schwaegerle Understanding the taxonomic relationships, evolution, and
biogeographic history of organisms depends upon accurate phylogenetic
information, that is, knowledge of the genealogy of the group. Dr. Scott
Armbruster of the University of Alaska in collaboration with Dr. Bruce Baldwin
of Duke University is reconstructing the phylogeny of Old and New World species
of the pantropical plant genus Dalechampia (Euphorbiaceae family) in order to
gain insights into the evolution of the group's pollination system and its
biogeographic history. Specific objectives include: 1. to collect liquid
preserved and herbarium specimens for morphological analysis and for DNA
sequencing of chloroplast and nuclear ribosomal genes; 2. to determine the
pollination ecology of a sample of Old World taxa, thus complementing knowledge
of New World species; 3. to reconstruct the phylogenetic pattern of species
divergences using nuclear and chloroplast DNA data and morphology; and 4. to use
the phylogeny to trace the biogeographic history of the group and to generate
testable hypotheses about change in pollination ecology and floral form. The
application of phylogenetic information to evolutionary biology and ecology has
generated considerable excitement in recent times. Important features of
studying evolution with an estimated phylogeny include the ability to infer long
term evolutionary history of characteristics not preserved in the fossil record,
such as ecological relationships between plants and animals, and to distinguish
adaptive evolution from the effects of phylogenetic constraint and past
stochastic events. The Armbruster and Baldwin project will advanc e that agenda.