* 9318548
* Current Sheet Equilibria and Disruptions
* GEO,AGS
* 05/15/1995,04/30/2000
* Grant Burkhart, SPACE SCIENCE INSTITUTE
* Continuing Grant
* kile baker
* 04/30/2000
* USD 154,184.00

In this proposal, we will address the physics of local and global conversion of
magnetic free energy to particle kinetic energy during substorms. An
understanding of these processes will be important implications to the global
response of the magnetosphere to solar wind variations. For example, this could
lead to an understanding of the partitioning of substorm released free energy
between energy lost down the tail and work done on the inner magnetosphere and
ionosphere. Also, such a theory of the global release of stored magnetic energy
during substorms could have important implications for energy release phenomena
in other space physics and astrophysical contexts. The difference between the
presently proposed study and similar studies of the past is that our study will
be based upon the current sheet catastrophe model for local current disruption
c.f. Lui et al., 1988 . This model arises from time independent and time
dependent calculations of 1D current sheet configurations with a nonzero Ey and
nonzero Bz Burkhart et al., 1992a; Pritchett and Coroniti, 1993; Burkhart et
al., 1993 . It was found in these calculations that under the quasi-static
evolution of the boundary conditions a force imbalance, which we have called the
current sheet catastrophe, develops. Subsequent time development leads to the
turbulent destruction of the current sheet over some time interval and the
conversion of the associated magnetic field energy to particle energy. In the
proposed research, we shall perform ID calculations for a variety of initial
conditions and boundary conditions to determine the robustness and scaling of
the signatures of the current sheet catastrophe. We shall study the radial
expansion of current disruption in a 2D, time-dependent, hybrid code, using, for
the first cut, x-independent initial equilibria. We shall extend the 1D
equilibrium calculations to include x-dependence and we shall study the
expansion of activity and the corresponding local and global conversion of
magnetic field energy to plasma energy using the x-dependent initial equilibria
in a time-dependent, hybrid simulation code.