* 9318731
* Collaborative Research: Integrated Geological Interpretation of Deep-Tow Sonar, Submersible, and Petrological           Observations of the Upper and Lower Oceanic Crust
* GEO,OCE
* 08/01/1994,01/31/1997
* Stephen Hurst, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Bruce T. Malfait
* 01/31/1997
* USD 86,848.00

9318731 Karson This project is to analyse deeply-towed side-scan sonar data
collected during recent studies in the Kane Fracture Zone on the Mid-Atlantic
Ridge. Delaney (University of Washington) and his colleague Karson (Duke
University) propose to integrate the results of the Kane Fracture Zone study
with similar side-scan sonar data from Blanco Fracture Zone in the Pacific, as
well as submersible observations and rock samples from both areas. The overall
goal of the project is to decipher the structure and rock types involved in the
formation of lower (Kane) and upper (Blanco) ocean crust, which are exposed at
these sites due to their tectonic settings. The proposed work builds on previous
observations, including four separate field programs over seven years,
collaborative among these investigators and French colleagues (the French
submersible Nautile was used for the two diving programs). Studies in the Kane
Fracture Zone region integrate with recent Ocean Drilling Program drilling in
this area by JOIDES Resolution, and provide a regional context in which to
interpret these drilling cores. Both programs provide a unique opportunity to
examine the continuity and detail of ocean crustal structure in a region where
it is exposed along steep cliffs at the sea floor. This provides an opportunity
to investigate both spatial and temporal continuity of tectonic and intracrustal
petrologic processes of crustal formation, which is not possible to the level of
detail proposed here using the "standard" techniques of drilling or seismic
reflection profiling. ***