* 9318388
* The Evolution of Correlations Among Floral Traits in an     Insect-Pollinated Plant
* BIO,DEB
* 04/15/1994,09/30/1997
* Jeffrey Conner, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Lyons
* 09/30/1997
* USD 155,000.00

9318388 Conner The genomes of all organisms are products of evolution. A
complete understanding of the genetics of any organism, therefore, requires
general knowledge about how genomes evolve. A crucial question is how groups of
traits become genetically integrated into a single functional unit, for example
an organ, through evolution. This study will investigate this questions using
the flower of wild radish, Raphanus raphanistrum, as a model system. The flower
is an ideal model organ because it is made up a number of easily-measured parts
(petals, pistils, stamens, etc.) that must work together as a functional unit
for successfully reproduction. The results of this work will improve our
understanding of how groups of individual traits become functionally integrated
into organs and organ systems. An additional goal of this work is to determine
many of the factors responsible for successful reproduction in wild radish. Wild
radish can be a destructive weed in small grain crops,and is closely related to
many important crop and weed species. For example, closely related crops include
radish, broccoli, cabbage, cauliflower,and canola. Therefore, knowledge gained
concerning reproduction in wild radish should be applicable to control of
several noxious weeds and improved seed production and yield in several
important corps.