* 9318497
* Wavelength Converting and Wavelength Routing for High-      Efficiency Almost-All-Optical Networks
* CSE,CNS
* 09/15/1993,01/31/1997
* Victor Li, University of Southern California
* Continuing Grant
* Tatsuya Suda
* 01/31/1997
* USD 729,540.00

9318497 Li The rapid development of fiber-optic technology has made high-speed
network services possible. However, the current gap between the bandwidth of the
standardized optical networks and the theoretical limit of optical fiber
bandwidth suggests that a great deal of research remains before an effective
optical network can be deployed. The objective of this research is to explore
the possible architectures, routing protocols, and system and device
implementations for the metropolitan-area or wide-area wavelength-division-
multiplexing (WDM) all-optical networks. Such a wide-area network will present
certain challenges which are not found in a local-area network. The researchers
will explore wavelength-division-multiplexing as the fundamental shifting
technology for all-optical networks due to its potential impact for significant
capacity upgrades through parallel transmissions on an optical fiber. Work will
done to enhance dramatically the efficiency and throughput of such a WDM all-
optical network by introducing the novel concept of wavelength converting (or
wavelength shifting) and by developing unique wavelength routing schemes which
consider new models and requirements of all-optical networks. The throughput and
utilization of WDM networks is expected to be at least doubled under the
expected traffic loads. Moreover, incurred disruptions are expected to be
reduced by 2 orders of magnitude. This will advance the art of previously
conceived wavelength-continuous WDM networks. A close collaboration will be
formed between experts in the networks, systems, and device areas of photonics.
***