* 9318183
* High Performance Computing for Land Cover Dynamics
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/1993,08/31/2000
* Joseph Ja'Ja', University of Maryland, College Park
* Continuing Grant
* THOMAS QUARLES
* 08/31/2000
* USD 2,932,000.00

9318183 Davis The Grand Challenge Application Groups competition provides one
mechanism for the support of multidisciplinary teams of scientists and engineers
to meet the goals of the High Performance Computing and Communications (HPCC)
Initiative in Fiscal Year 1993. The ideal proposal provided not only the
opportunity to achieve significant progress on (1) a fundamental problem in
science or engineering whose solution could be advanced by applying high
performance computing techniques and resources, or (2) enabling technologies
which facilitate those advances but also significant interactions between
scientific and computational activities, usually involving mathematical,
computer or computational scientist, that would have impact in high performance
computational activities beyond the specific scientific or engineering problem
area(s) or discipline being studied. The investigators will study the
application of high performance parallel computing to a class of scientifically
important and computationally demanding problems in remote sensing- land cover
dynamics problems including generating improved- fine spatial resolution data
for the global carbon cycle, hydrological modeling and global ecological
responses to climate changes and human activity. The research is collaborative,
including scientist from the University of Maryland, University of Indiana,
University of news Hampshire and NASA's Goddard Space Center. The award will
combine research on -new analysis procedures for remotely sensed data -the
integration of multispectral, multiresolution and multitemporal image data sets
into a unified global data structure based on hierarchical data structures
(i.e., quadtrees) -the utilization of these hierarchical, parallel data
structures for the representation of spatial data (maps and products developed
from image analysis) and the development of a spatial data base system with a
sophisticate d query language that scientist can use to control the application
of biophysical models to global data sets -run-time support for constructing
scalable and parallel solutions to problems involving the manipulation of
irregular data structures such as quadtrees -parallel l/O,especially novel
methods for mapping large arrays and quadtrees onto parallel disks and disk
systems, and for accessing them using low overhead bulk transfers The
development work will be conducted on a 32 processor Connection Machine CM5,
installed at the University of Maryland, and on an IBM SP1 which we propose to
obtain as part of the program. This award is being supported by the Advanced
Projects Research Agency as well as NSF programs in geological, biological, and
computer sciences.