* 9318625
* Mimicking Aspects of Heterogeneous Catalysis
* MPS,CHE
* 12/15/1993,11/30/1998
* Kenneth Eisenthal, Columbia University
* Continuing Grant
* Kenneth L. Busch
* 11/30/1998
* USD 480,000.00

9318625 Bent In order to understand how catalytic reactions take place, it is
important to identify and study possible reaction intermediates which might
exist on the surface during a reaction under catalytic conditions. This research
project, supported by the Analytical and Surface Chemistry Program, is designed
to identify intermediates and reaction pathways for reactions relevant to
heterogeneous catalysis. Reaction intermediates will be generated and
characterized on copper and gold surfaces at low temperature by the
decomposition of molecular precursors and by the reaction of atomic hydrogen
with unsaturated molecular adsorbates. This work will concentrate on allyl,
formyl and vinyl species as intermediates in catalytic cracking and partial
oxidation catalysis. The second part of this project will address the question
of activated adsorption of halocarbon molecules on these same transition metal
surfaces. Vibrational spectroscopy and near edge X-ray absorption fine structure
spectroscopy will be the primary tools used for these model studies. %%% The
design of efficient and non-polluting catalytic chemical processes relies on a
knowledge of the mechanisms of the transition metal catalyzed surface reaction.
One approach to obtaining this mechanistic information is to establish the
chemical identity and reactivity of possible reaction intermediates on the
surface. This research project addresses this aspect of catalytic chemistry by
preparing possible reaction intermediates, characterizing them on the surface,
and exploring their chemistry. The results of this work will help to develop an
understanding of important catalytic processes. ***