* 9318073
* LTREB: Long-Term Studies of a Gypsy Moth-Impacted Forest
* BIO,DEB
* 05/01/1994,10/31/1999
* Jack Schultz, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Scott L. Collins
* 10/31/1999
* USD 222,150.00

9318073 Schultz It has been established that oaks, like other tree species,
experience altered leaf quality as a consequence of being attacked by gypsy moth
(GM) caterpillars. These changes have at least two important effects on the GM:
they reduce fecundity and decrease mortality due to disease. Either effect could
influence population dynamics of GM (and other insects), but because their
influences appear to be opposite, it is difficult to determine what the net
effect of tree responses might be. No study of defoliation-induced changes in
leaf quality has ever extended beyond 2 or 3 years. Since GM outbreaks recur
every 9 or 10 years, these short-term studies can tell us little about the
importance of tree responses to the overall pattern of population fluctuation.
It is critical to establish the period over which leaf quality is altered, and
how long changes last after defoliation has declined if we are to understand the
role of the tree. This cannot be done with short-term studies. GM outbreaks must
also alter the quality and quantity of leaves available to other herbivores in
the same forest. Documented changes in leaf chemistry and the dramatic reduction
in leaf standing crop during an outbreak must produce interactions - probably
negative, or competitive - between the GM and other species. For the past 20
years, the ecological literature has been dominated by the view that such food-
mediated interactions among herbivorous insects were unlikely. More recently,
researchers have begun to appreciate the subtle, but significant, impact one
herbivore may have another by altering host plant quality. It i s obvious that
outbreaks provide an opportunity to quantify the impact of one herbivore (e.g.,
the GM) on other, yet this has not been done; there has never been a "before,
during, and after" study of this type. This project addresses the first 5 years
of a long-term (10-20 years) research program aimed at addressing these two
major ecological problems. In a series of specific studies of defoliation-
induced changes in oak leaf chemistry at a typical gypsy moth-impacted site in
central Pennsylvania, three years of post-outbreak data on gypsy moth-impacted
site in central Pennsylvania, three years of post-outbreak data on gypsy moth
populations and oak leaf traits. have been accumulated. The traits of greatest
importance are phenolics, especially hydrolyzable tannins, and oxidative
capacity (e.g., phenoloxidase and peroxidase enzyme activity). These vary
dramatically among trees, influence the gypsy moth and its diseases, and at
least the phenolic constituents are altered by defoliation. Critical leaf traits
of a large sample of 3 oak species will be monitored through two GM outbreaks,
establishing the pattern of tree response in relation to measured insect
population densities and defoliation levels. The relationship between leaf
traits and virus prevalence in GM populations will be assessed by tracking
infection levels in relation to insect density, defoliation, and tree leaf
traits. At the same time, the possible impact of GM populations on other
herbivorous insect will be investigated, by censuring those coexisting on the
focal oaks and one non-host, red maple. Densities of non-GM herbivores will be
related statistically to GM density, defoliation levels, and tree leaf traits.
Although a long-term monitoring effort is the core of this program, the data-
gathering is designed to test specific hypotheses right from the start and
throughout the study. BY undertaking this long term program, for the first time
it will be determined whether induced plant responses can be ecologically mea
ningful, and whether negative interactions among herbivorous insects occur or
are common in forested systems. K M K M F M M ? Dutch (scalable) R Symbol "
Swiss (scalable) 1 Courier " h _ _ H ; Elizabeth M. Behrens Elizabeth M. Behrens