* 9318698
* Pliocene Paleontology and Geology of the Middle Awash Valley Ethiopia
* SBE,BCS
* 05/15/1994,04/30/1997
* Tim White, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing grant
* Dennis H. O'Rourke
* 04/30/1997
* USD 295,159.00

ABSTRACT P.I. Tim White SBR- 9318698 Some time ago, paleontological work in
southern Africa established Australopithecus as an ancestor of the human family
and also revealed extensive diversity in the early human fossil record.
Subsequent work in eastern Africa at Olduvai Gorge (the Leakey's) and elsewhere,
including Hadar (Johansen), extended the known geographic and temporal
distributions of early hominids and led to the recognition of even greater
diversity and complexity. The Middle Awash in Ethiopia, with rocks spanning the
Late Miocene through Late Pleistocene, is the continent's most important natural
laboratory for the study of human origins and evolution. Data from here bear on
issues as wide-ranging as the tempo and mode of hominid evolution across the
last five million years, the origins and evolution of stone tool technology and
subsistence patterns, and the relationships between global climate change and
events in hominid evolution. The earlier work of this outstanding team has shown
that the Awash basin provides 'snapshots' of life through time rather than a
continuous succession of fossil bearing sediments. They have discovered a
variety of new archaeological occurrences and fossil vertebrates, including
early hominid remains from six separate time horizons spanning 3.5 million
years. The survey phase of the research is drawing to a close, and it is now
possible to match ongoing problems in human evolutionary studies with the
resources of this rich and complex repository. The work to be supported by this
grant will work on three sets of hominid-bearing Pliocene deposits, whic h have
already yielded some very interesting early hominid fossils. The fieldwork will
contribute critical data on key issues - 1) the earliest known hominids, 2) the
skeletal biology of Australopithecus afarensis, and the origin of the genus
Homo. To date, paleontologists have been unable to resolve these issues because
of inadequate fossil and contextual data sets, which this site will provide.
This project also has an unparalleled record of training of, and collaboration
with, professionals from an undeveloped country. *** P\anthro\jfried\9318698.abs
) r t U W ' ) ! ! ! ! D ) ) ( Times New Roman Symbol & Arial _ _ _ _ _ ^ " h (4
%54 %-4 % # I = Jonathan Friedlaender Jonathan Friedlaender