* 9318581
* Hydrolytic Cleavage of RNA by Metal Complexes;              A Fundamental Study in Catalysis
* MPS,CHE
* 03/01/1994,08/31/1998
* James Bashkin, Washington University
* Continuing Grant
* Re-Entered for CGI Processing
* 08/31/1998
* USD 305,000.00

9318581 Bashkin Washington Univ - St. Louis Dr. James K. Bashkin, Chemistry
Department, Washington University, is supported in the Inorganic, Bioinorganic,
and Organometallic Chemistry Program, for investigations of the metal-catalyzed
hydrolytic cleavage of RNA. To probe the mechanisms of these reactions, RNA
hydrolysis and cleavage will be studied using metal complexes with known
coordination geometries. Possible modes of action, including Lewis acid
catalysis, nucleophilic or base catalysis, and inner- and outer-sphere metal-
substrate interactions, will be probed. The mechanistic information will be
further utilized to design a series of synthetic ribozymes which will mimic the
ability of natural ribozymes to cleave specific RNA sequences. In order to
obtain rapid kinetic data, several new RNA cleavage assays will be developed.
The construction and breakdown of the genetic code in DNA and RNA involves
chemical processes that are of fundamental importance to living cells, yet many
aspects of these processes are poorly understood. The goal of this research is
to determine the chemistry by which DNA and RNA codes are disassembled. These
chemical discoveries may be applied to the destruction of undesirable genetic
codes which arise from mutation or infection.