* 9318255
* Improved Pressure-Clamp Technique for Studying              Mechanosensitive Channels
* BIO,DBI
* 03/15/1994,08/31/1996
* Owen Hamill, University of Texas Medical Branch at Galveston
* Continuing Grant
* Karl A. Koehler
* 08/31/1996
* USD 244,637.00

9318255 McBride Recently, a pressure-clamp technique has been developed (1)
which is used in conjunction with patch-clamp techniques to study the kinetic
properties of single and whole-cell mechanosensitive (MS) channel currents. The
pressure-clamp technique is based on the balancing of negative and positive
pressures to achieve the desired pressure at the membrane patch. Apart from its
use in the activation of MS channel currents it can also provide a convenient
means of applying defined and reproducible pressure/suction protocols for tight
seal formation necessary in all patch-clamp experiments. The main goals of this
project are to improved the existing prototype and make it into a convenient
unit accessible to researchers studying MS channels as well as to patch-clampers
in general. The main improvements center around efforts to reduce the response
time of the clamp from its present value of 10 ms to the sub-millisecond time
range. Another related improvement involves miniaturization of the system which
will make the clamp a more compact and convenient package. Another aspect of the
proposal involves determining the dynamics of membrane movement during the
application of rapid pressure/suction steps. For instance, does membrane
movement precede or is it even necessary for MS channel activation? This will be
addressed by high resolution (both temporal and spatial) video microscopy. We
will simultaneously monitor the pressure, voltage, current, membrane capacitance
and membrane movement during the pressure/suction step. y, a pressure-clamp
technique has been developed (1) which is used in conjunction wit h patch-clamp
tech ! ! ! F 3 Times New Roman Symbol & Arial 1 Courier D " h E E = abstract
Deseree King, BIR Deseree King, BIR