* 9318358
* Action of Le and Lip1 Genes in Controlling Stem Growth of   Pisum by Gibberellins and Light
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/1994,08/31/1995
* Valerie Sponsel, Indiana University
* Continuing Grant
* Machi F. Dilworth
* 08/31/1995
* USD 80,000.00

9318358 Sponsel The proposed research will utilize gibberellin (GA)
biosynthetic mutants and photomophogenetic mutants of Pisum sativum (garden pea)
to investigate the mechanisms by which a plant can regulate both the levels of
active hormone and the responsiveness of its target tissue. In the le dwarf
mutant of pea the conversion of gibberellin A20 to GA1 by 3Beta-hydroxylation is
reduced in intact plants. GA1 is the active GA for internode growth in pea. Some
recently reported results necessitate a re-examination of the biochemical basis
for the le mutation. In vivo and in vitro feeding studies of labeled GAs will be
used to examine whether the le mutation interferes with the transport of GA20
from leaves (which are its putative site of synthesis) to stems, or whether the
le locus could code for a regulatory factor. Qualitative and quantitative
analyses of the GA metabolites will be conducted using gas chromatography-mass
spectrometry providing definitive identification. Since 3Beta- hydroxylation is
one of the most important steps in GA biosynthesis it is imperative that the
functional basis of the le mutation is defined. The newly characterized lip1
mutation of pea results in light independent photomorphogenesis. In this mutant
the severe reduction in stem growth which normally takes place when pea
seedlings are transferred from dark to light (de-etiolation) is manifest in
complete darkness. Biochemical studies suggest that the signal transduction
pathway from phytochrome A is affected in the mutant. An investigation of the
effect of this mutation of GA levels, metabolism and on tissue responsiveness
will be conducted in order to define which aspects of GA biochemistry are a
factor in photomophogenesis. ***