* 9318936
* Vibrational Dynamics in Weakly-Bound Complexes and Gas-     Surface Scattering
* MPS,CHE
* 02/01/1994,07/31/1997
* Roger Miller, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Continuing Grant
* Joan M. Frye
* 07/31/1997
* USD 513,600.00

In this project in the Experimental Physical Chemistry program of the Chemistry
Division, Prof. R.E. Miller of the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
will continue a research program on problems of the dynamics of energy transfer,
specifically those present in weakly bound molecular complexes and in molecule-
surface interactions. For the weakly bound complexes there will be spectroscopic
characterization to determine the details of photodissociation dynamics and the
associated potential energy surfaces, as well as the state-to-state probing of
the fragments resulting from phtodissociation. These experiments are extended
into the realm of gas-surface scattering, especially that of scattering of non-
linear molecules and the vibrational and rotational energies transferred in this
process. The dynamics of chemical reactions stands at the forefront of
contemporary research in physical chemistry. The purpose is to obtain a detailed
understanding of reaction processes at the molecular level. Systems that are
investigated include stable molecules, weakly bound complexes composed of stable
molecules, and molecules interacting with solid surfaces in a scattering
process. Gas phase molecules or complexes elevated to high electronic,
vibrational or rotational states of energy by photoexcitation often dissociate
into fragments having characteristic energy distributions in the electronic,
vibrational, rotational, and translational degrees of freedom. Since there are
usually several possible paths along which a dissociation process is allowed to
occur, it is important to understand the details of these processes to allow
correct modeling of the overall reaction phenomenon. Similar reasons guide the
research in scattering of molecules by solid surfaces, especially those that
play a role in catalytic reactions.