* 9318055
* Gene Regulation of Dormancy in Avena fatua Embryos
* BIO,IOS
* 03/01/1994,02/28/1998
* Michael Foley, Purdue Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Erik T. Nilsen
* 02/28/1998
* USD 210,000.00

9318055 Foley The goal of this project is to elucidate the physiological basis
for seed dormancy and afterripening-induced breaking of dormancy. The aim of
this project is to investigate the molecular basis for dormancy/breaking
dormancy using complementary molecular and genetic approaches. Research on seed
dormancy has been approached mainly by studying breaking of dormancy which
complicates interpretation by confounding breaking of dormancy with germination.
The molecular and genetic approaches described herein are distinct in that they
focus primarily on maintenance of dormancy. The hypothesis to be tested states
that specific genes or their products which are expressed in dormant embryos
maintain seed in the dormant state. The expression of these genes is repressed
during afterripening of dormant embryos which facilitates subsequent
germination. Using in vivo and in vitro translation procedures, about 10
polypeptides have been identified that occur in dormant but not afterripened
embryos soon after imbibition. A dormancy-specific recombinant library has been
developed and sixteen putative dormancy-specific positive clones, whose
expression is modulated by afterripening, have been selected. These clones will
be further characterized as to their general expression and nucleic acid
sequence. To complement this approach it is proposed that molecular markers be
identified for major genes associated with the dormancy trait and simultaneously
evaluate/refine the tentative genetic model explaining dormancy in A. fatua. In
addition, to confirm any genetic modelbased on F2 populations derived for bulk
segregant analysis and to better understand the inheritance of dormancy it is
proposed that advanced-generation, F2-derived lines that vary in their degree of
dormancy be developed and genetically evaluated. This molecular and genetic
approach should provide significant information toward understanding the
physiological basis for this arrested stage of plant development. ***