* 9318484
* Solvatochromic Studies of Solvated Stationary Phases
* MPS,CHE
* 03/01/1994,08/31/1996
* Robert Bass, Virginia Commonwealth University
* Standard Grant
* Margaret A. Cavanaugh
* 08/31/1996
* USD 140,000.00

9318484 Hawkridge This award is made in the Analytical and Surface Chemistry
Program in support of the research of Dr. Sarah Rutan. The research is aimed at
elucidating the role of the solvated stationary phase in reversed phase liquid
chromatography. This will be achieved through the use of indicators whose UV-
visible absorbance maxima are dependent on their molecular environments.
Solvatochromic parameters describing the dipolarity/polarizability, hydrogen
bond acidity and hydrogen bond basicity will be determined. Spectra of various
indicators in mixed aqueous/organic supensions of stationary phase particles
which have been derivatized with alkyl chains will be obtained using diffuse
reflectance spectroscopy. Interferences from dye molecules that remain in the
bulk mobile phase will be eliminated using adaptive filtering techniques. In a
related study, factor analysis methods will be used to aid in the development of
methods for the prediction of infinite dilution activity coefficients and heats
of solution, based on these solvatochromic parameters. The combination of
improved modeling techniques and the development of parameters describing the
chemistry of the chromatographic phases should ultimately allow the researcher
to predict retention characteristics for solutes in reversed phase liquid
chromatography. This capability will be of significant benefit across a broad
range of industrial and medically related separations and may also prove
valuable to the characterization of other interfacial systems.