* 9318884
* Dissertation Research:  The Origin of Agricultural Bench    Terraces in the Colca Valley, Peru
* SBE,BCS
* 10/01/1993,09/30/1994
* William Denevan, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 09/30/1994
* USD 11,997.00

9318884 Denevan Under the direction of Dr. William Denevan, Ms. Sarah Brooks
will collect data for her doctoral dissertation. She will conduct archaeological
research in the Colca Valley of Peru and attempt to date and determine the
construction sequence of different kinds of agricultural terraces located on the
valley slopes. She will also collect data which will permit reconstruction of
climate change. To answer the first question she will conduct a through survey
of a 4 square km region with two terrace types and carry out partial or complete
excavations of 25 terraces and features physically associated with them. She
will also partially uncover several house structures and canals. Analyses will
be conducted on recovered lithics, ceramics and faunal remains. Dates will be
obtained through comparative ceramic analyses, carbon 14 analyses of organic
materials and hydration of obsidian artifacts. To determine climate change,
analyses will be conducted both on pollen and macro faunal materials collected
during excavation. Data resulting from the analysis of the Quelccaya ice cap
near the Colca Valley have indicated wet and dry periods from AD 500 to the
present. Limited studies of the region's prehistory indicate that in the early
sixth century AD farming practices changed and people abandoned rainfed sloping
field terraces and began to construct counterparts which could be watered by
irrigation. Ms. Brooks wishes to examine the relationship between climate change
and postulated human response. She wishes to determine how rainfall and
vegetation changed in the region and whether the new farming practices were in
fact related to this shift. This research is important for several reasons. Many
areas in the Andes which are unused today at one time supported intensive
agriculture. Reconstruction of past farming practices and discovery the
relationship between them and environmental variables may provide insights of
direct use for regional development today. In t he course of her work Ms. Brooks
will also produce a chronological sequence of value to many archaeologists who
work in highland Peru. The project will assist in the training of a promising
young scientist. ***