* 9318065
* RUI:  Does Maintenance of Elevated Muscle Temperatures in   Tunas Result in Increased Swimming Performance?
* BIO,IOS
* 05/01/1994,04/30/1998
* Kathryn Dickson, CSU Fullerton Auxiliary Services Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Zoe Eppley
* 04/30/1998
* USD 279,746.00

9318065 Dickson In addition to being the focus of important commercial fisheries
throughout the world, tunas are of particular interest to biologists because
they are the only bony fishes known to maintain muscle temperatures(Tm) elevated
significantly above the temperature of their environment by using metabolically
derived heat; i.e., they are endothermic. To do so, tunas need a source of heat
(provided by contraction of red muscle during continuous swimming) and a
mechanism to retain the heat within the muscle during activity (blood vessels
arranged as counter-current heat exchangers). The goal of this research project
is to test the hypothesis that maintenance of high muscle temperatures in tunas
results in increased swimming performance. A computerized, temperature-
controlled, variable speed, swimming-tunnel respirometer system will be used to
measure the maximal sustainable/aerobic swimming speed versus fish size and the
cost of swimming versus fish size relationships for juvenile black skipjack
tunas ranging in fork length (FL) from ~100mm to ~250mm. These sizes are above
and below the minimum size for endothermy of 207 mm FL postulated in a recent
publication by the Principal Investigator. Comparisons will be made with a
similar size range of closely related fishes that cannot elevate Tm
significantly at any size to "control" for the effects of fish size. Also, if
swimming mode changes with fish size, the maximal speed and/or cost of swimming
may change independent of Tm. Therefore, swimming mode, as well as tail beat
frequencies and amplitudes, will be determined from high-speed videotape
recordings of each fish swimming at speeds up to its maximum, using a
computerized video motion analysis system. In addition, Tm in a size range of
juvenile black skipjack tuna will be measured as they swim in laboratory aquaria
and in the respirometer: these data, combined with microscopic examination of
heat exchanger blood vessel morphology and red muscle amou nt in the same fish,
will allows the PI to test the hypothesis that the minimum size for endothermy
in black skip jacks is 207 mm FL. These studies will contribute a great deal to
our understanding of the evolution of endothermy and the advantages it confers.
The results will have implications for the ecology, energetics, and both short-
and long-range movements of tunas. In addition, estimates of the cost of
swimming obtained in the proposal study can be used in models of tuna energetics
and population dynamics that are used to regulate the fishery aspects of these
species. ***