* 9318918
* Telomere Structure and Function in Yeast
* BIO,MCB
* 04/01/1994,09/30/1997
* Arthur Lustig, Sloan Kettering Institute For Cancer Research
* Continuing Grant
* Philip Harriman
* 09/30/1997
* USD 360,000.00

9318918 Lustig The long-term goal of this research is to understand the protein-
DNA interactions that confer the unique structural, replication and functional
properties of telomeres. RAP1 is the first eukaryotic telomere binding protein
amenable to both genetic and molecular analysis. A wide array of telomere-
related phenotypes have been observed in rap1 mutant strains of the yeast
Saccharomyces cerevisiae, including loss of telomere size control and stability,
as well as the altered expression of telomere- adjacent genes. The genetic and
molecular analysis of these rap1 mutant strains addresses three critical
questions. First, what is the nature of binding protein interactions that
influence telomere position effects, size control and stability? Second, what is
the role of telomere structure in regulating long range position effects and
telomere size control? Finally, what other factors associate with the telomere
to maintain its structure and function? This project addresses these questions
with three specific interrelated aims. The first aim is to evaluate the role of
RAP1 in maintaining the fidelity of telomere addition or repair. The second aim
is to investigate the domains of RAP1 important in telomere function. The third
aim is to identify and characterize extragenic suppressors of rap1 nonsense and
missense alleles. %%% Telomeres, the unique protein-DNA structures present at
the termini of linear eukaryotic chromosomes, are essential for maintaining
chromosome stability and structure. First, telomeres serves as "caps" to protect
chromosomes against degradation and rearrangement. Second, telomeric DNA serves
as substrate for a unique non-DNA templated mechanism of replication that
prevents the loss of terminal (and ultimately essential) sequences. Third,
telomeres have long range effects on the transcription, replication, and
chromatin structures of adjacent genes and sequences. The functional importance
of telomeres is underscored by ev idence linking loss of telomeric sequences to
cellular senescence, tumor formation , and oncogenesis. Hence, an understanding
of the proteins that interact with telomeric DNA is of general importance. This
project is a genetic and molecular analysis of such a protein, designated RAP1,
from the yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae. ***