* 9318066
* Immunological Mechanisms of Nutritional-Induced Regulation  of Offspring Survival
* BIO,IOS
* 07/01/1994,06/30/1998
* Robert Lochmiller, Oklahoma State University
* Continuing Grant
* Zoe Eppley
* 06/30/1998
* USD 355,500.00

9318066 Lochmiller Wild animal populations are known to fluctuate in size from
season to season and year to year. Scientists have offered many explanations for
such fluctuations, and most, ultimately have attributed these fluctuations to
individuals in populations responding to environmental factors via altered
mortality and reproduction. Evidence suggests that survival of newborns may be
the single most important mechanism influencing overall reproductive success and
size of plant-eating animal populations. Unfortunately, difficulties associated
with mortality in the wild makes this one of the most poorly understood aspects
of animal ecology. Studies in the PI's laboratory on the development of immunity
in wild cotton rats (Sigmodon hispidus) will provide a physiological approach to
the problem; specifically, concentrating on immunological mechanisms by which
the environment influences survival. Initial studies have implicated involvement
of the immune system in determining the chances of survival in newborn plant-
eating animals as a result of protein malnutrition of their mothers during
pregnancy or during early juvenile life. This study will examine that proposed
mechanism in two plant-eating rodents whose populations are known to fluctuate
either erratically (cotton rats) or cyclically (prairie vole, Microtus
ochrogaster) in numbers from year to year, using a series of controlled
laboratory feeding trials and monitoring individuals from low and high density
populations in the wild. The ability of the immune system to develop and provide
protection against disease agents in newborn animals when their mothers are
confronted with diets deficient in protein during pregnancy and lactation will
be examined, as well if size of populations influences immunity in the wild. ***