* 9318078
* Enchancement and Upgrade of the DNA Sequencing Facility:    Upgrade of Automated Sequencer (ABI 37 3A)/Electrophoresis  Unit
* BIO,DBI
* 06/15/1994,05/31/1996
* Joseph Travis, Florida State University
* Standard Grant
* Michael K. Lamvik
* 05/31/1996
* USD 52,749.00

We are proposing to purchase a number of items of equipment and software that
will enhance the capabilities and services of our DNA Sequencing Core Facility
by upgrading our Applied Biosystems 373A Electrophoresis Unit (= automated
sequencer) and its associated equipment and providing the users with enhanced
access to data-analysis work stations. The hardware includes a five-filter wheel
(to permit sequencing with T7 DNA polymerase), a liner upgrade (to permit the
option of using several variable well-to-read gel plates), vertical agarose gel
plates (to facilitate analysis of 2-3 kb-fragments and random amplified
polymorphic DNA), and computer equipment (to increase analytical speed and
accommodate multiple users). The software includes material to facilitate
sequence alignment, increase the speed of scoring fragments, and create
consensus sequences. The enhancements will serve a diversity of research
projects in different disciplines, from phylogenetic reconstructions
(cyanobacteria from extreme environments, the major crustacean lineages) to
examinations of gene expression (flagellar regeneration in Chlamydomonas,
acclimatory change in muscle tissue) to the determination of reproductive
patterns in natural populations (mating in livebearing fishes). The upgrade will
expand the range of applications that the facility can offer and permit more
rapid sample analysis, thereby enabling users from several disciplines to expand
readily the scope of their work and to increase their productivity.