* 9318757
* Mechanism of Cytoplasmic Localization
* BIO,IOS
* 03/01/1994,08/31/1997
* Ralph Quatrano, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Continuing Grant
* Judith Plesset
* 08/31/1997
* USD 305,000.00

9318757 Quatrano Zygotes of Fucus provide a model system to study the basic
mechanisms involved in the generation of zygotic/cell asymmetry and partitioning
of localized cytoplasmic components to the resulting daughter cells. Large,
single-celled zygotes synchronously develop a polar axis in culture that can be
experimentally oriented by imposed gradients such as unilateral light. Such
cells represent an ideal system to study how a polar axis is established and how
a cell directionally transports cytoplasmic material to a predetermined site
defined by an extracellular vector. In order for a light-induced polar axis to
become fixed or stabilized in Fucus, a network of actin microfilaments in the
cytoplasm and an extracellular matrix must be intact. Dr. Quatrano has proposed
that the fixation of a polar axis involves linking actin cytoskeletal filaments
and cell wall fibrils through integral membrane proteins at the future rhizoid
site. This axis stabilizing complex (ASC) that structurally links the cytoplasm
with the cell wall could serve to immobilize asymmetries at the presumptive
rhizoid tip and to provide cytoplasmic "tracks" for vesicle transport to a
targeted patch for support of rhizoid outgrowth. The ASC is similar to polar
structures in other systems (i.e., focal adhesions in mammalian cells), and the
characteristics of its formation in Fucus is remarkably like other polar cells
(i.e., budding yeast and polarized epithelium). In this grant, Dr. Quatrano
proposes two major questions: (1) Does the ASC provide the structural basis for
the targeting and retention of vesicles and gene products localized in the
emerging rhizoid, and what are the critical linkages that stabilize this complex
with respect to axis fixation and tip growth? (2) Are gene products and
mechanisms of polar bud formation in yeast conserved in the formation of the
ASC, vesicle recruitment, and rhizoid growth in Fucus? If so, can these products
also be detected in other plant cells undergoing polarized, asymmetric cell
divisions? More specific aims are to characterize the proteins localized in the
complex and to identify the critical linkages between components that are
required for the asymmetries to become stabilized. To assess the role of
specific proteins in the fixation process and to test various structural models
of the complex, Dr. Quatrano proposes to interfere with the function of specific
proteins by microinjecting antibodies into the zygote. He will observe the
dynamics of the complex forming in response to external gradients by using
confocal microscopy. Fluorescently labeled actin and various dyes will be
microinjected into the zygotes to follow the assembly of the microfilament
network and Golgi vesicles at the targeted site. Also, specific mRNAs that are
localized in the developing zygote will be identified and characterized and used
as reporters to determine the role of the ASC in their asymmetric distribution.
Finally, Dr. Quatrano has shown that antibodies raised to neck filament and ras-
like proteins that are required for polar bud formation in yeast also recognize
proteins in Fucus. Using primers from conserved regions in these genes, he has
identified clones from brown algae that have sequence similarities with the
yeast products. He will test the functional similarities of these algal genes by
complementation tests in yeast. He will isolate other polarity genes from Fucus
by complementing yeast polarity mutants with Fucus cDNA libraries. If any of the
Fucus genes that have structural and functional homologies with the yeast
polarity genes are found in higher plant cells, he will determine if they are
specifically expressed in plant cells undergoing polar, asymmetric divisions.
*** # #!#"###$#%#&amp;#'#(#)#*#+#,#-#.#/#0#1#2#3#4#5#6# # # # # # # # # # # # #
# # # # # # # # # # # # # #9318757 Quatrano Zygotes of Fucus provide a model
system to study the basic mechanisms involved in the generation of zygotic &lt;
7 &lt; $ ! ! F &lt; &lt; ( Times New Roman Symbol &amp; Arial : " h fC e uC e U
K + Dana Brigham Dana Brigham