* 9318273
* Phylogeny and Social Behavior Evolution of the Cotingas (Aves: Cotingidae)
* NONE,NONE
* 02/15/1994,01/31/1999
* Richard Prum, University of Kansas Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Mary C. McKitrick
* 01/31/1999
* USD 115,000.00

9318273 Prum Studies of vertebrate breeding systems and social behavior have
focused largely on near-term or proximate mechanisms that can be labelled
ecological or environmental. Neglected have been determinants of behavior that
are genetic in nature and entrained phylogenetically, that is present in recent
common ancestors of the group of species under study. Dr. Richard Prum of the
University of Kansas will use phylogenetic methods to investigate the historical
pathways of evolutionary change in aspects of breeding and social behavior in a
diverse lineage of neotropical perching birds, the cotingas. New characters of
syringeal and skeletal morphology and traditional plumage features will be used
to construct a robust hypothesis of phylogenetic relationships among the ca. 90
species of neotropical cotingids; collaborative field work in Brasil will
provide new specimens for much of this research. This hypothesis of phylogeny
will be used to analyze patterns of interspecies variation in social behavior
and mating systems and to test comparatively several hypotheses about sexual
color differences, sexual size differences, and display behavior homologies. The
project contributes to avian systematics and to the synthesis of phylogenetic,
ethological, and behavioral research on birds.