* 9318523
* Correlations Among Environmental Agents: Implications for   Plant Ecology and Evolution
* BIO,DEB
* 02/15/1994,01/31/1997
* Thomas Miller, Florida State University
* Standard Grant
* Mark Courtney
* 01/31/1997
* USD 47,178.00

9318523 Miller Studies on the ways in which natural selection leads to the
evolution of species have demonstrated that many traits of interest, such as
leaf shape or growth rate, are controlled by numerous loci (many genes), but
that one can qualitatively predict how traits will evolve when undergoing
natural selection. For example, previous research has investigated how herbivory
by insects would lead to evolutionary changes in herbivore resistance of a plant
species. Clearly, however, organisms are affected simultaneously by multiple
environmental agents. The dune annual Sabatia stellaris, for example, appears to
be simultaneously affected by resource competition, water availability, and
herbivory. The proposed research asks how selection for one agent (e.g.
competition) is affected by the simultaneous action of a second agent (e.g.
herbivory). Theoretical predictions suggest that the selection by any one agent
will be increased, in some cases dramatically, by the presence of any second
agent%%% The proposed research will quantify selection for traits related to
competition, herbivory, and water stress in Sabatia plants grown under a variety
of different experimental conditions in the field: competition only, herbivory
only, water stress only, and several combinations of these three environmental
agents. In each environment, a number of plant traits known to be important for
dealing with competition, herbivory, and/or water stress will be quantified. By
counting the seeds produced by plants with these traits under various
conditions, selection for these traits will be quantified in each environment
and predictions can be tested. The results of this study may be important for
understanding basic questions about rates of evolutionary change of species in
different natural environments and the maintenance of genetic diversity. They
may also be important for developing or understanding breeding programs in
agricultural systems where factors su ch as completion and herbivory are
commonplace.