* 9318655
* Grant for Exploratory Research: Very Large Magnetic Field   Gradients for Diffusion Ordered NMR by Means of Sample      Shuttling
* MPS,CHE
* 12/15/1993,05/31/1995
* Charles Johnson, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Joan M. Frye
* 05/31/1995
* USD 49,948.00

9318655 Johnson In this project of the Physical Chemistry Program of the
Chemistry Division, Prof. C. S. Johnson of the University of North Carolina
proposes to develop an improvement in current NMR technique to allow the study
of ultra slow translational (diffusional) motions of molecules and molecular
aggregates in condensed media. An existing standard commercial NMR spectrometer
will be modified to allow the use of large magnetic field gradients and high
resolution NMR in the same experiment. This project is exploratory in nature and
is supported through a Small Grant for Exploratory Research (SGER). %%% The
limitations of present methods of Nuclear Magnetic Resonance (NMR) spectroscopy
make for difficulties in studying the transport of large micelles and vesicles,
restricted diffusion in cells and porous solids, and the simultaneous
measurement of diffusion rates of various size probe particles in tight gels and
polymers. The exploratory research to be undertaken in this project seeks to
overcome these limitations through the combination of several new techniques and
adapting them for inclusion in a standard commercial spectrometer. The
successful execution of this plan will bring about a major advance of the NMR
technique and will have important consequences and great benefits to several
applied areas, such as polymer chemistry, biochemistry, and the dynamics of
glassy materials. ***