* 9318513
* LTREB: Long-term Studies of Population and Community Ecology in an Experimentally Fragmented Landscape
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/1993,02/28/2001
* Kevin Price, University of Kansas Main Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Scott L. Collins
* 02/28/2001
* USD 308,662.00

&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;9308065&lt;br/&gt;Holt&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A long-term
experiment on habitat fragmentation is underway in the prairie-forest ecotone in
eastern Kansas. An archipelago of patches, representing different levels of
fragmentation, was arrayed within a period 6 years. During the first six years
of the study, fragmentation influenced consumer population dynamics, and the
local persistence of herbaceous plant species with clonal life cycles, but did
not affect measures of local species richness or the overall rates of
succession. It is expected that during the next five, substantial effects of
fragmentation upon successional dynamics should begin to appear, because: 1)
there is a transition underway from species present in the original seed pool to
species colonizing form external source pools, particularly trees and shrubs,
and 2) the stature of the dominant plants is increasing, thereby enhancing
microenvironmental differences between patch interiors and the surrounding
interstitial habitats and hence edge effects. It is also expected that small
mammal may be dominant driving factors in woody species establishment, and so
fragmentation effects observed in plant succession may be indirect
manifestations of fragmentation effects on the small mammal community. This
project will document dynamics in plant community composition, local
persistence, and plant architecture as a function of the degree of
fragmentation, using both ground surveys, canopy analysis technology, aerial
photography, and remote sensing. It will also monitor the spatial distributions
of small mammals that are potentially important in slowing the invasion of woody
species, and to use exclosures to directly measure effects on seedling
survivorship. This study is one of the very few experimental studies of habitat
fragmentation, and provides a system for exploring more general issue of scale
in ecological dynamics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Research projects such as this are
fundamental to the better understanding of the associative processes that occur
within communities. This understanding will provide a knowledge base on what to
expect as landscapes are more finely fragmented. It may also suggest
ameliorative measures for maintaining system integrity.&lt;br/&gt;