* 9318738
* U.S.-Malaysia Regional Workshop on Computer Aided Geometric Design, Penang and Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia, July 4-8, 1994
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/1994,05/31/1995
* Ronald Goldman, William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* Gerald Edwards
* 05/31/1995
* USD 44,687.00

9318738 Goldman This award provides funds to permit Dr. Ronald N. Goldman,
Professor of Computer Science, Rice University, to conduct with Dr. Hassan Said,
Department of Computer Science, Universiti Sains Malaysia, Penang, a
U.S.-Southeast Asian workshop on computer aided geometric design (CAGD). This
award will support the participation of ten U.S. scientists/engineers and eight
others from Indonesia, Singapore, and Thailand. Nine Malaysian participants are
supported from other sources. CAGD is becoming increasingly important in
manufacturing and is an area of great interest to computer scientists and
engineers. At the same time, countries in the ASEAN (Association of Southeast
Asian Nations) region have taken a prominent position in this field. The
workshop will provide an opportunity for U.S. participants to exchange
scientific information with ASEAN scientists/engineers and to keep abreast of
trends and directions of computer science and engineering in that region. This
project is relevant to the objectives of the East Asia and Pacific Program which
seeks to increase the level of cooperation between U.S. and East Asian
scientists and engineers through the exchange of scientific information, ideas,
skills, and techniques and through collaboration on problems of mutual interest
and benefit. ***