* 9318142
* The Acquisition of a Computer-controlled Fermentor for      High Level Expression of Recombinant Proteins
* BIO,DBI
* 04/15/1994,03/31/1996
* Charles Samuel, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Michael K. Lamvik
* 03/31/1996
* USD 65,952.00

9318142 Christoffersen The goal of this proposal is to purchase a modem
computer- controlled fermentor that will be used to express a wide variety of
proteins in microbial cells. The various projects that will utilize this
facility reflect the breadth of interests present on the UCSB campus. The areas
represented include proteins involved in neural growth factor receptor, DNA
methylation, interferon regulation of cellular activities, DNA binding domains,
plant hormone biosynthesis, plant secondary metabolism, the cellular
cytoskeleton, egg sperm receptor and others. The common need to produce large
amounts of protein for further biochemical or biophysical studies brings
together these diverse investigators on this single proposal. The need for this
instrumentation is due to advances in a variety of disciplines but most
importantly is the development highly efficient expression vectors for E. coli
or yeast cells. These simple, easy to growth organisms are extremely versatile
in their ability or produce a variety of proteins under the right experimental
conditions. Optimal expression for large scale experiments requires careful
control of temperature, dissolved oxygen and agitation. The proposed fermentor
would allow complete control of culture conditions and thus facilitate the
recovery of milligram amounts of these various proteins.