* 9318246
* Dimorphic Traits and Evolution of Behavior
* BIO,IOS
* 08/15/1994,07/31/1999
* David Westneat, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* John A. Byers
* 07/31/1999
* USD 331,500.00

IBN 9318246 Westneat ABSTRACT Contemporary biological studies of social systems,
which take an interdisciplinary approach combining evolution and behavior, have
revealed that there are general principles underlying the ways in which
characteristics of each sex can affect the other sex. Fuller understanding of
how those traits in which males and females differ, including behavioral traits,
influence both the actions of other animals and biological success are important
in a number of applied areas, particularly in designing optimal breeding
programs for endangered species. In the long run, a full understanding of these
basic biological processes will provide clues to understanding male and female
interactions in other species, including humans. Dr. Westneat will employ
experimental manipulations, observations of the behavior of free-living
individuals, and analyses of the genetic consequences of behavior to provide an
understanding of the evolutionary forces acting on the interactions between
males and females. Five experiments on red-winged blackbirds will be carried
out. Three will investigate how individual variation in appearance among free-
living males affects three components of mating success (number of females
nesting on the territory, proportion of their young sired by the territory
owner, and number of young sired in other males' territories) using molecular
genetic techniques. The other two experiments will test different factors that
influence female responses to males. Dr. Westneat's research will help us
comprehend the evolutionary consequences of the relationship between appearance
and behavior in the context of male-female interactions.