* 9318224
* Genetic and Environmental Factors that Influence            Microgametophytic Variation
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/1994,06/30/1997
* James Winsor, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Elizabeth Lyons
* 06/30/1997
* USD 95,000.00

9318224 Stephenson A large portion of the genome of the microgametophytes
(pollen) is both transcribed and translated during development, germination and
pollen tube growth. Consequently, the performance of pollen (speed and
germination, pollen tube growth rate and the ability to penetrate ovules and
achieve fertilization) can potentially be affected by its genetic composition,
by its interactions with the pistil, by environmental conditions and by the
resources provided to pollen by the pollen producing parent. This proposal seeks
support to continue our detailed investigations of the factors that affect
pollen performance, the relationship between pollen performance and non-random
fertilization, and the effects of non-random fertilization on the progeny
performance. The investigators will continue ongoing studies of pollen
competition in Cucurbita texana, to determine if there is heritable variation
for pollen performance and to determine if the effects of pollen competition on
progeny vigor extend to subsequent generations. They will also determine the
potential for pollen competition to occur and the effects of pollen competition
on progeny vigor in natural populations of C. foetidissima growing in the
Jornada Long-Term Ecological Research Site near Las Cruces, New Mexico. They
will also determine if the growing conditions of the pollen producing parent
affect the performance of the pollen. They will use C. texana and C.
foetidissima to examine the effects of leaf herbivory by cucumber beetles
(Diabrotica spp.) on pollen production, pollen grain size and the ability of the
pollen to sire seeds when deposited into stigmas in mixture. This research will
conclude studies of pollen competition and its effects on progeny performance
and will result in the most carefully controlled and comprehensive set of
experiments in this field of research. The herbivory studies will greatly extend
the now very limited understanding of environmental factors that affect pollen
performance.