* 9318138
* Connection of Carle Foundation Hospital and Clinics to the  University of Illinois Campus Network and to the Internet
* CSE,CNS
* 09/15/1993,02/29/1996
* Edward Krol, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Mark A. Luker
* 02/29/1996
* USD 30,000.00

9318138 Mintel The University of Illinois College of Medicine at Urbana-
Champaign proposes to extend the Urbana campus fiber-optic backbone to Carle
Foundation Hospital, its primary teaching hospital, thus providing Internet
connections for university faculty, staff, and students at the hospital. Funds
are requested to cover a major portion of the cost of equipment and services
necessary for this extension. A major benefit of this project will be the
establishment of a huge virtual medical library, with information from around
the world rapidly accessible to university faculty, staff, and students at the
Carle and the campus departments of the University of Illinois at Urbana.
Several of those make use of magnetic resonance imaging techniques and the
analytical resources available at the National Center for Supercomputing
Applications, and the Biomedical Magnetic Resonance Laboratory located on the
Urbana campus. A high-speed link between Carle and the university campus would
greatly facilitate data and image transfer. Third, the Carle Foundation Hospital
and Clinics serve as a major consultative resource for physicians in the
diagnosis and management of disease, being particularly active in the area of
rural health care. Connection of Carle Foundation Hospital with the University
of Illinois network would provide the final link between Carle's outlying
clinics in rural areas and the Internet, opening the door to electronic world-
wide collaboration in studies on the management and treatment of disease. ***