* 9318419
* An Experimental Investigation of the Determinants of        Reinforcement Rate Maximization and Matching
* BIO,IOS
* 08/15/1994,07/31/1997
* Gene Heyman, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* None
* 07/31/1997
* USD 119,999.00

IBN-9318419 Heyman A widely shared, basic idea in economics and related
disciplines is that choice is best described as rational decision-making in
which gains are maximized and losses minimized (an optimizing strategy).
However, the results of the actual decisions made by organisms often differ from
the calculations of rational decision theory. In many experiments, these
deviations appear to be the result of the operation of some other set of rules
than those of rational decision theory. One competing theory, based on
experimental studies, is a special case of a general psychological principle
known as "matching." Experimental results supporting matching seem to contradict
both rational choice theory and common sense. However, the empirical and
theoretical relationships between matching and rational choice theory have yet
to be clearly described, and recent data suggest a possible synthesis. The
purpose of this research will be to explore this synthesis. A number of studies
indicate that how individuals "calculate" the costs and benefits of their
choices is an important factor in determining matching vs. optimizing. When
subjects calculate costs and benefits in terms of the current status of each
alternative taken separately, they match. When they calculate costs and benefits
in terms of the joint contribution of each alternative, treating each source of
reward as a component of a larger unit, they optimize. Thus, the question of
whether individuals match or optimize can be restated as which "bookkeeping"
rule is in effect. Experiments will be carried out during which matching and
maximizing predict different patterns of behavior, producing data that will
reveal the conditions under which subjects learn to maximize or learn to match.
Implicit in this approach is the idea that it should be possible to discover a
yet more general behavioral rule, one that predicts which choice strategy is in
effect. A practical implication of this research is that it sho uld show how to
frame choice situations so that individuals will choose optimally. This question
is especially relevant to issues involving self-control, for example, overeating
and addiction.