* 9318776
* R/R:  Seismic Rehabilitation of Architectural Precast Panels
* ENG,CMMI
* 02/15/1994,07/31/1997
* Richard Nielsen, Regents of the University of Idaho
* Continuing Grant
* Shih-Chi Liu
* 07/31/1997
* USD 199,550.00

CMMI-9318776, PI-NIELSON: Existing architectural precast curtain wall panels may
have nonductile connection details that are prone to failure in strong
earthquakes. They also may have experienced significant corrosion of the
reinforcing steel. Corrosion of the bars anchoring the panel connection inserts
likewise reduces the strength and ductility of the panel connections. This
project conducts a study to investigate remedial procedures which will increase
the seismic integrity of the panels during earthquakes. Successful
rehabilitation schemes are developed to satisfy the following criteria: (1)
provide adequate strength to resist both seismic code design forces and forces
generated by structural response to actual earthquake ground motions, (2)
provide adequate ductility to accommodate realistic interstory drifts, (3)
accommodate a variety of structural framing schemes including both steel and
reinforced concrete, (4) be practical and economical, requiring minimal
disruption of a building's functions, and (5) reduce or eliminate the
possibility of corrosion of the panel reinforcement, and possibly reduce the
seismic dead load and lateral design load for the structure. Research tasks to
achieve these are: (1) Construct and test nonductile connection details. (2)
Design appropriate repair schemes. (3) Construct and test repair details and
verify their performance. (4) Perform dynamic analyses of full-panel repair
systems. This project is supported under the NSF Initiative "Repair and
Rehabilitation Research for Seismic Resistance of Structures."