* 9318997
* R/R:  Repair and Rehabilitation of Nonductile R.C. Frames   Using High Performance Fiber Reinforced Cement              Composites
* NONE,NONE
* 02/01/1994,07/31/1996
* Chia-Ming Uang, Northeastern University
* Continuing grant
* Manpreet K. Singh
* 07/31/1996
* USD 180,926.00

ABSTRACT: Older reinforced concrete frame structure constructed in seismic areas
of the United States are usually non-ductile and are thus identified as
hazardous. Laboratory studies have shown that the use of "ordinary" Fiber
Reinforced Concrete (FRC) in a new construction has substantially improved
seismic response, but conventional seismic retrofit techniques have not yet
taken advantage of FRCs or High Performance FRCs (HPFRCs). The advantage of FRCs
is a significant increase in ductility over that of conventional reinforced
concrete. The advantage of HPFRC is that, when loaded beyond the elastic limit,
these materials exhibit a significant improvement in the ability to undergo
further increase in stress and strain before failure. This increase in tensile
strength and ductility leads to an enormous increase in ability of the
structural frame to dissipate energy-a feature particularly desirable for
earthquake-resistance design. ***The goals of this research project herein is to
develop an innovative technique for seismic retrofit of nonductile reinforced
concrete frames using recently developed HPFRCs which exhibit significant
increase in the composite strain and stress capacity in the inelastic range. Use
of this material can solve the following common problems of reinforced concrete
frames: (1) Inadequate anchorage of the discontinuous bottom reinforcement in
beams, (2) inadequate confinement of the column lap splices, and (3) inadequate
confinement of the joint. The research is expected to open up a new area for
seismic repair and rehabilitation of non-ductile structures by using newly
developed HPFRC composites. The project is supported under NSF Initiative
"Repair and Rehabilitation Research for Seismic Resistance of Structures."***