* 9318119
* Systematics and Evolution of Cenococcum Geophilum Fr.:  An  Old Asexual Lineage?
* BIO,DEB
* 03/01/1994,02/28/1998
* John Taylor, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* James E. Rodman
* 02/28/1998
* USD 185,000.00

9318119 Taylor Molecular methods of DNA analysis, including nucleotide
sequencing and restriction enzyme mapping, are revolutionizing the study of
fungal evolution and taxonomy. The most problematic groups of fungi, the asexual
forms that do not undergo meiosis and do not form spores, are especially
troublesome because it is morphological features of the spore-bearing structures
that have traditionally served as characters for taxonomic identification and
classification. Molecular data provide a solution to the dilemma. Postdoctoral
associate Dr. Karen LoBuglio under the guidance of Dr. John Taylor at University
of California-Berkeley is using modern molecular procedures in a novel attack on
this problem, emphasizing the well-known mycorrhizal fungus Cenococcum
geophilum, which has been found throughout the world but never with spores. Data
from proteins and from nuclear ribosomal DNA will help determine the closest
living phylogenetic relatives of this fungus in the ascomycete lineage; under
molecular clock assumptions, these data will also suggest the time of origin of
the taxon. Molecular data will also indicate the extent of genetic variation
within local and regional populations of the fungus, and thereby test whether
cryptic cellular processes of recombination might generate variation in what has
been considered an asexual, dead-end mode of life. New DNA-based data from a
widespread but asexual mycorrhizal fungus will help answer two important
questions: the proper classification and phylogenetic position of Cenococcum
geophilum and the possibility that asexual taxa of fungi are able to generate
genetic variability, perhaps through cryptic cellular processes of
recombination.