* 9318479
* RUI: Regulation of the Pyrimidine Pathway in Plants
* BIO,IOS
* 07/01/1994,06/30/1998
* Robert Slocum, Goucher College
* Standard Grant
* Judith A. Verbeke
* 06/30/1998
* USD 206,000.00

9318479 Slocum Pyrimidine nucleotides are precursors of DNA and RNA synthesis
and pyrimidine derivatives are activated intermediates in many other types of
biosyntheses. These processes are of fundamental importance to the growth and
development of all living organisms. In plants, little is known about the
various mechanisms which regulate pyrimidine biosynthesis, but most evidence
suggests that the important sites of regulation are the first and/or second
steps of the pathway, involving the enzymes carbamoylphosphate synthetase
(CPSase) and aspartate transcarbamoylase (ATCase). The objective of this
research is to investigate the various molecular mechanisms regulating the
activity of these enzymes in plants. This will be accomplished by cloning the
genes for CPSase and ATCase, purifying and biochemically characterizing the
enzyme proteins, and producing CPSase and ATCase-specific antisera. The nucleic
acid and antibody probes will be used to investigate expression of the genes
encoding CPSase and ATCase in different plant tissues and in response to various
treatments that would be expected to impact pyrimidine biosynthesis. The genes
encoding CPSase and ATCase will be cloned by functional complementation in E.
coli carA/B- and pyrB- mutants. This approach has already permitted the
successful isolation of two different genes (pyrB1 and pyrB2) encoding
functional ATCases in pea. This plant is the first organism in which more than
one pyrB gene has been demonstrated. ***