* 9318896
* Collaborative Research: Validation of Land Surface          Hydrology Parameterizations for Climate Models
* GEO,EAR
* 02/15/1994,07/31/1997
* Eric Wood, Princeton University
* Continuing Grant
* L. Douglas James
* 07/31/1997
* USD 224,863.00

9318896 Wood This proposal is a collaborative effort between Dr. Ann-Henderson-
Sellers (Macquarie University), Dr. Dennis P. Lettenmaier (University of
Washington), and Dr. Eric F. Wood (Princeton University) The goal is to
determine the relative performance of land surface hydrology representations in
general circulation models (GCMs) used for climate simulation and numerical
weather prediction in terms of their ability to characterize energy fluxes at
the land surface and the surface water budget. The proposal has three primary
objectives: 1) to evaluate the ability of selected landsurface hydrology models
to reproduce measured surface energy and water fluxes using data from a range of
spatial scales; 2) To determine how best to combine and extend surface
observations, remote sensing, meteorological analyses to validate land surface
parameterizations GCMs; 3) To evaluate the ability of selected land surface
hydrology models used in GCMs to predict land surface fluxes of water and energy
at the scale of global atmospheric models. A suite of models would be evaluated
on a hierarchy of validation schemes. The models are 1) the variable
infiltration capacity (VIC) model developed by Wood, Lettenmaier, and
colleagues; 2) SECHIBA, the land surface model of the LMD (CNRS, Paris) GCM; 3)
The ECMWF land surface parameterization; 4) a simplified version of SiB; and 5)
BATS. The validation sites and data sets will be: 1) FIFE, a 225 Km2 region of
native grassland in the central U.S., and 2) A portion of the Arkansas River
basin which includes at least part of DOE's ARM (Atmospheric Radiation
Monitoring) Southern Great Plains CART site. A major focus will be to use
satellite remotely sensed measurements of land surface fluxes and surface
measurements to obtain large-area validation data for evapotranspiration and
surface soil moisture. ***