* 9318047
* Mechanisms of Leukotriene Biosynthesis and Physiological    Action in Amphibians
* BIO,IOS
* 03/01/1994,08/31/1999
* Ceil Herman, New Mexico State University
* Continuing Grant
* Judith A. Verbeke
* 08/31/1999
* USD 267,000.00

9318047 Herman Eicosanoids are biomedically important hormones. They have
diverse actions including effects on blood clotting, inflammation, anaphylaxis,
and cardiovascular and nervous system regulation in mammals. Eicosanoids include
prostaglandins and leukotrienes and are synthesized from arachidonic acid, a
polyunsaturated fatty acid found in cell membranes. When diets high in fish are
consumed, membranes contain high quantities of eicosapentaenoic acid and the
eicosanoids synthesized from this fatty acid have less biological activity.
While much work has been done on the biochemistry and physiology of eicosanoids
in mammals, much less is known of their roles in other animals. White blood
cells in mammals produce leukotrienes, but red cells lack this capacity.
However, bullfrog red blood cells synthesize leukotrienes, therefore, regulation
of synthesis will be investigated. Frog membranes contain high levels of
eicosapentaenoic acid which may affect synthesis. Leukotrienes may act by
stimulating synthesis of prostaglandins, and this will be investigated using
isolated bullfrog lung strips. Since antagonism of leukotriene effects is
biomedically important, receptor antagonists will be tested in cannulated
bullfrogs in vivo. Amphibian tissues are simpler than their mammalian
counterparts, therefore, mechanisms and results will be easier to interpret.
This research will provide insight into the evolution of these biomedically
important compounds. ***