* 9318879
* NSFNET Connectivity for Teaching Institutions in the States of Delaware, New Jersey, New York, Massachusetts and        Pennsylvania
* CSE,CNS
* 03/15/1994,02/29/1996
* Sergio Heker, Global Enterprise Services, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Mark A. Luker
* 02/29/1996
* USD 199,346.00

9318879 Heker Consistent with the mission of the JVNCnet which is to support the
academic and research networking communities in the Northeast and in order to
facilitate the provision of networking services to these institutions, Global
Enterprise Services is requesting partial support for the addition of 8
predominantly undergraduate institutions to the NSFNET family of networks
through the JVNCnet midlevel network. Each institution has separately included
information regarding their facility and their need to be a member of the
NSFNET. The list of schools includes: Burlington County College - NJ(2yr),
Mercer County College - NJ(2yr), Felician College - NJ, Gordon- Conwell Seminary
- MA, Gordon College - MA, Mercy College - NY, Wesley College - DE, Cedar Crest
College - PA. These eight institutions participating in this proposal represent
the diversity of the educational system in the United States. Schools range from
two-year to four-year institutions, from primarily teaching facilities to
research environments, and from small to large student bodies. All share the
desire to gain access to the resources and people made reachable through the
NSFNET, with the goal of improving the quality of their educational offerings
and outreach to their communities. Global Enterprise Services will act as a
regional or mid-level agent (JVNCnet) to identify the networking needs and
assist the academic institutions in the northeastern United States to meet those
needs by providing connectivity, education and training. In addition, the
JVNCnet is working towards achieving financial self-sufficiency by increasing
its membership.