* 9318819
* SGER:  Installing, Distributing, and Accessing Brain        Collection Information and Images Via INTERNET
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/1993,02/29/1996
* Wallace Welker, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Platt
* 02/29/1996
* USD 25,545.00

9318819 Welker The Comparative Mammalian Brain Collections at the University of
Wisconsin and at Michigan State University represent an incomparable unique set
on brain anatomy representing existing mammals from all over the world. It is
the largest collection of its kind, containing over a half million anatomical
sections from over 150 species including members of 50 Families from 17
different Orders of Mammalia. It has been assembled over decades, and includes
specimens from many animals that represent important groups but now are rare,
and even endangered, prohibiting any collection of more material. This project
will make basic catalog data avaliable over the Internet network for worldwide
use. These data will include a complete list of over 375 sectioned and stained
mammalian brains, photographic images of each brain from standard views, and
textual data about each brain with scanned color images of selected sections
stained for either cell bodies or myelin sheaths. A catalog also will be
published together with examples of brain photographs and photomicrographs to
illustrate the high quality of the stained sections. This work will provide a
new kind of worldwide access to the main features of this unique collection, to
allow comparative neuroanatomists to see whether data they seek for their work
may already be available and useable through this collection. The impact will be
not only on neuroscience and comparative anatomy, but on production of
electronic catalogs for other biological collections in museums or universities,
and on ecological and evolutionary studies of worldwide mammalian biodiversity.
***