* 9318930
* Dissertation Research:  Maya Wetlands Project:  Ecology and Subsistence in Prehispanic Belize
* SBE,BCS
* 12/01/1993,11/30/1996
* T. Patrick Culbert, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 11/30/1996
* USD 11,976.00

9318930 Culbert Under the direction of Dr. Patrick Culbert, Mr. Jeffrey Baker
will collect data for his doctoral dissertation. He will conduct
geoarchaeological research in lowland Belize. Mr. Baker wishes to reconstruct
agricultural practices of prehistoric Mayan peoples. In particular he wants to
understand cultivation techniques which were practiced in lowland areas or
"bajos" which are waterlogged for portions of the year. He will employ both
geological and ecological techniques to study the nature of bajo soils, their
chemistry and their water retention characteristics. He will study the
vegetation of a number of bajo types to understand the relationship between
soil, water and vegetation. Finally he will also conduct archaeological
excavation to determine whether fields underwent human modification and how
Mayan peoples used them. Archaeological evidence demonstrates that ancient Mayan
peoples were able to farm low-lying tropical areas and produce enough food to
support large populations. While many archaeologists believe that this was
accomplished through a system of raised fields and that landscape was
extensively modified, others disagree. Unfortunately the basic geological and
ecological data necessary to address this question does not exist. The research
which Mr. Baker will conduct should help to remedy this problem. This project is
important for several reasons. Ancient Mayan peoples thrived in regions which
today support only small populations. Prehistoric peoples had developed
agricultural techniques which, if reconstructed could have direct practical
benefit. The project will also further the development of an extremely promising
young scientist. ***