* 9318686
* Coll Res: Interaction of Saline-Formation Water, Near-      Surface Ground Water, and Large Lakes
* GEO,EAR
* 03/15/1994,02/28/1997
* Jane Davison, Central Michigan University
* Standard Grant
* L. Douglas James
* 02/28/1997
* USD 41,500.00

9318686 Matty Saline ground-water seeps have been recently found entering Lake
Ontario. Although stable isotope and geochemical analyses indicate that the
saline ground water is from regional saline formation water, the source for the
formation water is not well constrained. Geochemical and isotopic evidence
indicates that high Cl values in the water of Saginaw Bay, Lake Huron may be in
part caused by the direct discharge to the bay of saline ground water from
saline formation water from the Michigan basin. Since the source and
hydrogeology of the Saginaw Bay area is better constrained than in Lake Ontario,
Saginaw Bay is an excellent site to study the interaction of saline-formation
water, near-surface ground water, and large lakes. The objectives of this
research are to 1) document the occurrence and source of saline water in the
sediments of Saginaw Bay by geochemical and isotopic determinations; (2) relate
the occurrence of the saline water in the bay sediments to the surrounding
ground-water chemistry by comparing spatial iso- chemical trends in the pore
waters of the bay with that of the ground water; and (3) determine the effect of
the saline water on pore-water chemistry by chemical modeling. This will be
accomplished by examining geochemical and isotopic characteristics of pore water
in sediments of Saginaw Bay and in water of the streams in the major watershed
entering the bay. The data will be studied in the context of the
hydrogeochemistry of the regional as well as local ground-water systems. Results
from this study will be important in understanding the importance of direct
ground-water discharge to large lakes and the interaction of large lakes and
regional ground-water flow particularly that part of the flow that involves deep
saline formation water. ***