* 9318648
* Complex Systems in Earth Sciences:  Predictability,         Mitigation and Reduction of Natural Hazards
* GEO,EAR
* 01/01/1994,06/30/1995
* John Rundle, Santa Fe Institute
* Standard Grant
* Robin Reichlin
* 06/30/1995
* USD 11,305.00

9318646 Rundle It has been recognized by the international community that it may
be possible, through programs of systematic study, to devise means to reduce and
mitigate the occurrence of a variety of devastating natural hazards (see
appendix). One of the most promising avenues of approach is to develop the
capability to simulate these physical processes in the computer. Many of the
recent models are nonlinear in significant ways, including cellular automata-
type or fractal growth models, and can thus be analyzed in a framework familiar
to workers in complex system theory. Moreover, it is often the case that the
occurrence frequency of disaster events generated by the models follow power
laws. While recognizing the importance of this new approach, at this time earth
scientists do not generally possess the skills needed to develop or analyze
these models. Moreover, it is clear that a variety of workers in statistical
mechanics, applied mathematics, and other fields have developed significant
interest in these nontraditional problems. The development and analysis of
simulations for these problems would therefore proceed most expeditiously in an
interdisciplinary professional setting such as that provided by the Santa Fe
Institute. A workshop be held at SFI to address these issues, and to allow a
forum in which earth scientists can interact with physicists and mathematicians
developing techniques to simulate and analyze complex systems.