* 9318072
* Structure and Function of a Prokaryotic Tyrosine            Phosphoprotein
* BIO,MCB
* 05/15/1994,10/31/1998
* Merelee Atkinson, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Barbara K. Zain
* 10/31/1998
* USD 285,000.00

9318072 Allen In eukaryotes, tyrosine protein kinases occupy key positions in
signal transduction pathways that regulate cell growth, development, and
malignant transformation. Although protein phosphorylation is important in
prokaryotes, phosphorylation of tyrosine residues is rare. It was shown that
Pseudomonas solanacearum, an economically important plant pathogen, has tyrosine
protein kinase activity that phosphorylates a 90 kD membrane protein. This
protein substrate has been partially purified and kinetic experiments suggest
that it is itself a tyrosine kinase. Molecular genetic and biochemical
approaches will be used to investigate the role of this phosphoprotein in plant
pathogenesis. P. solanacearum has an array of virulence factors that contribute
to bacterial wilt disease, this include polygalacturonase production and
motility. Recent evidence suggests that tyrosine phosphorylation is involved in
the regulation of these traits. Strains that overproduce a positive regulator of
polygalacturonase production have no detectable phosphorylation of the 90 kD
protein. Preliminary results also indicate that flagellin, the flagellar
filament protein, is phosphorylated on tyrosine. Thus, the kinase activity may
also affect bacterial motility. The objectives of this research are to determine
the functions of the kinase activity and its protein substrates, and to
characterize these proteins. A combination of molecular genetic and biochemical
approaches will be used. Oligonucleotide probes derived from an amino acid
sequence of the purified tyrosine phosphoprotein will be used to clone the
cognate tpp gene from a P. solanacearum gene library. The DNA sequence of tpp
will be compared to eukaryotic tyrosine kinase genes. The hypothesis that tpp is
part of the regulatory pathway for plant-inducible genes will be tested by
phenotypic analysis of tpp and polygalacturonase regulatory mutants. Site
specific mutagenesis and biochemical methods will be used to identify and
characterize functional domains with the 90 kD phosphoprotein. %%% Pseudomonas
solanacearum causes wilt disease on a wide range of important crop plants,
including potatoes, tomatoes, bananas, pepper and eggplant. These diseases cause
severe economic losses in the Southeastern US and many developing countries.
Effective control of this pathogen requires that we understand the mechanism by
which it causes disease. The proposal addresses research on the activity of a
specific enzyme, a protein kinase, that regulates the growth of this organism,
and that also plays a major role in cancer development. ***