* 9318130
* Dynamics of Habitat Structure in Seagrass Landscapes;       Ecosystem Implications
* BIO,DEB
* 02/01/1994,01/31/1996
* Susan Bell, University of South Florida
* Standard Grant
* Richard F. Dame
* 01/31/1996
* USD 70,018.00

9318130 Bell In models developed for marine vegetated habitats which emphasize
ecosystem function, macrophytic vegetation is not generally considered to have
major direct links to higher trophic levels. Instead, plants are veiwed as
important important trophic contributors to the detrital pool. In the study
proposed here we expand the veiw of the role of plants and consider how habitat
structure provided by macrophytes, either as physical or predator refuge, or as
a site of resource accumulation, might be important to ecosystem function. %%%
This study is proposed to 1) explore the relationship of fauna known to be
trophically-linked (i.e. small resident fish and epiphytal amphipods) to plant
cover, height, and arrangement of plants across spatial scales and 2) develop a
model depicting sedimentation processes that influence seagrass patch
development and maintenance. Twenty four seagrass beds of varying size and shape
will be sampled during the Spring and Fall of 1994 and 1995 in Tampa Bay,
Florida. Seagrass patches will be characterized for physical attributes on a
landscape level (from aerial photographs), and on a sub-landscape level (i.e.
within a landscape, patch level). Regression analyses techniques will be used to
investigate relationships between the physical attributes of the seagrass beds
at both landscape and sub-landscape scales. The relationship of faunal
components and bed physical attributes will also be examined using regression
analysis techniques. In the same 24 seagrass beds, sedimentation rates will be
measured at each of the four compass headings and expansion/contraction of bed
margin recorded monthly. These combined data should allow us to determine if
sedimentation plays a major role in defining seagrass patch characteristics,
whether patch characteristics have important influence on fauna, and hence,
ecosystem function. %%% Our techniques and results should be of general interest
to ecosystem research programs where macrophytes are the dominant vegetat ion,
including freshwater and salt marshes. Given that macrophyte-dominated areas are
often those reported to provide critical habitat for higher trophic levels as
feeding/refuge/nesting sites, the role habitat structure plays in these
ecosystems may be similar to that in seagrass beds. It is anticipated that
results from our study can be used to build a predictive basis for determining
the ecosystem level implications of habitat degradation.