* 9318332
* Collaborative Research:  Control of Natural Convection Alonga Heated, Inclined Plate
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/1993,10/31/1998
* Ari Glezer, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* ASHLEY F EMERY
* 10/31/1998
* USD 169,008.00

The proposed research focuses on the active control on the origin and evolution
of the streamwise vortices in a flat plate boundary layer along an inclined
heated surface. Because these vortices play important roles in transport
phenomena near the surface, active control of their onset and evolution can
become a powerful tool for the manipulation of heat transfer and surface
deposition for free convection boundary layers of practical interest, including
cooling techniques and manufacturing of electronics chips. The proposed
experiments will be conducted in water, and the flow instabilities leading to
the formation of the streamwise vortices will be manipulated using mosaics of
individually-controlled film heaters flush-mounted on a submerged test surface.
An important feature of such manipulation is that the ensuing flow structures
are extremely repeatable in time and space, thus allowing for detailed
measurements and flow visualization studies that are phase-locked to the
excitation wave-form. Of particular interest are the flow mechanisms, associated
with the evolution of the streamwise vortices. Spanwise interactions of these
vortices appear to be a precursor to the development of a secondary instability
that is followed by rapid transition to turbulence. High-resolution measurements
of cross-stream and spanwise time-dependent temperature distributions will be
obtained using rakes of miniature cold-wire temperature sensors, and the flow
will be visualized using sensitive double-pass Schlieren system. An important
aspect of the proposed work is the measurement of global and of planform
distributions of heat flux from the test surface to the adjacent fluid. Of
particular interest is the incremental change in heat transfer between the
forced and unforced flows. At the later stages of this research, the surface
actuators will be used to control suppression or enhancement of the longitudinal
vortices.