* 9318118
* Acquisition of a Confocal Microscope for the Levine Science Resource Center
* BIO,DBI
* 07/15/1994,06/30/1996
* R.  Bruce Nicklas, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Michael K. Lamvik
* 06/30/1996
* USD 150,000.00

This proposal is for a multi-user confocal microscope and supporting
instrumentation. The core user group at Duke University include faculty in the
Department of Chemistry, Zoology, Cell Biology, Immunology, and the Section of
Cell Growth, Regulation and Cancer. In 1994, a new building, the Science
Resource Center, now being built as a multidisciplinary science facility, will
be occupied. The building will house the School of the Environment, and
components of the Schools of Engineering, Arts and Sciences, and Medicine. One
of the core facilities in that building will be an microscopic Imaging Center.
The intent for that facility, and all other shared-user technologies in the
building, is to keep the hardware and software at the leading edge of
biotechnology and to find ways to interface these technologies with advances in
other emerging areas. Also being planned for the new building are an NMR center,
X-ray crystallography and protein modeling Center, and the University's
transgenic mouse Center. Each of these Centers will be shared user operations
which will complement one another and will interface with the Microscopic
Imaging Center. These Centers will foster new developments as the chemists,
biophysicists, physicists, biochemists, biologists, and computer scientists
interact with one another in the continuing development of these technologies.
This application for a confocal microscope brings together seven faculty from
five departments as the core users. Each of us has used confocal microscopes,
either at other institutions (four of us are new faculty at Duke), or at Duke.
At present the Center has one confocal microscope that has been getting
increasingly heavier use. That microscope is in need of an upgrade, and it is no
longer, by itself, capable of supporting many of the applications that are
proposed. Therefore, this request is for partial support of an effort to upgrade
the existing microscope and to purchase a newer generation of confoc al
microscope plus support hardware and software. Our projects are quite varied.
New innovations, plus the increase in traffic of users will require a new
microscopic platform and newly available laser sources, plus they will be
facilitated by the networking capabilities that will be build into the new
building.