* 9319180
* Hydraulic Constraints on Transpiration and Stress Tolerance  of Cold Desert Shrubs
* BIO,IOS
* 02/15/1994,07/31/1998
* John Sperry, University of Utah
* Continuing Grant
* Zoe Eppley
* 07/31/1998
* USD 240,000.00

9319180 Sperry Disruption of water transport in the physical process of
cavitation in xylem conduits occurs at xylem pressures that can differ widely
between species. These cavitation pressures set unambiguous limits to maximum
drought tolerance and water transport capacity. Cavitation is also caused by
freeze-thaw cycles and sets additional limits to water transport under
conditions when freezing and thawing occurs in the xylem water. The proposed
research will evaluate the role cavitation and whole -plant hydraulic
conductance play in conferring the necessary summer drought tolerance for the
cold-desert shrub Artemesia tridentata while at the same time promoting maximum
stomatal conductance and xylem flow when water is available in spring but
freeze-thaw cycles are common. This work will extend current efforts to
characterize the integration between physically limited hydraulic parameters of
water transport and physiological-morphological responses to stress including
turgor maintenance, stomatal closure, and leaf abscission. At the same time, the
research will complement and perhaps help explain previous work which has
extensively characterized seasonal patterns in water relations, photosynthesis
and growth in this species. Genetic differentiation in hydraulic limitations to
water flow will be evaluated among the three ecologically distinct subspecies
vaseyana, wyomingensis, and tridentata. The patterns found in A. tridentata will
be compared to the herbaceous perennial A. ludoviciana to obtain further insight
into stress responses related to life history; this will also provide an
evolutionary perspective becaus e woody Artemisia probably evolved from
congeneric herbaceous ancestors. Field monitoring of soil and plant water
relations, leaf area and phenology for two-three years under differing water
regimes will be evaluated in the context of laboratory determinations of the
cavitation response to freeze-thaw cycles and water stress that form the basis
of predicting maximum possible flows without cavitation. Greenhouse/lab
experiments will allow more precise determination of responses to soil and
atmospheric drought and evaluate whether water stress is sensed in the root vs.
the leaf. The ultimate outcome will be a better understanding of the adaptations
of cold-desert shrubs to their unique seasonal climatic regime, and a critical
evaluation of how cavitation and hydraulic conductance considerations are
integrated into whole plant stress responses. *** ~ J P E J ! ! ! F J P J 4 CG
Times Symbol &amp; Arial Tms Rmn " Helv m m m h S % S % ^ / Rochelle D Ray
Rochelle D Ray