* 9319272
* Prosody in Language Comprehension and Production
* SBE,BCS
* 05/01/1994,09/30/1999
* Fernanda Ferreira, Michigan State University
* Continuing Grant
* Catherine N. Ball
* 09/30/1999
* USD 273,933.00

9319272 Ferreira ABSTRACT The purpose of this project is to explore the
architecture of the language processing system by examining how prosody is
created and used. More specifically, the goals are to: (1) elaborate a model of
prosodic production proposed recently by Ferreira (1993), which in turn will
shed light on more global models of production; (2) use this model to develop
and test hypothesis about how prosodic information might be used and integrated
with syntactic and semantic information during auditory language comprehension;
and (3) develop an online task for examining auditory language comprehension, an
auditory analogue of the moving window task. In addition, by combining research
in production and comprehension, this project will shed light on the important
question of how the language production and comprehension systems are related.
The proposed studies are divided into two sections, one on production and one on
comprehension. The production experiments employ a paradigm in which
participants view a picture or answer a question and generate a sentence in
response to the stimulus. These studies designed to explore the prosody of
spoken sentences employ a paradigm in which speakers read a sentence, memorize
it, and produce it upon receipt of a cue. These experiments will examine the
syntactic and phonological factors influencing the durational and pitch
properties of spoken sentences. The comprehension experiments will use a
technique Ferreira has recently developed called the Auditory Moving Window,
which measures processing load across a sentence. (To allow comparison of
sentence processing in the auditory and visual domains, the comprehension
studies will also be conducted using eye movement monitoring and the visual
moving window paradigms.) The listeners will hear sentences containing prosodic
cues normally produced by speakers for those sentences, either with or without
biasing lexical and contextual information. The goal of these studies is to
examine how t hese sources of information interact during auditory language
processing.