* 9319798
* Cognitive Foundations of Biological Reasoning:  Categorization &amp; Inference Among American Folk &amp; Itza Maya
* SBE,BCS
* 05/15/1994,04/30/1997
* Douglas Medin, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Jasmine Young
* 04/30/1997
* USD 289,896.00

9319798 ATRAN This research will explore how people categorize animals and
plants and reason about them. The focus is on how the structure of categories,
such as the set of taxonomic relations that hold between DEER and MAMMAL or OAK
and TREE, constrain inferences about the distribution of biological properties
among the categories. For example, when people discover that both deer and cows
have multi-chambered stomachs or hoof-and-mouth disease, to what extent do
people then predict that other animals also have multi-chambered stomachs or
hoof-and-mouth disease? More generally, to what extent does this categorical
structure constrain inferences that causally relate biological taxa to one
another, and to what extent are culturally-specific belief systems, or
"theories," able to modify that structure and hence change the nature of
biological reasoning? These interrelated issues of category formation and
induction are central to a broader understanding of conceptual development both
in everyday thinking and in science. This research will compare biological
categorization and reasoning among groups of American folk and Itza, the last
Maya native to Guatemala's rainforest. This comparison also will involve looking
into the influences of science on American folkbiology as well as the effects of
cultural expertise on Itza folkbiology. In particular, the studies will address
three questions: 1) To what extent is there a universal folkbiological taxonomy?
2) How is this taxonomy used in reasoning? 3) Where, and how, do differences in
theories and cultural belief systems affect folkbiological categorization and
reasoning? The project will build on previous fieldwork and laboratory studies,
bringing together recent theoretical and methodological innovations in
anthropology and psychology to promote an interdisciplinary cognitive science.
It will provide a way to measure levels of consensus in categorization and
reasoning among individuals within cultures, be tween cultures, and between the
folktaxonomies of different cultures and scientific taxonomies. Biological
inventories of local flora and fauna provide crucial comparative data. The work
will employ multidisciplinary techniques across cultures to analyze
theoretically the relationship between category formation and category-based
reasoning for a cognitive domain, biology, which is at the center of human
knowledge and understanding of the natural world. Although this project is
specifically designed to address issues in basic cognition, tasks involving
categorization of living kinds and reasoning about biological properties and
diseases can inform our broader understanding of environment, health, and
science education. ***