* 9319917
* Systems and device Research in All-Optical Wavelength-      Routed Switching Networks
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/1993,08/31/1996
* Kam Yin Lau, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing grant
* Deborah L. Crawford
* 08/31/1996
* USD 540,787.00

9319917 Lau We propose a novel all-optical, self-routing switching network based
on an innovative address coding scheme. The proposed work includes concerted
research efforts at the network, systems and device levels. "All-optical"
switching is accomplished by tagging the data packet with an address code
consisting of a serial combination of wavelengths, so that switching can be done
simply by sensing the wavelength without the need for first converting the high-
speed data to electronic form. Self-routing is exercised by sensing the
wavelength content of the address tag in a data packet. At each switching stage
of a multistage switching network, the switching node performs a latching
function which directs the entire content of the packet to the appropriate
output port based on a certain section of the wavelength address code, until the
final destination is reached. Under this scheme, a large number of address codes
can be accommodated and is not limited by the number of available wavelengths as
in conventional wavelength division multiplexed networks. The proposed work
consists of investigation of a suitable multiwavelength laser transmitter based
on surface emitting laser arrays, a switching node which sorts and routes
incoming optical signals to appropriate output ports based on the wavelength tag
of the input signal, optical crossbar switches which are based on switched
semiconductor amplifier arrays, and system/architectural studies of this type of
all-optical self-routing network. A small-scale demonstration network is planned
which uses the novel components described above, which serves as a testbed for
investigating systems related issues as well as ascertaining the performance of
the interacting devices and components under real traffic environments. ***