* 9319967
* Functional Interrelationships among Landscape Position,     Lithology, and Water Flow in Bisequal Soils
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/1994,12/31/1998
* Randall Schaetzl, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Bernard O. Bauer
* 12/31/1998
* USD 114,093.00

9319967 SCHAETZL Considerable attention has been given by physical geographers,
soil scientists, and other scientists to studies of the processes through which
soils have been formed. In regions that have undergone relatively recent glacial
deposition, such as large parts of the Midwestern states, analyses of soil
morphology are complicated by the need to differentiate between glacial
processes that deposited different types of materials and the more localized
processes that later altered the structure and composition of materials. A set
of soils for which these roles of these two general forces are poorly understood
are bisequal soils, having two sets of lower horizons. This project will examine
two broadly distributed bisequal soils in Michigan, evaluating how water flows
through these soils and interacts with parent materials. Water flow within the
upper two meters of loamy and sandy materials in various parts of drumlins and
moraines will be measured and analyzed. Soil properties like lithology,
mineralogy, and texture will be examined to determine whether the two different
sets of horizons are the product of the same morphological processes operating
of different parent materials. The results of this research project will provide
valuable new insights regarding the processes through which water and other
forces create and alter soils. The types of soils to be examined in this project
are similar to bisequal soils that are found in large parts of the Midwest and
in other locales. The study also will contribute additional data on stratigraphy
and lithology of soils in lower Michigan, providing a foundation for additional
research on soil morphology in recently glaciated regions. ***