* 9319687
* U.S.-New Zealand Junior Investigator Research Fellowship:   Utilizing Remote Sensing and GIS Technologies to Meet       Management Objectives for the Ross Sea Region, Antarctica
* O/D,OISE
* 09/15/1994,08/31/1996
* L. Thomas Curdts, Individual Award
* Fixed Amount Award
* W. Y. B. Chang
* 08/31/1996
* USD 38,780.00

9319687 Curdts This award will provide a research fellowship for Thomas Curdts
to spend a year at the International Center for Antarctic Information and
Research (ICAIR) located in Christchurch, New Zealand. While at ICAIR, Mr.
Curdts will be working under Dr. Steven M. Smith, the Director of the Center,
which is primarily concerned with assembling, processing and supplying research
and general information relating to Antarctica and its environs. During the past
few decades, the Ross Sea Region of Antarctica has witnessed increased
utilization by both the scientific and non-scientific communities. In order to
minimize negative impacts to the region, ICAIR is developing a management plan
for Ross Island. Integral to the design of this plan is the use of remote
sensing and geographic information systems (GIS) technologies. Specific
objectives to be addressed by Curdts are to identify and evaluate available data
for the Ross Sea region, to develop a GIS database for this area, and to conduct
preliminary GIS analyses relevant to the development of a management plan for
Ross Island. The benefits of this project extend beyond the cooperating
countries of New Zealand and the U.S. An effective management plan will assist
in coordinating the activities of all nations utilizing the Ross Island region.
A well designed digital database will help facilitate the exchange of
information concerning the Ross Sea region and perhaps may also set a precedent
for the entire Antarctic region. The travel is supported under the U.S.-New
Zealand Junior Investigator Research Fellowship activity.