* 9319461
* Three Dimensional Modeling of Dynamical Interactions With   Convective, Radiative, and Surface Fluxes Over the Tropical Pacific
* GEO,AGS
* 04/01/1994,03/31/1996
* Stephen Zebiak, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Jay S. Fein
* 03/31/1996
* USD 119,851.00

Abstract ATM-9319461 Seager, R. Zebiak, Stephen E. Columbia University Title:
Three Dimensional Modeling of Dynamical Interactions with Convective, Radiative
and Surface Fluxes Over the Tropical Pacific This project will concern the
interaction between the convective, radiative and surface fluxes over the
Pacific sector with an emphasis on the west Pacific. The PIs will use a newly
developed, efficient and accurate, global, linear primitive equation model
together with parameterizations of moist convection, radiative transfer and
boundary layer processes. The ultimate goal of the work is to improve model
representation of these processes in order to improve model simulations of the
large scale variables (especially near surface properties) necessary for
continued progress in simulation and prediction of climate variability on time
scales of months to decades. Verification of model physics will hence be based
on observations of these processes within the TOGA COARE domain and also on
their effect on simulation of the large scale circulation. The PIs are
especially interested in being able to model the observed limited scale of
convection and convective anomalies, errors in which currently create large
errors in modelled surface winds. This work will proceed through experiments
with observed SST forcing and through studies of the role of the radiative,
convection and surface fluxes in determination of the character and organization
of propagating convective disturbances. Another focus of the work will be on the
surface energy budget of the west Pacific. The PIs will aim to reconcile
estimates of the flux, and its components, derived from the atmospheric modeling
work with other estimates derived from ocean SST modeling and with the TOGA
COARE data. The various roles of convection, radiation and boundary layer
processes in determining the surface flux will be analyzed. This research is
important because it seeks to clarify proces ses important for understanding
climate variability. It is funded under the TOGA COARE program.