* 9319103
* A Formal Model of Visual Feature Integration
* SBE,BCS
* 05/15/1994,04/30/1998
* Richard Ivry, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* Jasmine Young
* 04/30/1998
* USD 199,706.00

9319103 IVRY Theories of object recognition in psychology, physiology, and even
computer science have concerned themselves with feature analysis, where features
may be line segments, colors, spatial frequencies, etc. According to these
theories, recognizing an object involves detecting the features of that object.
For example, the features round, shiny, and red might signal an apple. Recently,
however, Treisman and her colleagues have pointed out that correct feature
registration is not sufficient for veridical object recognition. When many
different objects are present, as they are in most natural scenes, observers
must not only correctly register the features, but also correctly bind the
features into separate objects. Treisman and other have shown that under
conditions of a brief exposure, observers will report "illusory conjunctions,"
or precepts in which they correctly identify the visual features, but combine
them incorrectly. For example, an individual briefly presented a red X and a
green O would perceive the X as green in some laboratory conditions on up to 30%
of the trials. In most circumstances, our visual systems combine features of
objects seemingly without error or effort, making the process of feature
integration difficult to study. By studying errors in this feature binding
process under laboratory conditions (i.e., illusory conjunctions), we can test
different theories of feature integration. Unfortunately, the study of feature
binding has been hampered for three reasons. First, most theories have been
specified in a vague or informal manner. Second, theories have not been
formulated in a format that allows a direct test between them. Finally, there
has been considerable disagreement on how to measure illusory conjunctions. Many
of the widely used methods of measuring feature binding from the occurrence of
illusory conjunctions confound feature registration with feature binding.
Preliminary research has led to the development of a mathematical model that add
resses the above three issues, as well as to the development of a new theory of
feature binding, based on probabilistic multidimensional modeling and on the
psychophysics of location perception. The 15 experiments to be performed fall
into four categories: (1) The formal theory will be tested by varying stimulus
values (e.g., color of items) systematically and seeing how they affect
parameters of the mathematical model, adjusting the model if necessary. (2)
Cognitive variables such as attention will be varied and the effect of these
variables on feature integration estimated separately. (3) Different theories of
feature binding will be compared directly. (4) The analytic method and formal
analysis will be extended to new experimental paradigms, in order to make it as
useful as possible to other investigators. ***