* 9319136
* The Effects of Heat Release on the Flow Structure of Planar Hydrogen Diffusion Flames
* ENG,CBET
* 01/15/1994,12/31/1997
* Noel Clemens, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Farley Fisher
* 12/31/1997
* USD 248,747.00

ABSTRACT -- CTS-9319136 CLEMENS The role of heat release on the structure of
turbulence and the mixing process has not been fully established. The
understanding of this phenomenon is very important to our capability of dealing
with turbulent reacting flows. This proposal presents a research plan, that if
successful, will contribute important knowledge to the field of turbulent
combustion by experimentally determining heat release effects, measured on non-
premixed Hydrogen/Air flames using a planar slot burner. The objective of the
proposed work is to document the influence of high levels of heat release under
mixing limited conditions, on the large-scale turbulent structure of planar jet
flames. The proposed effort is an extension of work done at Sandia while the PI
was a post doctoral fellow. In this study, the near field structure of
Hydrogen/Air round jet flames was investigated. Laser Induced Fluorescence (LIF)
was used to visualize the reaction zone by excitation of OH and the fuel was
marked by excitation of seeded acetone. Considerable modification of the flow
field in the reacting case was observed as compared to the non-reacting case;
turbulence appeared to be significantly laminarized and the growth rate of the
mixing layer greatly reduced; the hot reaction zone appeared to stabilize the
local turbulent fluctuations, resulting in an independence of the reacting and
turbulent regions. In order to simplify the interpretation of these experiments,
the PI has proposed a series of experiments in which a simpler geometry shear
flow (provided by a planar mixing layer) will be used to hopefully yield clearer
evidence for the modifications to the flow by high levels of heat release. A
planar jet nozzle flow facility together with flow visualization techniques
including OH and acetone PLIF and planar Mie scattering of seeded ceramic
particles will be used in this proposed investigation. Comparisons of cold and
hot flows will be made. A major goal of the study will be to compare the large-
scale structure of burning jets to the structure of their non-burning
counterparts. This research effort could lead to important contributions in the
understanding of turbulent reacting flows.