* 9319653
* Suprachiasmatic Control of Neuroendocrine Rhythms
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/1994,08/31/1996
* Eric Bittman, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Kathie L. Olsen
* 08/31/1996
* USD 49,000.00

9319653 Bittman All Multicellular organisms possess an internal clock that
insures daily rhythmicity of multiple physiological function even in an
aperiodic environment. In higher vertebrates, these endogenous daily or
circadian rhythms are driven by the suprachiasmatic nucleus of the hypothalamus.
This endogenous oscillator insures that incompatible processes occur at
different times, and that metabolic, thermoregulatory, osmoregulatory, immune
and reproductive functions and arousal are properly scheduled to meet
environmental challenges. Dr. Bittman will elucidate the role of this central
pacemaker in the timing of ovulation. Ovulation is triggered by a surge of
pituitary luteinizing hormone which results from the discharge in tot he
hypothalamic-hypophyseal portal system of gonadotropin releasing hormone, a
decapeptide synthesized in cells of the diagonal band, medial septum, preoptic
area and anterior hypothalamus. This release of gonadotropin-releasing hormone
is ultimately regulated by estrogen. Dr. Bittman will examine the function of
specific cell types within the suprachiasmatic nucleus in the regulation of the
estrous cycle by determining whether these neurons project directly to cells
elsewhere in the brain which in turn control the pituitary gland. Using state-
of-the-art neuroanatomical techniques, Dr. Bittman will then determine whether
these neurons that receive input from this hypothalamic nucleus contain estrogen
receptor or gonadotropin releasing hormone. In addition, he will establish
whether the signals from the suprachiasmatic nucleus at specific times of day
underly the appropriate timing of ovulation. The results from these studies will
help delineate the circadian regulation of neuroendocrine cells which govern
integrative processes. This research will provide basic information critical not
only to understanding how environmental factors impinge upon the nervous system
but may provide the fundamental groundwork towards developme nt of therapeutic
approaches to fertility and may have applications to contraception. ***