* 9319897
* Status, Solidarity and Non-Verbal Communications
* SBE,BCS
* 05/15/1994,04/30/1998
* Marianne LaFrance, Boston College
* Continuing Grant
* Amber L. Story
* 04/30/1998
* USD 176,892.00

9319897 LaFrance ABSTRACT The human smile is an ubiquitous yet indeterminate
facial gesture. People smile at each other when the situation is pleasurable,
but they also smile when the context is painful, tense, or even antagonistic.
Smiles appear to possess a number of meanings and seem designed to effect a
variety of social purposes, such as showing good will, affirming social
connections, conveying concession or apology, or enacting social position. This
research employs multiple methodologies to determine how the diverse meanings of
smiles are achieved, including meta-analysis, experimental studies, and content
analysis of existing verbal records. Two processes are proposed to be involved
in differentiating smiles: their physical qualities and the interaction context
in which they occur. The research will investigate particular facial features,
in addition to upward turning of the corners of the mouth area, that may
differentiate smiling expressions associated with affiliation from those
associated with appeasement. It will also investigate temporal qualities of
smiles, such as time to onset, duration, and offset, that may differentiate
smiling expressions associated with affiliation from those associated with
deference or dissension. Finally, it will determine whether the differentiation
among smiles is also a function of the degree of reciprocity of smiling between
people who are interacting with one another. Prior research on smiling has
focused primarily on its relationship to experienced emotion, neglecting the
social functions of a smile. Yet, this apparently small social gesture
contributes to and alters the nature of many social interactions. This research
will make an important contribution to our understanding of these effects and
thus to our ability to improve interpersonal communication in situations where
smiles may be misread. A prime example is the examination of gender differences
in smiling in the present research, which will test the generality of the
observation that women smile more than men as well as various explanations for
this difference, including women's higher affiliation motives or lower social
power. ***