* 9319780
* Congruence in Codeswitching and the Nature of Lexical Entries
* NONE,NONE
* 04/01/1994,09/30/1997
* Carol Myers-Scotton, University of South Carolina at Columbia
* Continuing grant
* Paul G. Chapin
* 09/30/1997
* USD 216,653.00

9319780 MYERS-SCOTTON ABSTRACT This a project to investigate the structural
constraints on intrasentential codeswitching. Specifically, the investigators
will collect and analyze intrasentential codeswitching in naturally-occurring
languages in particular language pairs, some in the United States and others in
Africa or Europe. The language pairs have been selected because apparent
differences in the structure of their lexical items will test the hypotheses
contained herein. While this study will further our knowledge about
intrasentential codeswitching, it is more important for the information it will
provide about the nature of lexical entries in some universal sense. This
information becomes available from codeswitching data because the existence of
sentences containing codeswitching seems to depend on compatibilities between
the languages involved regarding Lexical-Conceptual Structures and Predicate-
Argument Structures. The playing out of these compatibilities in codeswitching,
in turn, provides a uniquely available 'empirical window' on the viability of
key theoretical claims about the structure of language. The proposal's eight
hypotheses extend the analysis found in the Matrix Language Frame Model of
codeswitching (Myers-Scotton 1993b). Under this model, one of the languages
participating in codeswitching is more dominant (the Matrix Language) in
structuring codeswitching utterances. The less dominant language is called the
Embedded Language. The distinction between content and functional categories is
also critical in this model. While that model successfully predicts the form of
Embedded Language material in sentential frames prepared by the Matrix Language,
it is not sufficiently constrained to explain why one option rather than another
occurs and the form which Embedded Language material takes. The hypotheses in
this proposal provide necessary constraints. This research will provide evidence
for or agai nst theories about the nature of the abstract features of lexical
entries, including semantic content, and their relation to actually occurring
forms. In addition, the results may provide motivations for language production
modeling in psycholinguistics, especially in regard to the nature of lemma
entries in the mental lexicon. Finally, the project has a material objective. It
will provide a large-scale computerized data base of diverse codeswitching data.
It is expected that collecting preliminary analysis, data base entry, formal
analysis, and a presentation of the results of this study will require three
years. ***