* 9319525
* Neurohypopysial Peptides and Cognate Receptors
* BIO,IOS
* 06/15/1994,11/30/1995
* Thomas Koike, University of Arkansas Medical Sciences Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Karen Sigvardt
* 11/30/1995
* USD 50,000.00

9319525 Koike Neuropeptides act as chemical messengers in the brain and play
vital roles in the physiology and behavior of a variety of species. Hormones of
the vasopressin/oxtyocin superfamily has been shown to exist in may life forms
including, molluscs, hydra and protozoan suggesting that gene duplication
occurred in ancestors common to invertebrates and vertebrates. In vertebrates,
including mammals, these hormones play a crucial role in reproduction,
osmoregulation and cardiovascular function. Dr. Koike is interested in arginine
vasotocin (AVT) and mesotocin, two members of this peptidergic system, that are
found in domestic fowls. He has adopted the most sophisticated technology to
examine the sites and regulation of the physiological expression of vasotocin in
the brain and periphery. Dr. Koike will clone the receptor for this peptide and
then examine the regulation of the AVT gene expression. He will influence the
domestic fowl's physiology by a number of mechanisms including varying the
availability of water injecting gonadal hormones, and determine how these
changes affect the expression of the genes for AVT and its receptor. These
studies will lead to a better understanding of the physiological roles of this
family of hormones as neurotransmitters, as players in the reproductive systems
and as regulators of cardiovascular function. Moreover, the findings will allow
comparisons of the genes for AVT and its receptor in domestic fowl with
homologous genes of other vertebrate classes and thus, will provide basic
knowledge on the manner in which members of this hormone family and their
functions have evolved. Finally, understanding the normal physiology of an
economically and nutritionally important species will impact on the poultry
industry which provides high quality protein at economical prices. ***