* 9319630
* Biomechanics of Vertebrate Hair Cells:  Experimental and    Computational Analysis
* BIO,IOS
* 06/15/1994,05/31/1997
* J. Wallace Grant, Ohio University
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Platt
* 05/31/1997
* USD 189,025.00

Hair cells are a class of mechanosensory receptor cells in all vertebrates,
which are used to detect sound, head movement, vibration, and gravity. The first
step in the process converting the mechanical stimulus to a nerve signal is the
deflection of the microscopic bundle, called a ciliary bundle, that is a tuft of
hairlike processes on the top of the cell. This project is a collaborative
bioengineering effort between a neurobiologist and a bioengineer, using a novel
methodology to explore the micromechanics of these bundles. Microscopic
anatomical techniques are used to quantify the detailed structures of the
ciliary bundles, and these data will be used in a computational model
incorporating the contribution of different structural elements to bundle
mechanics, and to predict the performance of bundles having different shapes and
sizes. A novel fiber-optics system technology is being developed to measure
bundle stiffness by direct experiments on an isolated preparation of tissue, to
test the model predictions. These studies will provide important fundamental and
novel information on mechanosensory mechanisms at the subcellular level, with
impact on auditory and other mechanosensory systems, and the technology
developed may have important applications in micromechanics in bioengineering
and biomedical applications, and in industry.