* 9319106
* Randomization and Derandomization
* CSE,CCF
* 08/15/1994,07/31/1997
* Howard Karloff, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Yechezkel Zalcstein
* 07/31/1997
* USD 162,653.00

This project studies randomized algorithms and derandomization techniques;
specifically, randomized algorithms for on-line problems, randomized algorithms
for graph connectivity questions, techniques for ``derandomizing'' (making
deterministic) algorithms for on-line and connectivity problems, and general
techniques for derandomizing large classes of randomized algorithms. An on-line
problem is one in which the input is revealed to the algorithm only one piece at
a time, and the algorithm is required to respond without knowledge of the
future. An example is the problem of paging in a computer system: the operating
system does not know which pages will be requested in the future, and therefore
does not know which pages put in fast memory and which to leave in slow memory.
Recent research has shown that randomized algorithms can be dramatically better
than deterministic algorithms for some on-line motion planning, scheduling, and
graph coloring. The (edge) connectivity of a connected graph is the minimum
number of edges one has to remove to disconnect the graph. Determining the
connectivity of a graph is an important problem in the area of network
reliability. Recent advances have provided the key to faster algorithms to
determine the edge connectivity of a graph. But the new algorithms are not
likely to be the fastest possible algorithms. This research builds faster
connectivity algorithms, randomized if necessary, deterministic if possible.
Much research over the past few years has dealt with derandomizing randomized
algorithms. This work continues this effort in the hope of derandomizing
algorithms for certain on-line and connectivity problems, and also providing new
general techniques for derandomizing randomized algorithms.