* 9319234
* Single Crystal Adsorption Microcalorimetry
* MPS,CHE
* 12/01/1993,05/31/1997
* Charles Campbell, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Steven Bernasek
* 05/31/1997
* USD 300,000.00

9319234 Campbell Accurate thermodynamic information about adsorption processes
is essential to developing a mechanistic understanding of surface reactions.
This information is not available, for the most part, for adsorption of reactive
molecular species on well characterized solid surfaces. This research project,
supported in the Analytical and Suface Chemistry Program, is designed to obtain
this sort of information for a number of catalytically important systems. This
information will be obtained by careful microcalorimetry measurements on well
characterized thin metal and metal oxide single crystal specimens under ultra
high vacuum conditions. The work will emphasize systems which can not be studied
by more traditional methods such as thermal desorption spectroscopy. Detailed
information about adsorption bond strengths, and the effect of surface structure
and composition on these thermodynamic properties will be obtained. %%% A basic
understanding of the strength of bonding between an adsorbed molecule and a
catalytic surface is needed in order to develop and probe reaction mechanisms
for these technologically important processes. This research project is designed
to develop and apply a technique for the direct measurement of this adsorption
strength on well characterized catalytic surfaces. The thermodynamic information
obtained will be very useful for evaluating possible surface reaction mechanisms
and developing a basic understanding of catalytically important processes. ***