* 9319433
* RUI:  The Modulatory Role of pH in Hippocampal Neuron       Metabolic Responses to Challenge
* BIO,IOS
* 07/01/1994,06/30/1998
* Kathleen Susman, Vassar College
* Standard Grant
* None
* 06/30/1998
* USD 140,595.00

9319433 Susman Acid-base balance, or pH homeostasis, is crucial for the proper
function of many organs within the body, including the brain. However, despite
the general agreement that pH homeostasis is crucial for brain function, little
is known about the impact of changes in pH on nerve cell (neuron) functioning.
It was only recently that scientists recognized that changes in brain pH play a
role in neuron signalling. Neurotransmitters, released from neurons in response
to an electrical signal, influence brain pH. Further, brain pH influences the
response of neurons to neurotransmitters. These findings indicate that changes
in pH modulate neuron electrical functioning. It is well-known in other systems
that pH changes affect many cellular processes, including energy and protein
metabolism. Despite indications that pH affects neuronal function, little is
known about the role of pH changes in metabolism of neurons or of how pH is
regulated in neurons. Current research explores the relationships among pH,
energy metabolism and protein metabolism in slices from the region of the brain
implicated in learning and memory, the hippocampus. We assess the impact of
brief changes in pH on neuronal metabolic responses to neurotransmitter
stimulation and to energy challenges. Results from this study will provide
important information about the role of changes in brain pH in several important
aspects of neuronal function, particularly protein and energy metabolism, and
will provide new information about pH regulation in the mammalian brain. ***