* 9319556
* Detecting Deception:  Sex Differences, Social Motives, and  Untapped Knowledge
* SBE,BCS
* 05/01/1994,04/30/1998
* Bella DePaulo, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Amber L. Story
* 04/30/1998
* USD 194,000.00

9319556 De Paulo ABSTRACT Several new motivational and cognitive explanations
for people's inaccuracy at detecting deception are described, and tests of those
explanations are proposed. A basic assumption guiding the research is that
people are better at detecting deception than previous research suggests, and an
accommodation motive is proposed to explain the less than optimal rates of
detection. Specifically, it is hypothesized that people (women especially) read
other people in the ways they think those people want to be read. The research
includes laboratory and field studies that investigate whether accommodation
really is the relevant motive; whether in reading others as they want to be
read, people might be pleasing themselves as well as others, and whether people
might be actively avoiding information that could help them determine when
others are lying. These studies include manipulations of interpersonal contexts
which may moderate accommodation, including the threat of being exploited,
subordinate power positions, and the possibility of negative evaluations of
self. The nature of the perceivers' personal relationships with others is also
examined as a predictor of sensitivity to deceit. It is also hypothesized that
people's success at detecting deception can be improved by feedback about the
accuracy of their deceptiveness judgments and by manipulations that are
motivationally rich but informationally vacuous. The research is important
because it offers (a) a new answer to the question of why people are sometimes
so inept at detecting deception, and (b) new promise for improving lie detection
skill. The traditional answer to the question of why people are unskilled lie
detectors is that they do not know which cues to look for. This may in fact be
part of the answer. But another important part may be that people are sometimes
motivated to overlook deception rather than detect it. This research will
determine whether detection accuracy improves when people are appropriately
motivated to detect deception. It will also determine whether people have
implicit knowledge about deception that they ordinarily do not even realize they
have. The studies investigating procedures for helping people to make use of
their implicit knowledge hold promise for developing cost-efficient and time-
efficient methods of improving people's lie-detection skills. ***