* 9319641
* Theoretical Nuclear Physics
* MPS,PHY
* 07/01/1994,06/30/1998
* Leonard Kisslinger, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Continuing Grant
* Virginia R. Brown
* 06/30/1998
* USD 382,000.00

9319641 Kisslinger Research in theoretical medium energy nuclear physics in the
following areas: (1) studies of perturbative and nonperturbative QCD for the
quark/gluon structure of hadrons and nuclei by QCD sum rule methods and by
light-cone Bethe-Salpeter models; and (2) the development of relativistic
Hamiltonian dynamics for nuclear physics and for quark models of hadrons. In
(1), the method of QCD sum rules will be used for the determination of hadronic
properties. For the nucleon, studies will include the axial coupling constant,
the neutron-proton mass difference and the parity-violating nuclear interaction.
Weak hyperon decays will be calculated. For heavy-light mesons vector-
pseudoscalar mass differences and leptonic decay constants are being determined
including both perturbative and nonperturbative QCD. Extensions of the QCD sum
rule method will be studied using nonlocal condensates for quark distributions.
The transition from nonperturbative to perturbative QCD will be studied in
light-cone Bethe-Salpeter models of pion and nucleon elastic form factors.
Studies of quark cluster structure of nuclei, and properties of hadrons in
nuclear matter will also be carried out. In (2), a major study of nucleon
Compton scattering, recently completed, will be extended to other areas.
Extensive calculations of nucleon electroexcitation using light-front particle
dynamics will proceed. Earlier treatments of deuteron electromagnetic processes
will be extended to different kinematic regimes, including quasi-elastic
electrodisintegration and photodisintegration. A new study of nucleon Compton
scattering will proceed. ***