* 9319933
* Neuroethology of Action Syntax
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/1994,07/31/1997
* Kent Berridge, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Emmeline Edwards
* 07/31/1997
* USD 226,120.00

9319933 Berridge In this project Dr. Kent Berridge will study how a specific
circuit within the brain integrates behavior into coordinated sequences of
movement. This part of the brain, the striatum, is a "high-level modulator" of
action in a wide range of mammals. In humans, it may control the sequencing of
overt movements, words and thoughts. Dr. Berridge will study the striatum in
rodents, where it appears to coordinate the sequencing of instinctive grooming
movements. Previous indirect evidence suggested that the striatum allocates
control among various lower-level action generating systems. Presumably, some of
these action systems express programmed movements, while others may use sensory
input to guide the form of movements. In the work proposed here, Dr. Berridge's
group will first map the specific areas of the striatum controlling particular
functions. Then they will use deactivation techniques and tests of sensorimotor
thresholds to determine if the contribution of the striatum to the sequencing of
movement does indeed depend upon modulation of sensory processing. These results
will provide a better understanding of how the brain produces complex behavioral
sequences. It may also provide insights into the nature of the processes that
are disturbed in human striatal syndromes characterized by abnormal sequences of
movement or thought. ***