* 9319755
* RUI:  Differentiation of AVP Structures and Behaviors:      Impact of Perinatal Hormones
* BIO,IOS
* 06/01/1994,05/31/1995
* John Axelson, College of the Holy Cross
* Standard Grant
* Kathie L. Olsen
* 05/31/1995
* USD 38,420.00

9319755 Axelson Vasopressin is a neuropeptide that function as a chemical
messenger in the brain. It has been shown to be involved in regulating a number
of behaviors, including aggression, reproduction, communication and learning and
memory. For example, social recognition memory, or the ability to recognize
familiar animals, is thought to be mediated by vasopressin in the lateral septum
region of the limbic system. Interestingly, social recognition memory is
sexually dimorphic. Females can maintain the ability to recognize familiar
members of the species significantly longer than males. Moreover, the
vasopressin system in the limbichypothalamic system is also sexually dimorphic.
Dr. Axelson is interested in this structure-function relationship. He will tease
apart this association with the use of the gonadal steroids at different times
during perinatal development. By combining biochemical, neuroanatomical and
behavioral techniques, Dr. Axelson and his students will extend what is known
about the role of androgen and estrogen in determining the development of
functional sex differences by clarifying hormonal mechanisms underlying cellular
changes in vasopressin and correlating these changes with altered expression of
a sexually dimorphic vasopressin dependent behavior. Moreover, this project will
provide resources and research opportunities for a number of excellent
undergraduate students and introduce them to the field of hormonal control and
development and possible influence their decision to become future researchers.
***