* 9319073
* RUI: Collaborative Research-Nonlinear Demographic Dynamics: Mathematical Models, Biological Experiments, Data Analyses
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/1993,02/28/1997
* Robert Desharnais, California State L A University Auxiliary Services Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Michael Steuerwalt
* 02/28/1997
* USD 157,264.00

9319073 Desharnais The investigator and his colleagues conduct an
interdisciplinary research program to test nonlinear population theory: they
construct and analyze mathematical models, design and implement biological
experiments, develop and apply statistical techniques for the analysis of data.
For the biological experiments an organism is used that is easy to culture, has
a short generation time (i.e. yields long time series data) and allows an
accurate census of animal numbers: flour beetles of the genus Tribolium. In the
first part of the study the objectives are model identification and parameter
estimation. In the second part, the concern is to document transitions in the
qualitative behavior of the demographic dynamics. Rates of reproduction and
adult mortality are manipulated in order to cross boundaries in parameter space
from stable equilibria, to periodic cycles, to chaos. In phase three the
objectives are to test hypotheses concerning the existence of these unusual
demographic dynamics and develop methods for identifying these phenomena in
experimental data. A major contribution of this project is an unequivocal
example of experimentally manipulated transitions between qualitatively
different dynamical behaviors of a biological population as predicted by a
mathematical model. In the last ten years or so, the recognition that simple
equations can generate complex dynamics has led to an outpouring of fascinating
theoretical possibilities for the explanation of population time series data.
Understanding the observed fluctuations in animal population numbers is a
central question in population biology; it has far-reaching applications in
areas ranging from food production and pest control, to the management of
renewable resources, to the conservation of species diversity. The hypothesis
that fluctuations are the result of nonlinear dynamic forces has proved to be
elusive to test due to the difficulties of gathering adequate ecological da ta,
of experimentally manipulating ecological systems, and of evaluating complex
mathematical models with ecological data. In this research project the
investigators' approach to testing nonlinear population theory is to connect
mathematical models rigorously with experimental biological data by means of
newly developed statistical methods for nonlinear time series. The project is
unique in its interdisciplinary approach because it involves both theory and
experimentation and utilizes the talents of the biologist, statistician, and
mathematician. It is unusual in the field of population biology to have an
interdisciplinary effort in which investigators from all of these disciplines
are involved in all aspects of the project, from experimental design and
implementation, through theoretical modeling and analysis, to statistical
testing and verification. The ultimate goal is to demonstrate the usefulness and
importance of nonlinear mathematics in gaining a rigorous understanding of the
dynamics of animal populations and in particular of fluctuations in population
numbers, be these fluctations regular or "chaotic."