* 9319702
* Role of Glial Cells in Spinal Cord Regeneration
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/1994,08/31/1998
* Michael Selzer, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Marc D. Servetnick
* 08/31/1998
* USD 265,793.00

This proposal is aimed at determining whether glial cells in lamprey spinal cord
revert to an earlier developmental type in response to injury. In most
vertebrates, the main type of glial cell, the astrocyte, is filled with bundles
of filaments composed of a protein called glial fibrillary acidic protein
(GFAP). However, in animals, such as the sea lamprey, that show regeneration in
the central nervous system, the glial filaments are composed of keratins,
similar to the protein that makes skin tough, and are interconnected by a
network of "spot weld" mechanical contacts called "desmosomes". Our laboratory
is determining the reasons for this correlation. In the lamprey, three different
keratin subunits combine in different proportions to form filaments in glial
cells of brain and spinal cord. Near a spinal cord transection, the glial
filaments become like those found in the brain. Since the brain develops later
than the spinal cord, this may represent a developmentally more primitive glial
cell. The goal of the present proposal is to determine whether this change in
keratin composition truly represents a reversion to an earlier embryonic form
and whether this comes about by a change in the relative rates of synthesis of
the three keratin subunits. We will clone and sequence the gene for each of the
three subunits and thus generate molecular probes with which to determine how
actively each subunit is made. In situ hybridization will be used on brains and
spinal cords from animals of different ages, in order to determine how the mix
of keratin subunits expressed by glial cells changes during development. Then we
will compare this pattern of change with the pattern seen in glial cells at the
site of a spinal cord cut. If there is evidence from the composition of keratin
filaments for a reversion of glial cells to an earlier developmental form,
future work in the laboratory will be targeted toward discovering the molecules
on the surface of the Glial cells that may be responsible for guiding nerve
fibers during their regeneration and presumably also their early development.