* 9319540
* Genetic Analysis of the Beta1-Subunit of Voltage Dependent  Calcium Channels
* BIO,IOS
* 07/15/1994,06/30/1997
* Ronald Gregg, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Raymon Glantz
* 06/30/1997
* USD 259,895.00

Calcium channels control the movement of calcium ions into neuronal cells. The
amount of calcium entering a given cell is critical in determining the function
of that particular cell, and how it responds to input from other cells. There
are a large number of different calcium channels that have specific functions
and are present in different parts of the brain. Furthermore, each calcium
channel is a complex of several different proteins, all of which are important
in determining the function of any particular channel. New strategies are
required to dissect the role of specific calcium channels in brain function.
This project is designed to investigate the role of one of these proteins in
neuronal cell function, using a novel approach. A mouse model that lacks the
protein of interest is being developed. This animal model will be used to
determine the effect of the absence of one particular protein on channel
function, both in the whole animal and in isolated cells. These studies will
provide valuable insight into the role that this particular gene plays on the
function of some neuronal calcium channels. These studies also will provide
information regarding the feasibility of using this approach for the study of
other calcium channel proteins in the future.