* 9319885
* Ion Implantation into SiC and Ge x Si 1-x
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/1994,02/28/1998
* Mulpuri Rao, George Mason University
* Continuing grant
* Rajinder P. Khosla
* 02/28/1998
* USD 210,000.00

9319885 Rao Al, B, N, and P ion implantation will be performed in both bulk
crystals and epitaxial layers of 6h({SYMBOL 97 \f "Symbol"})-SiC and 3C({SYMBOL
98 \f "Symbol"})-SiC. For each ion, variable energy and variable dose implants
will be performed. By analyzing the implant secondary ion mass spectrometry
(SIMS) depth profiles in the as-implanted material, the first four moments of
the implant depth distribution will be determined at various ion energies. Using
these experimentally determined moments, the implant profile will be
reconstructed using Pearson-IV distribution and compared with the actual SIMS
profiles. Following annealing the redistribution of the implant will be checked
by SIMS measurements and then the material will be thoroughly characterized. To
obtain high resistance regions required for interdevice isolation, 200 keV O+
compensation implants of various doses, accompanied by isochronal anneals will
be tried in both n- and p- SiC of various conductivities. Using the optimum
implantation/annealing conditions developed in this work, high-temperature/high-
power p-n junction rectifiers, blue LEDs, and JFETs will be made SiC. B and P
ion implantations will also be performed into GexSi1-x alloy layers grown on
(100) Si for x values in the range 0.1 to 0.4. The implanted material will be
annealed in a halogen lamp RTA station and then characterized by using various
techniques as mentioned above for SiC. The proposed work will be performed in
collaboration with the scientist at Naval Research Laboratory, Oak Ridge
National Laboratory, National Institute of Standards and Technology and General
Electric Research Center (Schnectady). ***