* 9319602
* Mechanisms and Integration of Signal Pathways: A Role       for Calpains?
* NONE,NONE
* 03/15/1994,08/31/1997
* Dorothy Croall, University of Maine
* Continuing grant
* Barbara K. Zain
* 08/31/1997
* USD 300,000.00

9319602 Croall Cells receive environmental signals which determine their
development, growth and differentiation. How external signals transmit
information to the nucleus to regulate these processes is a fundamental question
of cell biology. The long range goal of this research is to understand the
biochemical mechanisms that mediate cellular responses to these signals. This
project focuses on the two calcium-dependent proteolytic enzymes, micro- and
milli- calpain (EC 3.4.22.17), and a protein inhibitor that specifically
inhibits them, calpastatin. These enzymes may play a direct role in calcium-
linked signal pathways and also may mediate integration (cross-talk) between
signalling pathways. The proteins susceptible to calpain represent each phase of
signal transduction including receptors, kinases, phosphatases and transcription
factors. It is not known whether these signalling components share common
features that are recognized by calpain. These studies will characterize the
substrate recognition determinants for calpains by 1) identifying the
calpastatin binding site within calpain; 2) testing the hypothesis that either
calmodulin-binding domains, PEST- regions, or both, mediate substrate
recognition; and 3) analyzing the amino acid sequences surrounding calpain-
cleavage sites within potentially, physiologically significant protein targets.
Results of these studies will provide new approaches for experimental
manipulation of calcium-linked signal pathways. Another objective is to discover
how calcium regulates calpain activity. It is hypothesized that the regulation
of calpain by calcium is analogous to calmodulin regulation of its target
enzymes. A first step toward testing this hypothesis will be to examine the
effects of calmodulin antagonists on calpain. Further tests of the hypothesis
are envisioned, but are beyond the scope of this project. The results of these
experiments should provide important insights towards a general understanding of
how calcium regulates the functions of the proteins and enzymes that can bind
calcium ion directly. %%% Cells receive environmental signals which determine
their development, growth and differentiation. How external signals transmit
information to the cell nucleus to regulate these processes is a fundamental
question of cell biology. One major internal messenger in signaling is calcium.
Intracellular calcium levels have been found to go up in response to a variety
of signals in many types of cells, but the mechanisms by which calcium acts in
various signaling pathways are not yet understood despite much research. This
project focuses on two calcium-dependent enzymes that break down specific
proteins, and an inhibitor that specifically inhibits them. These enzymes may
play direct roles in calcium-linked signal pathways and also may mediate cross-
talk between different signalling pathways. A primary goal of this research is
to characterize the mechanisms by which the calcium- dependent enzymes recognize
and act on other proteins in the signaling pathways. The results will be an
important contribution to our understanding of the role of calcium in cellular
signal transduction mechanisms.***