* 9319833
* U.S.-Mexico:  Sustainable Development for the Rio Grande/Rio Bravo Basin; June 27-29, 1994, The Woodlands, Texas
* O/D,OISE
* 06/15/1994,02/28/1995
* Jurgen Schmandt, Houston Advanced Research Center
* Standard Grant
* Harold Stolberg
* 02/28/1995
* USD 25,404.00

9319833 Schmandt This U.S.-Mexico award will support a workshop on sustainable
development for the Rio Grande/Rio Bravo basin, organized by Dr. Jurgen
Schmandt, director of the Center for Global Studies, Houston Advanced Research
Center and Professor Salvador Contreras, of the Universidad Autonoma de Nuevo
Leon. The workshop will help to implement a sustainable development initiative
for the Rio Grande/Rio Bravo Basin (SDI). The SDI project involves five U.S. and
Mexican basin institutions seeking to encourage improved management of the
region's water resources and development options by establishing a network of
regional groups responsible for water management and economic development. The
objective of the workshop is to develop a detailed plan of action for
implementing the findings and recommendations resulting from previous work of
the participants. The planned document should serve as the foundation for the
future establishment of a coordinated research and policy development program
for the basin. A key problem in the region is the frequency of drought and other
stressful water-related events. With the worsening depletion of ground water,
pollution from mining activity, transfers of water rights from irrigation to
municipalities and accelerating industrial development, water problems are
likely to become more severe. A basin wide community-based approach to these
challenges is vital for the creation of sustainable responses to growth and
change. The SDI project aims to provide a long- lasting agenda for this
approach. ***