* 9319835
* The Commons: Institutions, Heterogeneities, Time            Dependencies, and Local/Global Nesting
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/1994,12/31/1998
* Roy Gardner, Indiana University
* Continuing Grant
* Frank P. Scioli  Jr.
* 12/31/1998
* USD 306,163.00

9319835 Ostrom Common Pool Resources (CPRs) have been the focus of extensive
research in the social sciences. In particular, there has been an ever-growing
policy debate regarding the ability of diverse institutions to cope with the
allocation issues that surround CPRs. Individuals jointly using a CPR are
assumed to face a social dilemma - - often called the tragedy of the commons - -
in which individually rational resource users ignore the external harm they
impose on other users, leading to outcomes that are not rational from the
perspective of the group. Using a theoretical and empirical approach with
foundations in game theory, field studies, and experimental methods, the
authors' previous research addressed numerous questions related to the
allocation issues that surround CPRs. The current investigation extends this
previous work by examining behavioral regularities in more complex (more
realistic) laboratory and field environments. In particular, the proposed
research begins the process of examining behavior in environments with the
following attributes: time dependencies; multiple equilibria; heterogeneities;
and, local/global nesting. Each of these attributes will be investigated with a
specific focus on how the institutional setting interacts with individual and
group behavior. In the laboratory, time-dependent settings will be investigated
in which subjects' current decisions have significant consequences on the
characteristics of the decision setting they face in future plays of the game.
Settings will be investigated where subjects make decisions facing exogenously
imposed "rules of the game: and settings where subjects have flexibility in
choosing the rules. A principle focus will be the potential conflict that arises
due to heterogeneities in input endowments, costs, technology, and information.
In the field, the focus will also address issues of time dependency and
appropriator heterogeneity in relation to variations in physical a nd
institutional conditions. The filed research will focus principally on forestry
resources. As part of prior NSF funding, the authors developed and pretested a
series of data collection instruments that can be used to record systematic data
about forests and forest institutions on a repeated basis over time. This
current project is crucial for extensive scientific analyses of this evolving
database. ***