* 9319949
* International Travel Grant for Participants in PSE '94      (Kyongju, Korea) and ADCHEM '94 (Kyoto, Japan)
* ENG,CBET
* 10/01/1993,09/30/1994
* Thomas Edgar, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Edgar A. O'Rear
* 09/30/1994
* USD 22,000.00

9319949 University of Texas-Austin Thomas F. Edgar ABSTRACT The purpose of this
award is to help support travel costs and registration fees of academic
participants from the United States at two international conferences on control
and computer-aided process design, modeling, and manufacturing. These meetings
are ADCHEM '94 (Kyoto, Japan) and PSE '94 (Kyongju, Korea) to be held on
successive weeks at the end of May and beginning of June in 1994. Twenty four U.
S. academic program participants will receive a minimum allocation of $500, with
travel support also going to other U.S. faculty and, particularly, young
faculty. A maximum of 40 academic researchers will receive assistance with
support increasing proportionately if fewer letters of application are submitted
to Professor Thomas Edgar at the University of Texas. Advertisements are to
announce the availability of travel grants after both conference programs are
finalized. Process control in the chemical industry helps to ensure consistent
product quality and to reduce production costs so that this sector of American
industry and others which depend on the chemical industry may be more
economically competitive. ` IBMDOS COM' ` AUTOEXECBAK s" Ã• FLW K PSFONTS K !
89DECS PRE .N T" AUTOEXECBAT i J BURKA PRE dP #zs SAVERS j " ICONS j " LM Y
9319949 University of Texas-Austin Thomas F. Edgar ABSTRACT The purpose of this
award is to help sup port travel costs / 1 ; = 1 ! ! ! F 1 1 ( Times New Roman
Symbol &amp; Arial Apple LaserWriter II NT LPT3: pscript Apple LaserWriter II NT
U D o d , X Z e Apple LaserWriter II NT U D o d , X Z e " h , , 1 Nichelle
Coward Nichelle Coward