* 9319002
* Differential Seed Fitness in a Gynodioecious Plant: An      Experimental Evaluation of Mechanisms
* BIO,DEB
* 04/15/1994,09/30/1999
* Lynda Delph, Indiana University
* Continuing Grant
* Mark Courtney
* 09/30/1999
* USD 236,000.00

9319002 Delph This research addresses the genetic mechanisms that may be
responsible for variation in the ability of offspring to survive, for the alpine
tundra plant, Silene acaulis. Silene acaulis has a mating system that is termed
"gynodioecy", in which there are two types of individuals, females and
hermaphrodites. This contrasts with the majority of flowering plant species, in
which only hermaphrodites occur. It has been reported that offspring from the
female morph are nine times more likely to survive the seedling establishment
phase than are offspring whose seed-parents are hermaphrodites. This is in spite
of the fact that the seeds from the females are smaller and contain fewer
nutrients than those from hermaphrodites. This suggests that genetic mechanisms
are involved. Three genetically based hypotheses to explain the higher quality
of seeds from females will be tested using field and laboratory experiments. The
work funded by this grant will provide insight into (1) how genes that affect
more than one trait in an organism are selected for, (2) how matings between
related individuals affect offspring fitness,and (3) how competition among
pollen grains that differ in their genetic constitution can affect offspring
fitness. Furthermore, the genetic basis of sex determination will be
investigated, in that the number of cytoplasmic types conferring male-sterility
will be determined. Plant species with different mating systems vary in their
ability to persist in natural populations, and this work promote understanding
of the mechanisms responsible for this difference.