* 9319709
* SGER:  Social Psychological Reactions of Survivors of 1993  Flooding in Midwest
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/1993,08/31/1995
* John Harvey, University of Iowa
* Standard Grant
* Jasmine Young
* 08/31/1995
* USD 50,000.00

WPC&gt; 2 B P Z Courier 10cpi #| x x 6 X @ 8 ; X @ HP LaserJet Series II
HPLASEII.PRS x @ , t 0 )|X @ 2 2 B V P Z #| x Courier 10cpi 2 x x x , x @ 8 ; X
@ HP LaserJet Series II HPLASER2.PRS x @ , t 0 vX @ 2 2 F ` &lt; 9319709 Harvey
&amp; Abstract This research will investigate reactions of survivors in the
Midwest to the floods in the summer of 1993. Respondents will be solicited via
advertisements in newspapers and posted in community meeting places and contact
with local agencies such as the Red Cross and mental health services. Responses
will be gathered via telphone and mail surveys, interviews, written narratives
about their losses, and diary record keeping from approximately 200 280 people
living in Iowa, Illinois, Missouri, and Wisconsin. The subjects will reflect
diversity in age, gender, race, socio economic status, urban rural home
location, and occupation and who have experiences different kinds of loss as a
result of the flooding. Subjects will include farmers, small business owners,
non farmer/non business persons who were forced out of their homes by the
flooding. A baseline comparison group will be people who lived in the region
during the floods but who did not experience the loss of substantial physical
property, jobs or income. During the next year, archival data will be gathered
to assess the possible relationshops between people's experience of the flooding
and the occurrences of events such as divorce, bankruptcy, and mental health
visits.