* 9319118
* Dissertation Research:  Paleolithic Mobility, Movement,     and Range:  A Lithic Perspective
* SBE,BCS
* 11/01/1993,10/31/1995
* James Stoltman, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 10/31/1995
* USD 11,150.00

9319118 Stoltman Under the direction of Dr. James Stoltman, Mr. Jeffrey Shokler
will collect data for his doctoral dissertation. He will focus on lithic
materials - stone tools - excavated from a large number of sites in the
Estremadura region of Portugal and use both macroscopic examination and chemical
sourcing to determine the source of raw material origin. To accomplish this he
will continue his ongoing surveys of flint source areas which are abundant in
the region. Preliminary work suggests that, although in the same general region,
different sources are distinct enough to allow attribution of tools recovered in
archaeological sites material to source of geological origin. With such data Mr.
Shokler should then be able to address a number of anthropologically significant
questions which concern how prehistoric hunters and gatherers moved over the
landscape and how they related to each other. He will examine how observed
patterns changed over the course of the last ca. 40,000 years and how a
developing lithic production technology affected raw material selection. About
40,000 years ago cultural traits such as art and religion first appeared in
Europe. Over this part of the last Ice Age archaeologists can trace their
intensification and further development. What is harder to discern however is
the underlying social context in which these traits developed and Mr. Shokler's
research is directed towards this goal. Based on evidence in Southern France and
Northern Spain, it has been postulated that population increased over time and
that groups adapted a yearly cycle which involved dispersal into smaller units
and then aggregation into larger multiband groups. Aggregation requires social
mechanisms which allow peaceful and organized interaction and this need served
as incentive for change. Lithics provide a window which will allow Mr. Shokler
to examine such questions. This research is important for several reasons. In
recent years much archaeological data has been collected in Portugal with NSF
support. Relatively little analysis has been done and the results of Mr.
Shokler's research will be of interest to many archaeologists. The work examines
the mechanisms by which modern cultural traits develop and will support the
training of a promising young scientist. ***