* 9319084
* Insulating and Semi-Metallic Quasiperiodic and              Periodic Alloys of Metals
* MPS,DMR
* 02/15/1994,01/31/1998
* Joseph Poon, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Continuing Grant
* H. Hollis Wickman
* 01/31/1998
* USD 240,000.00

9319084 Poon It is proposed to study the electronic properties of a new class of
metallic alloys that exhibits non-metallic behavior ranging from that of a
semimetal to semiconductor to insulator. Chemically designed icosahedral and
decagonal quasicrystalline alloys, as well as crystalline alloys of high
structural quality and thermal stability, will be synthesized and measured in
order to evaluate the effects of quasiperiodicity and strength of atomic
potential on the electronic and optical properties. Experiments to be performed
include magneto-transport, heat capacity, thermopower, optical conductivity,
NMR, x-ray spectroscopy, and neutron scattering. Several of these studies will
be performed jointly with other groups. Other goals of the study will be to
understand the bandgap and nature of localized and itinerant states in these
novel metallic alloys, as well as to explore possible new electronic and
magnetic phenomena in these materials. %%% The electronic alloys to be studied
are new and unusual in the sense that they are semiconductors and insulators
composed entirely of elemental metals, in contrast to the traditionally studied
covalent or ionic non-metals such as silicon and gallium arsenide. Some of these
materials have structures not describable by text- book crystallography; the
atoms in these solids order in a "quasi- periodic fashion, hence the name quasi-
crystal. Because of their quasi-crystallinity, a number of novel physical
properties have been predicted and these will be investigated in this proposal.
Current commercial applications of quasicrystalline materials are where
materials are required which have low sticking coefficients, have a high thermal
stability and have low surface sticking coefficients. ***