* 9319947
* Workshop on the Development of Remote Sensing and In situ   Seawater Temperature Measurement Capabilities:  Florida,    January 1994
* O/D,OISE
* 01/15/1994,12/31/1996
* Frank Muller-Karger, University of South Florida
* Standard Grant
* Beverly Diaz
* 12/31/1996
* USD 152,015.00

9319947 Ogden This Americas award will support a group of approximately 25 U.S.
and Caribbean scientists representing 19 regional marine laboratories, to
participate in a workshop organized by Professor John Ogden of the University of
South Florida and collaborators. The workshop, which will take place in Keys
Marine Laboratories, Florida, will consider the application of the region-wide
ecosystem and physical time series measurements being made at present, to remote
sensing of sea surface temperature and ocean color. This project builds on the
Caribbean Coastal Marine Productivity (CARICOMP) program, a network of marine
laboratories in the Western Tropical Atlantic region, developed under the
support of UNESCO and NSF and currently supported by the MacArthur Foundation.
CARICOMP monitors the state of coastal oceans in reef, mangrove and seagrass
ecosystems. The present program will promote the development of regional ground
truth measurements for current and future remote sensing capabilities in the
U.S. and will develop potential collaborators and users of remote sensing data
within research institutions in 15 countries bordering the Caribbean sea. The
regional data to be developed under this project will contribute fundamentally
to our understanding of the impact of global change on the biologically diverse
ecosystems of the tropical coastal zone. ***