* 9319371
* Cross-Linguistic Study of the Syntax and Semantics of       Reciprocal Constructions
* SBE,BCS
* 05/01/1994,04/30/1996
* Stanley Peters, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Paul G. Chapin
* 04/30/1996
* USD 100,000.00

9319371 Peters This project will undertake a comparative study of the relation
between syntax and semantics, taking as a case study an intensive investigation
of the syntactic realizations and interpretive possibilities for reciprocal
constructions. Reciprocals are particularly well-suited for an investigation of
the syntax-semantics interface because they distill and combine characteristics
of a number of other constructions. Syntactically, reciprocals may be realized
as pronouns, as verbal affixes, or as adverbials. In the first two respects,
they have much in common with pronominal and intransitivizing reflexive
constructions. Semantically, reciprocals behave as semantic operators, sharing
characteristics with quantifiers. The project has two overall aims: to explore
correlations between the syntactic realization of the reciprocals and its
interpretation, and to examine the semantics of reciprocity and the status of
the reciprocal as a semantic operator. Because of the complex, multifaceted
nature of reciprocals, an investigation of reciprocity will illuminate the
syntax and semantics of other constructions whose characteristics they share:
the syntax and semantics of anaphoric relations and syntactic valence-reducing
operations, the semantics of plural noun phrases, and the syntax and semantics
of other scope-bearing operators such as negation and quantification.