* 9319034
* Numerical Simulation of Nebulae with Implications for       Galactic Chemical Evolution
* MPS,AST
* 05/15/1994,10/31/1997
* Gary Ferland, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Sethanne Howard
* 10/31/1997
* USD 300,128.00

9319034 Ferland Emission line regions define the end points of stellar evolution
and are present in the most luminous objects in the universe (the distant
quasars). Detailed understanding of this gas requires reference to large- scale
numerical simulations. This project will continue developing a computer program
which simulates the physical conditions within a non-equilibrium plasma and
predicts its spectrum. Several broad problems in active galactic nuclei, H II
regions, and classical novae will be investigated . The emission line clouds of
high redshift quasars have metallicities approaching 10 times solar, similar to
those found in the cores of massive galaxies at similar epochs, and this
metallicity correlates with luminosity and/or redshift. This work will probe
galactic chemical evolution at large redshift. A second area to be investigated
will involve an attempt to understand physical conditions within galactic H II
regions and surrounding photodissociation regions. This will lead to a more
complete understanding of measurements of galactic abundance gradients. Another
area will be classical novae, to better constrain the mass and abundances of the
ejecta, and thereby their contribution to galactic nucleosynthesis. ******