* 9319957
* Numeric and Symbolic Methods for Polynomial Manipulation
* CSE,CCF
* 04/15/1994,03/31/1998
* Dinesh Manocha, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Continuing Grant
* S. Kamal Abdali
* 03/31/1998
* USD 199,494.00

Algorithms for symbolic and numeric manipulation of systems are needed for
basic symbolic, numeric and geometric computations and their application to
problems in graphics, geometric modeling, robotics, vision and engineering. This
research takes a three-fold approach to these problems using multipolynomial
resultants: (1) Develop better algorithms for symbolic resultant computation and
solving nonlinear polynomial equations using resultants and matrix computations.
Algorithms are being developed in the context of exact arithmetic as well as
floating point arithmetic. It involves better formulations of resultants in
terms of matrices and determinants and use of symbolic and numeric algorithms
making use of the matrix formulation. (2) Specialize these algorithms to
applications in computer graphics, geometric modeling and robotics by making use
of the specific polynomial systems arising in these applications. (3) Develop a
library of routines, ELIMPACK, for symbolic resultant computation and finding
roots of polynomial equations (in exact and floating point arithmetic). This
package is of great utility to symbolic computation, numerical computation,
geometric applications and the engineering community. The results also help in
understanding the complexity of geometric problems described in terms of
polynomial equations.