* 9319331
* Internet Access to Large Government Data Archives:          The Direct Edgar Access System
* CSE,CNS
* 11/01/1993,04/30/1996
* Ajit Kambil, New York University
* Continuing Grant
* Mark A. Luker
* 04/30/1996
* USD 666,528.00

9319331 Kambil The Internet computer network is a U.S. priority, receiving
substantial backing from agencies ranging from the National Science Foundation
to NASA to the Department of Defense. This infrastructure is widely available in
university, research, and government institutions. The Internet and related
initiatives are a key part of the emerging National Research and Education
Network. While the network is already in place there is considerable work to be
done to make large data archives available over this infrastructure. This
project investigates techniques by which the government can make large archives
available to the public over the Internet. A key goal of the project is to
provide an example for agencies from which they can learn to directly provide
information to the Internet in a cost-effective manner. This project will
develop and demonstrate ways to post large government data archives on the
Internet for access by researchers and the general public. The two-year project
will use the Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) EDGAR Database as a test
database and will develop and implement techniques to provide the low-cost
management and dissemination of these data archives. The goal of the project is
to develop techniques that can be used directly by government agencies another
information providers, giving these organizations the tools and knowledge to
allow them to place government information on the Internet for direct access by
researchers and the general public. Secondary goals o the project are to make
key financial archives from the SEC available to researchers and the general
public who would not otherwise have access to the information.