* 9319399
* Monolithic Gallium Arsenide Receiver for NMR Microscopy
* BIO,DBI
* 12/15/1993,11/30/1995
* Timothy Peck, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Michael K. Lamvik
* 11/30/1995
* USD 50,000.00

9319399 Peck, T. The objective of this research is to improve the performance
of nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) microscopy systems by fabricating the radio-
frequency (RF) detection coil and preamplifier on a single monolithic GaAs
substrate. This combination of circuit elements can be designed to provide an
optimum signal-to-noise ratio (SNR). The RF microcoil will be formed from 4-7
turns of a gold conductor in a planar geometry. A simple tuning and impedance
matching network will link the RF coil to a single stage, common source
configuration, GaAs metal semiconductor field effect transistor (MESFET). The
amplifier will be designed for high gain and low noise over the relatively
narrow bandwidth (300+/- 0.1 NHz) needed for NMR signal detection. Gallium
arsenide MESFET amplifiers are ideal for this purpose. This project focuses
specifically on the fabrication and testing of a prototype integrated circuit
for NMR microscopy. The goal is to establish the feasibility of this approach as
a stimulus to the future development of more advanced integrated circuitry for
NMR research. Future developments in NMR microscopy (microcoil arrays, scanning
NMR microscopes, and superconducting RF coils) will rely on advances in NMR
integrated circuit technology. This proposal effort assembles a team of NMR, RF,
and fabrication experts who are collaborating to develop the new technology. The
success of this project is expected to have a major impact on NMR microscopy in
particular, with potential advantages for the entire field of NMR spectroscopy
and imaging. ***