* 9319817
* Generation and Initial Study of Zebrafish Genomic           Instability Mutants
* BIO,MCB
* 03/01/1994,08/31/1997
* Keith Cheng, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* DeLill Nasser
* 08/31/1997
* USD 354,285.00

Cheng 9319817 Abstract Zebra fish have many advantages as an experimental
organism for developmental studies. However, its use is limited unless it can be
developed as a genetic system also. It is proposed that this project will
demonstrate the feasibility of using zebra fish as experimental genetic
organisms. Mutations that increase genomic instability, e.g. by increasing the
rate of chromosome loss or mutation, are expected to increase the frequency of
loss of heterozygosity. That loss can be used as a phenotypic screen in that a
recessive pigment mutation which can be quantitatively assessed by screening the
number of nonpigmented cells in an otherwise pigmented retinal epithelium of
three-day old unhatched embryos can be used as a tracer. The mutant candidates
can be generated as the progeny of mutagenized gol-1+ males and non- mutagenized
gol-1(b1) females. The recessive mutant screen proposed involves inspection
under a dissecting microscope of the progeny. Clutches of progeny yielding a
potential aggregate of more than 100,000 cells will be scored in situ under a
dissecting microscope at three days. A simpler dominant screen will be evaluated
in parallel primarily with males after standard crosses. When possible,
complementation analysis of recessive mutations, outcrosses and quantitation of
the effect of mutations will be begun. %%% The feasibility of developing zebra
fish as useful genetic organisms will be determined. The strains necessary for
the projected screen for mutant progeny will be generated. Genomic instability
mutants, both dominant and recessive, will be generated. When possible, the
mutants will be characterized and karyotyping will be attempted. ***