* 9319593
* General Procedures for Evaluating Ligand Binding to         Substrates: Application to Proton Affinity Distribution for Determination of Acidic/Basic Architecture of Oxide Surfaces
* MPS,CHE
* 03/01/1994,08/31/1996
* James Schwarz, Syracuse University
* Standard Grant
* Steven Bernasek
* 08/31/1996
* USD 158,000.00

In this project, supported by the Analytical and Surface Chemistry Program, a
method for the characterization of ligand binding systems using a continuous
affinity distribution will be developed. A local solution to the adsorption
integral equation is used to calculate proton affinity distributions for high
surface area oxide materials. A detailed knowledge of proton binding sites and
distributions will be useful for the a priori design and synthesis of oxide
supported metal catalysts. This methodology should also find use in the
characterization of various complex substrate/liquid interfaces, including
systems encountered in immunology, drug design, and the transport and
sequestering of metals in aquatic and soil systems. The very complex
solid/liquid interface environment will be examined in the research of this
project. A method for the quantitative description of the adsorption of protons
on complex oxide substrates will be developed, which will allow the de novo
design of oxide supported catalysts. If this work, supported by the Chemistry
Division, is fully successful, the approach should also impact environmentally
important areas such as heavy metal and halocarbon transport in soil and aquatic
systems. A more complete understanding of the complex liquid/solid interface
should result from this work.