* 9319881
* Water Soluble Phosphines for Organometallic Chemistry and   Catalysis in the Aqueous Phase
* MPS,CHE
* 06/01/1994,11/30/1997
* Brian Hanson, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Continuing Grant
* Brian J. Rappoli
* 11/30/1997
* USD 282,500.00

9319881 Hanson Virginia Polytechnic Inst. Dr. Brian E. Hanson, Chemistry
Department, Virginia Polytechnic Institute, is supported by the Inorganic,
Bioinorganic, and Organometallic Chemistry Program for the synthesis of water
soluble phosphines and to develop catalysts which dissolve or form micelles in
water. Phosphines containing sulfonated aryl substituents will be prepared by
several routes. The steric and electronic parameters will be widely varied and
examples will be prepared with parameters similar to those of phosphines
currently being used in catalysts. These newly prepared water soluble or surface
active phosphines will be used to form catalysts which will be active for
hydroformylation, hydrogenation, and/or asymmetric synthesis in water. Chemical
processes which can be carried out in an aqueous solution have potential
environmental advantages arising from the non-toxic, non-polluting nature of
water. However, catalysts which are used in many industrial processes do not
dissolve and consequently cannot be used in water based processes. In this
project catalysts which will operate in aqueous media will be devised, with
those for industrially important hydroformylation, hydrogenation, and asymmetric
synthesis being targeted.