* 9319406
* Response Properties of Central Olfactory Neurons
* BIO,IOS
* 03/15/1994,08/31/1999
* DeForest Mellon, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Avijit Chaudhuri
* 08/31/1999
* USD 266,628.00

Mellon 9319406 Of the five major senses, olfaction has the least understood
central integrative mechanisms for analyzing olfactory stimuli. Recent advances
in understanding peripheral olfactory coding have come from crustaceans, where
the antenna of lobsters, crayfish and crabs have proven valuable simple
preparations. This project examines central coding, using electrophysiological
recording in the crayfish olfactory system to determine the stimulus/response
characteristics of individual nerve cells. Central cells called interneurons
will be studied in a part of the brain called the protocerebrum, which shows a
sophisticated anatomical structuring very like that in part of the mammalian
olfactory system. Responses of these interneurons will be compared to responses
from the peripheral primary neurons that converge on the interneurons, using
stimuli of single amino acid compounds and of particular mixtures with
systematically quantified differences. These studies will give information on
how coded olfactory information is handled, and which stimulus features are
attended to by neurons at this higher level in the olfactory system. The effects
of temporal changes in stimulus delivery will be looked at to determine what
role pulsatile stimuli and adaptation may play in reception. Responses during
the antennular flicking behavior, which may be analogous to sniffing, will be
quantified to see whether flicking modifies the neuronal sensitivity. Results
from this work on this model system will have an impact on chemosensory
neuroscience in general, will increase our understanding of neural coding in
sensory systems, and may also be important for understanding chemically-cued
feeding and mating behavior of marine and aquatic crustaceans with potential
commercial impact. ***