* 9319304
* NMR Investigations of the Static and Dynamic Properties of  Spin Density Waves
* NONE,NONE
* 04/01/1994,09/30/1997
* W. Gilbert Clark, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing grant
* H. Hollis Wickman
* 09/30/1997
* USD 255,000.00

9319304 Clark Technical abstract: The main issues addressed by this project are
the static and dynamic properties of spin density waves (SDW) in anisotropic
conductors. Nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) spin echoes will be used as a
microscopic probe, in conjunction with electrical transport. Most of the work
will be on the Bechgaard salts (TMTSF)2X (X=PF6, ClO4, AsF6, etc.). Both
"ordinary" and field induced spin density waves with varying degrees of pinning
will be investigated. The physical quantities to be obtained from this work
include the temperature dependence of the order parameter, the displacement of
the condensate in response to an electrical field below threshold, its sliding
velocity above threshold, the spatial and temporal distribution of the sliding
velocity above threshold, SDW memory and repinning effects, and the temperature
and frequency dependence of SDW phason fluctuations. Non-technical abstract: The
purpose of this project is to investigate an unusual property of several organic
materials that conduct electricity. At low temperatures the conducting electrons
form a semiconducting state with an undulating magnetic structure called a spin
density wave (SDW). This SDW is usually pinned to the underlying material
imperfections. When, however, a small electric field above a certain threshold
is applied to the material, the SDW slides. Under these conditions, it becomes a
new type of electrical current. The measurements to be made are electrical
conduction and nuclear magnetic resonance spin echo studies of the basic
properties of these SDWs. They include the size of the undulating magnetic
field, how its size varies with temperature, its thermal vibrations, how it
moves when driven by an electric field, and the complex way it becomes pinned
again when the electric field is removed. p:\wickman\abstract\clark.doc