* 9319945
* The Certification Trail Approach to Software Fault          Tolerance and Testability
* NONE,NONE
* 09/15/1994,08/31/1998
* Gregory Sullivan, Johns Hopkins University
* Continuing grant
* Frank D. Anger
* 08/31/1998
* USD 280,427.00

This research investigates a technique which allows computer programs to be
constructed which are more easily and efficiently tested and which can be
incorporated into a design methodology for producing efficiently testable and
fault tolerant software systems. The technique is to modify a primary
applications program so that, with essentially negligible overhead, the primary
program not only produces its required output but also generates additional
data, referred to as a ``certification trail.'' The certification trail allows
the correctness of the primary program's output to be completely and efficiently
certified by means of a second, simpler and more efficiently executed program,
referred to as a ``certifier'' which uses the certification trail to also
produce the output so that a subsequent comparison operation can take place. The
relative simplicity of the certifier has significant advantages beyond that of
speed of execution. For example, the certifier program can be formally verified
for correctness in cases where doing so for the primary program is much more
complicated --- perhaps prohibitively so. In general, this project develops a
formal, theoritical framework for the certification trail technique, as well as
for building upon proof-of-concept performance experimentation by means of
implementing the technique and generating performance data for primary programs
implementing a variety of well-known algorithms.