* 9319968
* Mapping and Simulating the Electric Fields of Weakly        Electric Fish
* BIO,IOS
* 08/15/1994,01/31/1998
* James Bower, California Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Christopher Platt
* 01/31/1998
* USD 299,467.00

A variety of small freshwater fishes are known as weakly electric fish, since
they have an electric organ like that of the electric eel, but produce only a
small voltage with it. Their electric organ discharge, the EOD, has a particular
waveform and temporal pattern, and produces a spatially patterned electric field
around the fish. A sophisticated system of electroreceptor organs in the skin
allows them to investigate their environment by detecting changes in this
electric field produced by objects around them, and the signals of other fish.
By analogy to the bat and the dolphin auditory echolocation system, this
electrosensory behavior is called electrolocation. This project incorporates
electrical field measurements into computational simulations to produce novel
three-dimensional reconstructions of the electrosensory images detected by the
fish. Detailed analysis of the spatial and temporal organization of these
electric fields will help to better understand both the mechanisms by which they
are generated, as well as their possible significance for object recognition.
Development of a simulator capable of accurately reconstructing the fields will
allow a quantitative investigation of the electrosensory consequences of fish
movements during exploratory behavior. This combined mathematical, physiological
and behavioral approach will clarify how the external environment is "imaged" by
a whole sensory system, and how that image is used to guide spatially oriented
behavior, which is a major general issue for sensory neuroscience. There is
potential impact in two other fields, one in bioengineering development of
sensing systems for robotics or aids to handicapped, and the other in field
ecology where the this software for mapping electric field potential data could
be used for analyzing aquatic salinity data to track critical changes in
estuarine ecosystems.