* 9319570
* Self-Concept Stability and Change
* SBE,BCS
* 02/01/1994,01/31/1999
* William Swann, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* Jean B. Intermaggio
* 01/31/1999
* USD 270,000.00

9319570 SWANN ABSTRACT Recent research suggests that people's self-concepts lead
them to behave in ways that make their self-concepts very resistant to change.
For example, people seem to prefer and choose relationship partners who confirm
and validate their self-views. This occur seven if their self-views are
negative: in one study, married people with negative self-views committed
themselves to spouses who held them in low esteem. Their behaviors, then, are
reminiscent of Groucho Marz's quip, "I'd never join a club that would have me as
a member." The investigators have studied these processes with emphasis on
specifying why people with negative self-views behave as they do. They have also
considered how these activities may make it difficult to change people's self-
views. One remaining puzzle concerns the conflicted feelings people with
negative self-views have about the evaluations they receive. On the one hand,
such persons prefer and seek unfavorable evaluations. Nevertheless,they feel
terrible when they actually receive such evaluations! The investigators hope to
find out why people with negative self-views routinely behave in ways that
generate such ambivalence. They will also try to determine the conditions under
which they will break out of such vicious cycles. This research is designed to
provide a deeper understanding of the feelings and thoughts that underlie the
self-defeating behaviors of people with negative self-views. As such, it is
likely to provide a perspective on these behaviors that is ultimately useful in
developing strategies of prevention.