* 9319404
* Theoretical Investigations of Lattice Dynamical and Optical Properties of Solids and the Stability and Doping of        Semiconductors
* MPS,DMR
* 03/01/1994,02/28/1999
* Alexei Maradudin, University of California-Irvine
* Continuing Grant
* G. Bruce Taggart
* 02/28/1999
* USD 249,000.00

9319404 Maradudin This proposal concerns several aspects of materials theory;
anharmonic interactions in crystals, optical properties of solids and the doping
of semiconductor systems. (1a) First principles calculations of the anharmonic
force constants and phonon linewidths in Al and Cu will be performed. (1b)
Calculations of the ultrasonic attenuation in Si will be attempted. (2a) The
nonreciprocal photonic band structure effects in n-type semiconductors in
magnetic fields will be investigated. (2b) Light localization in infinite
periodic arrays of dielectric rods will be studied. (3a) The stability of
ternary alloys of III-V semiconductors deposited on semiconductor substrates
will be examined from the point of view of elastic energy effects. (3b) The
equilibrium doping of boron in silicon will be studied taking special account of
vibrational contributions to the free energy. %%% This proposal concerns the
calculation of a wide variety of materials properties in specific systems. It is
divided into three broad areas. The first concerns vibrational properties of
metals and semiconductors - specifically how sound is attenuated in silicon and
how harmonic are the vibrations in simple metals. The second involves how light
may be trapped or may be manipulated in carefully constructed periodic
materials. The third studies the stability of semiconductor alloys that are
adsorbed on other semiconductors and why it is difficult to dope silicon with
boron (a useful dopant if it could be achieved). ***