* 9319175
* The Dynamics of Propagating Polymerization Fronts
* ENG,CBET
* 05/15/1994,10/31/1997
* John Pojman, University of Southern Mississippi
* Standard Grant
* Maria Burka
* 10/31/1997
* USD 127,760.00

Abstract - Pojman - 9319175 An exothermic reaction can sometimes support a
propagating front of reaction in an unstirred medium. Polymerization reactions
are very exothermic, and addition polymerizations can be initiated with free
radicals produced from the thermal decomposition of an unstable compound such as
a peroxide. Thus, the heat produced by the polymerization can diffuse and cause
the initiation of polymerization in a neighboring region, resulting in a
propagating front. Performing polymerization in the frontal regime has, for
example, potential for materials synthesis for two reasons: (1) If the
polymerization were performed in a flow reactor such that the input flow
velocity would equal the front propagation velocity, then it would be possible
to maintain the high temperature, strongly oxidizing reaction zone away from the
walls. If the oxidizing region is in contact with the metal walls, as in a
standard Continuous Stirred Tank Reactor (CSTR), then oxidized impurities will
necessarily contaminate the product. However, in the frontal regime, the
reaction zone is not in contact with metal and thus, no contamination occurs. It
has been possible to produce ultra-pure polystyrene and poly(methyl
methacrylate) in a commercial plant using this approach. (2) If the front is
carried out in a static medium, then novel materials may be formed because of
the self-organizing character of the front. But, instabilities in the fronts can
interfere with these approaches. The PI is therefore planning to look at the
dynamic behavior of propagating polymerization fronts for four reasons: (1)
polymerization fronts offer readily accessible experimental systems to test
theories of thermal instabilities in reaction-diffusion systems, including
oscillations, spinning modes, period-doubling and chaos; (2) polymerization
fronts exhibit interesting convective instabilities, that are poorly understood;
(3) polymerization fronts hold promise as a means of materials production but
instabilities c an interfere (understanding the conditions that lead to
instabilities could allow the design of experimental conditions that eliminate
the instabilities or exploit them); and (4) developing complete models of
frontal polymerization could provide fundamental understanding of non-steady
state polymerization kinetics.