* 9319483
* Relationship Between Clouds, SST and Surface Fluxes on Seasonal and Interannual Time Scales Over the Western Pacific
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/1994,12/31/1997
* Catherine Gautier-Downes, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Continuing grant
* Jay S. Fein
* 12/31/1997
* USD 169,519.00

ABSTRACT ATM 9319483 Gautier, Catherine University of California, Santa Cruz
Title: Relationship between Clouds, SST and Surface Fluxes on Seasonal and
Interannual Time Scales Over the Western Pacific The goal of this proposal is to
contribute to the clarification of the role of clouds on the surface radiation
and latent heat flux in the western Pacific over climatologically significant
space and time scales. The data available until recently have not allowed us to
estimate unambiguously the magnitude and variability of the dominant mechanisms
at work in air-sea interactions in the tropical regions. There are, for
instance, competing theories regarding the mechanism responsible for the
maintenance of tropical sea surface temperatures at their observed temperature
in the western Pacific. Our proposal has three objectives. First, we will
compute cloud and surface (shortwave radiation and latent heat) fluxes from
satellite observations using techniques we have developed or adapted from other
investigators. Second, we will intercompare our satellite results with surface
and aircraft observations to ensure the quality of the satellite-derived surface
fluxes. Third, and this is the heart of oup proposal, we will investigate the
effect of clouds on surface fluxes (including SST) over climatologically
significant space and time scales. Our approach uses satellite data extensively
to provide the large scale framework, and it also builds upon the availability
of TOGA- COARE data to validate our satellite data and perform some process-
oriented studies. The investigation will, however, extend the results from the
TOGA-COARE IOP to longer time periods in order to explore seasonal and
interannual variability. Results from this research are expected to lead to a
better understanding of some of the mechanisms controlling air-sea interactions
and, thus, should help in the development of new parameterizations for a
hierarchy of numerical models aimed at simulating the coupled atmosphere-ocean
system over seasonal to interannual time scales in the tropical regions.