* 9319770
* Improved Silicon Carbide on Silicon Crystal Quality         by Epitaxial Necking
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/1994,08/31/1998
* James Edgar, Kansas State University
* Standard Grant
* RAUL MIRANDA
* 08/31/1998
* USD 125,000.00

ABSTRACT CTS-9319770 James Edgar Localized, confined-area epitaxy is developed
to reduce the defect density of silicon-carbide (SiC) films on silicon (Si)
substrates. The hypothesis is to eliminate defect propagation through the
necking process, in which defects terminate on the side planes of the SiC;
epitaxial silicon carbide deposited after the necking process should contain
fewer defects. Both selective silicon carbide growth on silica-masked silicon
and anisotropic growth on nonplanar patterned silicon are examined as methods of
confining epitaxy to small areas. New source chemistries using chlorinated
hydrocarbons and silanes with helium as a carrier gas are explored in attempts
to selective epitaxial growth at reduced temperatures and to increase growth
anisotropy on various crystal planes. The shape and orientation of the window
pattern, the chlorine content of the source materials, the operating pressure,
and temperature are varied to minimize the propagation of defects. Silicon
carbide is an attractive semiconductor for many electronic and optoelectronic
applications, including high-speed, high-power devices, devices that must
operate at elevated temperatures, microelectromechanical sensors, and solar-
blind ultraviolet detectors. However, such applications are hampered by the
difficulty of obtaining low-defect silicon-carbide films on other
semiconductors. It is this issue that is addressed in this research.