* 9319186
* The Influence of Substrates on the Kinetics of Cadmium      Telluride Organmetallic Vapor-Phase Epitaxy
* ENG,CBET
* 06/01/1994,05/31/1997
* Paul Sides, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Continuing Grant
* RAUL MIRANDA
* 05/31/1997
* USD 263,000.00

9319186 Sides This is an investigation of the kinetics of organometallic vapor-
phase epitaxy (OMVPE) of homoepitaxial cadmium telluride at both the macroscopic
and microscopic levels. Macroscopic experiments explore the effect of
misorientation of substrates on the morphology of OMVPE-deposited material. Rate
laws for step growth and for hillock growth are developed in order to test the
hypothesis that steps are critical sites of reactions of the commonly used
sources dimethlycadmium and diisopropyltellurium. A methodology will be
developed to use rate laws to predict conditions under which high-quality
epitaxial films can be grown. The effect of substrate surface microstructure on
the elementary reactions in the deposition mechanism is also investigated.
Scanning tunneling microscopy, low-energy electron diffraction, and other
surface science techniques are employed. Thin films of cadmium telluride and
related compounds are attractive for fabrication of devices involving light
emitters, radiation detectors, and optical switching. At present, they are
prepared by molecular beam epitaxy (MBE), a method that is slow, cumbersome, and
expensive. Perfection of OMVPE techniques should permit higher-volume, lower-
cost production of these films, making them acceptable for consumer
applications. It is to this end that this effort is ultimately directed. ***