* 9319731
* Improving Product Design:  Management Tools to Promote      Environmentally Friendly Design
* ENG,IIP
* 10/15/1993,03/31/1997
* Lester Lave, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Continuing Grant
* Joseph Hennessey
* 03/31/1997
* USD 450,000.00

9319731 Lave Business is under increasing pressure to make each aspect of their
activities, products and packaging "environmentally friendly." Unfortunately, no
one is clear about what this goal means operationally. We propose research to
enhance the ability of corporations to understand recycling, improve their
product and process design for the environment, and measure the improvements
resulting from our collaboration. Our work consists of six tasks: 1. Improve
measures of the environmental consequences of alternative products or designs.
Without quantitative measures, goals are vague and management performance cannot
be assessed. 2. Estimate and implement our measures for a range of IBM printers.
We will collaborate with IBM to meet the corporate goal of increased
environmental friendliness through developing and implement our measures and
approach. 3. Implement a system that informs the designers at IBM of the
environmental implications of alternative designs, materials, choices, and other
design issues. We will explore both intrusive and non-intrusive systems. 4.
Examine the ways in which the tools can be designed into a company's
organizational structure. We seek ways to have companies meet environmental
goals routinely and inexpensively without excess time of top executives or
decreased produce quality. 5. Investigate organizational learning by examining
the extent to which our tools affect product design, particularly as measured by
our indices, and how the use of these tools disseminate through the organization
and become more valuable to designers over time. We will explore how to increase
productivity while enhancing environmental friendliness. 6. Transfer our results
and indices to a second company making a quite different product. The Ford Motor
Company will work with us in transferring the research results from IBM to quite
a different setting.***