* 9319515
* Ant Diversity Patterns and Conservation Planning in         Madagascar
* O/D,OISE
* 02/15/1994,01/31/1997
* Philip Ward, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Patricia Jones Tsuchitani
* 01/31/1997
* USD 14,991.00

9319515 Ward This dissertation enhancement grant supports a U.S. graduate
student, Brian Fisher, working under the guidance of Dr. Philip S. Ward,
Professor of Entomology at the University of California/Davis,to survey the
distribution and abundance of ants in tropical forest habitats in Madagascar,
and compare the results to known patterns of vertebrate distribution. The aim of
the project is to test the hypothesis that patterns of diversity, endemism and
rarity of insects differ from those of birds and mammals, with insects showing
greater between-site variation and local endemism. A primary objective is to
develop standardized methods of assessing ant diversity that can be used in any
tropical wet forest. The project will develop a database regarding the
distribution of ants in the most biologically diverse region of Madagascar.
Altitudinal ant surveys will be conducted at five sites in the eastern tropical
wet forest of Madagascar. Species richness and abundance will be calculated for
each elevation at each locality, and compared to those extracted from existing
data bases for vertebrates. This information will allow estimates of the degree
of protection the Malagasy invertebrate fauna receives in existing reserves.
This study will illuminate a question fundamental to conservation biology: "Are
'indicator' taxa really indicators?" In the course of the project, young
Malagasy biologists will be trained in inventory, curation and identification
techniques. This study is being conducted in collaboration with the World Wide
Fund for Nature - Madagascar, and the Xerces Society. Augmenting the usual
channels of publication in scientific journals, these two non-profit
organizations will assist in diffusing the information collected to other
scientists, conservation biologists, and government agencies in Madagascar. ***