* 9319764
* Civil Engineering Education Improvement Project
* ENG,EEC
* 02/15/1994,09/30/1997
* James Yao, American Society of Civil Engineers
* Standard Grant
* Joy Pauschke
* 09/30/1997
* USD 89,792.00

9319764 Yao The American Society of Civil Engineers (ASCE) proposes to conduct,
during FY 1994 96, a cooperatively funded Education Improvement Project,
including an Evaluation, three Workshops, a Conference, and preparation of
Reports to disseminate findings, relative to past, current, and future changes
in education affecting civil engineering and related specialties/disciplines.
The project will have the following purposes: 1. ` ` Evaluate the outcomes of
recommendations made over the past fifteen years at ASCE education conferences.
2. ` ` Prepare a Baseline Assessment and Evaluation Report, communicating the
findings to the organizations funding this Project and to participants in the
Workshops and Conference described below, for their use during deliberations. 3.
` ` Conduct Workshops on curriculum innovation, quality management, and the
interface between education and practice, bringing together limited numbers of
highly qualified practitioners and educators so as to: ` ` o Review, evaluate
and improve the civil (and civil related) engineering curriculum. ` ` o Propose
strategies to strengthen interaction among educators, students, and
practitioners. ` ` o Forecast characteristics of civil engineering leaders of
the future and suggest ways to educate young engineers in developing these
characteristics. ` ` o Review and evaluate the potential for a continuous
quality improvement process within civil engineering education. ` ` o Propose
alternative strategies for implementation of recommendations. 4. ` ` Prepare a
workshop report, an "Agenda for Implementation," highlighting key issues and
presenting alternatives, options, and implementation strategies, so as to
provide the funding organizations with insightful evaluations of current
proposals in engineering education, while also facilitating discussion by a
larger audience at the subsequent Conference. 5. ` ` Conduct a National
Conference, (funding for which is not part of this proposal), using the
deliberations and reports above, which will bring together a large number of
leaders in civil engineering education, from both academia and practice, to
learn, advise, and subsequently assist in implementing the alternatives and
options under discussion. 6. ` ` Prepare and disseminate widely a succinct
concluding Project Report and Implementation Strategies, with recommendations
and alternative implementation strategies. ***