* 9319153
* Perceptual Grouping by Position-Frequency Analysis
* CSE,IIS
* 04/01/1994,09/30/1997
* Jun Zhang, University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee
* Continuing Grant
* Howard Moraff
* 09/30/1997
* USD 168,292.00

9319153 Zhang This research studies an approach to perceptual grouping in
computer vision, using as a basis a theory of position-frequency analysis.
Perceptual grouping organizes local features of an input image, such as pixels,
line-segments, and regions, into perceptually salient structures. Successful
perceptual grouping can lead to a drastic reduction of the search space and
significant performance improvements for various computer vision and image
processing applications, such as object recognition, image analysis, and active
vision. The main difficulty in perceptual grouping, however, lies in the lack of
understanding of how perceptual grouping should be formulated as a computational
problem under a proper data representation. The recent success of time-frequency
analysis in signal processing has motivated the use of its extension, position-
frequency analysis, in computer vision. Position-frequency representations can
be used to model a wide range of image features, local and global. It also
provides new insights on how perceptual grouping can be formulated as a
computational problem. The objectives of this research project are to: 1.)
Develop a general mathematical framework for perceptual grouping based on the
theory of position-frequency analysis, 2.) Investigate a number of fundamental
problems in perceptual grouping using this framework and developing grouping
algorithms, 3.) Test these algorithms in practical (e.g., industrial)
applications.