* 9319264
* Fractional Quantum Hall Effect and Related Strong           Correlation Physics in Advanced Heterostructures
* MPS,DMR
* 04/15/1994,09/30/1997
* Daniel Tsui, Princeton University
* Continuing Grant
* H. Hollis Wickman
* 09/30/1997
* USD 479,400.00

9319264 Tsui Technical abstract: The fractional quantum Hall effect (FQHE) and
related physics of strong correlations in two dimensions will be studied in
advanced GaAs/A1xGa1-xAs heterostructures at low temperatures and high magnetic
fields. The research has three objectives: (1) To use novel sample structures to
study tunneling into the FQHE liquid and to investigate boiling of the liquid;
(2) To investigate the role of disorder in determining the nature of the
reentrant insulator around the 1/5 FQHE liquid and the physics governing the
transition between them; and (3) To search for the Josephson-like currents in
the double layer FQHE state. Non-technical abstract: It has been possible to
realize two dimensional electron systems in advanced materials of semiconductor
single-crystal thin film structures of different chemical compositions. The
physical properties of these electrons differ fundamentally from the ordinary
three-dimensional charge carriers in bulk semiconductors. Specifically, the
charge carriers condense, in the presence of a high magnetic field, into an
incompressible electron liquid. It is proposed to carry out a series of
experiments which seek to determine under what conditions does this new liquid
boil, when and if it freezes, does it freeze into a two dimensional electron
crystal or some other form of electron matter. ***