* 9319795
* Environmental Accounting for Managing Pollution in the      Chemical and Refining Industries
* ENG,IIP
* 10/01/1993,09/30/1996
* Paul Shields, University of Houston
* Continuing Grant
* Joseph Hennessey
* 09/30/1996
* USD 297,688.00

9319795 Shields The proposed research investigates the information gap that
confronts decision-making regarding both investment in R&amp;D for and
deployment of innovative technologies for pollution prevention to support
environmentally conscious manufacturing. Commitments by major industries were
made up to three years ago to reduce hazardous wastes and toxic emissions by 50%
by the year 1995. Industrial managers are now challenged to decide: 1) which
product changes should be initiated to achieve pollution prevention goals? 20
which innovative technologies should receive research and development
investments to advance pollution prevention goals? and 3) Which processes should
be redesigned using innovative technologies that have already been researched
and developed but not yet deployed? To ensure the economic as well as the
environmental viability of the company, these managers must make informed
decisions based on reasonably accurate costs and benefits. Historically, though,
environmental costs have not been properly valued, notably externalities have
not been internalized by producers. Additionally, the manner in which any
environmental costs have been tracked is not conductive to on-going management
of technology innovation because the costs are not allocated accurately to
technologies, processes and products. The proposed research effort addresses
both these needs. Through case-studies and benchmarking the research will
establish a systems framework to track environmental costs as well as a method
for valuing them. Life-cycle costing will enable this. Eventual practical
implementation of the system will be facilitated by formalizing the links
between the costs and the technologies by defining waste generating processes
and overlaying on them Activity-Based Costing (ABC) methods. The ABC system will
be specific to the Chemical and Refining Industries since it is activity based.
These two industries were selected for three reasons: 1) together the y
contribute to over half of all waste generated in the United States; 2) the
tendency to focus on discrete manufacturing has neglected these very important
waste producers and economic contributors; and 3) these industries are heavily
concentrated in the State of Texas where the majority of the research will be
conducted. The wide range of support to this effort from industry
representatives, policy organizations, academics and government agencies is a
testament to feasibility and desirability of this research endeavor. ***