* 9319549
* Context Information and Recognition
* SBE,BCS
* 04/15/1994,09/30/1996
* Kevin Murnane, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Jasmine Young
* 09/30/1996
* USD 99,983.00

9319549 MURNANE The overall goal of this research is to understand how context
information affects recognition memory. This will provide a deeper understanding
of the ways in which the learning environment and the environment in which
remembering takes place interact and will be useful in developing optimal
learning environments and in providing aid to the memory impaired. Many current
theories of memory divide information into two broad classes. The information
one is trying to remember is called item or target information. Other
information that is stored in memory with the target information is called
context information. Context information may include information about the
physical environment in which the target information was learned (environmental
context), stray thoughts that occurred while the target information was learned
(semantic context), or the learner's mood while the target information was
stored in memory (emotional context). Context information plays a critical role
in many explanations of how people can retrieve individual episodes or events
from among the many similar events stored in memory. However, studies that use
recognition to measure memory performance often fail to find that changes in
context information have an effect, raising serious questions about whether
context information in fact plays the critical role assigned to it by current
theories. Murnane will address the role played by context information in
recognition through the continued development and testing of his own context
model, a formal model of context and recognition. The context model is a
generalization of several computational memory theories that share the
characteristic that recognition decisions are based on information derived from
a large set of items stored in memory rather than on information derived only
from the memory representation of the test item. Murnane will test his model
against two dominant hypotheses about why manipulations of context information
sometimes fail to produce predicted results, the mental reinstatement hypothesis
and the outshining hypothesis. The basic idea of the mental reinstatement
hypothesis is that subjects imagine, or mentally reinstate, the learning context
when tested in a different context, and then use this mentally reinstated
context information in making recognition decisions. Mental reinstatement is
assumed to be just as effective as physically reinstating the context (e.g., by
placing the subject back in the learning context during the recognition test).
Murnane's context model makes different predictions from the mental
reinstatement hypothesis; these will be tested in a series of experiments that
will (a) clarify the conditions under which mental reinstatement is effective,
(b) determine whether mental reinstatement is as effective as physical
reinstatement, and (c) determine whether mental reinstatement is equally
effective with different types of context information. The second popular
hypothesis that attempts to explain the conflicting recognition results, the
outshining hypothesis, is that item information is such a strong memory cue
relative to the context information that it masks, or "outshines" any effects
caused by changes in context information. Preliminary development of the context
model has produced predictions that are contradictory to the outshining
hypothesis and preliminary studies support the context model. Several
experiments will provide a critical test of the two hypotheses. In addition,
other predictions from the context model will be tested, the model will be
extended to cover different types of context information, a version of the model
that is capable of making quantitative predictions will be constructed, and the
model will be extended to account for a broader set of empirical data than
covered by current models. For example, the model predicts that the effects of
changes in the relative strengths of context and item information on recognition
differ depending on whether item or c ontext information is strengthened.
Several studies will address how changes in each type of information affect
recognition. ***