* 9319358
* Acquisition of a Multiple Peptide Synthesizer and Laser     Desorption Mass Spectrometer
* BIO,DBI
* 07/01/1994,06/30/1996
* Kenneth Williams, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Michael K. Lamvik
* 06/30/1996
* USD 120,000.00

The W.M. Keck Foundation Biotechnology Resource Laboratory at Yale University
provides a full range of protein and nucleic acid analytical and synthetic
services to nearly 600 principal investigators at Yale University, Cornell
University, Columbia University, Harvard Medical School, Johns Hopkins Medical
School, Mt. Sinai School of Medicine, Rockefeller University, Sloan-Kettering
Cancer Center, Texas A&amp;M University, and the universities of California,
Illinois, Michigan, Texas and Virginia as well as at another 123 institutions.
Each year this facility completes more than 10,000 services including the
sequencing of ~750 proteins and peptides. The vast majority of the latter
samples are HPLC-purified peptides that have either been eluted from MHC
molecules or that have been isolated from tryptic digests carried out by the
Keck Facility on SDS PAGE- separated proteins. Although all these peptides gave
symmetrical absorbance peaks upon HPLC, amino acid sequencing demonstrated that
nearly one-third of these samples were, in fact, either mixtures of peptides,
artifact peaks resulting from Coomassie Blue and other reagents or, were lost
prior to sequencing due to adsorption onto plastic surfaces. The ability of the
requested laser desorption mass spectrometer (LDMS) to routinely determine
masses on 50- 500 femtomole amounts of peptide will, in most instances, enable
the prior identification of those two-thirds of the samples which contain only a
single species in the expected mass range (for a 10-40 residue peptide) and
which are therefore suitable for amino acid sequencing. In addition to
preventing the needless sequencing of unsuitable samples, the resulting masses
will confirm residues which would have been only tentatively assigned by Edman
degradation and will establish the length of these peptides, which is of
particular concern in characterizing MHC bound peptides. Other applications
envisioned for LDMS are in characterizing posttranslational modificati ons of
proteins and, possibly, as a quality control monitor of oligonucleotide
synthesis. The other instrument that is requested, a multiple peptide
synthesizer capable of the simultaneous synthesis and automated cleavage of 96
peptides, will need the increasing demand for large numbers of economically
priced, high quality synthetic peptides. Currently, several laboratories at Yale
are synthesizing as many as 100 peptides/year using a manual system of multiple
peptide synthesis. Obviously, acquisition of a multiple peptide synthesizer
would significantly increase research productivity in these laboratories and
would bring the cost of these essential oligomers within reach of many more
investigators. If funds are provided, these two instruments will immediately be
brought to bear on a large number of important research projects that range from
characterizing peptides bound to MHC molecules in T cell responses to increasing
our understanding of the biochemical basis of autoimmunity, protein folding,
posttranslational processing of a parathyroid-like hormone related protein,
isotype switch recombination in activated B lymphocytes to biological
applications of peptide nucleic acids. The high level of technical expertise in
the Keck Facility virtually guarantees that these instruments would be expertly
maintained and the extremely large number of Yale and non- Yale investigators
served by this facility ensures that the positive impact of this equipment on
biochemical research would be large and would extend well beyond Yale
University.