* 9319301
* Models Relating Population Dynamics to Individual Physiology and Behavior
* NONE,NONE
* 03/01/1994,02/28/1998
* Roger Nisbet, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Continuing grant
* Mark Courtney
* 02/28/1998
* USD 271,000.00

9319301 Nisbet Individual-based models are becoming widely used tools in
population biology. These models use mathematical descriptions of the physiology
and behavior of individuals to predict properties of populations. The PIs view
individual-based models, not as an end in themselves, but as part of a process
that can allow them to develop testable theory. They aim to identify those
components of individual physiology that are key to predicting population
dynamics.%%% The system for which these questions will be explored is the
zooplankter Daphnia and its algal food supply. This system is appropriate for
many reasons. Daphnia is an important genus in many natural lakes and ponds and
previous studies have identified common dynamic patterns across many
populations; thus any understanding gained from the population models is likely
to be ecologically important. The physiology of the more common Daphnia species
is well documented, in part because of their common use in toxicological
studies, and the PIs have a major on-going program of research on the energetics
of individual Daphnia. Daphnia populations in large stock tanks have been
studied by one of the PIs and by one of our collaborators, Dr. E. McCauley at
the University of Calgary. Thus the chosen system offers the possibility of
studying the individual-to-population link in systems of increasing
complexity.%%% The "deliverables" from the project will be of three kinds: (1)
increased insight into the population dynamics of the chosen system, (2) sharper
understanding of the processes of formulating, testing and simplifying
individual-based models, and (3) new general theory.***