* 9319434
* A Deformation Based Methodology for the Evaluation and      Upgrading of Existing Structures
* ENG,CMMI
* 05/01/1994,04/30/1997
* Helmut Krawinkler, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* Shih-Chi Liu
* 04/30/1997
* USD 195,407.00

9319434 Krawinkler This project is concerned with the development of basic
concepts and fundamental information needed to formalize a deformation based
methodology for the evaluation and strengthening of existing structures. This
methodology is intended to (1) permit an assessment of the expected seismic
performance of existing structures and the identification of basic strengthening
needs, (2) facilitate the development of an effective strengthening scheme and
provide target values for the required strength and deformation capacities of
the components of the strengthening scheme, (3) permit a verification of the
seismic performance of the strengthened structure and provide information for
fine-tuning of the elements of the strengthening scheme, and (4) provide
information on the deformation demands that will govern requirements for
detailing of the elements of the strengthening scheme. There have been knowledge
gaps in deformation base evaluation/strengthening which reflects the physical
phenomena that control seismic performance and this research is intended to fill
most of these gaps. Research is conducted on the following three topics: (1)
Quantification of seismic strength and displacement demands for Single- Degree-
of-Freedom and Multiple-Degree-Of-Freedom systems, (2) development of procedures
and criteria for the execution and evaluation of a "push-over" analysis that is
to be employed as part of the evaluation/verification process, and (3)
formalization of the concepts of the deformation method to the extent that it
can become a feasible and attractive tool for the engineering profession. A
successful completion of this research will make it possible to implement an
approach to repairing and strengthening of seismically vulnerable structures. It
represents a unique opportunity to advance the state of the practice and
introduce deformation control as an accepted part of the design process. This is
an award under NSF-Initiative "Repair and Rehabilitation Research for Seismic
Resistance of Structures." ***