* 9319919
* Is Incoherent Scatter Feasible Using the UTR-2 Antenna      and the SURA Transmitter?
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/1993,08/31/1994
* Michael Kelley, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Sunanda Basu
* 08/31/1994
* USD 31,594.00

9319919 Kelley The purpose of this Small Grant for Exploratory research (SGER)
is to plan and carry out a key component to the first incoherent scatter
observations in the frequency range 20-25 MHz by using a huge Radio Telescope
located near Kharkov, Ukraine. The work is closely coupled to the joint proposal
from Tulsa University and te Radiophysical Research institute (NIRFI) in Nizhny
Novgorod. Under the latter proposal an antenna field will be constructed at
Vasil"sursk in Russia. Upon completion of one-third of the projected antenna
field, a joint experiment will be carried outto test the notion that incoherent
scatter can be carried out in the bi-static mode described here. The results of
the project will be crucial in assessing the performance of the full system
which will have three times the power and three times the antenna size. In turn
these data will allow the NSF to gauge the importance of taking the next steps
in a possible International facility for probing the inner magnetosphere with
incoherent scatter and the source of the aurora with coherent scatter. The
proposal is appropriate for a SGER grant since it is clearly exploratory and
high risk. There has never been an incoherent scatter radar measurement at this
frequency nor has there been a way to determine the location of the outer
boundary of the plasmasphere by radar methods. This experiment will allow a
clear assessment of the ability of a ground based system to track this important
boundary. In addition the very difficult present situation for scientists in the
Ukraine makes such a cooperative effort very important in the nearest future.
Among other things, immediate support is needed for the large UTR-2 antenna
array (radio telescope) whose value for the world radio-scientific community is
unique and which is critically important for the project described here. ***