* 9319097
* Neural Control of Adrenocortical Function
* BIO,IOS
* 06/01/1994,08/31/1997
* William Engeland, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Christopher Platt
* 08/31/1997
* USD 255,774.00

9319097 Engeland Stress Activates the neuroendocrine system through a feedback
mechanism involving the hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal system. Corticotropin
releasing factor, a peptide hormone, is released from the hypothalamus and
travels to the pituitary where it triggers the release of adrenocorticotropic
hormone (ACTH). ACTH travels in the blood to the adrenal glands where it
stimulates the release of glucocorticoids, such as cortisol and corticosterone.
This system is also involved in the maintenance of the body's normal internal
functioning. Glucocorticoids not only help the body respond to stress but play
an integral part of daily life and adaptation to environmental change. Recently,
Dr. Engeland and others have found changes in plasma glucocorticoids in the
absence of changes in plasma ACTH under both stressful and non-stress
conditions. The finding challenges our simplistic view of adrenocortical
secretion and indicates that other mechanisms are involved in the release of
adrenal hormones. Recent evidence suggests a role for the adrenal nerves but the
specific contribution of adrenal neural input to physiological responses are not
known. Using a variety of innovative techniques, Dr. Engeland will characterize
the contribution of adrenal neural activity to non-stress and stress- induced
secretion of adrenal glucocorticoids. He will then determine which
neurotransmitters are mediating its effect. Finally Dr.Engeland will identify
the adrenal cellular mechanisms that mediate neural effects on steroidogenesis.
These results will provide a new understanding about why exposure to the same
environmental conditions that appear to have similar effects on ACTH release may
produce different adrenocortical responses. The function of most tissues is
dependent on the maintenance of normal plasma glucocorticoids levels. Aberrant
adrenal hormone secretion can result in weaken muscles and suppressed organ
systems. Understanding the nature of the interaction between adrenal nerve input
and ACTH will provide a new perspective on physiological and pathological
alternations in adrenocortical secretion. Thus, findings resulting from this
basic research may eventually lead to the development of new pharmacological or
surgical approaches to control adrenal secretion of glucocorticoids. ***