* 9319891
* Protecting the Public's Trust:  A Search for Balance Among  Benefits and Conflicts in University Industry Relationships
* SBE,SES
* 10/15/1993,07/31/1995
* Teresa Campbell, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Rachelle D. Hollander
* 07/31/1995
* USD 46,603.00

9319891 SLAUGHTER As the economy shifts from a heavy emphasis on defense science
and technology (S&amp;T) to a focus on civilian S&amp;T and the application of
innovation to commercial markets, decision makers within universities,
businesses and government agencies are eager to learn how to shape successful
partnerships to develop technology that is beneficial to all participants and
contributes to social and economic progress. Since 1980, the numbers of
business-university partnerships have increased dramatically. Several authors
have identified the problems and barriers that must be overcome and many have
described the primary characteristics of university-industry relationships.
However, few studies have investigated empirically the factors that influence
organizations to become involved with each other and, as a possible result,
increasingly share similar perspectives and interests. Given that the trend is
toward greater numbers of partnerships, it would be useful to understand and
identify empirically any compelling factors and normative behaviors that might
exist between institutions and corporations, particularly those related to
possible conflicts. This project investigates whether scientists and
administrators involved in university-industry cooperation in corporations and
universities share similar perspective and mutual interests, and, if so, to
determine the implications for the two sets of institutions and for federal
policy toward these institutions. The study seeks to understand the factors
influencing university-industry relationships in order to provide decision
makers with insight into issues and recommendations that might address this
phenomenon. The research project consists of a survey instrument that will
establish an empirical understanding of university and industry perceptions
related to benefits, conflicts, and mutual interests. It will include
universities and colleges from all the major Carnegie classifications as well as
both small, medium, and large companies, delineated by Business Week (1993) and
Inc. (Mangelsdorf 1992). Within these organizations, individuals from a variety
of university administrative, academic, industry management, and scientific
levels will be asked to participate. Also, persons involved in cooperative
activities as well as those who are not will be included. The study focuses on
potential conflicts and provides insight into possible implications of potential
organizational transformations that may be occurring and experiences and
mechanisms used to pursue mutually beneficiary cooperation while ameliorating
potential conflicts.