* 9319838
* Seismic Resistance of Composite Coupled Walls
* NONE,NONE
* 01/15/1994,12/31/1997
* Bahram Shahrooz, University of Cincinnati Main Campus
* Continuing grant
* Shih-Chi Liu
* 12/31/1997
* USD 165,338.00

WPC 2 Y B Z V #| x U^ x @ X @ Courier 10 Pitch z N x x x U^ x @ X @ 2 Z Courier
10 Pitch < #| x 2 : F R 12-21-93 03:46p Dana Brigham Dana Brigham . 3 ' 3 '
Standard 3 ' 3 ' Standard < X ` h p x (# % '0* , .81 3 5@8 : <H? A 4 < D L ! 3 '
3 ' Standard 3 ' 3 ' Standard < 3 ' 3 ' Standard 3 ' 3 ' Standard < 3 ' 3 '
Standard 3 ' 3 ' Standard < # x \ P C U^X P# 9319838 Bahram Shahrooz This
project conducts basic research examining fundamental behavior of structures
employing mixed steel concrete construction which has been lagging. The existing
knowledge base, particularly for seismic performance of a large class of mixed
constructions needs to be expanded before comprehensive design provisions can be
established to advance engineering practice. Concrete walls or cores have been
frequently coupled by steel beams, and steel perimeter frames are commonly
attached to central concrete cores through outrigger beams. A major concern is
the transfer of forces from steel coupling beams or outrigger beams into the
walls or cores, particularly beyond the serviceability limit state. An
experimental and analytical study of the fundamental seismic performance of
concrete walls coupled through steel or composite beams is undertaken. The
experimental phase of the research includes testing of six isolated connections
representing half scale subassemblies. The specimens comprise a portion of a
reinforced concrete wall and stub steel beams (either encased or unencased)
simulating one half of a coupling beam. The parameters that will be investigated
include: (a) effects of construction joints above and below coupling beams; (b)
boundary element transverse reinforcement in the connection region; (c) addition
of face bearing plates to the coupling beam as an effort to mobilize h) 0*0*0*
compression struts in the connection region; (d) philosophies for sizing steel
coupling beams, i.e. design as link beams in eccentrically braced frames or as
"regular flexural" members such that web yielding will be prevented prior to
development of plastic moment capacity; (e) performance of encased versus
unencased steel coupling beams; and (f) requirements for preventing premature
flange and web buckling. The pr oject will provide basic input for developing
appropriate design model and seismic guidelines for such coupled structural
systems.