* 9319909
* Group Dynamics, Reproductive Success and Hibitat Utilization in Chimpanzees and Baboons
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/1994,01/31/1998
* Craig Packer, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Mark L. Weiss
* 01/31/1998
* USD 237,568.00

9319909 Anne Pusey In the past 30 years, Jane Goodall revolutionized our
understanding of chimpanzee behavior, and in the process gave us an
extraordinary perspective on ourselves and our behavioral origins. Chimpanzees
are fascinating in their own right. They are one of the few mammalian species to
show female dispersal and male-male cooperation, and this continuing study will
provide new insights into the causes and consequences of this unusual social
organization. Though less prominent than the chimp study, the Gombe baboon study
is the longest and most extensive field study of any African monkey. This
current research effort, in coordination with Goodall and Tanzanian
collaborators, will involve three interconnecting projects. First, long-term
demographic and behavioral data on chimpanzees and olive baboons will be
analyzed and new data will be collected. This will include Goodall's records
from the past three decades. The emphasis will be an examination of the costs
and benefits of female dispersion and male sociality. In contrast, olive baboons
show the social organization typical of old world monkeys, with home ranges
maintained largely by the females and males moving between troops. This research
effort will investigate group-level factors influencing female reproductive
success, and the causes of individual variability in male reproductive success,
social relationships and paternal care. The large sample sizes allow
sophisticated statistical analysis of demography and social behavior. The second
project involves a highly detailed survey of the diversity and distribution of
vegetation in the entire park -- an area of unusual plant diversity. The
vegetation studies will clarify the ecological basis of chimpanzee social
organization, the importance of inter-troop competition in baboons, and will
also contribute to the inventory of biodiversity in Tanzania. The third project
will use DNA extracted from feces of both species to assess paternity, measure
genetic relatedness and levels of inbreeding. By perfecting the extraction of
nuclear DNA from feces and developing baboon-specific primers, the team will
facilitate paternity studies in other primate field studies.