* 9319788
* U.S.-Korea Cooperative Research: Supersymmetry Phenomenology and Superstrings
* O/D,OISE
* 08/15/1994,07/31/1998
* Michael Dine, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Standard Grant
* Gerald Edwards
* 07/31/1998
* USD 21,882.00

9319788 Dine This award provides funds to permit Dr. Michael Dine, Department of
Physics, University of California, Santa Cruz, to pursue with Dr. Soo-Jong Rey,
Department of Physics, Seoul National University, Korea, for 36 months, a
program of cooperative research on supersymmetry phenomenology and superstrings.
In particular, this research seeks to provide a theoretical and phenomenological
understanding of low-energy supersymmetry and superstring theories. Theoretical
arguments suggest that nature may be supersymmetric. If this is so, it must be
described by a supergravity theory, and supergravity must be embedded in a more
fundamental theory such as the heterotic string. The collaborators will use this
theory to investigate several aspects of low energy supersymmetry phenomenology.
The PI is respected as a leader in the field of elementary particle physics
whose work has had a major influence on numerous subdisciplines including
supersymmetry, supergravity, and superstring theory. His Korean collaborator
also is an active string theorist. This project is relevant to the objectives of
the U.S.-Korea Cooperative Science Program which seeks to increase the level of
cooperation between U.S. and Korean scientists and engineers through the
exchange of scientific information, ideas, skills, and techniques and through
collaboration on problems of mutual benefit. Korean participation in the project
is supported by the Korea Science and Engineering Foundation (KOSEF). ***