* 9319752
* A Theoretical Analysis of Crossed Social Categorization     Effects
* SBE,BCS
* 02/01/1994,01/31/1998
* Norman Miller, University of Southern California
* Continuing Grant
* Steven Breckler
* 01/31/1998
* USD 262,480.00

9319752 MILLER ABSTRACT In culturally plural societies such as the U.S.,
individuals typically belong to several groups, (e.g. race, religion,
occupation, place of residence, hobby or interest groups, etc.) When the social
category memberships of an actor and another individual provide convergent
evidence of their respective ingroup and outgroup identities, category
distinctiveness is high and prejudice or bias is likely because there is no
competing loyalties. By contrast, when an actor and a target person belong to
different social categories on one dimension but are members of the same
category on a second dimension, such crossed clues for ingroup/outgroup identity
sometimes reduce intergroup bias in comparison to that found with convergent
cues for outgroup membership. Six specific patterns regarding the relative bias
toward double ingroup, crossed, and double outgroup targets have emerged in
prior research. This research invokes principles related to affective arousal,
cognitive sources of variation in category salience, and the structure of the
setting, to explain when each pattern will be found. The current studies assess
these theoretical principles in the context of impression formation tasks, and
in ingroup interaction settings. Key measures include self-reports of liking,
perceived similarity, and reward allocations toward ingroup, crossed, and
outgroup targets, as well behavioral preferences for interacting with different
types of targets. Electromyographic measures (EMG) of non-visible movement in
facial muscles that control the smile and the frown (furrowing of the brow) will
assess non-voluntary positive and negative affect respectively. This is
important in studies that use targets who are members of racial-ethnic groups
because current norms for our college age subjects invoke a masking of
expression of negative attitudes toward ethnic minority groups on the paper and
pencil measures typically used in laboratory research. Results from the proposed
research will be useful for structuring more effective intergroup contact
interventions and for reducing intergroup conflict. Intergroup hostility and
conflict across racial-ethnic gender, and other important dimensions of social
category differentiation (e.g. age) can be a source of misplaced energy in the
work setting, contributing to lowered productivity. The outcomes of the proposed
research can add to the development of a set of rules for structuring work
settings so as to minimize this source of diminished productivity.