* 9319539
* Prenatal Developmental of Functional Connections in the     Mammalian Visual System
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/1994,07/31/1997
* Carla Shatz, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing grant
* Jim Edwards
* 07/31/1997
* USD 349,084.00

During development, the brain must lay down an incredibly complex system of
connections between nerve cells that number in the billions. Central issues for
this development include how nerve cells are directed to form proper
connections, and to what extent nerve cell activity is necessary for connections
to form normally. The visual system of mammals has been extensively studied to
approach these issues, and the basic wiring patterns are well known. This
project uses an important area, called the lateral geniculate nucleus, where the
fibers of the optic nerve in the eye terminate on cells that project to the
visual cortex. Electrophysiological recordings, optical recordings using special
dyes, and pharmacological manipulations will be used to explore how cellular
activity, and in particular activity correlated among particular cells, is
important during prenatal development before full vision is established. Results
will be important for understanding how functioning of nerve cells is important
to establishing connections, and forming a bridge between a systems-level
description of mammalian visual development and the formulation of cellular
mechanisms to account for the process of activity-dependent development. The
results may have important applicability in understanding the changes that occur
in learning and memory, as well as being important for developmental biology and
sensory neuroscience.