* 9319999
* Social Influence Factors in Group Brainstorming
* SBE,BCS
* 01/15/1994,12/31/1995
* Paul Paulus, University of Texas at Arlington
* Standard Grant
* Jean B. Intermaggio
* 12/31/1995
* USD 67,576.00

9319999 PAULUS ABSTRACT Groups in organizations and industry often meet to
generate ideas about important problems or issues. Sometimes such groups use
brainstorming procedures in which they try to generate as many ideas as possible
without concern for quality in a noncritical atmosphere. It is presumed that
such an approach will yield both large numbers of ideas and a number of high
quality ones. However, research has demonstrated that brainstorming groups
generate fewer ideas and fewer high quality ideas than a comparable number of
individuals brainstorming alone. Recent studies by the investigator have
provided evidence that social influence factors may play a critical role in the
performance of interactive groups. There is a tendency for individuals in
interactive groups to match each others' performance. In laboratory groups with
previously unacquainted members, there also appears to be a tendency for the low
performing members to have a greater impact than high performing ones. The
social influence model suggests that the poor performance of brainstorming
groups results in part from their tendency to develop low performance norms or
standards. On the other hand, the presence of productive group members may
stimulate the other group members to be more productive. In several experiments
using brainstorming groups of four individuals, the ability of two of the
participants to generate ideas will be varied. In some conditions these two
participants will be able to generate many ideas, and in other conditions they
will be able to generate only a few ideas. It is expected that the variation in
rate of co-worker activity will influence the activity level of the other
participants during the brainstorming session as well as in a subsequent session
with new participants. This series of studies will increase our understanding of
the processes involved in group brainstorming and group task performance in
general. It is likely that the social processes observed in group brainstorming
will occur whenever group members combine their intellectual resources with
those of others in an attempt to achieve some product or goal. Since much idea
generation in science and industry involves group interaction, this series of
studies will provide important information about the factors that influence both
the productivity and creativity of such groups. The results of this research may
suggest ways to enhance the effectiveness of groups on such tasks.