* 9319051
* Mechanisms of Submicron Droplet Production and Ion          Evaporation in Electrosprays
* ENG,CBET
* 04/01/1994,09/30/1998
* Juan de la Mora, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Mihail Roco
* 09/30/1998
* USD 225,000.00

9319051 de la Mora It is proposed to investigate the physics of the formation of
ultrafine aerosol particles from electrosprays, and ion emission from droplets.
The experimental and theoretical study on particle formation is well documented,
and has relevance in an area of focus of the Fluid, Particulate and Hydraulic
Systems programs related to advanced materials research. The second part on ion
emission seems difficult to be performed as described. The P.I. has a good track
record in his previous grant. Four referees have rated this proposal with 3 Very
Good and 1 Good. The P.I. is a creative researcher, who has the expertise as
well as most of the experimental facilities to conduct the research. The first
topic of the project, on the generation of monodispered submicron and nanometer
particles, is highly recommended for funding. Several comments were made on
improving the experimental approach (control of the residence time of the fluid
in the Taylor cone during measurements) and a suggestion was made on using
numerical simulations for data interpretation. It is expected that the P.I. will
address a range of fundamental issues, with a reasonable chance of success. The
second topic of the project has a lower chance of generating new, significant
results as compared on the first topic, and has lowered the overall rating of
this proposal. That area should be de-emphasized in the project. By considering
the goal and quality of this proposal relevant to ultrafine particle synthesis
and the unique theoretical- experimental background of the P.I., a standard
three-year award of $225,000 with starting date on March 1, 1994, is
recommended, with the following suggestions: (i) The main focus of the project
will be on ultrafine particle production (ii) Numerical modeling of droplet
formation should be investigated in order to better understand the mechanisms
and to generalized the results. ***