* 9319074
* RUI Collaborative Research:  The Interactive Effects of     Spatial and Temporal Patch Structure on Faunal Dynamics
* BIO,DEB
* 09/15/1994,08/31/1998
* Pamela Silver, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Thomas M. Frost
* 08/31/1998
* USD 87,550.00

9319074 Botts Theoretical studies have argued that the spatial and temporal
arrangement of habitat patches may have a strong influence on population size
and persistence in environments that are heterogeneous and/or disturbed. Few
experimental studies have addressed the interactive effects of spatial
arrangement and patch age on local population dynamics. In this research, the
PI's will conduct a set of experiments to determine how the distance between
patches and patch age influence the abundances and distributions of patch-
dwelling organisms. The test organisms will be stream invertebrates within
experimental patches of woody/leafy debris. First, the PI's will determine the
spatial scale over which fauna potentially can respond to patch arrangement by
measuring species-specific dispersal distances in the field. Next, experiments
will be designed to manipulate the distance among patches and patch age,
followed by monitoring species responses based on population abundance and
distribution. %%% This research is broadly relevant to both theoretical and
empirical investigations of patch dynamics and it is of particular interest to
lotic ecologists because it addresses how habitat heterogeneity and faunal
dispersal in streams interact to ensure population persistence in highly
variable environments. in addition, this work will provide one of the first
empirical applications of theoretical models which suggest using dispersal
ability as a scaling function when studying spatial habitat heterogeneity.