* 9319229
* Investigations of the Stellar and Cluster Populations of    the Inner Galactic Halo
* MPS,AST
* 08/01/1994,07/31/1997
* Robert Zinn, Yale University
* Continuing Grant
* Vernon Pankonin
* 07/31/1997
* USD 150,000.00

9319229 Zinn Recent investigations have indicated that the flattening of the
galactic halo and the morphology of the horizontal branch (i.e. the relative
frequencies of red and blue HB stars) of the halo vary with distance from the
galactic center. The work of Dr. Zinn and other astronomers on the system of
globular clusters suggests that this is due to the composite nature of the halo.
The globular clusters of the inner halo have characteristics that are indicative
of very old ages. While this Old halo population extends into the outer halo, at
large galactocentric distances, the majority of clusters belong to a separate
population, termed the Young halo. The properties of the Old halo clusters
suggests that this system is a relic of the collapse of the Galaxy that
ultimately produced the galactic disk and bulge, while those of the Young halo
suggest that it is the debris of one or more large satellite galaxy (similar to
the Large Magellanic Cloud) that merged with the Milky Way and was tidally
disrupted in the process. The research carried out with this award is designed
to test this hypothesis for the structure and formation of the galactic halo and
to provide valuable information on the inner halo even if the hypothesis needs
to be discarded. Observations of a selected sample of RR Lyrae variable stars
will indicate if the stellar population of the inner halo is kinematically
similar to the Old halo globular clusters. Samples of halo stars near the Sun
will be examined for evidence that they are a mixture of the Old and Young
halos. The results obtained by these investigations will provide a more detailed
picture of the inner halo and the relationship between the globular cluster
system and the stellar halo. They will therefore further our understanding of
the evolution of our galaxy.