* 9319044
* Collaborative Research:  Microbial and Geochemical          Controls on Metal Cycling in Lake Vanda
* GEO,OPP
* 06/01/1994,12/31/1998
* William Green, Miami University
* Continuing grant
* Polly A. Penhale
* 12/31/1998
* USD 203,539.00

9319044 Green Lake Vanda is an ice-covered, permanently stratified lake. The
water column, 69-meter deep, presents a wide range of geochemical and
microbiological environments. The lake's 1200-year stratification history and
its water column stability make it a model system for exploring the relationship
between chemical processes and microbial diversity and activity. Of special
interest is the relationship between successive reductive and oxidative zones
and the microbial and chemical characteristics of those zones. Dr. Green and
colleague plan the first simultaneous study of chemical and microbial community
structure using a combination of measurements, including determinations of
microbial biomass and diversity as estimated by microscopy and nucleic acid
extraction and identification. Central to this work is the role played by
manganese-reducing organisms in metal cycling in the Vanda water column. The
capacity for microbially mediated manganese cycling will be assessed by
determining the abundance of manganese reducers and the mechanisms involved in
Mn reduction. In addition, a detailed study of metal transport mechanisms is
planned along the 27-km course of the Onyx River, the lake's sole inflow.
Determination of metal loadings and residences times in the lake will be made.
***