* 9319278
* Strontium Markers of Reproduction in Maternal Bone of Macaca Nemestrina
* SBE,BCS
* 02/01/1994,07/31/2000
* Robert Dunnell, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Mark L. Weiss
* 07/31/2000
* USD 169,128.00

ABSTRACT P.I. Laura Newell SBR- 9319278 Probably the most important innovation
to affect archaeological interpretation in the last two decades has been the
appreciation that human bone often carries chemical and physical traces of the
health and dietary conditions encountered by an individual during life. This
appreciation is linked to the development of instrumentation that permits these
often minute traces to be quantified. But this potential has been slow to be
realized, as basic research into the relationship of bone composition and
structure to specific conditions under which individuals live has been sparse.
This research is one instance of the sort of necessary basic research that has
been lacking. Strontium (Sr), like calcium (Ca), is ingested and absorbed from
plant and animal matter in the diet. Archaeological populations show marked
differences frequently in the ratio of Sr/Ca between male and female skeletal
materials. Two different explanations for the sexually dimorphic ratios have
been offered - either they are the result of gender-linked dietary differences,
or of physiological responses to the demands of reproduction in women. Both
hypotheses are interesting, but not verified or elaborated. While the
reproductive link has been established in rats, preliminary studies of modern
human populations do not show this effect, thus rendering the archaeological
physiological inference suspect. This proposal will address the possibility of
physiological alteration of Sr/Ca ratios during pregnancy and lactation. An NIH
grant to the P.I. is generating macaque bone samples with vital markers placed
in early pregnancy and immediately post-weaning in approximately 100 reproducing
females. Examination of thin sections from these samples by electron microprobe
WDS analysis will determine Sr/Ca ratios before, during, and after reproduction
in a nonhuman primate species appropriate for the evaluation of the
physiological model. *** P\anthro\jfried\9319278.abs o ^ ` - / I K P m o ! ! ! !
D o o ( Times New Roman Symbol &amp; Arial F " h E e E e = Jonathan Friedlaender
Jonathan Friedlaender