* 9319164
* Dissertation Research:  An Ethnoarchaeological Study:       Subsistence Economies in the Melendiz Plain, Central        Anatolia, Turkey
* SBE,BCS
* 02/01/1994,01/31/1996
* Patty Jo Watson, Washington University
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 01/31/1996
* USD 9,500.00

9319164 Watson Under the direction of Dr. Patty Jo Watson, Ms. Ertug-Yaras will
collect data for her doctoral dissertation. She will study current subsistence
practices in a traditional Turkish village located in the Cappadocia region,
south-east of Ankara. Ms. Ertug-Yaras is an archaeologist interested in
understanding the past and she will examine present and recent practices to
glean information relevant to this goal. The economy of the village is based on
agriculture, basically field cropping and gardening, as well as the husbandry of
sheep, goats and cattle. Although the economy is integrated into the regional,
national and even international systems, preliminaries studies indicate that
local knowledge about pre-market oriented techniques still exists. Ms. Ertug-
Yaras will collect basic social and demographic data. She will also observe and
document current subsistence activities and especially focus on the gathering of
wild plants which still play an important economic role. Use of animals and herd
management strategies will also be examined. Finally extensive structured
interviews will be conducted to record strategies which are no longer employed.
The results will then be applied to an archaeological site in the region. The
domestication of animals such as goats and sheep and plants such as barley and
wheat occurred just over 10,000 years ago in the Near East and sites in Turkey
and adjacent regions document this process. This Neolithic revolution marks a
major turning point in human prehistory and it laid the groundwork for the
development of complex societies. While many relevant sites have been excavated,
archaeological material does not speak for itself and can be difficult to
interpret. Studies of present day peoples who appear to engage in some of the
same activities provide an extremely useful interpretive context. The Ms. Ertug-
Yaras has been fortunate enough to locate a region in which both early
archaeological sites and a range of traditiona l activities are present. This
research is important for several reasons. It will provide data of value to
archaeologists who work in many parts of the Near East. It holds the potential
to shed new light on the origins of complex society and will assist in the
training of a promising young scientist. ***