* 9319558
* The Experience of Regret:  What, When, and Why
* SBE,BCS
* 01/15/1994,12/31/1997
* Thomas Gilovich, Cornell University
* Continuing Grant
* Steven Breckler
* 12/31/1997
* USD 172,147.00

9319558 GILOVICH ABSTRACT Previous research indicates that people experience
more regret over negative outcomes that stem from actions taken than over
identical outcomes that stem from actions foregone. For example, someone who
loses money by selling stocks to buy another one is believed to regret the loss
more than someone who thinks about switching but hangs onto his or her current
stock. As compelling as this might seem, it conflicts with an observation from
everyday life: when people describe what they regret most, their regrets often
center around things they failed to do. The purpose of this research is to
further our understanding of regret by reconciling everyday observation with the
results of previous research. The research has three objectives. The first is to
verify everyday observation. Do omissions in fact predominate in the biggest
regrets of people's lives? A series of structured interviews will ascertain the
most common regrets in people's lives. The second objective follows from the
first. If people's biggest regrets involve things they failed to do in their
lives, how can we account for previous research that demonstrates the opposite
result? This research will explore whether there is a systematic time course to
the experience of regret: people regret their unfortunate actions more in the
short term (as current research suggests), but their unfortunate inactions more
in the long run (as everyday experience suggests). An experimental test of this
proposed temporal pattern will be conducted. The third objective is to
understand why this temporal pattern might exist. In particular, a series of
laboratory experiments will examine: 1) why regret over action tends to diminish
with time, 2) why regret over inaction tends to intensify with time, and 3) why
our regrettable inactions remain more cognitively available to us in the long
run. By furthering our understanding of the regret, this research promises to
improv e everyday judgement and decision making. In addition, the examination of
underlying mechanisms should expand our knowledge of basic social psychological
phenomena such as post-decision dissonance reduction, subjective confidence, and
counterfactual thinking.