* 9319421
* Quantitative Analysis of Growth Defects in II-VI            Semiconductors by X-Ray Diffraction
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/1994,07/31/1998
* Richard Matyi, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* LaVerne D. Hess
* 07/31/1998
* USD 299,000.00

9319421 Matyi The overall goals of this program are (1) to develop advanced
analytical techniques based on x-ray diffraction for the quantitative study of
crystallographic defects in II-VI semiconductors; (2) to develop a better
understanding of the effects of alloying on the crystal defect structure and the
process of defect generation; and (3) to articulate the effect of structural
defects on the optical properties of these materials. The intrinsic defect
structure of the starting materials will be fully characterized using a broad
array of advanced x-ray diffraction methods, with particular emphasis given to
high resolution triple crystal diffraction and diffuse scattering measurements.
We will also explore the usefulness of anomalous transmission and short
wavelength x-ray diffraction measurements as alternative methods for defect
characterization. In addition to analyzing as-grown samples of Cadmium Telluride
and its ternary alloys, samples will be annealed under Group II and Group VI
overpressures to alter the defect structure and optical behavior in a controlled
fashion. %%% The primary goal of this program is to develop a fundamental-
understanding of the growth, processing, and properties of wide bandgap II-VI
semiconductor materials so that they can be exploited in the realization of a
variety of advanced electronic and photonic devices. In addition to these
fundamental research goals, the proposed research will lead to a better
understanding the relationship between overall II-VI materials growth and
processing methodologies and the physical properties of II VI semiconductors. An
important feature of the program is the training of graduate and undergraduate
students in a fundamentally and technologically significant area of materials
and processing research. This research will contribute to improving the general
performance of advanced devices and integrated circuits used in computing,
information processing, and telecommunications. ***