* 9319379
* Support Office for Aerogeophysical Research (SOAR)
* GEO,OPP
* 08/01/1994,01/31/2001
* Donald Blankenship, University of Texas at Austin
* Cooperative Agreement
* Scott Borg
* 01/31/2001
* USD 5,932,266.00

This award for a cooperative agreement supports the technical foundation of an
aerogeophysical facility that is required for several projects within the Polar
Earth Sciences and Polar Glaciology Programs. The facility is referred to as
SOAR, the Support Office for Aerogeophysical Research. The function of SOAR is
to facilitate aerogeophysical research over continental Antarctica toward an
understanding of the dynamic behavior of the ice sheet and the nature of the
lithosphere beneath the ice sheet. SOAR will support peer-reviewed research
requiring high precision laser altimetery, gravity, magnetics and navigational
data sets. Tasking for SOAR will be negotiated annually. The first projects to
be supported are investigations in West Antarctica. West Antarctica is
characterized by two kinds of the Earth s most dynamic systems, a continental
rift (the West Antarctic Rift System) and a marine based ice sheet, the West
Antarctic Ice Sheet (WAIS). Active continental rift systems, caused by divergent
plate motions, result in thinned continental crust. Associated with the thin
crust are fault-bounded sedimentary basins, active volcanism, and elevated heat
flow. Marine ice sheets are characterized by rapidly moving streams of ice,
penetrating and draining a slowly moving ice reservoir. Evidence left by past
marine ice sheets indicates that they may have a strongly non-linear response to
long-term climate change which results in massive and rapid discharges of ice.
Understanding the evolution of the ice stream system and its interaction with
the interior ice is the key to understanding this non-linear response. In
addition to these specific projects, SOAR will provide information essential to
site selection decisions for a West Antarctic ice core as well as critical
information for selection of locations of over-snow seismic transects. SOAR
represents a unique experiment in research support for the US Antarctic program.
It has the potential to revolutionize the conduct of Earth Science and
Glaciology research in Antarctica.