* 9319028
* Genetic Analysis of Morphologic Differentiation in          Saccharomyces Cerevisiae
* BIO,MCB
* 02/01/1994,07/31/1997
* Alan Myers, Iowa State University
* Continuing Grant
* Philip Harriman
* 07/31/1997
* USD 297,169.00

Myers 9319028 This project is investigating the molecular mechanisms controlling
morphologic development. Multicellular eucaryotes contain many types of
genetically identical yet morphologically distinct cells, indicating morphologic
differentiation is an integral aspect of development. Little information is
available regarding the molecular mechanisms by which morphologic
differentiation is regulated. This question will be addressed through the
identification of gene loci that influence a defined morphologic differentiation
pathway in the ascomycete Saccharomyces cerevisiae. A screen is being used to
recognize genes within this group likely to code for regulatory components of
the differentiation response. The genes will be characterize by molecular
cloning methods, and their sites of action will be ordered in a presumed
hierarchy of events that determine the differentiation state. The first specific
objective of this project is to identify additional loci in the S. cerevisiae
genome required for normal control of cellular dimorphism. Genetic analysis
using visual characterization of cell and colony morphology as a scorable
phenotype will accomplish this goal. The second objective is to isolate selected
genes by molecular cloning, and to determine the primary structure of the
corresponding protein products by nucleotide sequence analysis. This goal will
be met by selecting plasmids from a genomic library based on their ability to
restore yeast-like growth to a specific pseudohyphal mutant. The role of each
cloned gene in determination of morphologic differentiation will be confirmed by
site-specific mutagenesis and gene replacement methods. The third objective is
to determine whether the genes act in a linear pathway controlling the
differentiation response and, if so, to determine their relative sites of
action. This goal will be accomplished by determining epistasis relationships
between genetic elements that either stimulate or repress pseudohyphal growth.
%%% Accomplishing these objectives will provide significant new insights into
the molecular mechanisms that control development of cell shape. Specific
proteins will be identified that control morphologic differentiation, and their
primary structures most likely will suggest biochemical activities by which this
regulation is accomplished. Information regarding the relative sites of action
of these molecules in a differentiation pathway will suggest the function of
specific factors. Future investigations could then utilize this information to
characterize control of morphologic development at the biochemical level, and to
examine whether similar mechanisms are broadly conserved in evolution. ***