* 9319141
* The Wyoming King Air as a National Facility
* GEO,AGS
* 07/01/1994,12/31/1998
* John Marwitz, University of Wyoming
* Cooperative Agreement
* James R. Huning
* 12/31/1998
* USD 3,861,942.00

9319141 Marwitz Observations of the atmosphere through remote sensing and in-
situ measurement are necessary for advancement in atmospheric science.
Instrumented research aircraft have been invaluable in providing these
observations over the last four decades. The need for such aircraft will be
great over the next few years for research covering a broad range of research
problems including atmospheric chemistry, mesoscale meteorology and cloud
physics. These areas of atmospheric science are high priority research areas for
the next decade. This award makes available to the entire atmospheric sciences
community the University of Wyoming King Air research aircraft. The Wyoming King
Air will be treated as all other atmospheric sciences community facilities with
allocation being made by an NSF Facility Advisory Council based on a community
peer-review process. The University of Wyoming personnel are experienced in
airborne research and the King Air is a state-of-the-technology research
platform. During a previous three year award, the University demonstrated
exceptional performance in servicing the community needs. This award also helps
maintain an active program in airborne research at the University of Wyoming and
extends this educational benefit to other institutions through emerging
agreements with other universities. The University of Wyoming produced many
excellent airborne research scientists over the last three years. ***