* 9320066
* CISE Research Instrumentation:  Equipment for IC            Measurement and Testing
* CSE,EIA
* 03/01/1994,02/28/1995
* Michael Green, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Tse-yun Feng
* 02/28/1995
* USD 35,758.00

9320066 Green The equipment purchased will be dedicated to support research in
analog and digital VLSI. It will be used for several projects, including in
particular: design of fully differential current-mode circuits that do not need
common-mode feedback; design of analog IC's for radiation detection systems;
research of superconducting technologies for the design of extremely high-speed
oversampling analog-to-digital converters. The test and measurement equipment to
be purchased includes a distortion analyzer, a semiconductor parameter analyzer
and a color plotter. The distortion analyzer will be used in the design of fully
differential current-mode circuits and the design of analog IC's for radiation
detection systems. It is essential for obtaining precise values of low-level
noise and distortion present in analog integrated circuits. The semiconductor
parameter analyzer will also be used in these projects to obtain measurement of
the characteristics of individual devices and subcircuits (e.g., a differential
pair). Such measurements are needed to determine the effects of individual
device parameters on the performance of an overall large circuit. The color
plotter is to be used on all three of the projects in order to check the circuit
layouts for errors before submitting the chip to the foundry. This is
particularly important for analog circuits which generally cannot be fully
checked using tools optimized for checking digital circuits. *** E B TERMINALHLP
@ j 9320066 Green The equipment purchased will be dedicated to support research
in analog and digital VLSI. It will be used fo P Z : &lt; K P $ $ $ G P Z P
Times Symbol " Helvetica Chicago Times New Roman &amp; Arial 5 Courier New R
ZapfDingbats Palatino Greek GenMath MathMeteor MT Extra % % " ; e; e 5
Green/SUNYSB Mark Purvis Mark Purvis