* 9320304
* RUI/SGER:  Collaborative Research:  Impacts of a            Catastrophic Flood on Nutrient Sources and Organic          Processing in Large River Ecosystems
* BIO,DEB
* 09/15/1993,02/28/1995
* Michael Delong, Winona State University
* Standard Grant
* Richard F. Dame
* 02/28/1995
* USD 24,353.00

9320304 DeLong The Mississippi River and some of its tributaries are currently
experiencing catastrophic floods which have significantly modified their typical
hydrological patterns. The ecological impacts of an extreme flood occurring
outside of the normal flood period should have substantial effects on this
important lotic ecosystem, such as altering normal patterns of imput, storage,
and transport of organic matter and nutrients. In addition, sources of organic
matter which are not normally available may be introduced into the river at this
time. These changes in nutrient supply and timing should act as major
disturbance to the trophic dynamics of the Mississippi River Ecosystem. %%% We
hypothesize that the catastrophic flood presently occurring in the Mississippi
River ecosystem will produce a shift in normal tropical processes by altering
the role of different sources of organic matter in the riverine food web. This
hypothesis will be tested by evaluating the stable-isotype ratios in the food
webs of four rivers (two flooded and two unflooded, flood plain rivers). During
three dates over a year period, we will collect 5 replicates of 21 sample units
per river, each representing a nutrient source or organic processor. We will
then determine the composition 13C and 15N and C/N ratio in the sample units. To
ascertain whether changes in the Mississippi River ecosystem over time reflect
the effects of the flood or merely represent normal variations, we will obtain
samples from four rivers: the Missouri and upper Mississippi Rivers, which are
currently experiencing the worst floods of the century, and the Oh io and Wabash
Rivers, which are flood plain rivers that have not been inundated by flood
waters. Information from this study will contribute to a data base useful for
making management decisions involving the role of flood plains in river
ecosystems. : ? Y F m m a Times New Roman Symbol &amp; Arial &amp; Technical
&amp; GreekMathSymbols &amp; FrankfurtGothicHeavy " h G3 G3 &amp; f - Gayle
Edmonds Gayle Edmonds