* 9320754
* Collaborative Research on Dependence Assessment for Decision and Risk Analysis
* NONE,NONE
* 03/01/1994,08/31/1995
* Robert Clemen, University of Oregon Eugene
* Standard Grant
* Robin A. Cantor
* 08/31/1995
* USD 47,303.00

Expert judgments are key inputs in important decision-making problems, and the
elicitation and modeling of such judgments are formalized in methodologies such
as decision analysis, risk analysis, and expert systems. As problems grow in
complexity (e.g., multi-systems modeling for regional and global environmental
change), with many variables of interest, assessing and modeling expert
knowledge about relationships among variables becomes more crucial. Up to this
point, conditional distributions have provided the only formal, rigorous, and
fully general way to represent an expert's knowledge about a set of interrelated
random variables. However, this approach becomes unwieldy and infeasible unless
the number of variables is very small, and it may pose cognitive problems. An
alternative approach involves representing joint distributions in terms of
copulas, which are functions of the marginal distributions and encode the
dependence among the variables. The overall goal of the proposed research is to
develop procedures for dependence assessment in practical expert-knowledge
encoding situations. In this one-year pilot project, the researchers will focus
primarily on the mathematical development and dependence assessments. They will
also begin an investigation into the behavioral issues involved in the
elicitation of expert knowledge via marginal distributions and dependence
measures (as compared to marginal and conditional distributions). This initial
work will provide the basis for the future development of sound assessment
procedures and implementable protocols as well as an analytical framework for
using those assessments.