* 9320251
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:  Spontaneous Generation     Controversies:  Scientific Politics, Evolution, and         Molecular Theories
* SBE,SES
* 05/01/1994,04/30/1996
* Gerald Geison, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Edward J. Hackett
* 04/30/1996
* USD 5,880.00

9320251 Geison Spontaneous generation--the theory that living cells can
"spontaneously" develop from inert matter--has had a long, controversial
history. The "correct" view since the 19th century is that spontaneous
generation does not occur. Yet, unless there was some point in the history of
the universe in which spontaneous generation of life occurred, then
evolutionists are confronted with two options: divine intervention or the
existence of "vital" matter. While neither of these options are inconsistent
with evolution, they implicitly undermine evolutionary theory and, at least in
the first option, play into the hands of creationists. If a god had to intervene
at least once to create life, what prevents that god from intervening again to
direct the development of species? So how is it that biologists have worked so
energetically to disprove spontaneous generation? This is the issue that James
Strick, under the direction of Dr. Gerald Geison, is examining in his doctoral
dissertation. Mr. Strick has found that the spontaneous generation controversies
in Britain offer a unique window into many areas of biological theory developing
in the 19th century. These areas include biological explanations of inheritance,
development, evolution, generation and cell theory. The debates over spontaneous
generation reveal how thoroughly entwined into a single problem complex all
these areas were, to a greater extent than has been appreciated previously. In
addition, ideas in biology and physics about the nature of molecules and their
role as simplest elements of life underwent rapid change during this period,
exemplified by the debate over the significance of Brownian motion and Brown's
"active molecules." This was an integral strand of the problem complex which has
been almost totally ignored. Any attempt to explain why spontaneous generation
lost favor so decisively after 1880 must explore all of these clusters of ideas
which were pillars of support for sponta neous generation theories. Shifts in
institutional power between the medical community and programs in experimental
biology also played a major part in the demise of spontaneous generation
theories. The maneuvering for control of prestige and power in British science
by the Darwinian "X-club" during this period involved rhetorical strategies to
make evolutionary theory more respectable by actively disengaging it from the
traditionally linked doctrine of spontaneous generation. In order to undertake
this study, Mr. Strick is examining archives in the United States, Great Britain
and France--the centers of scientific work on this issue. ***