* 9320154
* CISE Research Instrumentation Program
* CSE,EIA
* 03/01/1994,08/31/1995
* Charles Peskin, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Tuz C. Ting
* 08/31/1995
* USD 72,337.00

9320154 Shelley A color graphics workstation, with accessories and software,
will be acquired to advance research projects, all involving large-scale multi-
dimensional scientific computation, in computational fluid dynamics, physics,
nonlinear optics, and biology. One research project will use computer
visualization and animation to comprehend large-scale simulations of complex
fluid flows, develop good numerical methods for such problems, and to
disseminate these results to the scientific community. These problems include
computation and modeling of topology transitions and singularity formation in
fluid flows (vortex reconnection and bubble formation), and computation of
multi-phase flows with surface tensions. Another research project will apply
computer graphics to research on computer simulation of the heart. It will be
used to construct and improve the heart model, to debug the code, to visualize
the resulting computer experiments, to compare the simulational results with
experimental observations, and to communicate the results to others.
Comprehending the heart model involves simultaneous visualization of a
deformable structure and the fluid it contains, all requiring the rapid
manipulation of massive amounts of data. A third project will make numerical
studies of magnetic structures in two-dimensional unsteady flow fields. At large
magnetic Reynolds numbers, small-scale structures associated with fast dynamo
action in stretching flows will be identified, and comparisons made with
theoretical dynamo models. Color-coding of field strength and studying the field
evolution using videotaped se quences at about 60 frames/cycle, should allow
direct determination of the mechanism of field amplification. Finally, research
will be done on computational investigations addressing current issues of
spatial complexity in 3-d nonlinear optical systems. One computational study is
of mathematical models for the nonlinear evolution of self-focused laser beams
in systems which do not display transverse collapse. In some cases, the beam
profiles develop multiple filaments, corroborating experimental observations of
these finely-interwoven optical structures will be considerably enhanced by
fully three-dimensional computer visualizations. *** ECEXE @ j i SSMARQUESCR @ j
B SSMYST SCR @ j L SSSTARS SCR @ j D TADA WAV @ j &amp; l TARTAN BMP @ j 4 v
TERMINALEXE @ j E B TERMINALHLP @ j 9320154 Shelley A color graphics
workstation, with accessories and software, will be acquired to advance research
projects, | ^ ` o q \ ^ w | $ $ $ G | | Times Symbol " Helvetica Chicago Times
New Roman &amp; Arial 5 Courier New R ZapfDingbats Palatino Greek GenMath
MathMeteor MT Extra " e e 4 Shelley/NYU Mark Purvis Mark Purvis