* 9320115
* SGER:  The Impacts of Tourism on Wildlife Populations at    Palmer Station, Antarctic Peninsula
* O/D,OPP
* 09/15/1993,02/29/1996
* William Fraser, Montana State University
* Standard Grant
* Polly A. Penhale
* 02/29/1996
* USD 49,909.00

9320115 Fraser Tourism in Antarctica has been showing a steady increase since
the late 1960's. Despite rising concern that human activity may negatively
impact wildlife populations, studies designed to address this issue have been
lacking. The purpose of this Small Grant for Exploratory Research is to examine
the feasibility of coupling research on the effects of tourism on Adelie Penguin
populations on Torgersen island, Antarctic Peninsula, with two long-term
ecosystem-oriented programs already in existence in the area. The rationale for
this approach is based on the premise that understanding and defining the
natural variability inherent in the ecosystem is a necessary prerequisite for
identifying and interpreting the effects of human activity. By employing
identical technologies and methodologies, this study seeks to develop identical,
coincident databases at sites visited by tourists to compare with databases
developed as part of the two ecosystem studies at sites not visited by tourists.
The latter will thus provide the background ecosystem data needed to discern and
interpret the former. This arrangement, if successful, is likely to establish
the proposed research as one of the key studies addressing human impacts in
Antarctica, and serve as a model for future research of a similar nature. The
award will help fulfill the National Science Foundation's responsibility and
obligations for environmental protection under the Antarctic Conservation Act of
1978. ***