* 9320048
* Dissertation Resesearch:  Technical Diversity and           Technological Advice in the American Semiconductor Industry,1952-1965
* SBE,SES
* 02/15/1994,07/31/1995
* David Hounshell, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Edward J. Hackett
* 07/31/1995
* USD 6,281.00

9320048 Hounshell Under the direction of Professor David Hounshell, Daniel
Holbrook is investigating the sources and dynamics of technological knowledge in
the semiconductor industry and its contribution to the overall development of
semiconductor technology. He hypothesizes that diversity in approaches to
technological innovation was at the heart of the rapid and numerous advances in
semiconductor technology during the early years of the industry. Technological
opportunities were many, and literally hundreds of firms pursued an array of
research and development projects. Although many of the projects were
technological and economic failures, the knowledge produced contributed to the
overall advance of the technology. Evolutionary theories of technological
development include variation and selection models; most evolutionary theorists,
however, concentrate on the selection portion. Mr. Holbrook is exploring inputs
to variation. Diversity in expertise and the stock of technological knowledge
possessed by firms shapes their research and development activities. In the
semiconductor industry, this diversity in expertise and technological knowledge
conditioned the rate and direction of technological innovation. Diverse
innovative activities were often complementary or synergistic for the
development of the entire industry. After surveying technological developments
across the industry, Mr. Holbrook is focusing on four technological areas
related to the development of integrated circuits. Then he will explore the
diverse sets of technological knowledge possessed by selected firms, how
knowledge governed the firms' choices of R&amp;D projects, and the consequences
of those choices for further technological development. This study promises to
illuminate the relationship between technological knowledge and innovation as
well as issues concerning the dynamics and growth of technological knowledge. It
is also exploring the sources and importance of diversity in the evolution of
technology. ***