* 9320180
* Measurement of Software Reusability in the Object Oriented  Paradigm
* CSE,CCF
* 09/15/1994,12/31/1996
* Sallie Henry, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Frank D. Anger
* 12/31/1996
* USD 127,118.00

9320180 Henry Software reuse is the key to increasing productivity within the
software development process. By reusing existing software, time and effort are
saved in the testing and maintenance phases of a software product. The goals of
this research involve the measurement of reusability of software in the object
oriented paradigm and the investigation how the process of reuse fits into the
overall software development lifecycle. The effects of reuse on software
development are also being accessed. In particular, what costs are involved in
retraining programmers to think about reuse, to learn the object oriented
paradigm, and to know what reusable routines are available and how to use them.
Specifically, the goals of this research are: (1) to quantitatively measure
object oriented designs and relate them to aspects of the final code
(complexity, reusability, readability); (2) to identify the measurable qualities
of reusable software (costs, benefits); (3) to correlate various aspects of
reusability with programmer characteristics; (4) to measure the effects of
reusing software on the process of software development (design, coding,
integration, testing, maintenance). These goals are sought through an empirical
study conducted in a controlled academic environment. After analysis and
refinement of the new suite of metrics, final validation would involve one or
more software vendors in another study usilg production software systems and
maintenance data. ***