* 9320003
* International Conference on Tree-Rings, Environment and     Humanity
* SBE,BCS
* 02/15/1994,07/31/1995
* Jeffrey Dean, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 07/31/1995
* USD 10,000.00

9320003 Dean This grant will provide support to allow scholars from outside the
United States to participate in the 1994 "International Conference on Tree
Rings, Environment, and Humanity: Relationships and Processes." In particular,
effort will focus on assisting researchers from the third world and Eastern
Europe. Without NSF support, such individuals could not attend. In temperate
regions of the world, trees add rings annually and differences in the thickness
and chemical composition of the rings are determined by local environmental
factors. Resultant series from mature trees may cover hundreds of years and
provide excellent information on environmental change. Tree rings also serve a
valuable dating function since rings from archaeological sites can be matched to
master sequences. Tree ring research is conducted in many parts of the world and
the results are of value to a wide range of scientists. For these reasons,
international conferences which bring together diverse groups of scientists are
extremely important and the 1994 meeting will serve this function. The amount of
dendrochronological research in the developing world has increased significantly
in recent years. Therefore it is particularly important to have representation
from scholars in these regions. ***