* 9320098
* CISE Research Instrumentation:  A DSP Research Station for  Sensing and Control
* CSE,EIA
* 03/01/1994,08/31/1995
* Fernando Figueroa, Tulane University
* Standard Grant
* Tse-yun Feng
* 08/31/1995
* USD 26,333.00

9320098 Barbieri This award is for assembling a high performance platform for
the synthesis and implementation of advanced sensing and control algorithms.
Testbed hardware is for applications in robotics and flexible structure sensing
and control. The platform is designed around a 486-class computer. It is
equipped with a 20 MHz 4-channel digital scope, and a DSP motion controller
based on a Texas Instrument TMS 320C30 floating-point DSP board, a 12-bit D/A
converter, a 32-channel 16-bit A/D converter, a five channel incremental
encoder, two digital I/O and timers, and a real time tracer. The boards are
enclosed within a 20-slot industrial-quality box and interconnected via a 32-bit
bus. High-level programming is done at the system block level via SIMULINK. The
MATLAB files are automatically converted to portable C-code and downloaded to
the DSP boards. The station will have a direct impact on the following
interdisciplinary ongoing research projects: (1) use of redundant degrees of
freedom in a manipulator to suppress vibrations, (2) modeling and control of
flexible structures instrumented with an ultrasonic ranging system, (3)
nonlinear control of a flexible arm using inertial devices, and (4) development
of an ultrasonic 3-dimensional vibration measurement system and generic modeling
of intelligent learning sensors. *** 9320098 Barbieri This award is for
assembling a high performance platform for the synthesis and implement ation of
advanced $ $ G P P Times Symbol " Helvetica Chicago Times New Roman &amp; Arial
5 Courier New R ZapfDingbats Palatino Greek GenMath MathMeteor MT Extra " e e 8
Barbieri/Tulane Mark Purvis Mark Purvis