* 9320138
* Mobile Autonomous Robotic Systems for Unstructured          Environment--With Application to the USS Constitution
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/1993,02/28/1995
* Steven Dubowsky, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Howard Moraff
* 02/28/1995
* USD 30,000.00

9320138 Dubowsky This award, in the Small Grants for Exploratory Research,
supports preliminary investigation of the potential role of robotics in field
conservation, restoration, and preservation, using as a demonstration the
exploration and later restoration of the historic Navy vessel, the USS
Constitution. Thi effort seeks to determine appropriate design approaches for
multirobot systems to be used in making measurements, detecting defects, and
ultimately participating in repair and restoration operations, and to identify
basic problems facing such robotic applications. Questions include modes of
cooperation, communication demands, sensing demands, need for minimalist
computing, and need for separate systems for inspection and remediation. The
project is expected to yield valuable insights into the appropriate design and
employment of robots for such field conservation and restoration operations, and
also should lead to a highly-visible demonstration of robotic capabilities in
less-structured environments. 9It might also make a good test of practical
potential of the Brooksian approach to multirobot architecture). The PI will be
working with conservators, conservation scientists, and the Naval Historian for
the Constitution, and the overall operations will be guided by an advisory
panel.