* 9320047
* Phospholipid Acylation in Cotyledons of Cotton Seedlings
* BIO,MCB
* 11/15/1993,04/30/1995
* Kent Chapman, University of North Texas
* Standard Grant
* Rona Hirschberg
* 04/30/1995
* USD 43,000.00

Chapman 9320047 Phospholipids are an integral component of all biological
membranes. The phospholipid composition of intracellular membranes is highly
variable. Differences in phospholipid composition determine the specific
properties of the membrane; its physical properties and its function.
Retailoring of phospholipids, such as deacylation or acylation of phospholipid
chains in existing membranes, may be an important mechanism that the cell has
for rapidly adjusting membrane function in response to changing environmental
conditions, such as temperature, salt concentration, water activity, etc.
Although there has been growing interest in the role of membrane lipid
metabolism as a way to protect against environmental stress, retailoring
mechanisms of existing membrane phospholipids has received less attention. The
aim of this research program is to examine the role of biochemical pathway(s)
that support the incorporation of acyl moieties into existing plant membrane
phospholipids. This is accomplished by a pathway different from the ordinary
plant biosynthetic pathway for de novo phospholipid synthesis. The specific aim
of this research program is to delineate the biochemical pathway(s) leading to
this unusual acyl-group incorporation into preformed cottonseed membrane
phospholipids and to identify the enzyme(s) involved in the process. %%% This is
a basic research project to determine how plant cells can efficiently regulate
the chemical composition of their membranes to resist destructive changes in
their environment, such as temperature, salt concentrations, water activity,
etc. Although the effects of environmental stress on lipid biosynthesis in
membrane formation have been a subject of research for some time to explain the
development of plant resistance, changes in phospholipid chemistry in existing
membranes has not. Experiments will be conducted to determine how plants can
change the structure of membrane phospholipids and identify the enzymes
involved. This research should significantly increase our understanding and
ability to control resistance to environmental stress in plants. ***