* 9320068
* U.S. - Russia Cooperative Research Program on Magneto-      Rotational Phenomena in Astrophysics
* NONE,NONE
* 04/15/1994,03/31/1999
* Richard Lovelace, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Susan M. Simkin
* 03/31/1999
* USD 102,723.00

9320068 Lovelace There are important fundamental unsolved problems in
astrophysics such as supernova explosions, formation and propagation of stellar
and extragalactic jets, formation of stars and compact objects where rotation
and magnetic fields are significant. A rigorous understanding of these rotating
magnetized systems can be obtained only as a result of systematic development of
one, two, and three dimensional magneto-hydrodynamical models and corresponding
computer simulation codes. In this proposal the Principal Investigators plan to
treat a number of astrophysical problems based partly on advanced 2D computer
codes created at the M.V. Keldysh Institute of Applied Mathematics at Moscow
University, and on codes developed at Cornell University. The collaboration of
scientists at the Space Research Institute (IKI) in Moscow and Cornell began
more than two years ago, and several joint papers have been published. They have
now involved applied mathematicians in the project, and several computer codes
have been created and successfully tested on small, personal computers in Russia
and the U.S. However, to obtain the physically interesting results, much longer
calculations on the larger computers and supercomputers are needed. This
research will enhance the interactions between scientists in the U.S. and Russia
and will lead to advances in our understanding of magneto- rotational phenomena
in astrophysics which may have practical laboratory applications.