* 9320481
* Economics of the Internet
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/1994,06/30/1999
* Scott Shenker, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 06/30/1999
* USD 322,068.00

9320481 The Internet is a worldwide network of networks. As of May 1993 it
connects over 10,000 different networks, comprising over 1.5 million separate
computers. Traffic on the NSFNET backbone to the Internet (the largest but not
the only backbone) has been growing at about 11% per month over the last five
years; this means it has been doubling every seven months. The Internet is
considered to be the model for the National Research and Education Network
(NREN) that is the focus of the $5 billion HPCC program adopted by Congress in
1992. Important policy decisions are already being made about the
commercialization and privatization of the Internet backbones, regulation of
transmission providers and information service providers, the protection of
intellectual property in electronic form, and public access to information
infrastructure. These decisions are being made with little input from
economists. This project will clarify the economic context for wide-area data
networks: costs, pricing, investment, and growth. It examines competition and
industry structure, and address the important regulatory questions that follow
as data, telephone and video technologies and markets begin to merge.
Furthermore it develops mechanisms for efficient resource allocation in such
networks.