* 9320173
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:  Historical, Social and     Cultural Roots of Experimnetal Surgery, 1960-1993
* NONE,NONE
* 03/01/1994,08/31/1994
* Adele Clarke, University of California-San Francisco
* Standard Grant
* Ronald J. Overmann
* 08/31/1994
* USD 10,000.00

9320173 Clarke Ms. Monica Casper, under the direction of Dr. Adele Clarke, is
investigating the historical emergence of experimental fetal surgery. Fetal
surgery was considered as early as 1960 following several successful non-
surgical fetal treatments. Research in the 1960's in New Zealand and Puerto
Rico, in which surgical procedures were used to treat fetuses for Rh
incompatibility, paved the way for subsequent experimental and clinical
practices. Fetal surgery experienced a renaissance in the early 1980's when
surgeons at the University of California, San Francisco, began surgically
operating on fetuses in utero. There has been very little historical or social
research on experimental fetal surgery. Ms. Casper is examining the historical,
social and cultural roots of this practice, beginning with biomedical research
in the 1960's. She is addressing three related sets of questions. First, what
relationships have existed among basic physiological research, technological
developments, and the emergence of experimental fetal surgery in the clinical
domain, and how have these been shaped historically? Second, how are human and
non-human fetuses conceptualized, used, and treated materially in contemporary
scientific and biomedical practices? Third, what are the social, cultural, and
institutional dimensions of contemporary experimental fetal surgery practices?
Under this grant, Ms. Casper is undertaking archival research and interviews in
New Zealand and Puerto Rico focused on the experimental work of the 1960's. ***