* 9320248
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:  Rain Forest Exhibits and   Public Understanding of Science
* SBE,SES
* 05/15/1994,04/30/1995
* Bruce Lewenstein, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Edward J. Hackett
* 04/30/1995
* USD 9,252.00

9320248 Lewenstein In order for citizens in a democracy to make informed
decisions about science and technology policy, they must have a certain basic
understanding of how science and technology work. Providing such an
understanding is one of the tasks given to the National Science Foundation. This
dissertation aims to study one way that scientists attempt to communicate to the
general public the results of their research: i.e. exhibits in science and
natural history museums. Steven Allison, under the direction of Dr. Lewenstein,
is exploring the relationships between scientific research and the public
representation of natural knowledge. He is investigating how scientists in four
different museums have attempted to communicate to the public their
understanding of the ecology of tropical rain forests. The major case for Mr.
Allison's study is at the Smithsonian. He is following how a tropical rain
forest exhibit which began in 1960 with plans for a Hall of Botany was
transformed in the late 1960's into an exhibit hall on ecosystems and was
finally built in 1974 as a temporary exhibit motivated by the environmental
movement. His preliminary research has shown that changes in the definition of
"ecology," professionalization of the exhibit development process, and the rise
of the environmentalist movement all shaped the changing form and content of the
exhibit. Two exhibitions at the British Museum (Natural History) offer the
opportunity for comparison to the Smithsonian case. The 1961 botany hall
provides an example of more didactic exhibits than the Smithsonian botanists
planned for their hall, while the 1989 exhibition "Ecology" deploys visual and
verbal presentations that are very similar to the final Smithsonian exhibit in
the 1970's. He is also making less detailed comparisons of exhibition practice
at the American Museum of Natural History in New York, the Denver Museum of
Natural History, and the 1992 "Amazonia" exhibit at the National Zoologica l
Park. These individual cases promise to make significant contributions not only
to the history of natural history research but to broader issues of concern for
public understanding of science. Parallels between the historical and
contemporary exhibitions raise questions about the role of museums in the public
communication of science, especially environmental issues. ***