* 9320097
* A Theory of Explanation in Science
* SBE,SES
* 04/01/1994,03/31/1996
* James Woodward, California Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Edward J. Hackett
* 03/31/1996
* USD 65,000.00

93200097 Woodward Dr. Woodward is developing a treatment of explanation and
causation with applications in both the natural and social sciences. A guiding
theme of his study is that explanatory information is information that is
potentially relevant to controlling or manipulating nature. Another closely
related themes that the sorts of relationships that can be used to provide
explanations must satisfy an invariance requirement--they must be relationships
that will remain stable under some class of changes or interventions, for these
will be exactly the relationships that will support potential manipulations.
These two themes provide a central part of what Dr. Woodward takes to be the
picture of causation and explanation implicit in the contemporary econometrics
literature. In this research, he is extending and generalizing this picture to
produce a general theory that will enable us to understand and assess the
structure of different forms of explanation in the natural and social sciences
and in more common sensical contexts. The theory he is developing will have
interesting and somewhat novel consequences for how we should understand laws of
nature and their role in explanation, for the role of derivational structure in
explanations, for the possibility of explanations that do not appeal to laws,
for the relationships between laws and counterfactuals, for the assessment of
probabilistic theories of causation, and for understanding the role of
idealization in scientific theorizing. ***