* 9320190
* Covalent Derivatives of Oxide Molecules and Solids
* MPS,CHE
* 02/15/1994,07/31/1996
* Walter Klemperer, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Clarke-Williams, Mark K.
* 07/31/1996
* USD 139,600.00

9320190 Klemperer Univ. of Illinois - Urbana Dr. Walter G. Klemperer, Chemistry
Department, University of Illinois - Urbana, is supported in the Inorganic,
Bioinorganic, and Organometallic Chemistry Program, for studies of relatively
simple metal oxides and solids that incorporate key features of more complex
systems of practical importance. The oxidation of olefin-polyoxoanion complexes
will be investigated with the aim of developing epoxidation catalysts. New
platinum and palladium polyoxoanion complexes will be prepared and their ability
to promote olefin polymerization and carbon-hydrogen activation will be probed.
Molecular titanates and zirconates will be synthesized and their ability to bind
organometallic cations and sulfate will be evaluated. Finally, the solid state
reaction chemistry of a series of organometallic compounds will be developed.
The significance of the research lies in part in developing an understanding
about fundamental processes of industrial and biological significance. These
include the activation of organic materials, their reactions with oxygen, and
their polymerization. In addition, an emphasis will be placed on discovering
entirely new types of materials with the hope and expectation that new and
useful applications will be developed.