* 9320300
* CISE Research Instrumentation:  Structuring Client/Server   Applications in the Mobile and Wireless Environment
* CSE,EIA
* 03/01/1994,08/31/1996
* Casimir Kulikowski, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Tse-yun Feng
* 08/31/1996
* USD 29,400.00

9320300 Kulikowski Wireless technology is gaining in popularity very rapidly.
Many predict a new emerging, gigantic market where millions of mobile users will
carry small, battery powered palmtop based terminals with wireless connections.
Mobile users will be in constant need of information for traffic directions,
local directory, weather, shopping. The wireless medium will be used as the
"first mile" of the information highway which will disseminate massive amounts
of information across the country. Before this vision can be realized a number
of challenging research problems ranging from telecommunications to data
management and distributed systems have to be solved. This award provides
equipment to gain implementation experience in deploying Wireless Information
Systems dealing with location aware or/and location transparent access to
information resources. Wireless infrastructure support is needed to understand
the effects of three new aspects of wireless information access: (1) mobility of
information consumers (and perhaps producers.) (2) wireless bandwidth and (3)
battery power limitations. Methods of supporting wireless services as
broadcasting, triggering, ad hoc queries, and network-oriented services (such as
ftp, telnet, X window, etc.) for mobile clients will be evaluated and these
services over wide areas and regardless of client mobility and disconnection
will be supported. This equipment will help to set up a wireless laboratory.
With the infrastructure in place, experiments can be conducted to determine the
suitability and performance of the proposed concepts, algorithms, and prot ocols
and report on the experience of supporting network-oriented information services
in a wireless environment. *** RVu 4 MS-DOS_5 ( kT 3COM t WINA20 386 ` $
AUTOEXEC33 Xt V LM VW @$ CONFIG BAK V CONFIG OLD nW WIN31 X 9320300 Kulikowski
Wireless technology is gaining in popularity very rapidly. Many predict a new
emerging, gigantic market f p . 0 a f $ $ $ G f p f Times Symbol " Helvetica
Chicago Times New Roman &amp; Arial 5 Courier New R ZapfDingbats Palatino Greek
GenMath MathMeteor MT Extra % % % " t eAj ; Kulikowski/Rutgers Mark Purvis Mark
Purvis