* 9320225
* CISE Research Instrumentation
* CSE,EIA
* 03/01/1994,08/31/1995
* Stephen Seidman, Auburn University
* Standard Grant
* Tse-yun Feng
* 08/31/1995
* USD 99,990.00

9320225 Seidman This instrumentation award supports the purchase of a
distributed-memory multiprocessor to support research in computer science,
computer engineering, and electrical engineering. The equipment will be used for
several research projects, including the development of a comprehensive
parallelization system for MIMD multiprocessors, design and performance
evaluation of mechanisms for parallel discrete event simulation, and development
of parallel algorithms for simulation of two-dimensional radio frequency glow
discharge. Research on graph-based parallelizing compiler technology at Auburn
University has already produced tools to perform dependence analysis and SSA-PDG
transformations, along with graph partitioning and task scheduling. The next
step for the project is the analysis of the parallel code produced by the tools,
and this step requires a dedicated multiprocessor. At Auburn University,
research on parallel and distributed discrete event simulation includes the
study of benchmarks for conservative and optimistic simulation mechanisms, the
analysis of optimistic (Time Warp) mechanisms under realistic conditions, and
the investigation of new hybrid mechanisms. All of these research directions
require the availability of a distributed-memory multiprocessor. The use of
simulation to study radio-frequency glow discharges is computationally
intensive. Most previous work in this area is limited to one-dimensional
simulations, which do not provide sufficient realistic details. The availability
of a distributed-memory multiprocessor will make it possible to perform two-
dimensional simu lations with reasonable turnaround time. *** X SYSTEM X SETUP
EXE @ j p SETUP HLP @ j SETUP TXT @ j WIN INI arj R _# WINHELP EXE @ j = SYSTEM
INI &lt;o\ # CONTROL HLP @ j N H WIN COM :X T BOOTLOG TXT EX k 9320225 Seidman
This instrumentation award supports the purchase of a distributed-memory
multiprocessor to support research ' $ $ $ $ G ' Times Symbol " Helvetica
Chicago Times New Roman &amp; Arial 5 Courier New R ZapfDingbats Palatino Greek
GenMath MathMeteor MT Extra " e e 7 Seidman/Auburn Mark Purvis Mark Purvis