* 9320589
* Solar System Laboratory Aeronomy by Electron Impact with    Emphasis on Terrestial Processes
* GEO,AGS
* 04/15/1994,09/30/1997
* Donald Shemansky, University of Southern California
* Continuing Grant
* Sunanda Basu
* 09/30/1997
* USD 342,561.00

9320589 Shemansky In the upper atmosphere of the Earth, the energy budget is
controlled by both particle collision processes and direct interaction of solar
radiation. In response to the need for accurate atomic and molecular properties
in order to understand the processes, the University of Southern California
(USC) and the Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL) of the Calfiornia Institute of
Technology have established a program which combines laboratory measurements and
non-linear modeling of excitation reactions. The present award will continue in
the examination of species critical to the understanding of the observed
phenomena. Crossed beam excitation and photoabsorption measurements will be used
to define accurate excitation cross sections and other basic atomic and
molecular properties such as predissociation fractions required for atmospheric
models. Calculations of the combined detailed collisional and radiative non-
linear volumetric processes will be produced for utilization by the larger
atmospheric models that other researchers have established. In this three-year
renewal task plan USC-JPL will concentrate on the species: N2, O2, NO, N, O, H,
and their ions the most abundant atomic and molecular species in the upper
atmosphere and the species ubiquitously observed by earth orbiting satellites
(RAIDS, DMSP, Polar Bear, HUP, SMEX, Aura) equipped with UV sensors. In addition
for UV calibration purposes in laboratory and spaceflight instrumentation the
target gas H2 will be reexamined to resolve cross section discrepancies. To
carry out the measurements JPL will utilize three fully operational UV
spectrometers, including the highest resolution single scattering UV instrument
in the U.S., a new 3m high resolution spectrometer ( = 67000) with extreme
ultraviolet (EUV) and vacuum ultraviolet (FUV) array detectors. ***