* 9320719
* MRI:  Quantitative Sociotechnical Cost Benefit Models for   Organizational Implementation of Information Technologies
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/1994,01/31/1997
* Barrett Caldwell, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Les Gasser
* 01/31/1997
* USD 109,000.00

The objective of the proposed research project is to apply feedback control
systems analysis methods to address the process of technology innovations in
organizations. Specifically, the initial focus of the project is to use a
feedback model of costs and benefits to quantify factors influencing the success
of information technology implementation efforts. Information technology in
general and computer mediated communication systems in particular have been the
subject of a large research literature base in the social and behavioral
sciences, as well as human factors and computer sciences. One of the consistent
findings from this diverse body of research is that new information technologies
(IT's) often fail to meet the organizational, work group, and individual
expectations of increased productivity and communication efficiency. The
proposed research utilizes a methodology which, although new in terms of social
science research, has a long tradition in systems engineering. This methodology
combines the concepts of systems dynamics and economic cost and benefit analysis
within the theoretical framework of both Living Systems and Sociotechnical
Systems theories. By identifying situational, organizational, cultural, and
other factors which affect successful IT implementation, a cost and benefits
model can be derived which will apply to the diffusions of IT's and other
communications or technology innovations across organizations.