* 9320808
* Religious Missions, Social Change, and Resistance to        Authority (Sociology)
* SBE,SES
* 06/01/1994,05/31/1998
* Jon Miller, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Patricia White
* 05/31/1998
* USD 150,477.00

9320808 Miller This is a study of the circumstances under which religious
missions resisted the policies of political and economic interests associated
with colonialism, and contributed to forces of democratization in colonies of
the European powers and other developing countries. Data will be collected from
archives located in Germany, Norway, Switzerland, England and the United States,
and these data will concern missionary work in nations such as Ghana, Cameroon,
India and China. Comparative and interpretive analysis will contrast conflict
theories with Weberian theories of values. Among the hypotheses to be explored
are the possibility that the secular effects of the missionary movement often
went beyond the expectations or even contrary to the intentions of the
participants. Another hypothesis is that religious opposition to the political
and economic interests to which the missions were symbiotically tied was
especially likely to occur when a religious vision of the ideal social structure
was threatened. %%% This project will contribute to the sociology of religion,
and it will improve our general understanding of colonialism and imperialism.
Extensive religious missionary movements exist today, and this historical study
will provide the theoretical and factual basis for understanding their
consequences for the developing democracies in the modern world. ***