* 9320696
* Synthetic and Mechanistic Studies of Organometallic Reagents
* MPS,CHE
* 03/01/1994,02/28/1997
* Hans Reich, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Kenneth M. Doxsee
* 02/28/1997
* USD 387,500.00

9320696 Reich The focus of this research is to gain a mechanistic understanding
of a number of important reactions and processes in organolithium chemistry.
Because the chemical properties of organolithium reagents, perhaps more than any
other class of organometallic compound, are dominated by inter- and
intramolecular interactions with solvents and pendant groups, the spectroscopic
and reactivity studies of solvation, chelation and stereochemistry together with
product, selectivity and rate studies will give a better understanding of these
phenomena. Since the experiments will be carried out under the conditions and in
solvents in which they are used by synthetic chemists, the studies will allow
better predictability of the chemical reactions of organolithium reagents and
the expansion of the applications of them. Specific projects include
coordinating cosolvents (principally HMPA) and the role of ion pair structure on
reactivity, chelation effects, allenyl/propargyllithium reagents, preparation
and mechanism of epimerization of stereochemically defined organolithium
reagents, and the lithium metalloid exchange reaction. %%% With this award the
Synthetic Organic Program is supporting the research of Dr. Hans J. Reich of the
Department of Chemistry at the University of Wisconsin, Madison. Professor Reich
will focus his work on gaining a mechanistic understanding of a number of
important reactions and processes in organolithium chemistry. Since many of
these reagents play a central role in organic synthesis, especially for the very
important carbon-carbon bond forming reactions, these studies will allow better
predictability of the chemical reactions of organolithium reagents and an
expansion of their applications. ***