* 9320220
* Set Theoretical Naturalism
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/1994,05/31/1996
* Penelope Maddy, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Edward J. Hackett
* 05/31/1996
* USD 47,057.00

9320220 Maddy The theory of sets functions as a framework for most contemporary
work in mathematics: all mathematical entities are ultimately modelled as sets
and all mathematical theorems are ultimately provable from the standard axioms
of set theory (i.e. from the system ZFC). Unfortunately, the axioms of ZFC are
probably not strong enough to settle some questions that turn up in the various
branches of mathematics: e.g., in algebra, in analysis, and in set theory
itself. One reaction to this problem has been to embrace all relatively
consistent extensions of ZFC as equally admissible, and thus to dismiss the
independent questions as meaningless (they are true in some models, false in
others, and that is the end of the story). For various good reasons, this
solution is not acceptable to many leading set theorists. The alternative is to
search for new axioms to add to those of ZFC in hopes of answering the
independent questions. The pressing philosophical question is how to make sense
of this evaluation of new axiom candidates. If there is an objectively existing
world of sets, then such candidates should be accepted insofar as they reflect
the truth about that world. Philosophers have puzzled over the nature of that
world and our cognitive access to it. These philosophical matters aside, this
realistic position has shortcomings from a purely mathematical point of view: it
short-circuits various legitimate methodological questions inside set theory
itself. In this project, Dr. Maddy aims to produce a better understanding of the
proper means of evaluating axiom candidates with less attention to extra-
mathematical philosophical quandaries, and more attention to the texture of the
mathematics itself. Her approach, which she calls `set theoretic naturalism',
provides a framework for the defense of various general methodological
principles for set theory, principles defended by their ability to generate good
mathematics rather than by some purported ability to generate truths about some
extra-mathematically characterized reality of sets. With these principles in
place, it is possible to defend various additional axioms and hypotheses and to
answer at least some of the independent questions. ***