* 9320686
* Schools of the Pacific Rainfall Climate Experiment
* O/D,OISE
* 08/01/1994,07/31/1997
* Susan Postawko, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Standard Grant
* W. Y. B. Chang
* 07/31/1997
* USD 119,952.00

9320686 Postawko This three year award is designed to provide support for the
cooperative field project "Schools of the Pacific Rainfall Climate Experiment
(SPaRCE)" involving middle school, high school and college level teachers and
students from various Pacific island and atoll nations. The project is
coordinated on the U.S. side by Dr. Susan Postawko, Dr. Mark Morrissey and Dr.
Victoria Duca from the University of Oklahoma. At present over forty college and
school sites have been identified for participation under SPaRCE. Donald
Edgeworth, Principal of the Papaaroa Adventist College located in Rarotonga in
the Cook Islands, is one of many foreign counterpart investigators participating
in the program. Climate change is a primary concern to people of the Pacific
islands due to the vulnerability of their islands to sea level and rainfall
pattern changes. Numerous models of earth-atmosphere systems have been developed
in an effort to diagnose and predict future climate trends. Surface rainfall
observations are crucial to test and validate satellite algorithms. This program
benefits the participants by allowing students to participate in a real research
project, and by providing them with educational materials on climate and climate
change. Data collected by participants is compiled into data sets for
distribution to climate researchers. Funds in this award will be used to support
a number of functions including travel by program staff for teacher training and
equipment maintenance purposes, the support of a student Project Coordinator to
organize and analyze incoming data, and to facilitate communications with the
school network gathering rainfall data. The project plans to focus a
considerable amount of activity on regions such as Guam, American Samoa and the
Northern Mariana Islands, all U.S. Territories; the Republic of Palau, a U.S.
Trust Territory; and the freely associated states of the Federated States of
Micronesia and the Marshall Islands. On e of the initial activities included
under this award will be a seminar on basic weather and climate with hands-on
instruction on the use of meteorological instruments and data analysis to be
conducted for SPaRCE investigators at the Annual Pacific Educational Conference
to be held in Saipan in August 1994.