* 9320973
* The Sources and Effects of Knowledge Spillovers
* SBE,SES
* 06/01/1994,11/30/1998
* James Adams, National Bureau of Economic Research Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Lynn A. Pollnow
* 11/30/1998
* USD 284,998.00

9320973 Jaffe Knowledge spillovers are key to understanding the process of
technological progress, how it contributes to economic growth, and how policy
levers can be used effectively to foster growth through innovation. Knowledge
spillovers are created when universities and government labs produce the basic
research results that provide the foundation for applied research in the private
sector; they are also created in the private sector, when researchers take
advantage of knowledge produced by other private agents. Yet, despite this
importance and a decade of research, crucial questions remain unanswered. For
example, we do not know the relative importance of different institutions,
different industries and different geographic regions in generating spillovers;
the extent to which spillovers are contained within local or national
boundaries; whether and how firms vary in their ability to use spillovers from
others; and how the public knowledge flows that spillovers represent have varied
over time. The contribution of this project comes from assembling a
comprehensive database on patents, validating the use of patent citations as
evidence of knowledge flows through the detailed examination of other evidence,
and using the datasets to address these unanswered questions. More specifically,
the project constructs a comprehensive database on all patents granted between
1975 and 1993 and all citations made by those patents, including references to
earlier patents going back to 1871. The citations database is used to map the
flows of knowledge across time and among sectors, geographic regions, and
different institutions such as firms, universities and government labs, and to
measure the "basicness" and appropriability of particular inventions or the
portfolio of inventions held by particular firms, sectors or regions. The
database will be merged with the NBER R&amp;D Panel dataset, which contains
annual financial and market value information on over 2000 firms. It will also
be merged with the Census LRD data on production by establishment, and the
Census-NSF industrial R&amp;D survey data. These datasets will be used to
explore a number of important questions at the heart of the economics of
technological change and crucial to technology policy.