* 9320350
* Role of the Nervus Terminalis in Chemoreception and         Behavior
* BIO,IOS
* 06/15/1994,05/31/1995
* Celeste Wirsig-Wiechmann, Wake Forest University School of Medicine
* Continuing grant
* Kathie L. Olsen
* 05/31/1995
* USD 84,005.00

9320250 Wirsig-Wiechmann Coordination of sensory, motor and neuroendocrine
systems is essential for survival of many species. Indeed two nasal chemosensory
systems, the olfactory and vomeronasal systems, are known to play a significant
role in reproductive activities of many vertebrates species. The nervus
terminalis is another neural system in the nasal cavity. Unlike the olfactory
and vomeronasal systems, however, little is known about the function of this
cranial nerve. Dr. Wirsig-Wiechmann has shown that this neural complex which
extends into the brain contains gonadotropin-releasing hormone, a hormone
mediating many aspects of reproduction. Using a comparative approach combined
with a variety of state-of-the-art anatomical techniques, she will determine the
neuroanatomical organization of the nervus terminalis and the corresponding
distribution of receptors for this hormone. To examine its function, Dr. Wirsig-
Wiechmann will examine sensory and behavioral conditions that activate gene
expression in nervus terminalis neurons. The results of these studies will
better define the interrelationship between sensory, neurohormonal and
behavioral systems. It may lead to a more thorough understanding of how the
animals environment affects its reproductive capabilities that are important for
survival. ***