* 9320224
* The Cerro de Trincheras Excavation Project
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/1994,08/31/1997
* Randall McGuire, SUNY at Binghamton
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 08/31/1997
* USD 229,102.00

McGuire With National Science Foundation support, Dr. Randall McGuire and his
colleagues will continue archaeological excavation at the site of Cerro de
Trincheras. Located on a large isolated volcanic hill in northwest Sonora,
Mexico, the site covers over a hectare and includes more than 870 terraces on
the slopes of the hill. Some observable walls run for a hundred meters or more
and approach heights of up to 3 meters. Previous work at the site indicates an
occupation which extends from approximately 800-1450 AD. Excavation to date
shows that terraces were used for cultivation. Domestic structures were also
constructed on these surfaces. Building on a completed site map, Dr., McGuire
and his team will excavate approximately 3-5% of the surface area. The
excavation sample will be double-stratified by feature types and by loci defined
in the mapping project. This procedure will allow for the estimation of
parameters such as the number of houses per residential terrace and permit
inferences about population and labor investment. The broadly based sample will
provide chronometric dates for all portions of the site and allow reconstruction
of synchronic activity structure across the site. The materials to be recovered
- these include among other categories, ceramics, lithics, shell, bone and
pollen - will be analyzed by a range of specialists. Cerro de Trincheras is a
major and little known archaeological site which lies just South of the US
border. The project will test a number of propositions about its prehistoric
socio- political organization. At a lower level the research will address issues
such as the timing of growth, the size and permanence of the human population,
the nature of activities at the site and the role of the site in a larger
regional and inter- regional economic system. At a higher level the work will
address the nature of regional interaction in technologically simple prehistoric
systems. It has been argued that major arhaeological cultu res in the US
Southwest owe their existence to ties with central Mexico and that they can best
be interpreted as parts of a much larger interaction network. An equally
plausible interpretation sees the two as only weakly linked, essentially
independent phenomena. Cerro de Trincheras because of its location between the
two provides a means to examine these alternatives.