* 9320062
* The Use of Animals in Psychological Research and Education: A National Survey of Professional and Student Opinion
* NONE,NONE
* 05/15/1994,04/30/1997
* Scott Plous, Wesleyan University
* Standard Grant
* Rachelle D. Hollander
* 04/30/1997
* USD 58,902.00

9320062 Plous Animal research has played a central role in psychology, yet its
applied value and ethical propriety has recently come under attack. The purpose
of the present proposal is to conduct a large-scale survey of professional and
student opinion concerning the use of animals in psychological research and
education. The investigation will focus mainly on the following six questions:
(1) How widespread is support for animal research within the professional
community? (2) How strongly do psychology students support animal research? (3)
Which findings from animal research are seen as most useful? (4) What objections
are most common among critics of animal experimentation? (5) Does support for
animal research differ among demographic subpopulations? (6) Do students and
faculty support the use of animals in education? The primary research approach
will be to survey 5000 randomly selected psychologists from the American
Psychological Association, as well as 2000 students drawn from a national sample
of colleges and universities. Results from this survey are intended to
illuminate several questions critical to the infrastructure of science and
education within psychology, including questions of funding, research
priorities, government and institutional regulations, ideal curricula, and
differences in opinion between students and psychology faculty. Results will be
reported at meetings and in appropriate professional journals. ***