* 9320372
* The Affect of Altered Ocean Heat Transports on Climate:     Feedback Potential During Periods of Atmospheric Trace      Gas Increase
* GEO,AGS
* 04/15/1994,03/31/1998
* Vivien Gornitz, Columbia University
* Continuing Grant
* Jay S. Fein
* 03/31/1998
* USD 391,861.00

Abstract ATM-9320372 Chandler, Mark A. Martinson, David Gornitz, Vivien M. Rind,
David H. Columbia University Title: The Affect of Altered Ocean Heat Transports
on Climate: Feedback Potential During Periods of Atmospheric Trace Gas Increase
The objective of this project is to investigate the decadal to century-scale
affects of ocean heat transports in numerical climate change simulations. The
project uses the Goddard Institute for Space Studies atmospheric general
circulation model, coupled to an ocean model that includes meridional transport
of heat by the oceans, to test directly whether changes in ocean heat transport
could enhance or ameliorate the effects of trace-gas-induced global warming. The
project is designed as a three year, two phase study: In the first phase,
surface heat flux diagnostics from GCM experiments will be used to calculate the
potential ocean heat transport associated with historical (20th century)
anomalies in sea surface temperatures and sea ice extent. The SST and sea ice
anomalies will be acquired from the most comprehensive data sets available
including: COADS, Navy/NOAA, Walsh, ESMR, SMMR, and SMM/I, all of which are
currently in-house. In addition, ocean heat transports will be calculated from
GCM simulations and proxy data from the Little Ice Age (ca. 1700 AD) and Last
Glacial Maximum (ca. 18-2lky BP) in order to obtain larger variations of heat
fluxes that may be closer to the potential variability of the system. The second
phase of the project focuses on simulations of the climatic effects of altered
ocean heat transports in conjunction with transient trace gas increase
scenarios. Ten 100- year simulations are planned in which the ocean heat values,
calculated in phase one, will be used to perturb the normal pattern of climate
change associated with the atmospheric trace gas increase. The simulations in
phase two will take approximately two years to complete, based on estimates of
the current comput ational efficiency of the GISS 4ox5o GCM running on IBM
RS/6000-580 workstation. Individual transient experiments will be completed and
analyzed at the rate of one every three months. The primary objective of this
project is to identify patterns of climate change that are associated with
variability in the air/sea/ice system and to estimate the potential ocean energy
feedbacks that may accompany climate changes induced by atmospheric trace gas
increase. Fingerprinting of such climate patterns will improve our ability to
detect the signs of ocean-induced climate change and can improve our ability to
distinguish between natural variability and anthropogenic climate change.
Furthermore, it will provide us with a quantitative assessment of the oceans
ability, through energy transport feedbacks, to alter the climate sensitivity
and GCM predictions of future climate change. In lieu of fully coupled
atmosphere-ocean-ice models, which are unlikely to reach a reliable predictive
capacity in the near future, these experiments provide the realistic alternative
for gauging the ability of the oceans to alter GCM future climate diagnoses.
This project is funded under the USGCRP NSF Climate Modeling, Analysis and
Prediction program.