* 9320332
* Ecology, Morphology and Phylogeny of Bird Species in South  India, Award in Indian Currency
* O/D,OISE
* 07/01/1994,06/30/1995
* Trevor Price, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Marjorie Lueck
* 06/30/1995
* USD 8,000.00

9320332 Price Description: This project supports travel and field expenses for
Dr. Trevor Price of the University of California, San Diego, to conduct research
in India. His Indian collaborator is Dr. Priya Davidar of Pondicherry
University. A graduate student from U.C.S.D., Mr. Madhusudan Katti, will assist
in the field work. The research aim is the study of the factors that limit
population sizes of migratory bird species. Conditions during the breeding
season and during the non-breeding season have been implicated. The planned
field work is to study the wintering warblers in south India, with special focus
on a single group of warblers (genus Phylloscopus), which are abundant and easy
to study in winter, and which form a single tightly knit ecological guild. The
research will include identification of birds returning, and the territories
they return to, the strategies of feeding and the territorial behavior of both
sexes in different psychological conditions including the effect of the breeding
season. It is expected that this work would help develop a broader picture of
wintering populations in Asia, and allow comparisons with studies on other
continents. The study will help fill a gap in what is known about the
morphology-ecology associations in warblers in the non-breeding season. Scope:
The project provides support to do field research for a U.S. scientist, working
with a graduate student, and in collaboration with an Indian scientist. India
has unique resources and facilities in the project area, of biodiversity. The
project fits well with INT's objectives. ***