* 9320390
* CISE Research Instrumentation:  Interactive Modeling and    Visualization of Complex Environments
* CSE,EIA
* 03/01/1994,08/31/1995
* Anthony DeRose, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Tse-yun Feng
* 08/31/1995
* USD 109,503.00

9320390 DeRose This award is for the purchase of a state-of-the-art high-
performance graphics workstation which will be dedicated to support research in
computer and information science and engineering. The equipment will be used for
the following research projects in interactive modeling and visualization: (1)
Geometric design optimization, (2) Multiresolution geometry, (3) Controlled-
precision photorealistic image synthesis, (4) Computer-generated illustration,
and (5) The see-through interface. These projects are motivated by a common
theme: to develop tools for exploring extremely complex environments and
datasets such as those encountered in engineering design, medical imaging, and
physical simulation. The projects couple two powerful techniques:
multiresolution analysis and interactivity. Multiresolution analysis provides a
mathematical framework for representing varying levels of detail in different
regions of the data. Interactivity allows a user to dynamically choose the
regions of the data where a detailed representation is required. Together, these
techniques allow substantial performance gains, since in most applications high
fidelity is required over only a small portion of the overall dataset. Even with
these algorithmic performance gains, the interactive graphical systems will
still require fast CPUs, tightly coupled with high-performance graphics
hardware, in order to manipulate the multiresolution representations, as well as
to update the visual display in real time. It is expected that such hardware
will be relatively inexpensive and commonplace in the next five to ten years.
However, since there is a well-recognized qualitative difference between real-
time interactivity and batch-mode simulation, attempting to simulate the
interactive methods of the near future on less-powerful hardware is essentially
futile. It is, therefore, essential to acquire a high-performance graphics
workstation. *** TERMINALEXE @ j E B TERMINALHLP @ j 9320390 DeRose This award
is for the purchase of a state-of-the-art high-performance graphics workstation
which will be ded 4 &gt; Z \ _ a / 4 $ $ $ $ G 4 &gt; 4 Times Symbol " Helvetica
Chicago Times New Roman &amp; Arial 5 Courier New R ZapfDingbats Palatino Greek
GenMath MathMeteor MT Extra " 9 e9 e : DeRose/Washington Mark Purvis Mark Purvis