* 9320419
* CISE Research Instrumentation
* CSE,EIA
* 03/01/1994,08/31/1995
* Oussama Khatib, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Tse-yun Feng
* 08/31/1995
* USD 107,725.00

9320419 Khatib The general thrust of this effort is to develop mobile
manipulation systems with ever-increasing degrees of autonomy. The equipment,
two mobile robots with manipulators, will be used for the research projects
outlined below: Robotic Material Handling Assistants: Autonomous transport of
material through complex domains is a task that might be considered beyond the
current capability of robotic systems. Construction areas are a prime example of
such an environment. However, a set of cooperating robotic "assistants" with
human guidance could accomplish just such a task, increasing productivity and
decreasing the risk of injury. The goal in this project is to develop such a set
of mobile robotic assistants. Initially, these robots would be guided in their
actions by a human "master." As the project progresses, ever-increasing levels
of autonomy would be exhibited, increasing the dexterity of the system. Visual
Sensing for Mobile Robots: The project is aimed to develop real-time visual
sensing capabilities for mobile robots. This goal offers a considerable
challenge, but it is a crucial step that must be taken to bring mobile robots
into real-world unstructured task environments. This work starts by implementing
and evaluating a variety of vision algorithms using two experimental setups: a
stereo platform and motion analysis stage. The results of the research will be
both a systematic comparison, and possibly combination, of existing algorithms,
as well as a benchmark of calibrated image data to be used at Stanford and by
others in the field. Cooperation among Autonomous Mobile Age nts: Several
aspects of cooperation will be investigated, including communication modality,
cooperation strategy, type of information or service exchanged, and degree of
responsibility exchanged. The focus will be on agents that have advanced
cognitive and physical capabilities and considerable autonomy. Their
interactions will be discretionary and opportunistic, reflecting an explicit
(but usually incomplete) understanding of their own capabilities, goals, and
plans, along with those of their cooperative partners. Research on Autonomous
Agents: In this project, the goal is to provide robotic systems with a high
degree of run-time "conditionality" which are capable of adapting to complex and
changing environments. *** ` $ AUTOEXEC33 Xt V LM VW @$ CONFIG BAK V CONFIG OLD
nW WIN31 X 9320419 Khatib The general thrust of this effort is to develop mobile
manipulation systems with ever-increasing degrees of y { 2 4 $ $ $ $ G M M Times
Symbol " Helvetica Chicago Times New Roman &amp; Arial 5 Courier New R
ZapfDingbats Palatino Greek GenMath MathMeteor MT Extra &amp; &amp; &amp; " b
eFj 8 Khatib/Stanford Mark Purvis Mark Purvis