* 9320568
* Effects of Greenland Ice on the Earth's Gravity, Crustal    Deformation, and Tilt
* GEO,OPP
* 09/01/1994,08/31/1998
* Andrew Trupin, Vassar College
* Continuing Grant
* Jane V. Dionne
* 08/31/1998
* USD 93,223.00

This award supports a theoretical and modeling effort to determine the effects
of the Greenland ice sheet on the rotation and gravity field of Earth. To
accomplish the goals, the secular and interannual changes in the geopotential,
the position in the Earth's rotation axis and certain other parameters, such as
center-of-mass motion and length of day will be calculated from mass balance
changes in ice. The largest gravitational effects of ice thickness change shown
in simple models are up to many times higher than the observed effects. This
suggests that the viscous response of the mantle to long term changes in ice
loading may be cancelling some of the elastic response. Current changes in
gravity and crustal motion depend critically on the time lagged response of the
Earth's mantle to previous loading histories, lasting as long as tens of
thousands of years. Spatial and temporal changes in mass balance from late
Pleistocene deglaciation and the subsequent interglacial period will be combined
with current mass balance estimates to assemble time histories for ice thickness
throughout the ice sheet. From these histories, the elastic results for gravity,
rotation and deformation can be corrected by the use of glacial rebound models,
such as the visco-elastic spherical Earth model. The viscous correction to the
elastic loading for several cases of late Pleistocene deglaciation and more
recent thickness change will be calculated for various upper and lower mantle
viscosity profiles. A 20 kilometer by 20 kilometer grid will provide means of
projecting the viscous rebound rates for the point mass model into the non-
pointlike structure of the Greenland ice sheet. In addition to gravity, the
components of crustal deformation and tilt are important in geodetic
measurements from space. This project will also assess the impact that future
observational improvements will have on understanding the mass balance of
Greenland. The observational improvements are anticipated fr om global
positioning system (GPS) studies and studies involving satellites that use laser
ranging. The use of existing gridded meteorological, accumulation, ablation, and
ice thickness data, along with ice flow models to predict future ice thickness
changes in Greenland is expected to greatly reduce the difficulty in calculating
gravity coefficients and crustal motion for both the elastic and viscous cases.
The effects of the possible changes in the position of the upper boundary of
appreciable summer snow melt that roughly follows the periphery of the ice sheet
called the Benson line can be used to predict vertical motion near the ice sheet
boundary and the results may be checked against sea level records, where they
exist. Greenland strain and velocity data may be used to estimate retention time
of new accumulation and the rates of discharge at the perimeter of the ice
sheet. The sensitivity of ice model contributions to the total mass loss (or
gain) to the oceans and to changes in other ice systems will also be
investigated. Anticipated results include high resolution surface models of
gravity, deformation, and tilt for the Greenland Ice Sheet, based on refinements
of existing models of ice thickness change, and corrected for the viscous
response of the mantle. Since these results are expected to fall within the
detectable range of GPS receivers and possibly absolute gravity meters, they may
be tested against space and ground based geodetic observations. This research
will lead to a better understanding of the dynamic relationship between ice
sheets and Earth's crust.