* 9320324
* Dissertation Research: High-resolution Reconstruction of    Recent and Late-Holocene Climate Change in Equatorial East  Africa
* BIO,DEB
* 03/01/1994,02/29/1996
* Herbert Wright, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Scott L. Collins
* 02/29/1996
* USD 10,500.00

9320324 Wright Late-Quaternary sediment records from climate sensitive, closed
basin lakes in tropical East Africa are testimony to the complexity of climate
history at time scales ranging from millennia to years. High resolution
reconstruction of the underlying history of African continental paleoclimates is
complicated by individualistic response of the lakes to short-term climate
change because of variation in indirect climate effects, lake levels, and
salinity. This dissertation research will improve high resolution interpretation
of complex sedimentary records by (1) conducting a detailed paleolimnological
study of recent climate-caused environmental change in a system of four
interconnected lake basins, (2) investigating the ecological sensitivity and
patterns of species replacement in the lacustrine invertebrate communities of
these shallow lake ecosystems, and (3) establishing the analysis of fossil
assemblages of these lacustrine invertebrates as a tool in high resolution
paleoclimate reconstruction. %%% Results from this dissertation research will be
applied to the high resolution reconstruction of a strongly debated but poorly
documented episode in climatic history of east Africa and other tropical
regions: the last millennium which may include tropical equivalents of the
Midieval Warm Epoch and the Little Ice Age. Much of what we know about climate
change modeling at small spatial scales derives from paleolimnological studies
such as this. The attempts to increase the temporal resolution of climate
reconstruction will be invaluable for understanding and predicting future
patterns of climate change within the the context of natural, short-term
climatic variation. ***