* 9320951
* Agile Manufacturing Enterprise Forum (AMEF)
* ENG,CMMI
* 04/15/1994,03/31/1999
* Terrence Schmoyer, Lehigh University
* Cooperative Agreement
* george hazelrigg
* 03/31/1999
* USD 15,520,000.00

9320951 Schmoyer The purpose of this forum is to develop further a vision of
agile manufacturing, to assess the current state of implementation, to identify
and prioritize needed changes in practices and related technology, and to
influence the research agenda on agile manufacturing. The forum will carry out
strategic analyses of the technical and business issues affecting agile
manufacturing. It will serve as an industry voice in defining and prioritizing
research needs in support of agile manufacturing. The forum will provide
recommendations as requested on the entire Agile Manufacturing Initiative (AMI)
including the Agile Manufacturing Research Institutes and related demonstration
projects. The forum will evaluate industry training needs in agile manufacturing
against available courses and materials. This forum plays a central role in the
success of the AMI which provides an industry-led institute. The forum will work
as a catalyst to assist in the dissemination and adoption of the agile
manufacturing research results. Rapid deployment of this research is seen as an
important manufacturing strategy for the country. Enterprises which adopt agile
manufacturing concepts are expected to change a broad range of operating
characteristics quickly. This will enable them to take advantage of new
manufacturing technologies, and to facilitate timely response to unanticipated
market opportunities.