* 9320235
* Doctoral Dissertation Research in Sociology:  Perceptions ofFisheries Management on Lake Victoria, Tanzania
* O/D,OISE
* 05/01/1994,04/30/1996
* Douglas Wilson, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Patricia Jones Tsuchitani
* 04/30/1996
* USD 9,450.00

INT 93-20235 Harris This dissertation enhancement grant provides partial
support for a U.S. graduate student, Douglas C. Wilson, working under the
guidance of Prof. Craig Harris, of the Department of Sociology at Michigan State
University, to study the fisheries management situation on the Tanzanian shore
of Lake Victoria. The research will look at how several existing or proposed
management regulations are perceived by those in the industry, in terms of their
particular economic interests and the interest of preserving the resource. The
study will use a multi-site, multi- method approach to understanding the
perceptions of fisheries management of small-scale fishers, processors, and
traders on eight fishing beaches, and their large-scale counterparts in the
three major lakeside towns. Methods to be used include formal surveys, in-depth
interviews, focus groups, and a q-methodology survey to identify how perceptions
vary according to location, species pursued, technology used, demographic
characteristics, and the class of the various actors. The research will be done
in cooperation with, and assisted by personnel from, the Tanzanian Fisheries
Research Institute. The characterization of the constituencies in the Lake
Victoria fishery that emerges from this research will be given to the Tanzanian
fisheries authorities to facilitate the design and implementation of future
management programs. This study will make an important contribution to the
social science understanding of a major biological change in one of the world's
great aquatic ecosystems. The research could provide useful real-world data to
illuminate the issue of what influences behavior toward either the "free rider"
or the "respecter of the commons" mode. The grant will launch a young scientist
on a comparative research program to evaluate and improve the effectiveness of
this multi-site, multi-method approach to understanding common pool resources.
***