* 9320440
* CISE Research Instrumentation:  Research Instrumentation    in Support of VLSI Design and Testing
* NONE,NONE
* 03/01/1994,01/31/1997
* Seth Wolpert, University of Maine
* Standard Grant
* Tse-yun Feng
* 01/31/1997
* USD 26,465.00

9320440 Wolpert This award will provide funds to purchase a high-performance
workstation and laboratory bench equipment to facilitate the design and testing
of elaborate custom integrated circuits in support of a number of research
projects including the following: (1) Examination of a Neuronal Algorithm Using
VLSI-Based Models: This project is an evaluation of the singularity of the
relationship between the hardware and software of biological neural networks. It
involves implementing a custom VLSI-based model of a well-documented network of
biological neurons and comparing the electrical signals resident in this network
with those of its biological counterpart. (2) A Multichannel Sensor for
Extracellular Potentials: The objective of this project is the development and
evaluation of a multipolar nerve cuff electrode that can not only sense impulses
from outside of a nerve bundle, but discern their point of origin within the
fiber. In the final phase of this study, the electrodes will be installed and
tested on a preparation of lateral eye and optic nerve of Limulus, the horseshoe
crab. (3) An Intelligent Signal Detection System: The main objective of this
project is to study and develop a generic, modular and expandable
software/hardware platform interfaceable with the existing monitoring systems
where many visions can be developed, tested, evaluated and integrated. *** <o\ #
CONTROL HLP @ j N H WIN COM :X T BOOTLOG TXT EX k 9320440 Wolpert This award
will provide funds to purchase a high-performance workstation and laboratory
bench equipment to , . $ $ $ $ G Times Symbol " Helvetica Chicago Times New
Roman & Arial 5 Courier New R ZapfDingbats Palatino Greek GenMath MathMeteor MT
Extra " e e 6 Wolpert/Maine Mark Purvis Mark Purvis