* 9320325
* CISE Research Instrumentation
* CSE,EIA
* 03/01/1994,08/31/1995
* Premachandran Menon, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Tse-yun Feng
* 08/31/1995
* USD 40,000.00

9320325 Krishna The equipment funded by this award will be used for several
research projects, including in particular the following: (1) VLSI Arithmetic
Arrays for Digital Signal Processing: Methodologies and tools for analyzing and
comparing design alternatives at various levels of abstraction are being
developed. Part of the work consists of implementing chip designs using the
fabrication facilities of the Massachusetts Microelectronics Center and MOSIS.
(2) High-Performance VLSI Synthesis with Wave Pipelining: Wave pipelining is a
custom circuit design method which has previously been used in hand-crafted
designs. This technique is being incorporated in CAD tools for the automatic
synthesis of high-performance VLSI circuits. (3) Testable Non-Scan Sequential
Circuits: Design and development methodology for sequential circuits are being
done so that most path delay faults can be detected. To avoid performance
degradation, any circuitry added to enhance testability is not allowed to be in
functional paths. (4) Reconfiguration of Real-Time Distributed Systems:
Reconfiguration is a powerful method to improve the performance of distributed
systems. Currently, it has largely been used only to react to component
failures. In this project, techniques are being developed to configure the
system as a function of the prevailing workload so that the performance is
optimized. (5) Topological and Physical Layout Design Techniques for Yield
Enhancement: The greater integration levels and die sizes in integrated circuits
have increased the need for yield enhancement. In this project, design techniq
ues are being developed to improve the yield of larger chips, so as to fully
benefit from the advantages of higher levels of integration. *** ( kT 3COM t
WINA20 386 ` $ AUTOEXEC33 Xt V LM VW @$ CONFIG BAK V CONFIG OLD nW WIN31 X
9320325 Krishna The equipment funded by this award will be used for several
research projects, including in particular the Z \ u w { $ $ $ $ G Times Symbol
" Helvetica Chicago Times New Roman &amp; Arial 5 Courier New R ZapfDingbats
Palatino Greek GenMath MathMeteor MT Extra " f eDj 6 Krishna/UMass Mark Purvis
Mark Purvis