* 9320455
* Rule-Based System for Prediction and Detection of Northern  Hemisphere Climate Change
* GEO,AGS
* 04/01/1994,03/31/1997
* James Martin, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Jay S. Fein
* 03/31/1997
* USD 213,349.00

Abstract ATM-9320455 Martin, James H. Rodionov, Sergei N. University of Colorado
Title: Rule-Based System for Prediction and Detection of Northern Hemisphere
Climate Change Information regarding the climate system is often imprecise,
incomplete, vague, or uncertain. A significant part of this information exists
as empirical facts and rules, expressed in qualitative form. The objective of
this study is to develop a system that can manipulate qualitative information is
such a way as to provide understanding about observed climate changes. The
appropriate method to reach this objective is based on concepts and techniques
of expert systems and artificial intelligence. The information about parameters
of the climate system will be presented both in quantitative and qualitative
forms. Relationships between climatic variables will be expressed as production
rules written in IF-THEN format. Each rule will contain a certainty factor that
represents a numerical measure of the confidence one has in the validity of a
rule. Two methods will be used to combine certainty factors. The first method is
based on the Dempster-Sharper theory, and the second one on the Bayesian scheme.
The system will be able to evaluate the future state of various climatic
variables (such as temperature, precipitation, atmospheric pressure, etc.) and
of macroclimatic features (such as centers of action, jet streams, upper
atmospheric troughs and ridges, etc.). It will also explain why the conclusion
was reached and how certain it is. This system may also be considered as a
decision support system valuable for recording ideas and retrieving necessary
information that will facilitate discussions about observed and anticipated
climate changes. During the first year, the prototype will be developed which
will focus on the Northern Atlantic. During the second year the system will be
expanded to the entire Northern Hemisphere. The system will be useful both for
climatolog ists and decisionmakers. It will find different applications in
fisheries, agriculture, navigation, recreation and other climate-related
industries.