* 9320238
* Astronomy Studies with the Berkeley, Illinois and Maryland  Association (BIMA) Array
* MPS,AST
* 01/01/1994,04/30/1997
* Donald Backer, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* Robert L. Dickman
* 04/30/1997
* USD 3,079,374.00

9320238 Welch The Berkeley-Illinois-Maryland Array (BIMA) is a millimeter-wave
interferometer presently made up of 6 six-meter diameter antennas; expansion to
at least 9 antennas is planned during the next few years. Located at Berkeley's
Hat Creek Radio Observatory, BIMA was jointly capitalized and is jointly
operated by the University of California at Berkeley, the University of Illinois
and the University of Maryland through a combination of NSF and State funding.
These awards are for identical proposals submitted simultaneously by each
institution, and support astronomical research, technological development and
student training carried out at the BIMA array. Astronomical research at BIMA
includes high resolution studies of solar system objects, stellar envelopes,
star-forming regions in the Galaxy, and molecular clouds in external galaxies.
Notable accomplishments during the past three years at BIMA include expansion to
6 elements, the development of a novel high- reliability 4K closed cycle
refrigerator stage, the detection of bands in the Jovian atmosphere at
millimeter wavelengths, and infall onto star forming cores. During the next
grant period observations will continue, the array will be expanded to a total
of at least 9 elements, and the array baselines will be extended to at least 750
meters, providing angular resolution of 0.2 arcseconds at a wavelength of 1.3mm.