* 9320819
* Colonist Land Use and Deforestation in the Ecuadorian       Amazon
* SBE,BCS
* 04/01/1994,09/30/1996
* Richard Bilsborrow, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Daniel B. Hodge
* 09/30/1996
* USD 82,256.00

9320819 BILSBORROW The goal of this research is to investigate the factors
influencing land use and deforestation by migrant settlers in the rainforest of
the Ecuadorian Amazon. This area, which is considered to be one of the world's
"hot spots" in terms of its rich biodiversity, is now undergoing massive human
intervention in the form of agricultural colonization by spontaneous flows of
migrants along roads built by petroleum companies. Currently, the conflicting
aims of protecting the environment and economically developing the country are
dramatically apparent; satellite photos of the region taken over the past decade
vividly show rapid deforestation. This project builds on a previous grant from
NSF which was used to collect critical information from 419 colonist households.
This project will analyze those data using Tobit estimation procedures to
explain the proportion of settlers' lands devoted to different categories of
land use. These proportions will be explained using three major sets of
variables: (1) household demographic and socio-economic characteristics, (2)
natural resource conditions on the farm, and (3) the policy and institutional
context. This research will provide important new insights into the factors
influencing the behavior of colonists in one of the world's most important and
sensitive environments. Thus it will contribute to our basic understanding of
the interaction of factors in a developing area with a deep tension between
environmental preservation and economic development. Results of the research
should contribute to the development of more appropriate policies to promote
sustainable development in the region.