* 9320420
* CISE Research Instrumentation:  A Platform for Research     in Distributed Algorithms for Electronic CAD
* CSE,EIA
* 03/01/1994,02/29/1996
* Debashis Bhattacharya, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Tse-yun Feng
* 02/29/1996
* USD 76,682.00

9320420 Bhattacharya This award is for the purchase of eight workstations and
one multiprocessor workstation to act as a server, all to be connected by a
communication network. This cluster of workstations will be dedicated to support
several research projects, including: (1) distributed test generation and
simulation for digital VLSI and ULSI circuits, (2) distributed algorithms for
MCM (multichip module) design and test, (3) distributed ATPG and simulation
algorithms for mixed-signal and analog circuits, and (4) high-level optimization
tools for interactive architectural support. The underlying task in each of
these four projects will be to develop efficient parallel algorithms for various
graph problems such as tree search, bipartite matching, single-source shortest-
paths and minimum-cost flow. The research will provide extensive empirical
evaluation of parallel algorithms for graph problems. In addition to exploring
parallelism in fundamental computer science problems, the proposed research is
expected to have a significant impact on current design and test methods for
digital, analog, and mixed-signal circuits. Specifically, the research will
alleviate the confinement of these methods to uniprocessor machines. Moreover,
by focusing on distributed processing and networked workstations, the research
efforts will lead to techniques that are fully compatible with the existing
computing environment of most commercial and academic establishments. ***
9320420 Bhattacharya This award is for the purchase of eight workstations and
one multiprocessor workstat ion to act as a se U _ P U $ $ $ G ı U ı _ U Times
Symbol " Helvetica Chicago Times New Roman &amp; Arial 5 Courier New R
ZapfDingbats Palatino Greek GenMath MathMeteor MT Extra " # e# e :
Bhattacharya/Yale Mark Purvis Mark Purvis