* 9320673
* RUI: Comparative State Legislative Campaign Finance Project
* SBE,SES
* 04/15/1994,09/30/1998
* Joel Thompson, Appalachian State University
* Standard Grant
* Frank P. Scioli  Jr.
* 09/30/1998
* USD 210,813.00

9320673 Thompson Campaign financing is a prominent issue on the contemporary
public agenda. The costs of campaigns are increasing at a rapid pace and reports
indicate that political action committees (PACs) are contributing a greater
proportion of funds to candidates. Turnover rates are declining and, as a
result, the public is concerned about the influence of "special interests" and
career politicians in legislative decision making. The primary purpose of this
investigation is to collect state legislative campaign finance data from a large
and representative sample of states. Data are gathered from approximately 25
states, selected in relation to important differences in their political
characteristics (degree of partisan competition for legislative seats, degree of
legislative professionalism, etc.), regional and cultural differences, electoral
system characteristics, legal requirements (campaign finance restrictions,
public funding of elections, etc.), and structural factors (costs of campaigns,
size and type of district). Information is collected for approximately 40
potentially important explanatory variables. These include candidate
characteristics (party, race, gender, leadership position, etc.); electoral
variables (primary and general election votes in current and previous elections,
etc.); revenue and expenditure variables; and, system characteristics. Data are
collected for the four most recent election cycles - - 1986, 1988, 1990, and
1992. This data set will be the first multi-state, longitudinal (over four
election cycles) one available to researchers. The data will be archived at the
Inter-university Consortium for Political and Social Research where it will be
available to other researchers to pursue additional research topics. ***