* 9320296
* CISE Research Instrumentation:  Robotic and Vision System   Laboratory Instrumentation Improvement
* NONE,NONE
* 03/01/1994,03/31/1996
* Jill Crisman, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* Tse-yun Feng
* 03/31/1996
* USD 61,811.00

9320296 Crisman This award is for the acquisition of equipment which will be
placed within the Robotic and Vision Systems Laboratory (RVSL) to support
research in computer vision and robotics. Specifically, this equipment will be
used for four projects: (1) Deictic Primitives for General Purpose Navigation--A
deictic primitive is a command such as "approach that" where 'that' is an area
selected in a video image by the user. Research will be performed to define a
set of these primitives which can be used for general purpose navigation. (2)
Biologically-Based Shallow Water Robot Ambulation--This equipment will also be
used in the development of a biologically-based robot control architecture for a
shallow water walking robot. The proposed architecture is based on central
pattern generators and reflex models derived from lobster neurophysiology. (3)
Geometric Model-Free Robot Grasping--The RVSL will also explore robot mechanisms
and control architectures to perform general purpose grasping where neither the
position nor shape of the target object is explicitly computed by the robot
system. The proposed approach utilized a novel robot hand developed in the RVSL
to reflexively grasp objects. (4) Coordinated Multiple Robots for the Area
Coverage Problem--To completely cover a search area, a typical robot must
continually localize itself with respect to a prestored map. The proposed work
will investigate multiple robot solutions to this problem when a prior map of
the area is unavailable. *** This award is for the acquisition of equipment
which will be placed within the Robotic an d Vision Systems L N Q $ $ $ G Times
Symbol " Helvetica Chicago Times New Roman & Arial 5 Courier New R ZapfDingbats
Palatino Greek GenMath MathMeteor MT Extra " . e. e < Cisman/Northeastern Mark
Purvis Mark Purvis