* 9320461
* Summer Research Program in Chemical Analysis
* MPS,CHE
* 06/01/1994,11/30/1997
* Michael Sepaniak, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Continuing grant
* Fred M. Hawkridge
* 11/30/1997
* USD 165,000.00

This project, supported by the Analytical and Surface Chemistry Program, is
focused on infrastructure development in analytical chemistry. This activity
provides support for four faculty from undergraduate institutions to enable
their participation in research activities at the University of Tennessee during
the summer months. Both new participants, and visitors who have been involved
previously will be accommodated in this program. It is designed as an aggregated
NSF Research Opportunity Award (ROA) and has become known in the chemistry
community as a Macro-ROA. By providing faculty from regional undergraduate
institutions with such research opportunities, this program serves not only to
maintain or rejuvenate their interest in research pursuits, but also to update
them regarding modern analytical chemistry in a collegial setting. The focus of
this project is the support of faculty from undergraduate institutions for
research and training in analytical chemistry. Experiences garnered by
participants in this program are passed on to their students in their respective
institutions. This infrastructure investment serves to maintain topical currency
on the part of the participants and to indirectly promote the development of
their student's interest in careers in analytical chemistry.