* 9320715
* Quasar Research
* MPS,AST
* 05/15/1994,04/30/1998
* Christopher Impey, University of Arizona
* Continuing Grant
* Sethanne Howard
* 04/30/1998
* USD 375,711.00

9320715 Impey This project involves a systematic study of the properties of
quasars, using the recently completed Large Bright Quasar Survey (LBQS). The
objective and quantifiable selection criteria for the LBQS will allow a
calculation of the probability of detecting a quasar as a function of redshift
and optical luminosity. There will be a determination of the sensitivity of
derived quantities such as the luminosity function to the shape of the spectral
energy distribution. The Principal Investigators will continue deep and shallow
radio observations of the LBQS, in order to understand the bimodal distribution
of radio luminosity. The environments and host galaxies of low redshift quasars
(0.4 &lt; z &lt; 1) from the LBQS will be studied. The Principal Investigators
will construct global energy distributions from radio to X-ray wavelengths for
subsamples of the LBQS, in order to compare to the space density and evolution
of quasars selected at other wavelengths. In addition to continuing to exploit
the LBQS, the Principal Investigators will begin two new quasar surveys. The
first will use red objective prism plates to look for rare populations of bright
and high redshift (2 &lt; z &lt; 4) quasars. The second will use a multicolor
digital sky survey to isolate large numbers of high and low redshift quasars,
sufficient for studies of clustering and for a major improvement in our
understanding of the luminosity function.