* 9320960
* Validity of Intuitive Theories Underlying Legal Safeguards in Cases Involving Eyewitness Identification
* NONE,NONE
* 02/15/1994,07/31/1998
* Brian Cutler, Florida International University
* Standard Grant
* Patricia White
* 07/31/1998
* USD 154,127.00

9320960 CUTLER Public trust in the process of trial by jury rests on peoples'
perceptions of the fairness of trial procedures and the accuracy of trial
outcomes. Behavioral science methodology can be used to assess the fairness and
accuracy of trial procedures, to make recommendations for improving those
procedures, and ultimately to enhance peoples' faith in the justice system. This
research focuses on one of the most common elements of criminal and civil
trials: eyewitness testimony. By bringing behavioral science data to bear on the
effectiveness of traditional legal safeguards designed to ensure the accuracy of
eyewitness testimony, this research will make concrete and practical
recommendations concerning trial procedure. In this series of experiments the
PIs systematically examine attorney, judge and jury sensitivity to the factors
that influence the quality of identifications tests and their abilities to use
this information to properly evaluate the utility of eyewitness testimony. The
methodology involves exposing practicing attorneys to simulated line-up
identification tests, judges to simulated motions to suppress identification
testimony, and experienced jurors to simulated trials, and recording their
reactions to and evaluations of the fairness of the procedures and the likely
accuracy of the eyewitness testimony. ***