* 9320436
* CISE Research Instrumentation:  Equipment for Multimedia    Information Systems
* CSE,EIA
* 03/15/1994,08/31/1995
* Ramesh Jain, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Tse-yun Feng
* 08/31/1995
* USD 60,036.00

9320436 Jain Improved computational methods and information management tools are
critical in order to enhance the national competitive edge across broad sectors
of the economy and to make rapid progress in education, medicine, global change
analysis and several other aspects of scientific endeavor. Until recently,
information in computers was almost always in alpha-numeric form, but today,
alpha-numeric information seems very restricting in our interactions with
computers. We need multimedia systems that will seamlessly manage audio, video,
graphics, alpha-numeric and several other forms of information. To meet these
new demands, many aspects of multimedia computing are being addressed by
researchers at the University of California, San Diego. This award provides
equipment to support active research projects in the emerging areas of
multimedia computing in the Departments of Computer Science and Engineering, and
Electrical and Computer Engineering at the University of California, San Diego.
The massive storage equipment will be used for several research projects
covering many important areas of multimedia computing: multimedia servers,
networking, operating systems, and databases. This equipment will also
facilitate joint research projects in distributed multimedia information
systems. The massive storage will help to take some of the algorithms and
studies to the level of realistic prototypes. In addition, the equipment will
also be available to other researchers developing multimedia tools in robotics,
artificial intelligence, health care, manufacturing and other related areas. ***