* 9320980
* Collaborative Research on Competition Between Public and    Private Schools and Education Policy
* SBE,SES
* 03/15/1994,02/29/1996
* Richard Romano, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Lynn A. Pollnow
* 02/29/1996
* USD 51,333.00

9320988 Epple The purpose of this research is to develop and analyze a model of
school choice at the primary and secondary level that incorporates competition
between private and public schools. The model will be used to estimate the
effects of various public policy alternatives such as vouchers and neighborhood
versus open enrollment public schools. Students are characterized by an ability
level and household income. A student's educational achievement is dependent on
one's own ability and on the abilities of his classmates. The model
characterizes the sorting of students by income and ability across schools in
the public and private school sectors, taking into account financial aid
policies of private schools. A computational model paralleling the theoretical
model is developed and used to explore properties of the model and investigate
policy predictions. This research is important because it will shed light on the
consequences of an educational system which incorporates a greater degree of
school choice at the primary and secondary levels. *** 9320980 Romano The
purpose of this research is to develop and analyze a model of school choice at
the primary and secondary level that incorporates competition between private
and public schools. The model will be used to estimate the effects of various
public policy alternatives such as vouchers and neighborhood versus open
enrollment public schools. Students are characterized by an ability level and
household income. A student's educational achievement is dependent on one's own
ability and on the abilities of his classmates. The model characterizes the
sorting of students by income and ability across schools in the public and
private school sectors, taking into account financial aid policies of private
schools. A computational model paralleling the theoretical model is developed
and used to explore properties of the model and investigate policy predictions.
This research is important because it will s hed light on the consequences of an
educational system which incorporates a greater degree of school choice at the
primary and secondary levels. ***