* 9320301
* U.S.- China Joint Seminar on Singularities and Complex      Geometry, Beijing, China, June 1994
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/1994,05/31/1996
* Stephen S. Yau, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Alice C. Hogan
* 05/31/1996
* USD 25,700.00

9320301 Yau, Libgober This award provides support a joint U.S.-China Seminar on
Singularities and Complex Geometry. U.S. Principal Investigators Stephen Yau and
Anatoly Libgober of the University of Illinois at Chicago and Lu Qikeng,
Institute of Mathematics, Chinese Academy of Sciences, have organized a joint
seminar to be held in Beijing, China on singularities and complex geometry,
which is an active area of research in algebraic geometry with implications for
diverse areas of science ranging from elementary particle physics to fields of
engineering. The geometry of complex analytic spaces continues to warrant
considerable attention in pure mathematics and in recent years, both the
conceptual and technical aspects of the subject have become increasingly
important in several areas of modern mathematical physics. The principal
investigators are known as leading authorities in this area, and maintain active
research programs. Participants on both sides include a mix of senior and junior
researchers, with the expectation that channels of communication will be opened
between the new generation of mathematicians in both countries. It is
anticipated that given the development of China's very independent mathematical
school, and its limited contact with the West, new viewpoints and mathematical
techniques will be obtained through this proposed interaction. Support
recommended includes airfare for twelve U.S. participants, local travel, and
modest organizational fees. China's National Natural Science Foundation and
Academy of Sciences will support Chinese participation and the local subsistence
costs of U.S. researchers in China for the duration of the seminar.