* 9320890
* Closed-Form Angle Estimation with Circular Arrays/Apertures for Mobile/Cellular Communications and Surveillance Radar
* CSE,CCF
* 02/15/1994,08/31/1997
* Michael Zoltowski, Purdue Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* John Cozzens
* 08/31/1997
* USD 176,800.00

The digital communications industry is currently investing a plethora of
resources towards the development and experimental verification of prototype
antenna arrays to be deployed on mobile communication vehicles, including the
commercial automobile of the future, as a means of discriminating amongst
signals co-located in frequency based on their respective spatial locations.
Given the small aperture on a mobile communications unit, the uniform circular
array (UCA) geometry is ideal due to its rotational invariance with respect to
azimuth. This research is based on a recent breakthrough by the principal
investigator: the development of a simple, closed form algorithm for use in
conjunction with a UCA that provides automatically paired source azimuth and
elevation angle estimates. In contrast, the algorithms for 2D arrival-angle
estimation to date have required expensive spectral searches, iterative
solutions to multidimensional optimization problems, or ad-hoc schemes for
pairing direction cosine estimates with respect to each of a number of different
array axes. Note that UCA-ESPRIT is fundamentally different from ESPRIT in that
it is not based on a displacement invariance array structure but rather is based
on phase mode excitation and hinges on a recursive relationship between Bessel
functions. A theoretical performance analysis of UCA-ESPRIT is being conducted.
This will prove extremely useful for predicting its performance in a mobile
communications environment. Novel strategies for incorporating mutual coupling
effects are being developed as well. The real world performance of UCA-ESPRIT
will be assessed with experimental data from a prototype circular antenna array
currently being built at the Polytechnic University of Madrid for mobile sea
communications with the INMARSAT satellite system. Adaptations of UCA-ESPRIT for
filled circular arrays are also being developed.