* 9320218
* Structure-Function Relations in the Leaves of Maize and     Barley: Sink-to-Source Conversion
* BIO,IOS
* 08/15/1994,07/31/1998
* Ray Evert, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Judith A. Verbeke
* 07/31/1998
* USD 240,000.00

9320218 Evert The proposed research involves studies on the development and
structure of the leaves of maize and barley, utilizing bright- field,
transmission electron, epifluorescence, and confocal laser scanning microscopy.
The developmental and structural studies will be complemented by experimental
studies aimed at determining: 1) the pathways followed by photoassimilates in
source and sink leaves; 2) the sites and mechanisms of phloem loading and
unloading in source and sink leaves, respectively; 3) the structural
modifications associated with the sink-to-source conversion; and 4) the pathways
followed by water, which enters the leaf in the transpiration stream, to
intermediate, small, and transverse veins at various levels of leaves undergoing
sink-to-source conversion. Maize and barley, as other grass leaves, provide an
excellent system for following a sequence of cellular and subcellular events
precisely because polarized cell division at the base of the leaf results in an
unmixed gradient of cell development. This same system should be ideal for
determining the underlying mechanisms of the sink-to-source transition. The
leaves of maize and barley differ in many details both structurally and
developmentally. Parallel studies on the leaves of both of these economically
important grasses will provide a more balanced picture of structure-function
relations in grass leaves than would an investigation of only one of them. The
results of these studies will have long-term practical importance in relation to
crop productivity and will be of value to investigators interested in relations
of viruses, insects, mycoplasmas, and other parasites to their hosts and in the
movement of insecticides and growth regulating substances in cultivated plants.
***