* 9320373
* Dissertation Research:  An Articulatory, Acoustic and       Perceptual Study of Tiwi Coronals
* NONE,NONE
* 05/01/1994,04/30/1995
* Ian Maddieson, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Paul G. Chapin
* 04/30/1995
* USD 13,287.00

9320373 MADDIESON Arrernte, an Australian language, is unusual among the world's
languages in containing several subtly but meaningfully different consonants
produced by contact between the tip and/or blade of the tongue and the roof of
the mouth. Their acoustic characteristics, and how the distinctions are made and
perceived, are not well understood. Studies including a sufficient population to
account for inter-speaker variation are also lacking. the planned research will
seek to link articulatory gestures involved in producing these consonants with
salient acoustic characteristics, and to determine the roles of active
articulator shape, area of passive contact, and other variations in oral cavity
configuration. Acoustic and palatographic records for twelve speakers will be
obtained and submitted to preliminary analysis during an extended fieldwork trip
to Australia. Various potential perceptual cues will be tested to evaluate which
are most effective in predicting recognition of these consonants. Final analysis
of field data will be completed at UCLA. This study will constitute the first
comprehensive, instrumentally-backed, multi-speaker characterization of
production, acoustics and perception for a language of this type. It will
contribute to descriptive phonetics, the understanding of perceptual cues,
knowledge about uniformity of articulations within a language, and will help
shape hypotheses about linguistic universals. ***