* 9320275
* Direct Reconstruction of Surface Atomic Structures:         Holography and Beyond
* MPS,DMR
* 05/01/1994,04/30/1999
* Dilano Saldin, University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee
* Continuing Grant
* G. Bruce Taggart
* 04/30/1999
* USD 174,000.00

9320275 Saldin Although electron diffraction techniques have been successful at
revealing many of the complex and unusual atomic structures which exist at solid
surfaces, they are hampered by their most common methodology to date, which is
to compare simulated diffraction patterns for a large number of model structures
with experiment. Unfortunately, this limits their ability to determine complex
unknown structures because of the very large number of structural parameters
which need to be varied. The computer time scaling of such trial and error
techniques is known to scale exponentially with the number of optimized
parameters (an NP-complete problem). Recently, holographic techniques, as
developed for optics, have been shown to hold promise in overcoming some of
these difficulties for determining surface structure by electron diffraction.
This research will use the only method that explicitly addresses the nonlinear
object wave terms whose non-negligible nature is the main barrier to accurate
structure determination by purely holographic algorithms. This method employs
the unique idea of using a linear programming based algorithm to iteratively
optimize the solution to the nonlinear problem. The theoretical work will be
applied to experimental data of low energy electron diffraction, Auger and
photoelectron diffraction from both clean and adsorbate-covered surfaces. %%%
This analytical and computational research will focus on a new way of
interpreting experiments that determine the atomic structures of surfaces. The
method is analogous to that of holography as used in optics. In this case the
experimental probes are electrons instead of light. Successful completion of
this project will yield a rapid and accurate method to determine surface
structures. This determination is important for basic research, but is
particularly important in applications ranging from catalysis to corrosion. ***