* 9320144
* CISE Research Instrumentation:  The Multimedia Systems      Laboratory for Research in Multimedia Systems
* CSE,EIA
* 03/15/1994,02/28/1995
* Mohammad Ilyas, Florida Atlantic University
* Standard Grant
* Tse-yun Feng
* 02/28/1995
* USD 37,329.00

9320144 Coulter The aim of this project is to create a state-of-the-art
multimedia laboratory. The hardware component of the laboratory consists of a
number of multimedia stations connected in the local area network via Ethernets.
Besides these hardware elements, the multimedia stations will be connected to
various accessories needed to run multimedia applications. In addition, there
will be software tools for multimedia development and application enabling
software. The equipment will be used for a number of research projects, in
particular for: (1) research and development of multimedia operating systems,
(2) research and development of multimedia synchronization algorithms for
distributed systems, and (3) research in multimedia videoconferencing systems.
The research in multimedia operating systems will explore techniques to
transform traditional operating systems into a high-performance multimedia
operating system. In the area of multimedia synchronization algorithms, a new
synchronization algorithm will be developed with an idea to combine two
techniques: protocol-based synchronization and local synchronization. The
building of a multimedia conferencing system involves measuring timing and
resource usage, and evaluating critical issues such as video compression and
decompression, and resource synchronization and mixing. *** SCR @ j D TADA WAV @
j &amp; l TARTAN BMP @ j 4 v TERMINALEXE @ j E B TERMINALHLP @ j 9320144 Coulter
The aim of this project is to create a state-of-the-art multimedia laboratory.
The hardw are component of t b d $ $ $ $ G Times Symbol " Helvetica Chicago
Times New Roman &amp; Arial 5 Courier New R ZapfDingbats Palatino Greek GenMath
MathMeteor MT Extra " ( e( e A Coulter/Florida Atlantic Mark Purvis Mark Purvis