* 9320193
* Intraseasonal Variability of Atmospheric Large-Scale        Environment for Deep Convection in the Western Pacific
* GEO,AGS
* 02/01/1994,07/31/1997
* Chidong Zhang, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Sankar-Rao Mopidevi
* 07/31/1997
* USD 219,424.00

Abstract ATM-9320193 Zhang, Chidong University of Washington Title:
Intraseasonal Variability of Atmospheric Large-Scale Environment for Deep
Convection in the Western Pacific Case and composite studies are proposed to
investigate three events of the tropical intraseasonal oscillation (TIO) during
the Intensive Observing Period (IOP) of the Tropical Ocean Global Atmosphere
(TOGA) Coupled Ocean Atmosphere Response Experiment (COARE). Data collected
during the COARE IOP (1 November 1992 - 28 February 1993) from the Tropical
Atmosphere Ocean (TAO) mooring arrays, ships, surface and sounding stations, and
Japanese Geosynchronic Meteorology Satellite (GMS), and wind analyses from the
European Centre for Medium Range Weather Forecast (ECMWF) will be analyzed. The
proposed research will focus on the variability of large-scale atmospheric
environment in which deep convection is promoted or surpassed on the
intraseasonal time scales. Specifically, the proposed project will: (i) Detect
the intraseasonal variability of surface wind and convergence, surface/boundary-
layer thermal conditions (including surface turbulent heat fluxes, humidity and
temperature, moist static energy, etc.), vertical thermodynamic and dynamic
structures of the atmosphere, and surface precipitation; (ii) Explore
intraseasonal coherent signatures of these variables with tropospheric winds and
satellite cloud entitles subdivided by areal extent and cloud-top height.
Through the case studies of the three TIO events during the COARE IOP, the PI
and the co-investigators of the project will attempt a synthesized view of the
large-scale dynamic and thermodynamic structures of the TIO. The synthesized
view of the TIO will include the spatial structures, evolutions, and
interrelationships of three-dimensional wind field, surface and boundary-layer
thermal conditions, atmospheric vertical structures, convective cloud
populations and organization, precipitation, and characteri stics of air-sea
interactions associated with the TIO. The results from this project will provide
necessary information for enhancement of our overall understanding of the TIO
and for improvement and validation of theories and numerical modeling of the
TIO.