* 9320518
* U.S.-Philippines Workshop to Plan Phase III of the Flora of the Philippines Project
* O/D,OISE
* 04/15/1994,09/30/1996
* Seymour Sohmer, Botanical Research Institute of Texas
* Standard Grant
* Gerald Edwards
* 09/30/1996
* USD 67,827.00

9320518 Stone This award provides funds to permit Dr. Benjamin C. Stone,
Botanical Research Institute of Texas (BRIT), to conduct with Dr. Domingo A.
Madulid, National Museum, Manila, a workshop to plan Phase III of the Flora of
the Philippines Project (FPP). The participants, six U.S. scientists, three from
Western Europe, and four from the Philippines are members of the Philippine
Advisory Committee, the International Scientific Advisory Committee, and the
Living Collections Committee of FPP. The workshop provides an opportunity for
the members of these three committees to discuss the third and final component
of FPP. This component involves the research, writing, and editing that will
lead to the new flora of the Philippines. Session 1 of the workshop will be held
at BRIT, in Ft. Worth, Texas, while Session 2 will be held in Manila. A
completed flora will have major global significance because an important portion
of the earth's biodiversity will be better understood. Earlier collections of
Philippine plants held at the Museum in Manila were destroyed during World War
II. There is an urgency in completing FPP at this time in order to catalog and
classify Philippine plants that are endangered, threatened, or on the brink of
extinction. The collaborators are well known researchers in the field of this
project. This project is relevant to the objectives of the East Asia and Pacific
Program which seeks to increase the level of cooperation between U.S. and East
Asian scientists and engineers through the exchange of scientific information,
ideas, skills, and techniques and through collaboration on problems of mutual
interest and benefit. ***