* 9320541
* Effects of Surface Structure on Ordering in III/V Systems
* MPS,DMR
* 06/15/1994,05/31/1998
* Gerald Stringfellow, University of Utah
* Continuing Grant
* LaVerne D. Hess
* 05/31/1998
* USD 293,130.00

9320541 Stringfellow The proposed research addresses fundamental surface
processes related to atomic scale ordering in III-V semiconductor alloys during
epitaxial growth. This ordering phenomenon has only recently been discovered,
and is of great basic interest since ordering is thought to be intimately
connected with the surface processes occurring during growth, and because
ordering changes fundamental materials properties such as the band gap of the
disordered alloy. Recent work has indicated that surface reconstruction and the
motion of steps on the surface control the ordering process. Unfortunately, many
of the observations leading to the ordering models are indirect. The proposed
research attempts to directly relate surface features such as reconstruction and
steps to ordering, and to simultaneously monitor optical and electrical
properties of the resulting material. %%% At present, detailed understanding of
the surface structure during vapor phase epitaxial crystal growth is generally
poor. The proposed research will significantly benefit our basic understanding,
control, and general ability to improve epitaxial growth processes. The research
also has significant technological relevance; results from this research are
expected to be useful in a variety of ways in developing and bringing advanced
electronic and photonic device concepts to fruition. It will likely be useful
for achieving photon and carrier confinement, and for the intentional reduction
of the energy band gap for infrared photonic devices. Ordering is also expected
to lead to enhancement of free carrier mobilities by eliminating alloy
scattering. The research is expected to have a positive impact on the general
areas of telecommunications, information processing; and high speed computing.
***