* 9320909
* Spectroscopic Detection and Characterization of Chemical    Intermediates
* NONE,NONE
* 03/01/1994,09/30/1999
* Terry Miller, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Continuing grant
* Janice M. Hicks
* 09/30/1999
* USD 903,000.00

In this project in the Physical Chemistry Program of the Chemistry Division,
Prof. Terry A. Miller of the Ohio State University will conduct fundamental
investigations of chemical reaction intermediates and clusters involving them.
The primary method for detection and characterization of the species is high
resolution spectroscopy. The species are produced in the cold, unreactive
environment of a supersonic jet expansion where they can be interrogated by bot
moderate and very high resolution laser induced fluorescence (LIF) spectroscopy.
Using the same jet techniques, the zero kinetic energy (ZEKE) spectroscopy of
the chemically very important ions of a number of reactive, neutral free
radicals will be characterized. Specific chemical intermediates to be studied as
neutrals and/or cations include alkoxy radicals and their fluoro- and thio-
derivatives, carbenes, amiodogen and related radicals, and substituted methyl
radicals (carbonium ions). Concurrent theoretical developments in fundamental
spectroscopic theory, applied spectroscopic analysis, and ab initio calculations
on the chemical intermediates will be undertaken. Complex chemical reactions
that occur in atmospheric, combustion, and organic synthesis processes typically
involve transient chemical intermediates, such as free radicals and molecular
ions, that determine the overall result of the process. Spectroscopic
identification of the intermediates is critical for the practical investigation
and monitoring of such reactions. Spectroscopic characterization of the
intermediates provides a foundation for the basic understanding of the nature of
chemical reactivity. This research involves a multifaceted approach to the
spectroscopic detection and characterization of these intermediates and species
involving them.