* 9320317
* CISE Research Instrumentation
* CSE,EIA
* 03/15/1994,08/31/1995
* Gonzalo Arce, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* Tse-yun Feng
* 08/31/1995
* USD 66,750.00

9320317 Arce This award is for the purchase of high capacity digital video
equipment which will be dedicated to support research in computer and
information sciences and engineering. The equipment will be used for several
research projects, including in particular: (1) Nonlinear Digital Video Signal
Processing, (2) Joint Source-Channel Coding for Video Transmission, (3) Video
Transmission over High Speed Computer Networks, and (4) Transport Network
Protocols for Video in Multi-media Applications. Digital video will be playing
an important role in consumer electronics opening new application areas by
exploiting the technologies of communications and computer networks. The
research will accomplish several goals. Firstly, new nonlinear algorithms will
be developed for the filtering, interpolation, format conversion, multi-
resolution representation, and prediction of video processes needed in high-
definition television and in its interaction with existing video systems. The
need of nonlinear signal processing arises since linear signal processing
techniques are known to blur image and video details inhibiting the main goal of
digital video -- high resolution. Secondly, joint source channel coding schemes
will be developed for robust video delivery. Digital transmission systems suffer
from a threshold effect in signal quality, while broadcast systems that cater to
the most distant user are inefficient. The goal is to design efficient video
transmission schemes with a graceful degradation in performance. Thirdly, the
work on the interface and communications aspects of digital video over computer
networks wi ll be emphasized, in particular, the research focus will be on two
important problems: packet loss and buffer overflows and underflows. Both these
problems result in degradation of video quality. This research will assess this
loss in quality and design algorithms to minimize this loss. Finally, in order
to handle video data streams more efficiently, new transport network protocols
which are compatible with standard network software will be developed. *** video
equipment which will be dedicated to support res ~ $ $ $ G ? ? Times Symbol "
Helvetica Chicago Times New Roman &amp; Arial 5 Courier New R ZapfDingbats
Palatino Greek GenMath MathMeteor MT Extra k " e@j 6 Arce/Delaware Mark Purvis
Mark Purvis