* 9320044
* Collaborative Research on Laboratory Markets with Posted    Prices:  Discounts, Search Costs, and Demand Shocks
* SBE,SES
* 04/01/1994,03/31/1998
* Charles Holt, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 03/31/1998
* USD 76,596.00

9320044 Holt The posted-offer trading institution is one in which sellers post
prices on a take-it-or-leave-it basis. Posted-offer results provide a basis of
comparison with trading in less structured double-auction experiments. This
project is motivated by three stylized facts from posted-offer experiments. The
first involves explicit price-fixing conspiracies which can raise prices in
laboratory posted-offer settings. The ineffectiveness of seller conspiracies in
comparable double-auctions motivates the proposed work on whether collusion in
posted-offer markets is undermined by opportunities for sellers to offer private
discounts. Related experiments will examine the effects of contractual
restrictions on discounting and on trade association reports. A second stylized
fact is the poor response of posted-offer markets to demand shocks. One
implication of this observation is that the price-posting process could generate
price rigidities with Keynesian macroeconomic consequences. The proposed
experiments involve simultaneous posting of wages and prices in a general
equilibrium framework with fiat money. One goal is to study the real effects of
nominal monetary shocks. The third issue arises from the generally weak
competitive tendencies of posted-offer markets which suggest that prices might
be raised sharply by the addition of small imperfections, such as search costs.
The proposed experiments will evaluate several recent theoretical resolutions of
this ("Diamond") paradox, i.e., that small imperfections can produce monopoly
prices.