* 9320534
* Dissertation Research:  Middle and Later Stone Age Land Use at Lukenya Hill, Kenya
* SBE,BCS
* 02/01/1994,07/31/1996
* Charles Keller, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 07/31/1996
* USD 11,713.00

9320534 Lewis Under the direction of Dr. R. Barry Lewis, Ms. Sibel Barut will
collect data for her doctoral dissertation. She will study archaeological
materials from the site of Lukenya Hill, Kenya and also conduct limited
excavation at the locality. Lukenya Hill is extremely important for Africanist
prehistorians because the area contains a number of individual sites which span
the period from recent times to over 50,000 years ago. Excavations have yielded
not only abundant lithic materials but also large series of faunal remains. Ms.
Barut will focus on the lithics and study the processes employed to convert raw
materials into finished tools. In collaboration with other scientists, neutron
activation analyses will be conducted to determine the sources for the stone.
Obsidian hydration dating will allow age assessments of the different sites and
levels. On this basis it will be possible to gain insight into changing land use
and mobility strategies over time. Within the last 100,000 years major changes
in social and technological organization occurred in Africa and the result was
people with essentially modern cultural capacities. Information to date
indicates that this transformation occurred first in sub Saharan Africa and
therefore considerable archaeological attention has been focussed on this region
and time period. Unfortunately, the number of sites which span this transition
are very few. Lukenya Hill is one of them and because of this MS. Barut's study
is of major significance. This research is important for several reasons. It
will shed new light on the emergence of modern cultural capacities. It will
provide data of interest to many archaeologists and assist in the training of a
promising young scientist. ***