* 9320179
* CISE Research Instrumentation:  A High-Performance ATM      Research Network
* CSE,EIA
* 03/01/1994,08/31/1995
* William Seales, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Tse-yun Feng
* 08/31/1995
* USD 124,657.00

9320179 Truszczynski This award provides funds to purchase and construct a high-
speed ATM network testbed to support several projects in distributed computing,
network protocol, 3-D vision and artificial intelligence. Specific projects to
be studied are: (1) Distributed Collaborative Systems: Communication protocols
for distributed real-time multimedia collaborative applications such as remote
visualization, imaging, and video conferencing will be developed in this
research project. (2) Distributed Shared Memory: Research will be performed on
highly-scalable DSM synchronization and consistency algorithms and protocols for
designing massive multicomputers with a high-speed network serves as the
backplane. (3) Memory-Based File Systems: In this project a new file system
abstraction based on volatile storage that avoids the bottlenecks of disk
storage and capitalizes on fast networks and distributed memory resources will
be investigated. (4) Active 3-D Vision: Investigation on the use of active
camera control and distributed processing to improve the quality and performance
of stereo reconstruction of three-dimensional objects will be performed in this
research. (5) Distributed Automated Reasoning: Under this project a reasoning
system based on default logic and extended logic programming and implement it in
the distributed computing environment will be developed. These five projects
tackle several most pressing issues facing current and future distributed
systems. Approaches to scalable distributed multicomputers and new architectures
for high-performance distributed file systems studied. In addi tion, studies
will be made on other important domains of applications such as multimedia,
active 3-D vision, and automated reasoning --- each of them requiring
significant computational power and high bandwidth communications. *** INHELP
EXE @ j = SYSTEM INI &lt;o\ # CONTROL HLP @ j N H WIN COM :X T BOOTLOG TXT EX k
9320179 Truszczynski This award provides funds to purchase and construct a high-
speed ATM network testbed to support severa q s V X D F , . $ $ $ G W W Times
Symbol " Helvetica Chicago Times New Roman &amp; Arial 5 Courier New R
ZapfDingbats Palatino Greek GenMath MathMeteor MT Extra " e e :
Truszczynski/U.Ky Mark Purvis Mark Purvis