* 9320509
* Collaborative Research on the Formation of Opinion          Coalitions on the U. S. Supreme Court
* SBE,SES
* 03/01/1994,12/31/1998
* Jeffrey Segal, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Patricia White
* 12/31/1998
* USD 97,829.00

9320509 SEGAL This collaborative project investigates how coalitions are formed
on the U.S. Supreme Court. A particular focus is the process by which opinions
are written, often including many drafts and various shifts in position as the
doctrines that could decide a case are debated among the members of the Court.
The proposed research has scientific significance for two reasons. First, by
emphasizing the policies and doctrine enunciated by the Court through its
opinions, rather than simply counting votes on winning and losing sides, the
project refocuses the scientific study of the American legal system. Second, the
project expands the field of coalition analysis by examining an institution
composed of non-elected officials instead of legislatures and political parties.
To test the model of opinion coalition, the project calls for the collection of
data from two sources: the official records of the Supreme Court of the United
States and the collected papers of five justices, spanning from Chief Justice
Morrison R. Waite to Associate Justice Thurgood Marshall. Specific information
culled from these sources includes: the policies at issue, the tentative and
final votes of the justices, the size and composition of opinion coalitions, the
number of opinion drafts, and the length of time between votes on the merits and
final opinions. ***