* 9320786
* Collaborative Research on Snow Cover and Near-Surface       Climate Interations
* SBE,BCS
* 02/01/1994,07/31/1998
* David Robinson, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Bernard O. Bauer
* 07/31/1998
* USD 102,273.00

9320786 ROBINSON Physical geographers, climatologists, and other scientists
recently have come to understand the critical and highly variable role that snow
cover plays in the global climate system. Recent research has gathered data over
the last century from satellite images and ground station records. This research
also has advanced analyses of relationships between the extent of snow cover and
surface air temperatures. This collaborative research project will continue this
line of inquiry by expanding the study of snow kinematics to include data on
snow depths and by extending analyses to consider associations among snow cover
and depth and other near-surface atmospheric conditions. Data will continue to
be acquired from satellite and surface-based sources in order to better explore
spatial and temporal patterns of the extent and depth of terrestrial snow cover
throughout the Northern Hemisphere. The analyses also will identify and diagnose
sensitivities of near-surface atmospheric variables to variations in snow cover
across a range of spatial and temporal scales. The investigators also will test
the capabilities of different general-circulation climate models to simulate
observed patterns of snow cover and its relationships with other variables. This
research will extend a productive line of inquiry on an important topic. The
data-collection activities will expand a database of Northern Hemisphere snow
cover over the last century, further improving a resource that already has been
used by other researchers. These activities are complemented by analyses of
relationships between snow cover and a range of atmospheric variables. More
complete understandings of these relationships should advance general knowledge
and help refine meteorological forecasting techniques. The evaluation of
general-circulation models should also prove useful in assessing the possible
consequences of continued increases in atmospheric carbon dioxide and other
forms of global environmental change. ***