* 9320092
* Control of Nuisance Filamentous Algae in Streams by         Invertebrate Grazing
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/1994,02/28/1998
* Richard Horner, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Edward H. Bryan
* 02/28/1998
* USD 193,691.00

9320092 Welch This is an award to support research on the role of invertebrates
in controlling the proliferation of filamentous nuisance algae in rubble-bed,
natural streams that receive nutrients from point and nonpoint sources.
Experimental work is planned using laboratory channels and at three sites in
nutrient-enriched, natural streams. The laboratory channels will be used to
determine the effectiveness of grazing over a range in grazer sizes and their
abundance and the extent to which enrichment level affects grazer effectiveness.
Grazing rates will be used to modify an existing model that can be used to
predict the expected maximum periphyton biomass concentration as a function of
reactive phosphorus concentration using assumptions of available light,
temperature and current velocity in the receiving stream. The results of this
project are expected to provide knowledge that can be applied in determination
of the extent to which nutrient removal is necessary to meet acceptable
conditions for discharge of effluents from domestic and industrial wastewater
treatment plants into flowing streams and addressing the development of nuisance
conditions in streams resulting from nonpoint sources of nutrients. The results
of this research may be applied in location of treatment plants, approaches to
dealing with nonpoint sources of nutrients and in the engineering design of
systems for dealing with the flow of nutrients into natural streams. ***