* 9320895
* The History of Cartography
* SBE,BCS
* 09/15/1994,08/31/1999
* David Woodward, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Ngoc Linh Lam
* 08/31/1999
* USD 455,000.00

9320895 WOODWARD Throughout human history, maps have been a means for the
collection, storage, analysis, and dissemination of geographic information. Maps
and the underlying cartographic concepts and techniques used in their production
have been important factors in the development of human thought about the world
in both academic and practical contexts. Maps reflect myriad cultural, economic,
political, social, scientific, and intellectual aspects of human societies, and
the different ways in which societies have constructed and used maps provides
insights into the ways that different societies have viewed and interpreted
their environments. Furthermore, maps have been a medium used by many different
scientific disciplines, so a more complete understanding of how maps have
evolved sheds light on the development of interdisciplinary enterprises within
science. This award renews support for research and production of references
volumes produced by the History of Cartography project. Three volumes already
have been published. The first volume focused on cartography in prehistoric,
ancient, and medieval Europe and the Mediterranean, the second and third dealt
with Asian cartography. This award will facilitate completion of volumes on
cartography in other non-Western societies and cartography in the European
Renaissance, and it will contribute to work on a volume examining cartography in
the European Enlightenment. Each volume consists of essays that have been
commissioned from international experts who analyze and explain relevant
material from new theoretical perspectives. Each chapter is supplemented with
full reference tables and lists of maps, atlases (including their locations),
cartographers, and basic information. Unlike other encyclopedic works that are
descriptive, idiosyncratic, and largely Eurocentric in character, this project
involves considerable primary research into the ways that cartography reflects
its historical, cultural, socia l, and technological contexts. Authors of
articles in the volumes also make major philosophical and theoretical statements
about the importance of maps in different cultures and in the development of
scientific thought. In addition to renewed support from NSF, continued work on
this project will be supported from a broad range of other sources, including
other federal agencies and private sources.