* 9320083
* Transformation of Chickpea with Bt Genes, U.S.-Pakistan     Cooperative Research
* O/D,OISE
* 04/01/1994,09/30/1996
* Sheikh Riazuddin, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Osman Shinaishin
* 09/30/1996
* USD 20,000.00

9320083 Gordon Description: This project is for a collaborative research by two
well known laboratories: Dr. Milton Gordon's Laboratory, University of
Washington, Seattle, and Dr. S. Riazuddin's Laboratory at the Centre for
Advanced Molecular Biology, University of Punjab, Lahore, Pakistan. The work
seeks to develop plant transformation procedures which will be applied to
chickpea for the expression of Bacillus thuringiensis pesticidal proteins
possessing entomocidal properties against American bollworm (Heliothis
armigera). The study will address three main objectives. Firstly, pesticidal
genes identified in Bt isolates from Pakistani environments will be cloned in
plant expression vectors under the control of specific promoters. Secondly,
procedures will be developed for the transformation of chickpea by a reporter
gene (GUS) using particle bombardment. Finally, these procedures will be applied
to transform chickpea with Bt pesticidal genes and the transgenic plant will be
examined for level expression of the transgene and insect resistance. Scope: The
project will provide fund for a young scientist from Dr. Riazuddin Laboratory to
spend several months at the University of washington to participate with Dr.
Gordon in the experiments using facilities not available in Lahore. This
collaborative research is expected to be quite beneficial to the two
laboratories, and particularly useful in the efforts towards producing isect-
resistant economic crops. ***