* 9320133
* SGER: Quarry Database Project
* BIO,DEB
* 01/15/1994,12/31/1997
* John McIntosh, Butte-Glenn Community College District
* Standard Grant
* Charles Lydeard
* 12/31/1997
* USD 50,000.00

9320133 ` ` Fricker This project, a partnership between traditional paleontology
and pioneering technology in photogrammetry, aerial and terrestrial mapping and
surveying, image digitization and databasing, promises to revolutionize the
science of paleontology. This project will map, photograph and digitize the
world famous fossil dinosaur quarry at Dinosaur Nation Monument, as well as the
quarry maps of the original rock face that no longer exists. The quarry rock
face of what is now Dinosaur National Monument, near Vernal, Utah, was
discovered by paleontologists in 1909. Subsequent excavation yielded over 7
million pounds of dinosaur fossils, including the finest preserved skeletons and
skulls of over 20 species of Jurassic dinosaurs, now distributed in over 30
museums around the world. Only a portion of the original fossiliferous wall
remains at the DNM visitor center, bearing about 1600 dinosaur bones mostly
articulated skulls and skeletons in relief. A record of the entire original
wall, with all of the dinosaurian elements in their original position, is
preserved in a series of aged, disintegrating, hand drawn quarry maps at DNM and
other museums. The overall goal of this project is to produce a digitized map of
the entire quarry face, past and present, with all of the dinosaur elements in
original position, linked to an interactive database of those elements.
Investigators will attempt to combine emerging technologies in surveying,
photogrammetry, computer aided mapping and advanced database design to map the
entire face of the remaining quarry, photograph and calibrate the map grid to
millimeter accuracy, scan the images into a digital record, r ecalibrate the
position of the bones against the survey map, and produce a digitized map of the
current rock face a DNM and its lode of dinosaur material. A second component
involves scanning, digitizing, scaling and orienting hand drawn quarry maps of
the missing rock faces and their fossils, and attaching these to the digital map
of the current rock face to create a composite master digital map of this unique
paleontological record. The third component is an interactive database of all of
the dinosaur elements in the original and current quarry. The master digitized
map will allow powerful approaches to taphonomic and geologic investigations
that were hitherto impossible. The educational potential of this project is also
enormous for informal science programs in museums and for classroom instruction.
%%% This project will map, photograph and digitize the world famous fossil
dinosaur quarry at Dinosaur National Monument, as well as quarry maps of the
original rock face that no longer exists. Discovered in 1909, the quarry rock
face of what in now Dinosaur National Monument, near Vernal, Utah, yielded the
finest preserved skeletons and skulls of over 20 species of Jurassic dinosaurs.
Only a portion of the original fossiliferous wall remains at the DNM visitor
center, bearing about 1600 dinosaur bones mostly articulated skulls and
skeletons in relief. A record of entire original wall, with all of the
dinosaurian elements in their original position, is preserved in a series of
aged, disintegrating, hand drawn quarry maps at DNM and other museums. h) 0*0*0*
The overall goal of this project is to produce a digitized map of the entire
quarry face, past and present, with all of the dinosaur elements in original
position, linked to an interactive database of those elements. This project is
new to paleontology and will, if successful, revolutionize the science by
combining traditional approaches with emerging technologies in surveying,
photogrammetry, computer aided m apping and advanced database design. The
educational potential of this project is also enormous for informal science
programs in museums and for classroom instruction. ***