* 9320427
* CISE Research Instrumentation:  Experimental Parallel and   Distributed Computing Research at the University of Iowa
* CSE,EIA
* 03/01/1994,08/31/1995
* James Cremer, University of Iowa
* Standard Grant
* Tse-yun Feng
* 08/31/1995
* USD 130,000.00

9320427 Cremer This award is for creating a mixed shared and distributed memory
computing cluster to be used in support of the following research projects in
experimental parallel and distributed computing: (1) Physical System Simulation
and Applied Numerical Computing: While faster and more powerful hardware for
scientific computation continues to be developed, that task of creating software
to take full advantage of such hardware remains quite difficult. This project
aims to develop fundamental techniques and software tools that facilitate the
development of high-performance physical system simulation environments.
Particular emphasis is on development of high-performance mechanical systems
simulators, parallel real-time integration methods, and a framework for scenario
control in real-time driving simulation. (2) Automated Reasoning: Reasoning
algorithms are used in many application areas of computer science and artificial
intelligence, such as hardware and software verification, deductive data bases,
constraint solving, deductive plan generation, program specification and
generation, and logic programming. The objective of this project is to develop
new high performance reasoning algorithms, focusing on user-friendly induction
provers, satisfiability decision procedures, and distributed/parallel theorem
provers. Each of these requires a combination of implementation,
experimentation, and theoretical analysis. (3) Self-Stabilizing Systems: Self-
stabilizing programs are programs that require no initialization and can recover
from arbitrary transient failures. In large systems, software failures ma y
occur due to timing problems that can only be prevented by costly
synchronization procedures. Using the techniques of self-stabilization, the need
for such synchronization procedures can be avoided by tolerating and recovering
from faults. Moreover, it has been such programs have applications beyond fault-
tolerance -- stabilization can be useful to adapt to dynamic environments where
changes to the system resemble transient faults. This project examines the
following problems: stabilizing simulation; stabilizing adaptive programs; and
discrepancies between theoretical and empirical models of self-stabilization.
*** @ j SOUNDRECEXE @ j i SSMARQUESCR @ j B SSMYST SCR @ j L SSSTARS SCR @ j D
TADA WAV @ j &amp; l TARTAN BMP @ j 4 v TERMINALEXE @ j E B TERMINALHLP @ j
9320427 Cremer This award is for creating a mixed shared and distributed memory
computing cluster to be used in support of d n U W . 0 _ d $ $ $ G d n d Times
Symbol " Helvetica Chicago Times New Roman &amp; Arial 5 Courier New R
ZapfDingbats Palatino Greek GenMath MathMeteor MT Extra " + e+ e 4 Cremer/Iowa
Mark Purvis Mark Purvis