* 9320136
* GRGC  (SGER)  Relating Climate Model Data to Geologic       Deposits
* GEO,EAR
* 03/15/1994,08/31/1995
* William Hay, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* John A. Maccini
* 08/31/1995
* USD 48,535.00

9320136 Hay The proposal will develop a technique that provides a quantitative
link between climate model data and geological observations. Until now the only
means of assessing the validity of paleoclimate model data as a description of
past conditions has been in terms of subjective, often global scale generalities
(eg. Does the model reproduce the meridional temperature gradient?; Would the
winds cause upwelling and deposition of organic carbon?). There has been no way
to compare the model results with the occurrence of geological deposits except
in general terms. We believe that the technique proposed will allow quantitative
comparison of model results with geologic data, showing whether or not the model
accurately predicts conditions of formation of a specific deposit. This
quantitative comparison will enable modelers to determine what input parameters
need to be changed to come closer to simulating the ancient climate. The
proposal was submitted as an SGER because the technique, if developed, could be
used by a number of modelers to evaluate paleoclimate studies to be run in the
near future. Until the technique has been worked out the paleoclimate model
runs, representing a large amount of valuable supercomputer time will not result
in data that can be used for quantitative validation. SGER is appropriate
because of the urgent need to define the technique before planned and proposed
GENESIS paleoclimate model runs are initiated. ***