* 9320278
* Electronic Scientific Communities:  A Challenge for STS
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/1994,07/31/1995
* Susan Star, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Edward J. Hackett
* 07/31/1995
* USD 56,000.00

9320278 Star Scientific communities (and indeed the very ideal of a scientific
community) are undergoing significant changes as a result of rapidly changing
electronic infrastructures. These include specialized electronic support for
scientific collaboration, the explosive growth of the Internet, very large
databases, and increasingly common long-distance collaborations using such
tools. There are serious difficulties for STS researchers in understanding
practice and social change in these geographically dispersed workplaces and
professional communities. It is impossible to gain access to the work using
traditional ethnographic or survey tools. In part this is due to the need to
acquire significant information systems/advanced user skills, something which
can be difficult to do in a social science department. It is also due to
conceptual and methodological challenges as the very nature of work shifts. In
order to address these problems, Dr. Star is undertaking professional
development training in order to increase her skills in information systems and
electronic network usage while conducting research on two scientific
communities. The purpose of the training is severalfold: to deepen ongoing
collaborations with information and computer scientists; to help better
understand the activities of her respondent scientists who use these systems'
and to hep develop methods for studying large electronic systems such as
Internet. The research will develop tools and concepts for understanding the
impact and nature of electronically-supported scientific work. Dr. Star will be
based at the Community Systems Laboratory and the National Center for
Supercomputing Applications (NCSA). There she will continue research on a
community of biologists who are sequencing the genetic structure of the nematode
worm. This community has developed a large digital library (WCS). Dr. Star has
been collaborating with this team since 1991 as an ethnographer in aid of system
devel opment. She is also working with a second community of scientists
developing a large database describing the results of autopsies of patients with
severe dementia. She will also acquire skills in Unix programming, Internet use,
information retrieval and database programming through taking classes and on-
the-job training as a team member of the Software Development Group at NCSA. Her
research focus extends and makes more rigorous three concepts she has developed:
boundary objects, invisible work and distributed problem solving. Using these
concepts, she is analyzing how scientific work is being conducted electronically
(as well as off-line), in the two communities. At a higher level, she is
interested in how these large-scale infrastructural changes occurring in science
are impacting both the structure and processes of scientific communities. ***