* 9320335
* SGER:  Measurement Using Calcium-Specific Probes of Ca in a Diatom Treated With Chemotactic Effectors:  A First Step in the Dissection of the Signal Transduction Pathway
* BIO,MCB
* 02/01/1994,01/31/1996
* Keith Cooksey, Montana State University
* Standard Grant
* Barbara K. Zain
* 01/31/1996
* USD 50,000.00

9320335 Cooksey The long term goal of this research is to understand the
regulation of adhesion, motility and chemotaxis in diatoms of the genus Amphora.
This project will expand on preliminary observations that calcium plays a role
in the regulation of these processes. Preliminary results indicate that a
certain level of extracellular calcium is necessary for adhesion and motility
and that Amphora responds chemotactically to simple sugars and glutamate.
Calcium has a pivotal role as a second messenger in control of numerous
biological processes. This ion is responsible for signal-response coupling in
animal, plant, and other cells during such physiological processes as secretion
and the development of cellular polarity. The availability of calcium-sensitive
fluorescent probes such as Fura-2, Indo-1, Fluo-3 has made possible the direct
visualization of spatial and temporal changes in cytosolic free calcium in
single cells using confocal laser scanning microscopy, and changes in
intracellular calcium can be detected in suspensions of synchronized cells using
an appropriate spectrofluorimeter. Research supported by this Small Grant for
Exploratory Research will establish the experimental conditions for applying
these important experimental tools in studies of the role of calcium in
regulation of cell adhesion, motility, and chemotaxis in diatoms. These tools
will then be used to study the effects of external calcium and sugars that
promote chemotaxis on intracellular free calcium levels as part of a longer term
study of the control of physiological processes by calcium in these, rather
primitive, eukaryotes. %%% Marine diatoms are responsible for more than half of
the world's replacement oxygen. The diatoms that are the subject of this
research grow attached to illuminated surfaces in the nearshore benthic zone.
Whether chemotaxis is a common property of these organisms is not known.
Although diatoms are green algae and can carry out photosynthesis, ma ny diatoms
from this niche also can use some simple sugars and amino acids to support their
growth. If, as suggested by preliminary observations, they can sense chemical
gradients of these compounds in the sediment pore water and move toward higher
concentrations, these diatoms could be important in turnover of dissolved
organic carbon in illuminated sediments. Yet, despite the potential importance
of these organisms, very little is known about the mechanisms of their responses
to stimuli such as organic compounds. This Small Grant for Exploratory Research
will be used to lay the experimental groundwork for studies of the signal
transduction pathways regulating diatom adhesion, motility, and chemotaxis. The
longer term results of this research will not only fill a gap in knowledge of
the mechanisms by which these little-understood organisms respond to
environmental signals, but should also provide new insights into their
ecological role in the nearshore food web. ***