* 9320938
* Evolution of Sea Ice Characteristics, Cloud Properties and  Radiation Fluxes During the Autumnal Freezing of the        Beaufort Sea Coastal Waters
* O/D,OPP
* 04/15/1994,09/30/1996
* Jeffrey Tilley, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* Bernhard Lettau
* 09/30/1996
* USD 350,000.00

9320938 Curry This project is an integrated experimental and modeling effort to
understand and interpret the evolution of sea ice characteristics, cloud
properties, and radiation fluxes during the autumnal freezing of the coastal
waters of the Beaufort Sea. It will carried out in the scientific context of the
Beaufort and Arctic Seas Experiment (BASE), a Canadian program whose objective
is an improved understanding of weather systems in the Canadian Arctic, and
whose focus is the hydrologic balance of the Mackenzie River. This project will
make use of the NCAR C-130 aircraft, and BASE will provide substantial
synergistic observational facilities. The direct aircraft observations will be
supplemented by satellite data to extend the time and space scales of the
analyses, and will be used to interpret and validate satellite retrieval
algorithms. A three-dimensional mesoscale model of the atmosphere will be used
to interpret the temporal and spatial evolution of the sea ice cover and the
atmospheric boundary layer characteristics. A coupled sea ice model will be used
to interpret the physical processes of the sea ice that respond to atmospheric
forcing. The result of the research will be an improved understanding of the
atmospheric modulation of the surface radiation balance and the effect of the
radiation balance on the freezing of coastal waters. ***