* 9320823
* Characterization of Membrane Proteins in the Synaptic       Junction
* BIO,IOS
* 06/15/1994,05/31/1998
* Paul Erickson, University of Colorado at Denver
* Continuing Grant
* Roy L. White
* 05/31/1998
* USD 115,045.00

The normal functioning of the brain depends upon the ability of nerve cells to
rapidly transmit chemical signals to each other. This chemical transmission is
accomplished through cell contacts called synapses. Synapses form mainly during
embryonic and fetal life, and childhood, though they may form in adult life as
well. One nerve cell may make as many as 50,000 synapses, and as there are over
a billion nerve cells in the brain there would be over a trillion synapses in
the brain. The synapse is a relatively stable contact, tightly binding together
the nerve cells involved. This tight contact provides both the stability and
closeness necessary for chemical signals to be predictably and rapidly
transferred between neurons. Recent research has provided considerable insight
into the mechanisms involved in chemical neurotransmission. However, very little
is known about the molecules involved in generating the adhesiveness or
mechanical stability in the zone of synaptic contact. About a half-dozen
proteins have been identified recently which reside almost exclusively in the
cell membranes in the zone of synaptic contact in developing and adult brains of
mammals (and probably other vertebrates as well). Based upon their preliminary
characterization these proteins appear to be good candidates to be at least some
of the molecules involved in synaptic adhesion. This proposal outlines
experiments which would investigate further the ability of these proteins to
function as adhesion molecules. A number of approaches will be taken. These
molecules will be isolated from synaptic junctions of rats and examined for
their ability to bind each other or to other synaptic molecules. For example,
the proteins will be linked to tiny beads alone or in different combinations to
see if they can promote the aggregation of the beads (as has been seen for other
kinds of adhesion molecules). In a second approach, the isolated proteins will
be coated on the surface of tissue cult ure dishes or inert beads to see if they
have any ability to act as a favorable substrate for the formation of synaptic
contacts by cultured nerve cells. In a third approach, rabbit antibodies will be
generated to these proteins to see if they can either disrupt the stability of
the synaptic contact or prevent synapses from forming. If one or more of these
proteins appears to have the properties of an adhesion molecule then a new grant
proposal will be developed to further study their molecular organization and the
regulation of their synthesis and turnover.