* 9320303
* SGER:RUI:Collaborative:  Impacts of a Catastrophic Flood on Nutrient Sources and Organic Processing in Large River      Ecosystems
* BIO,DEB
* 10/15/1993,03/31/1995
* James Thorp, University of Louisville Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Richard F. Dame
* 03/31/1995
* USD 25,637.00

9320303 Thorp The Mississippi River and some of its tributaries are currently
experiencing catastrophic floods which have significantly modified their typical
hydrological patterns. The ecological impacts of an extreme flood occurring
outside of the normal flood period should have substantial effects on this
important lotic ecosystem, such as altering normal patterns of input, storage,
and transport of organic matter and nutrients. In addition, sources of organic
matter which are not normally available may be introduced onto the river at this
time. These changes in nutrient supply and timing should act as a major
disturbance to the trophic dynamics of the Mississippi River ecosystem. We
hypothesize that the catastrophic flood presently occurring in the Mississippi
River ecosystem will produce a shift in normal trophic processes by altering the
role of different sources of organic matter in the riverine food web. This
hypothesis will be tested by evaluating the stable-isotope ratios in the food
webs of four rivers (two flooded and two unflooded, flood plain rivers). During
three dates over a year period, we will collect 5 replicates of 21 sample units
per river, each representing a nutrient source of organic processor. We will
then determine the composition of 13C and 15N and C/N ratio in the sample units.
To ascertain whether changes in the Mississippi River Ecosystem over time
reflect the effects of the flood or merely represent normal seasonal variations,
we will obtain samples from four rivers: the Missouri and upper Mississippi
Rivers, which are currently experiencing the worst floods of the century, and
the Ohio and Wabash Rivers, which are flood plain rivers that have not been
inundated by flood waters. Information from this study will contribute to a data
base useful for making management decisions involving the role of flood plains
in river ecosystems.