* 9320158
* Cellular and Molecular Characterization of Angiotensin      Receptor Subtypes
* BIO,IOS
* 06/01/1994,11/30/1997
* James Weyhenmeyer, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Christopher Platt
* 11/30/1997
* USD 182,000.00

9320158 Weyhenmeyer Angiotensin is a small protein hormone that is important in
regulating cardiovascular, renal, endocrine, and nervous system activities.
Although angiotensin is principally known for its role in the regulation of
blood pressure and thirst, there is now evidence indicating that this protein is
involved in variety of central nervous system processes, including cell to cell
transmission, learning and memory, and cell growth and development. The recent
identification of multiple types of angiotensin binding proteins or receptors
have led to the suggestion that functional specificity may reside at the level
of individual receptor subtypes. Dr. Weyhenmeyer will identify the cellular and
molecular features of individual angiotensin receptor subtypes to determine
which of these receptors are specifically involved in the growth and development
of nerve cells. to accomplish this, he will grow cells in culture that express
different angiotensin receptor subtypes and expose them to a battery of growth
factors. Each of growth factors is likely to cause a neuronal response. Dr.
Weyhenmeyer will determine how the different growth factors interact with the
different receptor subtypes to induce distinct neuronal responses such as
proliferation, survival, differentiation and neurite extension. Understanding
how individual angiotensin receptor subtypes mediate their activity at the level
of the cell should not only provide important insights into their role in
controlling important physiological behaviors such as blood pressure and thirst
but may also open new perspectives in the complex field of brain development,
and perhaps, cell regeneration. ***