* 9320134
* Collaborative Research:  The Paquime Regional System,       Chihuahua, Mexico
* SBE,BCS
* 03/01/1994,02/28/1997
* Paul Minnis, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 02/28/1997
* USD 72,475.00

9320134 Minnis In a collaborative project, Drs. Paul Minnis and Michael Whalen
will conduct archaeological research in the Casas Grande region of northern
Mexico. The ruins of the great adobe pueblo of Paquime have consistently
impressed visitors from Spanish explorers to modern archaeologists. However
research in the region has been sporadic and the role which this site once
played and the extent of its influence are unclear. Drs. Minnis and Whalen plan
to conduct a systematic archaeological survey of the surrounding area in order
to situate Paquime within a broader regional context. They will define "inner"
and "outer" zones at varying distances from the site and locate archaeological
occurrences within each. The size of material scatters and associated structures
and agricultural features will be noted. "Exotic" or imported materials as well
as selected pottery samples will be collected and analyzed. The goal of the work
is to collect data on chronological and spatial variability in the size, type
and distribution of such sites, of productive and ritual facilities and of
artifacts. On this basis it will be possible to trace the degree of control out
from the center of Paquime and to determine how this changed over time. For many
years archaeologists have studied prehistoric cultures of the U.S. Southwest and
have gained considerable insight into the development of these societies which,
at their height, constructed pueblos which housed hundreds of individuals in a
complex stratified societies. However neither the origin nor the geographic
extent of these systems are well understood. While the Rio Grande river today
constitutes a international boundary, it did not serve a significant function in
the past. It is well known that the Southwestern cultures extended South into
Mexico but comparatively little work has been done in this area. This gap should
be filled because further to the South groups such as the Aztecs and their
predecessors were present and th e degree of stimulus they provided to the
development of complex societies further North is unknown. This research is
important because it will fill an important archaeological gap in the New World.
It will shed light on the development of prehistoric cultures in the United
States and provide data of interest to many archaeologists. ***