* 9321659
* Ten Week Summer Research for Four College Teachers with     Emphasis in Bioanalytical Chemistry
* MPS,CHE
* 06/01/1994,11/30/2000
* Theodore Kuwana, University of Kansas Main Campus
* Continuing grant
* Janice M. Hicks
* 11/30/2000
* USD 326,992.00

This project, supported by the Analytical and Surface Chemistry Program, is in
the general area of bioanalytical chemistry. The activity, which has as its
primary thrust infrastructure development, provides support for four faculty
from undergraduate institutions to enable their participation in research
activities at the University of Kansas during ten-week summer periods. In
addition, three faculty who have been supported during previous summers will
return to Kansas for two weeks to update their research. It is designed as an
aggregated NSF Research Opportunity Award (ROA) and has become known in the
chemistry community as a Macro-ROA. By providing faculty from regional
undergraduate institutions with such research opportunities, this program serves
not only to maintain or rejuvenate their interest in research pursuits, but also
to update them regarding modern bioanalytical chemistry in a collegial setting.
The focus of this project is the support of seven faculty from undergraduate
institutions for research and training in bioanalytical chemistry. Experiences
garnered by participants in this program are passed on to their students in
their respective institutions. This infrastructure investment serves to maintain
topical currency on the part of the participants and to indirectly promote the
development of their student's interest in careers in chemistry.