* 9321507
* U.S. Participation in the Development of a Transnational    Database on Family Income
* SBE,SES
* 06/01/1994,05/31/1996
* Timothy Smeeding, Syracuse University
* Standard Grant
* Cheryl Eavey
* 05/31/1996
* USD 69,232.00

9321507 Smeeding The Luxembourg Income Study (LIS) is an international
consortium with a membership of 20 nations located in Europe, the Middle East,
North America, and Australia. These countries, via their respective funding
organizations, cooperatively support a research center in Luxembourg that
standardizes and makes available household-based microdata on incomes for
representative samples of member nations' populations. These data are used by
over 260 researchers worldwide to analyze economic and social policy structure
and its effect on such topics as income structure, poverty and income inequality
and wage and earnings differences. Researchers can access the data on-site, or
via a computerized telecommunications network. Funds provided by the National
Science Foundation constitute United States participation in the consortium. The
full cooperation of all member nations is required in order to guarantee
feasibility of data retrieval, maintenance of high standards of data quality,
and gradual relaxation of methodological constraints on certain types of data
analysis. National Science Foundation funds not only represent U.S. cooperation
in the enterprise, they also assure U.S. involvement in all important
developmental decisions as well as helping to offset the cost of database
maintenance and update. ***