* 9321676
* Approaches to Improved Synthesis Design: Mechanistic and    Synthetic Studies on New Annelation Methods
* MPS,CHE
* 04/15/1994,09/30/1997
* Paul Wender, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* Kenneth M. Doxsee
* 09/30/1997
* USD 485,000.00

The focus of this research is the implementation of new and undeveloped
reactions, with an emphasis on organometallic chemistry, photochemistry, and
reactive intermediates, which provide significantly simplified and efficient
solutions to general problems in synthesis, which allow for the advancement of
the fundamental understanding of the theory, mechanism, structure-reactivity
relationships, and selectivities of these processes, and which provide access to
new materials of structural and/or biological importance. The research addresses
three major areas. First is the development of arene-alkene meta-cycloadditions,
including the first studies on asymmetric cycloaddition and the application to
the synthesis of crinipellin, the most complex tetraquinane known, as well as a
novel approach to new materials incorporating the fenestrane ring system. The
second area is the development of new transition metal mediated reactions,
including systematic studies of specific natural products. The third area is an
investigation of radical facilitated rearrangements, and as yet undeveloped and
potentially general concept of synthetic and mechanistic significance. Further
significance of this program derives from the enormous potential of
photochemistry and organometallic chemistry in development of more
environmentally acceptable processes, as these methods provide little or no
reagent derived waste. With this Renewal award, the Synthetic Organic Program is
supporting the research of Dr. Paul A. Wender of the Department of Chemistry at
Stanford University. Professor Wender will focus his work on the design and
development of fundamentally new reactions, reagents, and strategies for organic
synthesis. The emphasis of the research is on the implementation of new or
undeveloped reactions which provide significantly simplified and structural
and/or biological importance. Fu rther significance of this program derives from
the enormous potential of photochemistry and organometallic chemistry, central
themes of this project, in the development of more environmentally acceptable
processes, as these methods provide little or no reagent derived waste.