* 9321901
* Global Perceptions of Environmental Problems: Analysis of Results from a 24-Nation Survey
* NONE,NONE
* 05/15/1994,07/31/1997
* Riley Dunlap, Washington State University
* Standard Grant
* Patricia White
* 07/31/1997
* USD 143,395.00

9321901 Dunlap This is a study of global perceptions of environmental problems.
Results from a 1992 international survey of representative samples of adults in
24 economically and geographically diverse nations will be analyzed in detail.
Three broad types of investigation will be conducted: 1) Various analyses of
individual-level survey data will be conducted to test models of the nature and
sources of environmental concern within nations, as well as across nations; 2)
Results from the foregoing analyses will be used to create aggregate-level
measures of public perceptions for each nation, and these will be combined with
existing data on the economic, social, political and environmental
characteristics of these same nations to allow aggregate-level model testing at
the national and regional levels; 3) Potential links between national-level
characteristics and individual-level perceptions will be investigated using a
variety of contextual analysis techniques. In all of these analyses, special
attention will be paid to how perceptions of global change are interrelated with
perceptions of a wide range of environmental phenomena. %%% In addition to
providing unprecedented information on public perceptions related to global
environmental change that will be of value to research and policy-making
communities, this study offers an opportunity to test general theories and
extend existing social science research on the nature and sources of
environmental awareness and concern. ***