* 9321601
* Exploratory Research:  The Potential of Chemical Analysis   of Organic Residues on Ground Stone Tools in Reconstructing Prehistoric Diet
* SBE,BCS
* 12/01/1993,05/31/1996
* Katherine Wright, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 05/31/1996
* USD 19,994.00

9321601 Bar-Yosef Drs. Ofer Bar-Yosef and Katherine Wright, in collaboration
with chemists from University College, University of London, will conduct
chemical analysis of residues incorporated onto prehistoric pounding and
grinding stones. The objects to be studied derive from a series of sites in
Jordan and Israel. On this basis they hope to reconstruct the uses to which
these objects were put, determine whether individual specimens served to reduce
animal or plant products, and hopefully identify the individual plant species.
They will employ thin-layer chromatography and gas chromatography-mass
spectroscopy. Materials selected for analysis derive from secure well dated
archaeological contexts and include both pre- agricultural and early
agricultural sites. The domestication of plants and animals occurred in the Near
East ca. 10,000 years ago and marks a major transition in human lifestyle. This
"Neolithic revolution" provided the basis for population increase, the
development of settled village life and the rise of civilization. Archaeologists
wish to understand the process which lead to domestication and recognize how
difficult it is to accomplish this. Plants only infrequently leave a visible
mark in the archaeological record because - in contrast to animal bone - they
are often fragile and do not preserve well. It is known by ethnographic analogy
that ground stone objects are often used to process plant and animal foods and
for this reason Drs. Bar-Yosef and Wright are focussing on such materials. This
research is important for several reasons. It will help to develop a technique
which may be applied in many archaeological situations. It will provide data of
interest to many archaeologists and increase our understanding of how complex
societies such as our own developed. ***