* 9321699
* Marine Biotechnology Fellowship: Role of Chromosome- Associated DNA Binding Proteins in the Viable but Nonculturable State of Vibrio Vulnificus
* NONE,NONE
* 07/01/1994,12/31/1996
* Victoria McGovern, University of North Carolina at Charlotte
* Fellowship
* Phillip R. Taylor
* 12/31/1996
* USD 90,000.00

McGovern 9321699 Approximately 50% of the active bacteria that can be counted in
seawater resist attempts to culture. One reason may be that bacteria are
capable, under natural conditions of stress, of entering a viable but nongrowing
state. The viable but nonculturable (VBNC) state involves a metabolic program in
which the cell remains viable and maintains a low level of metabolism, but
cannot be cultured. Understanding the factors that govern entry into this state
may provide a window of entry into the biology of the uncluturable bacteria of
the ocean, The best characterized system for studying entry into and exit form
the VBNC state is the marine bacterium Vibrio vulnificus. V. vulnificus enters
the VBNC state in response to temperature downshifts. Entry into the VBNC state
poses problems at the DNA level: the chromosome-associated DNA binding proteins
(sometimes called "histone-like" proteins) may play an important role in the
VBNC state. One of the these proteins, HNS, has been shown to silence
transcription in vivo and to stabilize and ordered DNA structure in vitro. Its
pleiotropic effects indicate that this protein plays a role in allowing cells to
sense various types of environmental change. HNS is an abundant, cold-inducible
protein that varies in concentration over the course of a cell's growth cycle,
reaching its maximal concentration during stationary phase, a period of relative
metabolic quiescence. This project will test the hypothesis that during a
temperature downshift, the V. vulnificus homolog of HNS is induced, silencing
expression of genes needed for normal growth and leading to the VBNC state in
that bacterium. Such a system could account for a significant portion of the
nonculturable bacteria present in the ocean environment. ***