* 9321656
* Dissertation Research:  Population Differentiation in       Migratory Raptors
* BIO,DEB
* 04/01/1994,09/30/1995
* Brett Riddle, University of Nevada Las Vegas
* Standard Grant
* Mark Courtney
* 09/30/1995
* USD 8,842.00

9321656 Thompson Many species of North American birds of prey (raptors) breed in
northern North America and fly along several migration routes to wintering areas
in the southern United States and Mexico. It is hypothesized that because birds
show a strong tendency to return to their breeding grounds and because migratory
habits seem to be heritable, North American raptor species are composed of
populations which are geographically distinct from one another. If populations
from different geographic areas use separate migratory routes, it can be
postulated that raptors using different migration routes will be genetically and
morphologically divergent. The current research will investigate morphological
and mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) characteristics of four species of raptors which
use three migration routes. Possible differences might stem from unique
predatory habits, differences in migratory requirements, or individual responses
to the local environment. Mitochondrial DNA provides an excellent tool for
investigating differences between populations within a species because it is a
quickly evolving molecule and can reflect genetic uniqueness which may evolve in
populations that are partially isolated from one another. Little is known to
date of mtDNA relationships within and between raptor populations especially as
they relate to the geographic distribution of species.%%% This study will
uniquely combine statistical analysis of morphology with mtDNA relationships for
four species of raptors using the same migration routes. This study will
establish to what degree raptors from different geographic areas in North
America have evolved unique morphological and genetic characteristics. An
understanding of the differences between raptor populations within species is
essential to an understanding of the ecology of these top predators and to
further our knowledge of conservation and evolutionary biology.***