* 9321978
* Small Grants for Exploratory Research:  Direct              Microencapsulation of Proteins in Bioerodible Polymers Usinga Supercritical Fluid Anti-Solvent
* ENG,CBET
* 01/01/1994,06/30/1995
* Pablo Debenedetti, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Robert M. Wellek
* 06/30/1995
* USD 30,000.00

9321978 Debenedetti The supercritical fluid antisolvent (SAS) technique is a
novel and promising method of forming small particles of polymeric and
biological materials. We propose to explore the direct microencapsulation of
protein particles in a bioerodible polymeric matrix by SAS processing. These
composite microparticles can be ideal vehicles for the controlled release of
peptides and proteins. We have recently demonstrated the viability of producing
dry, pure, and biologically-active polypeptide microparticles by SAS. We now
propose to study the feasibility of incorporating these polypeptides directly
into a bioerodible polymer matrix using SAS processing. Model systems to be
tested are insulin and leutinising hormone - releasing hormone (proteins),
dimethylsulfoxide (organic solvent), supercritical CO2 (antisolvent), and
bioerodible polyesters (polymer matrix). The biological activity, peptide
release rate, and peptide conformation will be investigated as a function
processing condition. Changes in SAS processing conditions will be investigated
so as to fine-tune the size and distribution of these microparticles for
specific drug delivery systems. If successful, the proposed research can lead to
solvent-free, biologically active composite microparticles in a single
processing step. This would represent a breakthrough in the quest for efficient
means of delivering therapeutic peptides and proteins. ***