* 9321052
* Optical Dephasing and Phonon Dynamics in Ordered Crystals,  Disordered Crystals and Molecular Beam Epitaxy Films
* MPS,DMR
* 02/15/1994,01/31/1998
* William Dennis, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Continuing Grant
* H. Hollis Wickman
* 01/31/1998
* USD 225,000.00

9321052 Meltzer The optical dephasing time of dopant ions will be used as a tool
to investigate two-level systems (TLS) in disordered crystalline materials such
as mixed solid solutions and polycrystalline films, where the disorder is
generally experimentally variable. These types of experiments will be extended
to ordered arrangements of atoms in a restricted geometry, such as MBE grown
undoped as well as rare earth ion doped superlattices. In a second set of
experiments phonon dynamics will be studied with a number of innovative
approaches. These include use of a very short duration (100 ps) pulses to study
phonon-phonon interactions in RE doped fluoride crystals, and use of two FIR
pulse sources to study the interaction between two narrow band phonon
populations. A third study will apply coherent and transient holeburning
techniques to study the dynamics of the photoionization process of transition
metal ion sites in ferrolectric materials. %%% Unique optical techniques will be
applied to study the nature of disorder in doped crystals, mixed solid
solutions, and ultrathin semiconductor layers. The unique techniques include two
ultrashort pulsed lasers which emit radiation at very long infrared wavelengths
used for directly generating sound waves in solids, and a special laser which
emits visible light which is extremely close to a single frequency. The latter
light source will allow to study changes in absorption induced by a laser very
accurately as a function of light wavelength. A key aspect of this work is that
the degreee of disorder can be experimentally varied when preparing a particular
sample material. This study is expected to provide new sensitive tools for
characterizing disorder with applications to more controlled growth of a variety
of optoelectronic materials. ***