* 9321259
* Electronic, Optical, and Vibrational Properties of IV - VI  Semiconductor Nanocrystals
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/1994,05/31/1998
* Frank Wise, Cornell University
* Continuing Grant
* H. Hollis Wickman
* 05/31/1998
* USD 270,000.00

9321259 Wise Technical abstract: It is proposed to investigate the properties of
semiconductor nanocrystals which exhibit strong quantum confinement of
electrons, holes and excitons. Nanocrystals of the semiconducting lead
chalcogenides provide unique access to the strong-confinement regime. The
electronic structure, the vibrational properties, and the coupling of the
electronic and vibrational states of these nanocrystals will be investigated
with Raman and far-infrared spectroscopies as well as continuous wave,
nanosecond and femtosecond optical techniques. This research will provide
detailed information about the importance of Coulomb interactions under
conditions of strong confinement of charge carriers. Non-technical abstract:
Solid structures which confine electrons to dimensions on the order of atomic
sized dimensions have properties which differ drastically from those of the
corresponding bulk crystals. The goal of this project is to determine the
electronic and optical properties of nanostructures made of the lead salts (such
as lead sulfide), where the effects of confinement should be greater than in
most other materials. The unique features of the lead salts are expected to lead
to nonlinear optical properties approximately 1000 times stronger than those of
previously investigated nanostructures. The potential applications of such
strongly optically nonlinear materials is in optical information processing. ***