* 9321305
* Scientific Practice and Scientific Politics
* SBE,SES
* 11/15/1994,10/31/1997
* Mary Jo Nye, Oregon State University
* Fixed Price Award
* Edward J. Hackett
* 10/31/1997
* USD 69,401.00

9321305 Nye Scientists, among the most highly educated citizens in any society,
have often seen that they carry a special responsibility to address the problems
of the world around them. Professional societies such as the AAAS and APS give
special awards to those scientists who make significant contributions to
humanity. Professor Nye is examining how our views of the social responsibility
of scientists have developed in the contemporary Anglo-American world. During
the 1930's British scientists and intellectuals debated economic, social,
political, and philosophical issues, as never before, among themselves and
before the public. Because their scientific work was taken to exemplify reason,
objectivity and progress, many British scientists wondered whether they had a
special responsibility to turn their talents directly to the troublesome
dilemmas of their time. The essential questions which they debated focused on
what came to be called the "social responsibility of science" and included
concerns about the social determination of science, the nature of scientific
method, the applicability of scientific theories to social problems, the
organization and control of science, and the role of scientists in political
corridors of power. It may safely be said that these questions remains
controversial ones. As in the historical past, individual men and women continue
to respond to these questions indifferent, and sometimes equally convincing,
ways. Dr. Nye is reexamining and reanalyzing these questions about scientific
practice and scientific responsibility through a detailed study of two
scientists who answered social questions in radically different ways whose
responses carried considerable weight among scientific, philosophical and
political circles in England. As close personal friends, faculty colleagues
during 1937-53, and directors of scientific laboratories, the physicist P.M.S.
Blackett and the physical chemist Michael Polanyi were leading scienti sts in
Great Britain in the decades from the 1930's to the 1950's. A close study of
their scientific work, their social and philosophical epistemologies, and their
political lives is a means to better understanding the complicated relationships
among scientific practice, knowledge of the natural world, and improvement of
the human condition. ***