* 9321535
* Marine Biotechnology Fellowship: Development of Molecular   Tools for the Investigation of Urea Utilization by Marine   Cyanobacteria in the Field
* GEO,OCE
* 06/15/1994,11/30/1996
* Jackie Collier, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Fellowship Award
* Phillip R. Taylor
* 11/30/1996
* USD 90,000.00

9321535 COLLIER Differences in nitrogen nutrition might affect the distribution
of phyoplankters because each nitrogen source has different patterns of
availability. Ammonium, which is the preferred nitrogen source of most
phytoplankton, is often not available in sufficient quantities to support
phytoplankton growth. Therefore urea and nitrate are important nitrogen sources
for the phytoplankton. Because urea like ammonium is produced within the
plankton, while nitrate is supplied from deeper water, the relative availability
of the various nitrogen sources changes both in space and in time. Marine
cyanobacteria currently in culture are able to grow with ammonium or nitrate as
sole nitrogen source, but only about half of them are able to utilize urea. This
suggest that urea may affect the growth rate and distribution of marine
cyanobacteria. This project, will develop molecular probes to cyanobacterial
ureases which will then be used in field studies to examine the relationships
between cyanobacterial urease utilization and basic oceanographic parameter.
Molecular probes will be used because it is unlikely that any other techniques
can provide the sensitivity and resolution required to understand these
relationships. ***