* 9321048
* Accomplishment-Based Renewal:  Evaluating Social Programs
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/1994,07/31/1998
* James Heckman, National Opinion Research Center
* Continuing Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 07/31/1998
* USD 401,540.00

9321048 Heckman This project has four interrelated objectives: (1) To complete
an evaluation of the Job Training Partnership Act (JTPA) begun under the
previous NSF grant. The project studies the self-selection bias (if any) that
characterizes the differences in earnings, employment and wages between
participants and non-participants with an eye toward developing rigorously,
economically motivated program evaluation strategies using readily available
non- experimental data. (2) The study exploits unique data to develop
empirically-based models of incentives in organizations and the responses of
organizations to externally mandated performance standards. This portion of the
project provides new information on the economics of bureaucracies and the
responses of program managers to incentives. (3) The study develops and applies
econometric methods for estimating dynamic models of choices among alternative
possibilities, and the rewards from these choices. (4) The study considers the
empirical, economic and econometric foundations of the case for social
experiments. Both theoretical and empirical studies will be conducted on the
benefits and limitations of social experiments. The responses of training
centers to randomization will be investigated. One goal of the project is to
produce a book on the rigorous evaluation of social programs with an emphasis on
manpower training programs.