* 9321645
* Marine BioTech Post-doc:  Coevolution In A Luminous         Bacterium-Squid Symbiosis
* GEO,OCE
* 10/01/1994,09/30/1996
* Edward Ruby, University of Southern California
* Fellowship Award
* Phillip R. Taylor
* 09/30/1996
* USD 90,000.00

9321645 Ruby Bioluminescent marine bacteria of the species, Vibrio fischeri, are
the light organ symbionts of the sepiolid squid genera Euprymna, and Sepiola.
Bacterial colonization of the developing light organ results in the
establishment of a successful association by one specific subset (or subspecies)
of Vibrio fischeri strains. This project will examine populations of V. Fischeri
in several overlapping species of sepiolid squid from two locations, and will
determine whether these populations of V. fischeri are host specific. Through
the use of PCR amplification, restriction fragment length polymorphism (RFLP),
and sequence analysis of both host and symbiont DNA, the phylogenetic
relationships both among various strains of V. fischeri and among sepiolid squid
species will be inferred. Along with the molecular phylogenetic analysis, cross-
colonization experiments will be completed to determine whether the symbiotic
bacteria are able to initiate any colonization in other host species of squid.
Strains that colonize animals other than their host species, will be tested for
the degree, success, and competitive dominance with the natural symbiotic
strain. This model is the only known type of animal/bacterial symbioses where
both host and symbiont can be cultured successfully and independently from one
another, and provides a unique experimental system to address the role of
evolution in symbioses. ***