* 9321185
* Thin Film Martensites
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/1994,06/30/1997
* Manfred Wuttig, University of Maryland, College Park
* Continuing Grant
* Bruce A. MacDonald
* 06/30/1997
* USD 430,386.00

9321185 Wuttig This research project examines martensitic transformation in thin
films, concentrating on the transformation of austenite on a substrate. This
study emphasizes the elastic and anelastic properties of thin film
austenite/martensite/substrate composites and use the anelastic properties to
characterize the metallurgical changes in the composite as well as the internal
stresses. This approach has the major advantage that the structural and
microstructural changes, the adhesion and stresses can be monitored and their
effect on the transformation investigated, all in-situ and simultaneously. The
goal is to learn the effects of substrate constraint and film thickness, and the
state of crystallinity and microstructure of the "austenite" on the
transformation. In view of their potential practical importance, alloys from the
four major shape memory alloy (SMA) families, nickel/titanium-based, copper-
based, iron/manganese-based, and iron/platinum/palladium-based, as well as
hybrids thereof, are investigated. Characterization techniques include X-ray
diffraction, scanning and transmission electron microscopy, and Rutherford back
scattering. %%% Emphasized are thermoelastic martensites. The substrates include
silicon with different buffer layers because of the potential for micro-
mechanical device integration as well as silicon-carbide which is fast becoming
one of the more important micro-mechanical materials. ***