* 9321532
* Marine Biotechnology Fellowship:  Characterization of the   Role of Bacterial Symbionts in the Protection of Loligo     Opalescens Embryos
* GEO,OCE
* 05/01/1994,04/30/1996
* David Epel, Stanford University
* Fellowship Award
* Phillip R. Taylor
* 04/30/1996
* USD 90,000.00

9321532 EPEL Current understanding of the defense mechanisms utilized by early
embryos to evade environmental threats is rudimentary in comparison to our
knowledge of multicellular defense systems, such as the immune system, employed
by adult life stages. Strong ecological selectiv pressures for biological
devices to resist pathogens and predators must exist in embryos to assure
survival of these critical primary stages in oceanic life cycles. The egg
capsule of the Pacificc squid, Loligo opalescens, provides a model system to
study such embryo protection processes. These squid deposit their eggs in large
communal aggregates in shallow coastal waters such as in Monterey Bay. During
their month-long gestation period these embryos endure little or no animal,
fungal, or microbial predations. Initial studies revealed the presence of
several distinct bacterial symbionts specifically associated with the egg
capsule sheath. These bacteria apparently are secreted from the accessory
nidamental gland connected to the squid ovary, which also contains
symbioticbacteria. This research project aims to identify these microbes and
assess their contribution to the protection of the squid embryos in the wild. By
integrating prokaryotic genetics and molecular biology with more classical
approaches to ocean ecology, this research will address questions concerning
both marine embryo defense mechanisms and potential therapeutic agents for use
in aquaculture and medicine. Additionally, the molecular devices responsible for
the mutualistic relationship between marine bacteria and the eukaryotic host
that will be studied may represent a global phenomenon with implications for a
wide spectrum of disciplines including immunology, cell biology, and infectious
disease. ***