* 9321431
* Analytical Separations of Large Biopolymers through         Capillary Electrophoresis
* MPS,CHE
* 05/01/1994,10/31/1997
* Milos Novotny, Indiana University
* Continuing Grant
* R. Kenneth Marcus
* 10/31/1997
* USD 404,250.00

This grant from the Analytical and Surface Chemistry Program will support
Professor Novotny's investigations of the applications of pulsed-field capillary
electrophoresis (CE) in the separation and characterization of polysaccharides
and proteoglycans. The goal is to extend CE technology to high molecular weight
biopolymers in the range of 100,000 to 100,000,000 Daltons. The materials to be
investigated will include large proteins, DNA molecules with unusual shapes,
polysaccharides, proteoglycans, and other biomolecules. In addition, a
fundamental investigation of the factors which control the rate of migration of
large molecules in pulsed electric fields will be carried out by Professor
Novotny and his students. This research will extend the capabilities of
capillary electrophoresis, a method that allows the separation of charged
components present in complex macromolecular mixtures. The goal is to be able to
separate large biomolecules with molecular weights up to 100,000,000 Daltons.
Pulsed electric fields will be investigated in order to overcome many of the
problems encountered in the fractionation of mixtures of large molecules by
conventional capillary electrophoresis methods. The materials to be investigated
include polysaccharides, carbohydrates, and proteoglycans. The techniques
developed in this project will be used to separate large molecules of
biochemical and technological significance