* 9321127
* Career Advancement Award:  Ferromagnetic Resonance Studies  of Single Crystal Magnetic Layered Structures
* MPS,DMR
* 04/01/1994,03/31/1996
* Ratna Naik, Wayne State University
* Standard Grant
* H. Hollis Wickman
* 03/31/1996
* USD 60,000.00

9321127 Naik Technical abstract: The ferromagnetic resonance (FMR) method will
be used to probe the magnetic anisotropies of epitaxial magnetic multilayered
films. &lt;100&gt; oriented Ni-Cu and Co-Cu superlattices will be grown using a
molecular beam deposition system on a Cu (100) seed layer deposited on hydrogen
terminated Si (100) substrates. Reflection high energy electron diffraction and
x-ray diffraction studies will be used to determine the preferred orientation,
strains and periodicity of the superlattice. Evolution of FMR as a function of
the number of periods and also as a function of the thickness of the magnetic
and nonmagnetic layers will be studied to seek an insight into the origin of
multiple resonances observed in the multilayered structures. Non-technical
abstract: There is much interest in the growth and study of magnetic
multilayered films due to their potential for application in magnetic recording
and reading (conventional and magneto-optic) and also in sensor devices
(magnetoresistive and magnetostrictive). Magnetic multilayered structures
provide more freedom to tailor desirable magnetic properties. The proposed
research deals with the fabrication of single crystal magnetic multilayers of
Ni-Cu and Co-Cu and study of their magnetic properties. Magnetic properties of
the superlattices will be studied as function of the thickness of the magnetic
and nonmagnetic layers as well as the number of their repetitions. ***