* 9321119
* Support to Facilitate Collaboration of U.S. Scientists with European Scientists Participating in the European Science   Foundation's GISDATA Programme
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/1994,02/28/1998
* Michael Goodchild, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Continuing grant
* Bernard O. Bauer
* 02/28/1998
* USD 75,000.00

9321119 GOODCHILD The development and use of geographic information systems
(GISs) for the collection, storage, analysis, and presentation of spatial data
has had powerful and productive impacts on geography and related disciplines in
recent decades. The importance of this new technology and the advancement of
analytic methods that employ GISs has been given considerable attention within
the private and public sectors. In 1988, the National Science Foundation (NSF)
provided support that led to the establishment of the National Center for
Geographic Information and Analysis (NCGIA), a consortium dedicated to research,
education, and outreach with respect to the advancement of geographic
information science. Although the United States initially was the locus of
activity regarding GISs, scientists and practitioners from other nations
increasingly have engaged in activities aimed at advancing the capabilities and
uses of GISs. In 1993, the European Science Foundation (ESF) started a
scientific program in Geographic Information Systems Data Integration and Data
Base Design (GISDATA). This program is designed to foster international
collaborative research. In order to integrate the efforts of scientists from the
U.S. with the developing network of European scientists, this award will support
the efforts of the NCGIA to coordinate research activities in the U.S. with
those taking place in Europe. In particular, the participation of U.S.
scientists in crucial GISDATA meetings will be supported, as will the
involvement of more than a dozen early-career researchers in a summer institute
to be held in Europe in 1996. These activities will be matched by the ESF, which
will send leading European scientists to important U.S. meetings and funds
participation of younger European scientists at a 1995 summer institute
sponsored by the NCGIA in the U.S. Other federal agencies and private-sector
firms are expected to complement NSF's support of this project. Throu gh this
award, the NCGIA will involve more U.S. scientists in activities that will
understand and remove impediments to integration of geographic information from
different disciplines and from multiple national and regional sources. These
activities also will develop improved methods for database design, especially
those currently inhibited by problems in data integration. The award also will
facilitate collaborations among U.S. and European scientists in a partnership
that is more than the sum of its parts, and it will test new forms of mutual
support between NSF and a major European counterpart.