* 9321590
* Dissertation Research:  The Dynamics of Disease Spread by   Ectoparasites
* BIO,DEB
* 03/15/1994,08/31/1996
* Peter Kareiva, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Mark Courtney
* 08/31/1996
* USD 8,000.00

Kareiva 9321590 With few exceptions, diseases which are spread by ticks are
maintained within wildlife populations, not human populations. A similar biology
is seen for flea-borne diseases; for example, plague is maintained in wild
rodent populations without the involvement of humans. Perhaps because these
diseases are maintained in wildlife populations instead of human populations,
little work has been done on the dynamics of these diseases and the flea or tick
behaviors that influence the disease dynamics. In comparison, there is long
history of work on the dynamics of human infectious diseases. Much of this work,
however, assumes that transmission of disease occurs via random mixing of
infected and susceptible individuals. In general this is not an accurate
description of animal behavior, and it may be particularly inappropriate for
describing the transmission of diseases spread by ectoparasites ( parasites,
such as fleas and ticks that live on the exterior of their hosts). This research
project combines both experimental and theoretical approaches to examine the
effect of ectoparasite behavior on the dynamics of diseases spread by these
parasites. The study system for this project is a species of rodent, Neotoma
cinerea, the fleas, Orchopeas sexdentatus and Anomiopsyllus amphibolus, and the
hard tick, Ixodes angustus in Western Washington. The work involves observations
of flea and tick movement within the rodent populations and incorporates the
observed behaviors into theoretical models to predict the effects on disease
dynamics. The synthesis of field data and theoretical studies is especially
important in epidemiology, because one often wants to identify quantitative
attributes, such as thresholds for the spread of disease. By combining field
studies with theoretical models, this work seeks to develop realistic models and
estimates of numerical values of factors that strongly influence whether the
disease is epidemic and the disease is spatial distribution.