* 9321857
* Multivariate Paleoclimatic Analysis in Southern South       America with Emphasis on Transitional Periods
* GEO,AGS
* 04/15/1994,09/30/1997
* James White, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* Herman Zimmerman
* 09/30/1997
* USD 397,155.00

Abstract ATM-9321857 Markgraf, Vera White, James W.C. University of Colorado
Title: Multivariate Paleoclimatic Analysis in Southern South America with
Emphasis on Transitional Periods This award supports a multivariate paleoclimate
study, using pollen and stable isotope analyses, of peat cores from southern
South America. These cores are believed to contain a continuous record since the
last glacial/interglacial transition. Results obtained to date from the combined
high resolution analyses of one peat core, at latitude 55o in the Beagle
Channel, indicate that the pollen stratigraphy provides the perspective against
which stable isotope ratios can be better evaluated and that the combined
approach greatly augments the paleoclimatic information. The goal of the present
effort is threefold: 1) refine the calibration of the stable isotope data by
both experimental laboratory studies with mosses and indepth field studies of
modern bogs; 2) confirm the history of paleoclimatic change by analyzing other
records from the same general climatic region using the same approach; and 3)
confirm record of past changes in pCO2 by analyzing other records from different
regions in southern South America and also from the northern hemisphere. The
combination of records of paleoclimatic and paleo-carbon dioxide concentrations
from several cores will lead to a better understanding of the mechanisms and
dynamics of abrupt climate change events.