* 9321409
* Shipboard Scientific Support Equipment
* GEO,OCE
* 04/01/1994,03/31/1995
* Robert Knox, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Standard Grant
* Richard W. West
* 03/31/1995
* USD 123,273.00

9321409 KNOX This project will supply shipboard scientific equipment for the
research vessels MELVILLE, NEW HORIZON, and R. G. SPROUL, operated by the
Scripps Institution of Oceanography, and dedicated to use in support of ocean
science research. The Shipboard Scientific Support Equipment Program provides
funds for ship equipment deemed essential to the proper and safe conduct of
ocean science research. This Program provides support for such items as deck
equipment including winch systems for the deployment and retrieval of scientific
instruments, navigational equipment such as radars, gyroscopes and earth
satellite receivers to pin point the location of research sites, communication
equipment including radio transceivers and satellite transceivers for voice and
scientific data communications and other equipment such as motorized workboats
for transporting scientists to and from data retrieval sites. The Project
Director, Robert Knox is fully qualified to direct this project having had
considerable experience in overseeing the acquisition and installation of
shipboard equipment. This project will allow the institution to modify the CTD
winch, and replace a searchlight, radar, fathometer, water evaporator and
outboard motor on the SPROUL; acquire P-code GPSs and replace fire fighting
suits on all three ships; and upgrade self contained breathing devices on the
MELVILLE. ***