* 9321790
* Dissertation Research:  Causes of Complex Dynamics in       Cardamine Pensylvanica Populations
* BIO,DEB
* 03/15/1994,08/31/1996
* Janis Antonovics, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Mark Courtney
* 08/31/1996
* USD 10,000.00

9321790 Antonovics This project is an investigation of the mechanisms governing
population dynamics in Cardamine pennsylvanica, a weedy plant. In an earlier
study, experimental populations of these plants displayed complex numerical
dynamics over fifteen generations, with populations cycling from low to high
density in three to four generations. Although simple models of density-
dependent population growth predict that the oscillatory dynamics are possible,
these models predicted stable (non-cyclic) dynamics when applied to our
experimental populations. This project will investigate what factors responsible
for the discrepancy between the model predictions and the observed dynamics.
From this, the investigators extrapolate to when similar mechanisms might drive
complex dynamics in natural populations. The significance of complex dynamics in
nature is twofold. First, if these dynamics are the product of deterministic
population regulation (as opposed to stochastic fluctuations in resource
availability), then attempts to interpret the complexity of nature should focus
on understanding the feedback mechanisms that drive these processes. Second,
populations that are highly variable in size are prone to extinction due to
demographic stochasticity, and may be unable to adapt to a changing environment
due to increased probability of random genetic change. Thus, an understanding of
population dynamics is crucial to interpreting basic ecological studies, as well
as to environmental management. t v v ! ! ! F v v ( Times New Roman Symbol &amp;
Arial l " h * eX* eX* e 9 7 Crystal Blackshear Crystal Blackshear