* 9321136
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: The German Controversy Over the Oncomouse Patent:  A Case Study in the Social and       Cultural Repercussions of Biotechnology
* SBE,SES
* 04/01/1994,01/31/1995
* Paul Rabinow, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Ronald J. Overmann
* 01/31/1995
* USD 10,000.00

9321136 Rabinow Biotechnology is rapidly revolutionizing biology. New techniques
promise to cure disease and alter genes of plants, animals, and ultimately of
humans themselves. Fears of these humanly engineered species have led American
opponents to attempt to block sales of genetically altered foods in
supermarkets. "Animal rights" activists have also sought to halt manipulation of
animal genes. An important topic for Science and Technology Studies is to
examine the ways biotechnology has affected societies around the world. Under
the direction of Professor Rabinow, Soren Germer is examining the recent German
controversy over a patent on a transgenic mouse, the Harvard oncomouse. The goal
of this project is to document the social and cultural repercussions of
contemporary biotechnology in a concrete case and a specific national setting.
Two questions frame this research: How has the oncomouse, as a tangible product
of modern biotechnology, affected contemporary German ideas and practices
concerning the relationship between humans and animals? and, What are the
particular characteristics of the German development and reception of recent
biotechnology? Mr. Germer is conducting 12 months of ethnographic fieldwork in
Munich, Germany, with the main adversaries in the oncomouse controversy -- a
group of biotechnology critics, a group of geneticists, and various patent
lawyers -- in order to chart their conflicting beliefs and practices. He is
exploring local competing perspectives on the relationship between humans and
animals, on science and technology, and on culture and nature. The way we
classify, think, and treat animals plays an important role in how we define
ourselves as humans. This dissertation contributes to the analysis of late-
modern German cultural identity as it is reshaped by the radical changes which
science presents. ***