* 9321152
* Dissertation Research:  Paleopathology in Human Skeletal    Remains from the Bronze/Iron Age, Northeast Thailand
* SBE,BCS
* 01/01/1994,12/31/1995
* Michael Pietrusewsky, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* Mark L. Weiss
* 12/31/1995
* USD 6,000.00

ABSTRACT P.I. Michael Pietrusewsky/M. Douglas SBR-9321152 Extensive
archaeological research among peoples living around the Mediterranean and in
prehistoric America has been conducted in an attempt to document the transition
to agriculture and its subsequent effects on human health. One very common new
hypothesis is that the transition to dependence on one or a few agricultural
crops from gathering a large number of wild fruits and vegetables had a number
of detrimental effects on the health of early agricultural populations. However,
very little attention has been given to these same issues in human populations
found living in the unique tropical monsoon enviornment of Southeast Asia, where
the domestication and early intensification of rice agriculture is believed to
have occurred. It may well be, for example, that dependence on rice, rather than
maize, may not have been so detrimental to the health of the population. Through
a study of human skeletal remains from northern Thailand, this dissertation
research project will address the health status of the ancient inhabitants of
this critical comparative area of early agriculture, from the beginnings of rice
cultivation through its intensification and population dependence. ***
P\anthro\jfried\9321152.abs : &lt; s x ! ! ! D ( Times New Roman Symbol &amp;
Arial Q " h E E = Jonathan Friedlaender Jonathan Friedlaender