* 9321079
* Gas Phase NMR Studies of Conformational Kinetics
* NONE,NONE
* 03/15/1994,02/28/1998
* Nancy True, University of California-Davis
* Continuing grant
* Joan M. Frye
* 02/28/1998
* USD 304,900.00

In this project in the Physical Chemistry Program of the Chemistry Division,
Prof. Nancy S. True of the Chemistry Department of the University of California
at Davis will pursue a research program to determine if the kinetics of simple
conformational processes in the gas phase is significantly influenced by
restricted intramolecular vibrational energy redistribution (IVR). To this end
the fall-off curves (i.e. unimolecular rate constants vs. pressure) will be
determined under experimental conditions that will help address this question.
Calculation of the energies, symmetries, and anharmonic coupling constants for
vibrational states above the threshold energy will be used to develop models for
the IVR process in the critically energized molecules. These models will be used
in fall-off calculations employing a relaxation matrix approach which explicitly
includes competition between IVR and decay. The studies are a first attempt to
relate the experimentally determined shape of the fall-off for conformational
processes to a kinetic model containing a description of the IVR process.
Experimental fall-off curves will also be compared to those calculated using
standard RRKM theory in order to test its realm of validity in transition state
chemistry. The experimental techniques to be used in this work include high
pressure gas phase NMR. Methyl nitrite, cyclohexane, and sulfur tetrafluoride,
as well as processes involving the internal rotation dynamics in amides and
substituted ethanes, trimethylsilyl group rotation in
tetramethylsilylcyclopentadiene, pseudorotation in fluxional inorganic molecules
and ring inversion in unsaturated six-membered rings will be investigated. The
intramolecular redistribution of vibrational energy is at the heart of theories
of chemical reaction dynamics and equilibrium. Several theories have ben
proposed to account for such redistribution processes, the most prominent of
which is that proposed by Rice, Rams perger, Kassel, and Marcus, which is known
under the acronym RRKM theory. This theory is based on a statistical model of
energy flow and recent spectroscopic experiments have indicated that not all
intramolecular energy redistribution can be accounted for by it. The research
performed in this project, using different experimental techniques, will provide
additional data which will help delineate the range of applicability of the RRKM
theory.