* 9321852
* The Effect of Race on Sentencing: A Multi-Site Study
* NONE,NONE
* 06/01/1994,11/30/1997
* Cassia Spohn, University of Nebraska at Omaha
* Standard Grant
* Harmon M. Hosch
* 11/30/1997
* USD 179,051.00

9321852 SPOHN The issue of whether racial discrimination occurs in criminal
sentencing has not yet been resolved. Some studies have found that blacks are
sentenced more harshly than whites, but others have found either that there are
no differences or that blacks are sentenced more leniently than whites. Critics
of this research have suggested that these inconsistent findings reflect an
overly simplistic view of the relationship between race and sentencing. They
have called for research designed to delineate more precisely the conditions
under which defendants' race influences judges' sentencing decisions. The
proposed research responds to this call for substantive and methodological
improvements in research on race and sentencing. The PIs will conduct a multi-
site study that (1) probes for indirect as well as direct racial effects; (2)
tests for interactions between defendants' race, legal and extralegal variables,
and sentencing severity; (3) examines decisions made prior to sentencing for
evidence of racial bias; and (4) employs qualitative as well as quantitative
techniques. They will collect detailed data on defendant, victim and case
characteristics for a random sample of defendants convicted of felonies in Cook
County (Chicago) Circuit Court, Harris County (Houston) District Court, and
Douglas County (Omaha) District Court. In addition, interviews will be conducted
with criminal justice officials in each jurisdiction. ***