* 9321736
* Significance of Solar Ultraviolet Radiation in Arctic       Waters:  Effects on Phytoplankton and Ichthyoplankton
* GEO,OPP
* 06/15/1994,05/31/1999
* Russell Vetter, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Continuing Grant
* Jane V. Dionne
* 05/31/1999
* USD 292,105.00

9321736 Holm-Hansen The effects of increased ultraviolet (UV) irradiance on
planktonic ecosystems have been studied in some detail for Antarctic waters but
comparable studies have not been carried out at high northern latitudes. Recent
evidence has documented a thinning of ozone over Arctic seas, suggesting the
potential for similar UV effects in northern waters. In this proposal we will
determine the effects of present-day ultraviolet radiation, as well as the
potential effects of increased UV irradiance, on phytoplankton and
ichthyoplankton in high Arctic latitudes. Studies of Arctic phytoplankton, to be
conducted in Norway, will focus on (i) the effects of UV radiation on
photosynthetic rates and the effect on overall rates of primary production, (ii)
the extent to which cells can decrease their sensitivity of UV radiation by
synthesis of UV-absorbing compounds, (iii) species- specific differences in UV
resistance, and (iv) DNA repair capacities which are unknown for northern
plankton communites. Studies of UV damage to ichthyoplankton have not been
conducted at either pole. Recently developed methods allow us to measure the
amount of UV induced DNA damage in individual free-living eggs and larvae. The
results of these studies, done at temperate latitudes, have shown that the diel
cycle of damage and repair, the pre-exposure conditions, and interspecific
differences greatly effect the susceptablility to UV damage. The present study
will be the first attempt to measure the impact of UV on early life-stages of
important polar fisheries species. The proposal brings together the
investigators' skills in measuring UV damage together with the unique location,
collaborators and technical capabilities of the laboratories in Tromso, Norway.