* 9321244
* Development and Implementation of a U.S. Program in Marine  Biotoxins and Harmful Algae
* GEO,OCE
* 06/15/1994,04/30/2001
* Donald Anderson, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* Phillip R. Taylor
* 04/30/2001
* USD 655,178.00

9321244 Anderson Marine biotoxins and harmful algae represents a significant
and expanding threat to human health and fisheries resources throughout the
United States. This problem takes many forms, ranging from massive "red tides"
or blooms of cells that discolor the water to dilute, inconspicuous
concentrations of cells noticed only because of the harm caused by the highly
potent toxins contained in those cells. Impacts include mass moralities of wild
and farmed fish, human intoxication's and death from contaminated shellfish or
fish, alterations of marine trophic structure, and death from marine mammals,
seabirds, and other animals. The nature and extent of the problem has increased
considerably over the last two decades in the United States, but unfortunately,
our national research, monitoring, and regulatory infrastructure is not
adequately prepared to meet this expanding threat. To alleviate this problem,
national and international efforts underway to develop and implement science
programs to deal with the many complex issues that are involved. This proposal
seeks funds from NOAA and NSF for the P.I. to assist in the development and
coordination of these activities. This will involve continued participation as
the U.S. representative at international workshops and study groups convened by
ICES, IOC, WESTPAC and SCOR. Within the United States, activities will include
planning and advisory activities in support of an Ad Hoc Interagency Task Force
on Marine Biotoxins and Harmful Algae, compilation of bloom reports through the
ICES Coordinating Center for the Exchange of Information on Exceptional algal
Blooms, and the organization of a workshop to formulate a detailed science plan
for research on the ecology and oceanography of harmful algal blooms.