* 9321113
* Ground-Based Measurements of Sulfate Production in Marine   Clouds
* GEO,AGS
* 06/01/1994,05/31/1996
* William Zoller, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Jarvis L. Moyers
* 05/31/1996
* USD 39,887.00

Hegg Because the precipitation of clouds is low, sulfate particles go through
several cloud condensation-evaporation events before they are removed. This
processing within the cloud, involving the absorption of gaseous SO2 into cloud
droplets and subsequent oxidation to SO4, has two important effects. First,
initially small particles gain mass during cloud condensation-evaporation cycles
and are thus able to reach activatable size at lower cloud supersaturation. This
enables them to impact a much wider range of cloud type, e.g. the low
supersaturation marine stratus clouds that are so important climatically.
Second, an increase in mass occurs even for larger particles (r 0.1 um) that
have served as cloud condensation nuclei (CCN) during several could cycles.
These particles grow into the Mie scattering regime and become more effective
light scatters. In summary, the aqueous phase production of sulfate in clouds
(followed by evaporation) potentially produces aerosols that are better CCN and
more efficient light scatterers. In this SGER study, an attempt is to be made to
quantify in- cloud sulfate production in marine stratiform clouds at the Cheeka
Peak Research Station on the Olympic Peninsula in Washington state. The
consequences of the amount of sulfate production observed for direct and
indirect radiative forcing of climate will then be examined. This will be done
both through diagnostic modeling studies to relate the observed sulfate
production to changes in CCN activity and light-scattering, and by comparing the
results with those of colleagues who will be simultaneously measuring the
particle size distribution, and light-scattering properties of the sulfate
aerosols.