* 9321628
* Structure and Evolution of the Canada Basin: An             Aerogeophysical Study
* O/D,OPP
* 08/01/1994,07/31/1995
* John Brozena, Department of Navy Naval Research Laboratory
* Interagency Agreement
* Scott Borg
* 07/31/1995
* USD 219,928.00

9321628 Brozena and Kovacs This award supports a geophysical investigation of
the northern Canada Basin, part of the Arctic Ocean basin. A well constrained
understanding of the tectonic evolution of the Canada Basin is critical for
determining the geological evolution of the northern margins of Alaska, Canada,
and Siberia, and for determining the tectonic framework under which
paleoclimatic change occurred. The current regional geophysical knowledge of the
region is not complete enough to adequately constrain even zeroth-order tectonic
models of the evolution of the region. This is reflected in the continuing
scientific controversy over the timing and most basic tectonic characteristics
of those models. This project will conduct a regional aerogravity- aeromagnetic
investigation of the northern Canada Basin with the goal of determining the
structure and tectonic evolution of this region. To conduct these flights, Naval
Research Laboratory (NRL) will deploy its RP-3 Orion long-range aircraft
equipped with the NRL Airborne Geophysical Sensor Suite (AGSS) from Pt. Barrow,
Alaska for a one to two month study over a section of the Canada Basin chosen to
provide the highest likelihood of important tectonic signatures diagnostic of
opening direction and timing. Funds from NSF will partially support one month of
the field program. NRL will support the balance of the costs with internal
research funds and support from other Federal agencies. The AGSS consists of
multiple redundant gravimeter, kinematic GPS, and radar/laser altimeter systems
in addition to a standard airborne proton precession magnetometer. This system
has successfully collected over 200,000 line-km of high quality gravity,
magnetics, and topography data over Greenland in 1991 and 1992. In addition,
40,000 line-km of similar data were collected over the northern Canada Basin
adjacent to Arctic Canada in 1992 as a pilot program for the proposed work.
Typically, the accuracy of the system at the altitudes and speeds proposed (600m
and 240 knots) is about 2- 3 mGal (root-mean-square) at the track crossings,
resolving crustal features with wavelengths of 15 km and longer. The project
will be performed under the framework of a cooperative, international program
involving scientists from the United States, Canada, and Russia. This work will
yield an geophysical data set that will be used to interpret the tectonic and
geologic evolution of the region but the data set will also be used by many
parts of the broader earth sciences community.