* 9321453
* Dissertation Research: A Comparative Analysis of Two        Orthopteran Hybrid Zones
* BIO,DEB
* 03/15/1994,10/31/1995
* Douglas Futuyma, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Mark Courtney
* 10/31/1995
* USD 9,035.00

9321453 Futuyma Hybrid zones are areas in which two genetically distinct groups
(e.g., "species") successfully reproduce with each other to at least a limited
extent. The study of hybrid zones allows us to learn about the mechanisms of
reproductive isolation and their evolution, an understanding of which is
critical to our understanding of speciation. According to the most widely
accepted species definition, two groups of organisms that are not interfertile
belong to two different species. Hybrid zones represent an intermediate stage of
speciation, with limited gene flow between the "species": the two groups are
neither completely interfertile nor completely reproductively isolated. This
intermediate situation provides a unique opportunity for biologists to apply
analytical techniques developed for the study of single species population--
techniques that cannot be used in the total absence of gene flow--to improve our
understanding of how new species develop. This study will take the nearly unique
approach of comparing two geographically well separated hybrid zones involving
the same two " species". Patterns of variation in behavior, morphology,
proteins, DNA, and chromosomes will be compared across the hybrid zones. By
combining this information with information about the differing ecology and
history of contact between the two "species" in each zone, this research will
improve understanding of how ecology and history may influence patterns of
interactions between incompletely isolated taxa. The research will also produce
insight into the circumstances under which hybridizing groups may evolve into
reproduc tively isolated species. In addition to such inferences that may emerge
from this study (which would then require testing in other contact zones), the
basic information gathered to describe the hybrid zones will permit detailed
studies addressing a variety of questions in the future, as well as the tracking
of the two zones through time. U W U E G I K M O Q S U W ! ! ! F W W ( Times New
Roman Symbol &amp; Arial j j j j " h # EL* eL* e u # 7 Crystal Blackshear
Crystal Blackshear