* 9321826
* Atomic and Electronic Properties of Surfaces and Interfaces of Wide Band Gap Compound Semiconductors
* MPS,DMR
* 06/15/1994,03/31/1998
* Antoine Kahn, Princeton University
* Continuing Grant
* H. Hollis Wickman
* 03/31/1998
* USD 315,000.00

9321826 Kahn Technical abstract: This study will focus on the structural,
chemical, and electronic properties of surfaces and metal interfaces of wide
band gap zinc-selenide and III-V nitrides (gallium nitride, indium nitride,
aluminum nitride). The validity of the Schottky barrier models developed for
narrower gap semiconductors will be tested for these materials. The nature of
electronic surface states, their impact on the surface band bending and their
role in the formation of metal-semiconductor barriers will be determined. The
project will also investigate the occurrence of negative electron affinity which
has been reported for aluminum nitride surfaces. Formation of metal-zinc-
selenide and metal-nitride barriers will be investigated in order to establish
the limits of the dependence of Schottky barriers on these materials. The
thermal stability of interfaces, especially important for high temperature
applications (gallium nitride) will be investigated. This will include a search
for diffusion and chemical reaction barriers (e. g., titanium-gallium nitride).
Finally, the difficult problem of making ohmic contacts to these p- doped
semiconductors will be addressed. These contacts are crucial for the development
of light emitting devices. Two techniques will be studied: combination of high
p-doping and large work function metal (platinum) for p-gallium nitride, and
high electronegativity polymeric and metallic (poly sulfur nitride) contact on
p-zinc- selenide. Non-technical abstract: This project will investigate the
structural, chemical and electronic properties of interfaces of two important
types of semiconductors: zinc selenide and the Group III-V nitrides (gallium
nitride, indium nitride, and aluminum nitride), which have applications in
optoelectronics (emission in the green-blue for the II-VIs, blue-ultraviolet for
the nitrides) and high temperature electronics (nitrides). The proposed work
will begin to establish for these materials a solid understanding of their
interface properties for future technological developments, as well as to test
the validity of interface concepts and metal-semiconductor barrier models
developed for narrower gap semiconductors. The formation of ohmic contacts will
be investigated, since these are crucial for the operation of high- performance,
reliable, light-emitting devices. For example the chemical stability of these
contacts will be modulated via preparation of diffusion barriers which should
lead to interface engineering of these materials. ***