* 9321496
* Influence of Atmospheric Organic Aerosols on Cloud          Microphysics
* GEO,AGS
* 01/01/1994,12/31/1995
* Robert Charlson, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Anne-Marie Schmoltner
* 12/31/1995
* USD 37,595.00

9321496 Davis Oxidation products of organics in the atmosphere can be expected
to affect the thermodynamics of cloud droplets and the rates of droplet growth
and evaporation. Automobile emissions of olefins yield secondary organic
aerosols such as glutaric, adipic and phthalic acids, and a-pinene emissions
from tree foliage produce pinonaldehyde and pinonic acid upon oxidation. Recent
experiments in this laboratory indicate that such difunctional organic
oxygenates are surface active and significantly alter the physical and chemical
properties of the surface on an aqueous solution droplet. This proposal
addresses the surface chemistry and the effects of the surface chemistry on
evaporation/condensation rate processes of aerosol droplets containing organic
solutes. Preliminary experiments with aqueous solution droplets of adipic and
phthalic acids show that evaporation rates are lowered by more than an order of
magnitude eompared with water droplets at the same ambient conditions of
temperature and relative humidity. These large effects have not been explored
before, but their impact on cloud physics can be expected to be significant. The
work plan includes surface tension measurements of aqueous solutions for a wide
range of concentrations and evaporation/condensation rate measurements of
electrodynamically trapped aerosol droplets. The droplet size will be measured
as a function of time by light-scattering techniques, and the light- scattering
data will be analyzed to determine the refractive index of the droplet.
Facilities are also available to Measure inelastic scattering (Raman scattering)
by the droplets, which can be used to chemically characterize the droplets. ***