* 9321636
* A Comparison of Avian and Zooplankton Ecology in Two        Western Arctic Polynyas
* GEO,OPP
* 06/15/1994,05/31/1998
* George Hunt, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Polly A. Penhale
* 05/31/1998
* USD 363,137.00

9321636 Hunt The project compares seabirds and zooplankton populations in the
St. Lawrence Island Polynya (SLIP) and in the Gulf of Anadyr Polynya (GAP). The
SLIP is shallow (30-40m) and is expected to have a sluggish water circulation
when compared to the strongly advective regime expected for the deeper (50-200m)
GAP. Scientists predict that the ocean zooplankton community of the GAP will be
dominated by pelagic Neocalanus species that have been advected from the slope
region of the Bering Sea. Whereas in the SLIP, small coastal species will
probably dominate but not until late in the season. The premise of the project
is that seabird communities occupying the open ocean polynyas will reflect the
relative abundance of pelagic food web and that zooplanktivorous auklets will be
more abundant in the GAP than in the SLIP. It's expected that SLIP seabird diets
will reflect an epibenthic dominated food web and carbon fixed in previous
season contrary to that in GAP, where carbon from the current year's production
may be advected from the slope in growing copepods. This integrated study will
provide a first order estimate of the potential influence of seabirds on polynya
carbon budgets, and the first accounts of zooplankton and seabirds in western
Arctic polynyas with differing advective regimes and presumed carbon cycling
pathways. ***