* 9321296
* A Multimedia Database Model for STS
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/1994,07/31/1998
* Gregory Crane, Tufts University
* Continuing Grant
* Michael M. Sokal
* 07/31/1998
* USD 450,000.00

Dr. Crane is undertaking a case study of how electronic tools can not only help
researchers in Science and Technology Studies perform traditional tasks more
effectively, but can also make possible non- traditional avenues of inquiry and
can even open up bodies of evidence to whole new groups. The case study he is
using as a model for the this field is Greek science. He and his colleagues aim
to make more tractable and comprehensible to practicing scientists and general
historians the complexities of what is a very different, in many ways alien,
culture. Conversely, the scientific issues are often equally obscure to those
who are most familiar with the culture. They plan to exploit images, animations,
notes, and the general flexibility of the electronic environment so that the
cultural experts will be better able to come to grips with the technical issues
of such fields as biology, astronomy, and mathematics. They are thus designing
an environment that integrates more fully and naturally scientific and
humanistic issues. By showing how science can be made accessible to humanists
and how the cultural context can be made accessible and understandable to
scientists, Dr. Crane promises to revolutionize STS. The aim is ultimately to
transform the sources for Greek science into a dynamic, readily updatable
networked resource open to any researcher on the electronic network.