* 9321103
* Iterative Least Squares Estimation of Binary Choice Models: A Semi-Parametric Approach
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/1994,06/30/1996
* Mai Zhou, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 06/30/1996
* USD 44,412.00

9321103 Wang Existing semi-parametric methods for binary choice models face two
major disadvantages: namely, computational difficulty and multiple local maxima,
especially for models with multiple explanatory variables or large sample sizes.
Another problem is that some existing semi-parametric methods need a very large
size to obtain the benefits promised by asymptotic theory. These problems are so
severe that there is hardly any empirical application of semi-parametric methods
for binary choice models available in the literature although these methods have
been developed for a while. This project proposes a computationally convenient
semi-parametric estimation method for binary choice models based on a semi-
parametric interpretation of the EM (Expectation and Maximization) principle and
the least squares approach. Preliminary Monte Carlo studies show that this new
method has no problem of multiple local maxima (especially for large sample
sizes) and is computationally much less time consuming than other estimators.
This project studies the theoretical properties of the new estimator of binary
choice models, including large sample properties and the use of resampling
methods for estimating the variance of the estimator. The use of optimal
weighted least squares estimators instead of Ordinary Least Squares (OLS) will
be investigated as a means of improving efficiency. Extensive simulations will
be conducted in order to compare the performance of various semi-parametric
estimators. This method will be applied to an important empirical economic
problem, the early retirement decision. To facilitate the application of the
proposed method, the project will develop efficient and convenient computer
programs for the new estimator. These programs will be easily incorporated in
standard econometric computer packages, such as SAS, GAUSS and LIMDEP.