* 9321257
* Metal Complexes with Fullerene and Polyphosphine Backbones
* NONE,NONE
* 05/15/1994,04/30/1997
* Alan Balch, University of California-Davis
* Continuing grant
* Brian J. Rappoli
* 04/30/1997
* USD 245,000.00

9321257 Balch University of California - Davis Dr. Alan Balch, Chemistry
Department, University of California at Davis, is supported by the Inorganic,
Bioinorganic, and Organometallic Chemistry Program for studies of fullerene
chemistry and of metal complexes of polydentate phosphines. The reversible
binding of metal fragments will be evaluated as a route to obtaining complexes
of the higher fullerenes, which will then be structurally characterized. The
chemistry of these complexes will be evaluated both to understand fundamental
properties and to prepare crystalline polymers which may posses interesting
electronic properties. Polyphosphine complexes which contain several metal atoms
arranged around an open space within the molecule will be prepared. These will
be utilized to explore reactivity both within and outside of these cavities and
the ability of the complexes to interact with one another to form new
metallomacromolecules will be evaluated. The fullerenes are a new class of the
element carbon in which the carbon atoms are arranged in ball-like shapes. While
the behavior of these species is largely unknown there are hints of interesting
electrical and other properties. In this research new derivatives of the
fullerenes will be prepared both in order to determine their exact shapes and to
explore their chemical properties. It is hoped that new polymeric materials may
result form this project. In a separate but related portion of the
investigation, cage-like compounds will be prepared in which several metal atoms
face an interior void. As chemical reactions which are mediated by metal atoms
often require an exposed metal, a comparison of the properties inside the void
and outside the complex will provide valuable information on the exact nature of
exposed metal atoms.