* 9321838
* Multivariate Climate Analysis in Southern South America with Emphasis on Transitional Periods
* NONE,NONE
* 04/15/1994,09/30/1997
* Ray Kenny, New Mexico Highlands University
* Continuing grant
* Herman Zimmerman
* 09/30/1997
* USD 62,848.00

Abstract ATM-9321838 Kenny, Ray New Mexico Highlands University Title:
Multivariate Paleoclimatic Analysis in Southern South America with Emphasis on
Transitional Periods This award supports a multivariate paleoclimate study,
using pollen and stable isotope analyses, of peat cores from southern South
America. These cores are believed to contain a continuous record since the last
glacial/interglacial transition. Results obtained to date from the combined high
resolution analyses of one peat core, at latitude 55o in the Beagle Channel,
indicate that the pollen stratigraphy provides the perspective against which
stable isotope ratios can be better evaluated and that the combined approach
greatly augments the paleoclimatic information. The goal of the present effort
is threefold: 1) refine the calibration of the stable isotope data by both
experimental laboratory studies with mosses and indepth field studies of modern
bogs; 2) confirm the history of paleoclimatic change by analyzing other records
from the same general climatic region using the same approach; and 3) confirm
record of past changes in pCO2 by analyzing other records from different regions
in southern South America and also from the northern hemisphere. The combination
of records of paleoclimatic and paleo-carbon dioxide concentrations from several
cores will lead to a better understanding of the mechanisms and dynamics of
abrupt climate change events.