* 9321865
* The Effects of Uncertainties in Physical Property Data and  Models on Chemical Process Design
* ENG,CBET
* 02/15/1995,11/30/1997
* Wallace Whiting, West Virginia University Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Charles Alexander Garris, Jr.
* 11/30/1997
* USD 140,000.00

Gupta 9321865 Measurements of fluid-phase equilibrium necessarily involve
experimental error. Current models developed from these data (both equations of
state and activity coefficient models) typically are significantly less precise
than are the data. The quality of process simulation results based on these
models is, thereby, limited. The objective of this project is to develop a
rational and rigorous method for evaluating the relationships between the
uncertainties in thermodynamic experiments, models, and design. The approach is
to use Monte Carlo simulation to study the sensitivities and uncertainties of
base cases (chosen in collaboration with academic and industrial colleagues) and
thereby to formulate and to evaluate heuristics for experimental design, model
development, and process design. Preliminary results show that there is a very
significant uncertainty in the design and operation of processes when one
considers the seemingly small uncertainties in data for vapor-liquid
equilibrium. A common approach in the chemical processing industries is to apply
safety factors to designs to account for this uncertainty. However, Monte Carlo
uncertainty analysis can quantify the uncertainty and lead to rationalization of
the safety factor approach. The development of thermodynamic models from
experimental data requires the regression of model parameters, and the results
of these regressions can serve as input to the Monte Carlo simulations. However,
the classical application of the maximum likelihood regression method assumes
that the model is inherently more accurate than are the data. For phase-
equilibrium data, often the inverse is true. Therefore, an approach will be
developed that eliminates this inconsistency and allows one to compare models
and their accuracy's on a rational basis. One ultimate goal of this work is to
separate the uncertainty of physical-property into two categories: those caused
by model uncertainty and those caused by experimental uncertainty. Mon te Carlo
simulations will be performed to develop strategies to make this separation. ***