* 9321721
* (SGER) Use of High-Resolution Analysis of a Natural Extreme Event to Characterize Hydrologic System Dynamics
* NONE,NONE
* 09/15/1993,02/28/1995
* Robert Buddemeier, University of Kansas Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* L. Douglas James
* 02/28/1995
* USD 35,956.00

9321721 Buddemeier The recent anomalous precipitation pattern and resultant
flooding in the Midwestern US presents extraordinary opportunities to
investigate the dynamics of coupled surface-water/groundwater systems.
Coincidentally, digital high resolution radar precipitation data serves powerful
new techniques to the use of an extreme event as a hydrologic system probe. We
propose a prompt, intensive reconstruction and interpretation of rainfall,
surface water responses, aquifer recharge and groundwater equilibration in an
aquifer that has been intensively studied and well characterized under "normal"
conditions. The proposed research has three primary objectives. The first is to
explore the novel use of weather radar rainfall estimates as a means of
constructing precipitation estimates with unprecedented spatial and temporal
resolution, and to compare the values thus derived with conventional weather
station estimates. The second objective is to extend high- resolution hydrology
to surface and groundwater by developing detailed recharge and runoff estimates.
The third objective is to explore the feasibility of combining routine and
special groundwater level measurements with the refined recharge estimates in
order to determine aquifer characteristics by observing the groundwater
equilibration following what may be considered a spatially-variable aquifer-
scale slug test. ***