* 9321625
* Dissertation Research: Genetic Basis for Malathion          Resistance in Drosophila
* BIO,DEB
* 03/15/1994,02/29/1996
* Rollin Richmond, University of South Florida
* Standard Grant
* Mark Courtney
* 02/29/1996
* USD 10,000.00

9321625 Cochrane The evolution of insecticide resistance in insect populations
is a problem of agricultural, economic and environmental significance. Yet
despite the increasing magnitude of this problem, the genetic basis for the
response of an insect population to insecticides is not clearly understood.
Insect populations exhibit different genetic responses under field and
laboratory conditions. Furthermore, the effects of insecticide exposure on
closely related species are unknown. The research will address the evolution of
insecticide resistance in field populations of two closely related species of
the fruitfly, Drosophila, which have a 20 year history of exposure to the
insecticide malathion. Despite the close relationship of these species, one
population is an average of 10 times more resistant than the other.%%% The
immediate goal of the research is to determine the genetic basis for the
difference in resistance levels between these two populations. Classical genetic
procedure will be coupled with biochemical analysis of known detoxification
systems to identify major genes contributing to malathion resistance. The basis
of resistance in these populations will thus be compared with those from
geographically distinct populations of both species to determine the
significance of the differences between the species. This work will be of a
direct benefit to agricultural pest management strategies by determining the
effect of insecticide exposure on closely related species. This knowledge may
then be directly used to influence the development of future pest management
programs.***