* 9321163
* Conference on New Horizons in Feminist Geography; Lexington, Kentucky: August 1994
* SBE,BCS
* 02/01/1994,01/31/1996
* John Jones, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Daniel B. Hodge
* 01/31/1996
* USD 24,867.00

9321163 ROBERTS Feminist geography grew out of the women's movement and other
liberatory struggles of the 1960's. Since that time, and especially since the
mid-1980's, feminist geographers have focussed on the relationship between
feminist geographic research and social change. As a result of an explosion of
recent research, feminist geography has tackled important and difficult
questions concerning the relationship between gender, space, and power, and how
social constructions of gender and gender relations vary across space and time.
Furthermore, it has begun to formulate new ways of equitably negotiating and
representing difference in pedalogical, theoretical, and methodological terms.
Given the volume and pace of this recent research, it is timely to take stock of
progress, to identify new horizons, and to chart new directions for feminist
geography. This conference aims to achieve these ends through a focus on three
of the most recurrent and important themes arising out of new feminist research:
diversity and difference, methological frontiers, and new forms of
representation. Results of the conference will be published in book form.
Feminist geography has already had a major impact on the nature of human
geography studies. This conference will provide a timely and intensive
opportunity for leading and emerging scholars in the field of feminist geography
to reflect on past accomplishments and to structure future research. Thus this
conference will provide new visions of this important field of study that will
not only inspire those scientists actively involved in its study, but will also
further the impact of feminist geography on the rest of human geography.