* 9321506
* Exchange Rate Dynamics in Stochastic Monetary Models
* SBE,SES
* 03/15/1994,08/31/1996
* Geert Bekaert, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 08/31/1996
* USD 145,662.00

9321506 Bekaert Despite the importance of exchange rate movements in an
increasingly integrated world economy, we have not developed good economic
models that guide our understanding of the behavior of exchange rates over time.
This has lead to a widespread belief that currency markets are inefficient. This
research develops several exchange rate models in an attempt to explain various
empirical regularties of exchange rates without having to resort to market
inefficiency arguments. The models assume that markets are efficient and the
market participants are rational but risk averse.The empirical part of the study
examines how well the models fit actual exchange rate data. The first model
concentrates on high variability of exchange rates and how this variability
changes over time. The second model focusses on the predictability of
international asset returns. In an extension to this model, the effect of the
credibility of monetary policy on asset markets is examined. The third model
examines why, for example, is the dollar amount to buy a comparable basket of
consumption goods in the United States versus Japan so different? Here, the
study explores whether non-traded goods, such as houses, and the existence of a
sizable government sector are the main source of the puzzling behavior of
exchange rates and consumption prices across countries. ***