* 9321605
* Dissertation Research:  Tiwanaku Interaction and Land Use
* SBE,BCS
* 01/01/1994,06/30/1995
* Marc Bermann, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 06/30/1995
* USD 8,980.00

9321605 Bermann Under the direction of Dr. Marc Bermann, Mr. Alvaro Higueras-
Hare will collect data for his doctoral dissertation. He will conduct
archaeological survey and excavation in two areas of the Cochabamba Valley which
is located on the subtropical eastern slopes of the Bolivian Andes.These valleys
include distinct ecozones, some with significantly higher agricultural potential
than others. Mr. Higueras-Hare will select two which vary along this axis and
compare their land use over time. To accomplish this he will conduct a regional
survey noting both differences in agricultural potential and the distribution of
archaeological sites over time. With the use of GIS techniques he will map
variations in agricultural potential and then compare the archaeological
trajectory of high and low producing areas. In particular he is interested in
the transition from pre-Tiwanaku to Tiwanaku times. Archaeological evidence
indicates that large scale prehispanic states developed in the Andean region.
Empires repeatedly expanded and incorporated smaller adjacent entities. This
process occurred on a worldwide basis but is particularly interesting in the
Andes because of the strong attitudinal zonation in the region. Given the need
to obtain products from different ecological zones, what strategies did groups
employ to accomplish this? What economic and political mechanisms were thus
developed? Many models have been proposed. The Tiwanaku empire had its origin in
highland Bolivia. Although it's influence was widely felt, it is unclear just
how it interacted with important outlying regions. The Cochabamba Valleys
constitute such an area and through study of subregions of both high and low
agricultural potential, Mr. Higueras-Hare hopes to learn how the Valley was tied
into the Tiwanaku subsistence net. This research is important for several
reasons. It will increase our understanding of the interaction between human
societies and the environment in which they exist. It will shed new light on the
growth of complex societies and assist in the training of a promising young
scientist. ***