* 9321336
* Aircraft (P3) and Airborne Oceanographic Lidar (AOL)        Support of Interagency Iron-enrichment Experiment
* GEO,OCE
* 10/01/1993,03/31/1995
* Frank Muller-Karger, NASA
* Interagency Agreement
* Donald L. Rice
* 03/31/1995
* USD 60,900.00

9321336 Muller Karger There are several areas in the ocean where conditions
appear to be optimal for phytoplankton growth. However, chlorophyll
concentrations remain low in spite of persistently high major nutrient levels.
One of the oldest explanations for this condition concerns iron deficiency. With
the development and use of "clean" techniques, evidence supporting the "iron"
hypothesis has been obtained in bottle experiments performed in several
independent investigations. Nevertheless, many question the validity of these
experiments because of various adverse bottle containment effects. Thus it has
become apparent that the next step in testing the iron hypothesis should involve
the performance of unenclosed mesoscale (10 100 km2) iron fertilization
experiments. However adding a missing essential element to a way to proceed is
unclear. Through OCE 9297518 and OCE 9024373, in collaboration with ONR, such an
experiments will be undertaken. The type of iron to be used will be determined
as well as the best way to administer it to a 75 km2 "patch". Initial
experiments will be performed in the high nutrient, low chlorophyll region south
of the Galapagos Islands. The patch will be tracked using the inert tracer
sulphur hexaflouride. Chlorophyll and nutrients as well as other variables will
be monitored to determine the effects of the added iron. In conjunction with
this research a study will be made of the high chlorophyll, low nutr ient water
west of the Galapagos Islands. This area is of interest since it appears to
represent a natural enrichment experiment. This interagency transfer provides
NSF's share of the costs for NASA P 3B overflights to provide real time remotely
sensed measurements, necessary for the success for this experiments.