* 9321339
* Dissertation Research:  Body Size and Proportions in the    Late Pleistocene Western Old World and the Origins of       Modern Humans
* NONE,NONE
* 02/01/1994,07/31/1995
* Erik Trinkaus, University of New Mexico
* Standard Grant
* Mark L. Weiss
* 07/31/1995
* USD 11,990.00

ABSTRACT P.I. Erik Trinkaus SBR- 9321339 The question of modern human origins
remains the center of active debate. There are currently two opposing models for
our emergence. The first, "Replacement," posits that modern humans arose first
in a restricted region (most likely within sub-Saharan Africa) in the late
Middle or early Late Pleistocene, and subsequently spread out of Africa,
replacing existing archaic human populations elsewhere in the world. This model
would deny the Neandertals significant (if any) genetic contribution to modern
Eurasian populations. The second model, "Regional Continuity," proposes that
gene flow among archaic human populations was sufficient to prevent speciation,
with modern humans evolving gradually from a single diverse archaic human stock
distributed throughout the Old World. This model identifies presumed regional
features that persist across the archaic/modern human boundary, and the model
affords the Neandertals full status as ancestors of modern Eurasians. Fossil
evidence suggests late archaic sub-Saharan Africans were characterized by a
tropically-adapted morphology, akin to moderns there. If the replacement model
is correct, the first modern humans in cold-temperate regions should be
characterized by these same features, different from those of European archaics,
for example. The regional continuity model would argue that the ecogeographic
patterning in body size and proportions found today dates back to the Middle
Pleistocene spread of hominids to mid-latitudes. Through an examination of
fossil post-cranial remains, the investigators will test these t wo hypotheses
on changing body proportions over the last 50,000 years of human evolution. It
also will result in the training of an excellent new professional. ***
P\anthro\jfried\9321339.abs ! ! ! D 6 6 ( Times New Roman Symbol & Arial ? ? ? "
h es Eis E R | = Jonathan Friedlaender Jonathan Friedlaender