* 9321392
* Selective Electrophilic Substitution of Halogens into Alkyl-Aromatics using ZSM-5
* ENG,CBET
* 04/01/1994,03/31/1997
* Carl Lund, SUNY at Buffalo
* Continuing grant
* RAUL MIRANDA
* 03/31/1997
* USD 215,999.00

9321392 Lund This is a study of the zeolite ZSM-5 as a catalyst for the
chlorination of toluene. Of the three possible monochlorination products,
p-chlorotoluene is the most valuable; in other reactions involving
alkylaromatics, ZSM-5 is selective for formation of the para isomer. In this
work, a form of ZSM-5 in which iron cations are present in ion-exchange
positions of the zeolite is used. The first (chronologically) objective of the
study is to determine whether the catalyst deactivates under reaction
conditions, and if so, to measure the severity of the deactivation and determine
its origin. The second objective is to probe the active site using sorption
capacity and selectivity, Mossbauer spectroscopy, infrared spectroscopy of
adsorbed species, transmission electron microscopy, acidity measurements,
chemical analysis, ion exchange, and other techniques. Catalysts are prepared
with various degrees of dehydration, location of iron, and silicon/aluminum
ratios. Reactor studies are performed to measure catalytic activity and
selectivity. The third objective is to develop a mechanistic microkinetic model
of the reaction kinetics from steady-state and transient kinetics measurements
and temperature-programmed desorption data. The performance of ZSM-5 is compared
quantitatively to that of conventional Lewis-acid catalysts. Chlorinations and
related aromatic substitution reactions are widely used in chemical
manufacturing. They are presently done using relatively large amounts of
inexpensive (and not very active) catalysts that create large amounts of solid
waste that is now recognized to be an environmental problem. This work aims to
replace such processes with ones that employ small amounts of more active
catalysts that are relatively benign environmentally. ***