* 9321935
* International Symposium on Chemical Reaction Engineering    (ISCRE  13) in Baltimore, MD, September 25-28, 1994
* ENG,CBET
* 11/01/1993,04/30/1995
* Milorad Dudukovic, Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Maria Burka
* 04/30/1995
* USD 30,000.00

Abstract - Dudukovic 9321935 This grant is awarded to provide partial support
for the 13th International Symposium on Chemical Reaction Engineering (ISCRE-13)
which will be held in Baltimore, Maryland, September 25-28, 1994. The funds will
be partially used for invited plenary speakers as well as for subsidizing the
attendance of researchers in the field by lowering the registration fees.
Reaction Engineering is the discipline that quantifies the interactions of
transport phenomena and kinetics in relating reactor performance to operating
conditions and feed variables. This quantification requires a thorough
understanding of the micro-scale (molecular level), meso-scale (transport
kinetic events on a catalyst particle level) and macro-scale (reactor design in
the content of process and plant design). It results in methodology that is
useful in approaching a variety of systems including chemical, biological,
biochemical, and electrochemical, where the cause and effect relations imparted
by reactions and observed in small laboratory vessels need to be "scaled-up" to
commercial production. ISCRE conferences are unique in that they bring together
internationally prominent researchers in reaction engineering in a small setting
where there is an open atmosphere for the exchange of ideas. This particular
meeting has, as its underlying theme, the environment, including clean or
environmentally benign processing and emission control.