* 9321745
* Dissertation Research: Energetic Demands of Production of Young in the Chiropteran species, Phyllostomus hastatus
* NONE,NONE
* 03/15/1994,08/31/1996
* Thomas Kunz, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* Mark Courtney
* 08/31/1996
* USD 11,940.00

9321745 Kunz In nature, the energy an adult devotes to reproduction will affect
not only the survival of a particular litter, but its ability to produce future
offspring. Pregnancy and lactation place especially high energy and nutrient
demands on the female, which may increase her susceptibility to starvation or
disease. Thus, energy devoted to pregnancy and lactation must be counterbalanced
against the female's future reproductive potential. Compromise must also be
reached in balancing length of gestation against duration of lactation.
Gestation is relatively inexpensive compared to lactation, as nutrients can be
transferred directly to the developing young and thermoregulatory costs are
minimal. However, transport of the growing fetus can impede normal daily
activities and increase risk of predation. Patterns of energy expenditure during
pregnancy and lactation should thus reflect the costs of maintaining and
transporting a fetus versus feeding and caring for developing young.%%% The goal
of the proposed research is to conduct a series of field and laboratory
experiments to measure the cost associated with pregnancy in an omnivorous
tropical bat, Phyllostomus hastatus. Daily energy expenditure and allocation
will be quantified by measuring field metabolic rate (using doubly-labeled
water) and body composition (through isotope dilution) of females at progressive
stages of pregnancy. Nocturnal time-budgets of foraging females will be
constructed using radio-telemetry to test the hypothesis that foraging time is a
trade-off between supplying the growing needs of the fetus and minimizing the
cost of transporting a developing embryo. Diet composition and nutritional
content will be analyzed to determine how diet composition correlates with the
cost imposed by pregnancy. Completion of these projects will be integrated with
comparable data in the same species to provide important insights into the costs
and compromises associated with reproduc tion in an omnivorous volant mammal.***