* 9321964
* Mathematical Sciences: Theory of Gergman Spaces
* MPS,DMS
* 06/15/1994,05/31/1996
* Kehe Zhu, SUNY at Albany
* Standard Grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 05/31/1996
* USD 39,959.00

9321964 Zhu This award supports mathematical research on problems related to the
modern theory of functions of a complex variable and operator theory for
operators defined on spaces of such functions. The primary objective of the work
focuses on the structure of Bergman spaces of analytic function defined in a
disc. Recent results have established a factorization of functions in the
Bergman spaces similar to that found in the classic Hardy spaces. With this new
development arises the possibility that a classification of the subspaces
invariant under multiplication by the identity function will be possible. Work
will be done on this question. A second, related line of investigation concerns
Toeplitz operators arising from projection of functions into the Bergman space.
One question of particular interest is the identification of those Toeplitz
operators which are hyponormal. Finally, work will be done on Bergman spaces in
several complex variables to study those domains for which the Bergman
projection of the Lp-functions is surjective onto the space of Lp-holomorphic
functions. Studies in complex analysis combine the regularity of analytic
functions, the geometry of complex domains and the subtleties of boundary
characteristics to provide a basis for deep and powerful ideas relating many
different areas of mathematics. The application have ranged from partial
differential equations and harmonic analysis to the geometry of circle packing.
***