* 9321341
* Effect of Substrate Surface Microstructure on the           Metalorganic Molecular Beam Epitaxy (MOMBE) Growth of       Zinc Selenide on the (100) Face of Gallium Arsenide
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/1994,08/31/1998
* Arjun Yodh, University of Pennsylvania
* Continuing grant
* RAUL MIRANDA
* 08/31/1998
* USD 342,000.00

9321341 Vohs The objectives of this project are to provide a comprehensive
description of the surface-chemical phenomena involved in the growth of
epitaxial layers of zinc selenide (ZnSe) on the (100) surface of gallium
arsenide (GaAs) and to develop relationships between surface chemistry, film
structure, and interfacial properties. The influence of surface reconstruction
of a GaAs(100) substrate on the growth of epitaxial ZnSe films using
metalorganic molecular-beam epitaxy (MOMBE) is studied. The adsorption and
reaction of dimethylzinc, diethylzinc, and diethylselenium on the arsenic-rich
c(4x4) and c(2x8) reconstructions and the nearly stoichiometric (1x6)
reconstruction of GaAs(100) are investigated using temperature-programmed
desorption and high-resolution electron-energy-loss spectroscopy (HREELS). These
results are compared with those from previous studies on the gallium-rich (4x1)
reconstruction. The morphology and surface structure of ZnSe films are
characterized using atomic force microscopy and scanning tunnelling microscopy
as functions of GaAs(100) substrate reconstruction and processing conditions
(temperature, pressure, etc.). Structure and electronic properties of ZnSe/GaAs
interfaces are probed using HREELS and nonlinear optical spectroscopies. The
specific couple studied in this project is used in diodes, LEDs, lasers, and
other optoelectronic devices. Improved processing techniques should lead to
expanded uses. Additionally, much of this effort may be generalizable to other
II-VI / III-V heterojunctions.