* 9321162
* Dissertation Research Support:  Economists and the          Foundation of Slovenian National Identity
* NONE,NONE
* 03/15/1994,12/31/1995
* George Marcus, William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* Rachelle D. Hollander
* 12/31/1995
* USD 10,000.00

9321162 Marcus This dissertation research project will examine the role of
economists in Slovenia's transition from socialist to capitalist market systems.
Formerly Yugoslavia's frontier with the West, Slovenia declared its autonomy on
June 26, 1991. Economists have been working throughout Eastern Europe to advance
democracy and market reforms, and in Slovenia the role of economists has risen
to prominence in unexpected ways. The importance accorded to these reforms and
to the specialized knowledge used to define them has allowed economists in
Slovenia to emerge as a powerful intellectual elite accorded a crucial role in
the construction of an independent and stable nation. This study will examine
their role and analyze how their activities influence other spheres of change.
Slovenia's transition has been considered thus far a success, due to its
relatively peaceful independence form Yugoslavia, its successful preliminary
economic reforms, and its current political and economic stability. This study
will provide a rare opportunity to probe the political and cultural aspects of
the construction and implementation of economic reforms, allowing for a better
understanding of the political, economic and cultural changes redefining nations
across Eastern Europe and the former Soviet Bloc. Preliminary research has been
done to develop contacts and arrangements in Ljubljana, and to review relevant
documents and conduct interviews at the World Bank and other sources in
Washington DC. These funds will allow research in Ljubljana, the capital of
Slovenia, for a year, beginning in March 1994. ***