* 9321311
* Maize Genetics Conference, March 24-27, 1994, Pheasant Run Conference Center, Chicago, IL
* BIO,MCB
* 01/01/1994,06/30/1995
* Kathleen Newton, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Standard Grant
* DeLill Nasser
* 06/30/1995
* USD 20,000.00

9321311 Newton The Maize Genetics group has met on an annual basis for the past
35 years to discuss recent research advances. A broad range of topics are
covered from cytogenetics to molecular genetics and includes chromosome
mechanics, cytoplasmic inheritance, mapping, transposable element behavior, gene
identification and expression, development, tissue culture and transformation.
Although most participants are from academic institutions in the U.S., a number
of European scientists and increasing numbers of industry- affiliated scientists
attend. It is also usually the first meeting that U.S., graduate students in
maize genetics laboratories attend. The emphasis is on reporting recent,
unpublished data and presentations by graduate students and postdoctoral
researchers are strongly encouraged. The meeting is an essential gathering for
scientists working with maize, but is open to other plant scientists who wish to
learn from the strong heritage of maize genetics. Indeed, there is a long
tradition of cooperation and the open sharing of information and stocks in the
maize genetics community. To perpetuate the spirit of free exchange and
cooperation is one of the most important objectives of the meeting. The format
has evolved with time and with the increased attendance, but the strong sense of
community has been retained. **** The Maize Genetics Meeting will be held March
24-27, 1994 at the Pheasant Run Conference Center, near Chicago, Illinois. The
localized site will enhance the interactions between the established
investigators and younger scientists, all of whom use corn as an experimental
organism regardless of their expertise and interests. Thus, many of these
productive interactions would not occur except for this meeting. %%%%