* 9321850
* Defect Dynamics and Quantum Transport in Disordered         Mesoscopic Metals
* MPS,DMR
* 04/15/1994,12/31/1997
* Norman Birge, Michigan State University
* Continuing Grant
* H. Hollis Wickman
* 12/31/1997
* USD 270,000.00

9321850 Birge Technical abstract: The low temperature electrical properties of
mesoscopic metal samples will be studied in order to uncover new physical
phenomena that are unique to the mesoscopic regime. The specific problems to be
studied include dissipative quantum tunneling of single defects in disordered
metals, modulation of microscopic defect properties by externally applied
electric and strain fields, and the role of mesoscopic superconductors in
enhancing electronic quantum phase coherence. Measurements of 1/f noise in
larger samples complement the mesoscopic measurements by providing statistical
information about defects in disordered systems. Non-technical abstract: This
proposal focuses on two areas of study related to disordered metals. The first
is the study of individual, atomic defects. By carefully measuring the
electrical conductance of sub micrometer samples, one can detect the motion of a
single atom within the sample. This type of study reveals details about
individual defects that are not obtainable from studies of larger samples. The
second area of study is the quantum-mechanical behavior of electrons in metals
at low temperature. Due to their wave-like nature, electrons in metals exhibit
interference. In sub micrometer samples of normal and superconducting materials,
this interference leads to a number of new, intriguing electrical properties.
These effects can have potential impact on the development of future mesoscopic
devices. ***