* 9321801
* Dissertational Improvement: Conspicuous Coloration in Male  Northern Cardinals: Possible Benefits Throughout  the Year
* NONE,NONE
* 09/15/1994,08/31/1995
* Paul Sherman, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* None
* 08/31/1995
* USD 3,839.00

Conspicuous traits, such as vocalization in frogs or insects and showy plumage
or bright coloration in birds, are perplexing because often they reduce the
survivorship of the individual because they are costly to produce or display. In
this project possible year-round benefits to conspicuous coloration in male
Northern Cardinals (Cardinalis cardinalis), a species which has bright plumage
throughout the year will be studied. One experiment will determine whether
coloration influences territory quality and/or a male's ability to pair with an
earlier breeding female. The coloration of males just prior to the breeding
season will be manipulated in one of three ways - increase red, control (no
color change), and decrease red. If coloration during the breeding season
influences territory quality and/or timing of breeding, then significant
differences among the treatment groups will be expected. If a male's coloration
during the non-breeding season affects his ability to obtain a high quality
territory and/or an earlier breeding mate, then the natural coloration prior to
the manipulation to be correlated with these benefits will be expected. The
second experiment will test whether red coloration influences a male's access to
food and quality roosting sites. The same three treatments will be used and will
determine foraging efficiency and choice of roost site for males in an aviary.
These results should be of interest not only to behavioral biologists and
ornithologists interested in sexual selection but also to evolutionary and
theoretical biologists interested in the evolution of costly traits.