* 9321363
* Muon Spin Rotation Measurements of Off Axis Internal        Magnetic Fields in Anisotropic Superconductors
* MPS,DMR
* 06/15/1994,05/31/1998
* William Kossler, College of William and Mary
* Continuing Grant
* H. Hollis Wickman
* 05/31/1998
* USD 270,000.00

9321363 Kossler Technical abstract: Static and dynamic fields in high
temperature superconductors (HTS) will be studied both theoretically and
experimentally by new extension of muon spin rotation (muonSR) techniques.
Nearly all muonSR work in HTS to date has focused on transverse magnetic field
measurements. The new development in this work will allow use of the
longitudinal field technique even though the average internal field is neither
along nor perpendicular to the beam axis. This technique will be used to detect
small internal fields, which are perpendicular to the average magnetic field.
Experiments will be compared to the theoretically determined tilt disorder
induced by the transverse field distributions. Data on internal field
correlation times will be used to develop models for this motion which will aid
to understand the disordered vortex lattice melting process. Non-technical
abstract: Magnetic fields enter high temperature superconductors along axes of
vortices. Ideally these vortices are straight and arranged in regular patterns.
However, in reality these vortices tilt, flex, and move out of regular
positions. The static and dynamic disorder of these vortices needs to be
understood because they contribute to energy losses in these superconductors.
Such losses in turn have detrimental effects on potential superconducting
devices such as high field magnets or electrical transmission lines. The nature
of the vortex order, tilt, and motion will be studied both theoretically and
experimentally. The experimental technique uses the elementary particle called a
muon to sense the local magnetic environment in the superconductor. ***