* 9321974
* Pulsar Research at the Giant Metre-Wave Radio Telescope,    Pune, India, Indo-U.S. Collaborative Research
* O/D,OISE
* 09/15/1994,08/31/2001
* Joanna Rankin, University of Vermont & State Agricultural College
* Standard Grant
* Marjorie Lueck
* 08/31/2001
* USD 25,677.00

9321974 Rankin Description: This project supports Drs. Joanna Rankin, Department
of Physics, the University of Vermont, Timothy H. Hankins of the New Mexico
Institute of Mining and Technology, and Joel M. Weisberg of Carleton College,
for work at the Giant Metre-Wave Radio Telescope (GMRT) in Pune, India. They
will collaborate with Drs. G. Swarup, director of the GMRT and V. Radhakrishnan,
director of the Raman Research Institute (RRI) in Bangalore, India. The GMRT is
a project under the auspices of the National Centre for Radio Astrophysics
(NCRA) in Pune. The research will deal with pulsars, pulsar emission, beaming
and evolution, pulsar microstructure, and pulsar timing and polarimetry. It will
include broad observational programs using the GMRT, involving large and
currently active teams from the NCRA and the RRI Scope: This project allows the
three U.S. scientists to collaborate with two of India's most distinguished
scientists in research on pulsars, a topic of strong current interest. They will
use unique facilities including the GMRT which, when completed later in 1994,
will be the largest collection area, fully steerable telescope in the world,
placed in a location away from many man-made sources of interference. They will
also use data currently being generated using the Ooty Radio Telescope (ORT) in
India. The project presents a strong case of beneficial Indo-U.S. collaboration
in a scientific area which is strong in both countries. The project meets the
criteria of the Division of International Programs. ***