* 9321504
* RUI: Ice Scour Disturbance and the Structure of Arctic Bottom Communities
* NONE,NONE
* 06/01/1994,11/30/1999
* John Oliver, San Jose State University Foundation
* Continuing grant
* Jane V. Dionne
* 11/30/1999
* USD 484,447.00

9321504 Oliver Ice scouring is the most disruptive and widespread physical
disturbance to marine bottom communities in polar waters. At high latitudes, ice
pressure ridges scour the sea floor to depths of 60m, and larger ice bergs
ground as deep as 400m. This project will explore the ecological implications of
this disturbance to arctic benthic populations and communities. It is a multi-
disciplinary and joint Canadian-U.S. Program involving two major components. The
first is to characterize and model the physical disturbance regime over a three-
year period by repetitive mapping the study areas with high resolution side-scan
sonar, and to quantify the scour recovery process by divers. This approach will
enable us to identify newly formed scours each season, and to generate
quantitative and ecologically relevant data on disturbance coverage, frequency,
intensity, and physical recovery. The second component is to investigate benthic
population and community responses to ice scour, documenting the successional
stages of biotic recovery. They will test whether observed widespread patterns
of zonation and larger spatial and temporal community mosaics are correlated to
this key disturbance. This combined physical and biotic approach will enable
them to develop a conceptual model of scour aging and recovery, and to evaluate
the impact of this disturbance on benthic production and diversity. ***