* 9321014
* R&D, Innovation and the Competitive Performance of Large    U.S. Industrial Firms: Data Base Development and            Demonstration
* ENG,IIP
* 10/01/1994,09/30/1998
* Alden Bean, Lehigh University
* Continuing Grant
* george hazelrigg
* 09/30/1998
* USD 453,369.00

Proposal #9321014 Bean This award is in NSF's program on Management of
Technological Innovation its purpose is to create a data base on industrial R&D
activities that may support research on the management of technological
innovation. The data base would be made available to researchers whose studies
can benefit detailed information about the organizational structures, management
practices, R&D resources allocation decisions and business outcomes of
technology intensive firms operating in business sectors that are of substantial
importance to the U.S. economy. This data base will provide useful contextual
information about R&D investment levels, innovation management practices and
outcome of technological innovation activities in specific sectors of industry.
This contextual information, which can be used to describe innovation management
"norms" for these sectors, is intrinsically valuable, since such data does not
presently exist at the business sectors level. Additionally, the data base will
be helpful in interpreting the results of research on innovation management
practices and business performance in these industrial sectors. This project is
carried out jointly by the Center for Innovation Management Studies (CIMS) at
Lehigh University and the Industrial Research Institute (IRI). The data base
employs information provided to CIMS by large R&D performing firms who are
members of the IRI .