* 9321938
* Mathematical Sciences: Iterative Methods for Equations and  Optimization
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/1994,11/30/1997
* Carl Kelley, North Carolina State University
* Continuing Grant
* Deborah Lockhart
* 11/30/1997
* USD 175,000.00

9321938 Kelley The principal investigator will design and analyze algorithms for
the large systems of linear and nonlinear equations and optimization problems
that arise when infinite dimensional problems are discretized. Objectives
include further development of a new multilevel method for compact fixed point
problems, work on globally convergent methods for nonsmooth compact fixed point
problems, particularly those that arise from parabolic control problems, and
analysis of the sup-norm convergence of certain methods based on inner products,
particularly GMRES, CG, and primal-dual interior point methods. The principal
investigator will also continue work on special purpose methods for optimization
and solution of nonlinear equations. These methods are directed at problems such
as optimization of noisy functions, aomputer aided design of microwave devices,
and optimal control. Large systems of equations arise in scientific computation
in many ways. This project is to design and analyze efficient solution methods
for classes of very large problems that arise in many applications. The
particular objectives of and algorithms studied in this project are driven by
applications and the principal investigator works closely with scientists and
engineers in other disciplines. As an example, in computer aided design and
manufacture of microwave semiconductor devices, such as the amplifiers used in
radar and cellular communication, the principal investigator's work has been
incorporated into software for analysis and optimization of process yield,
design of more efficient devices, and bench testing of chips. In the course of
the development of this software, a new algorithm was discovered for the
optimization of noisy functions, that is, functions whose values are corrupted
by noise or error. Process yield models often have that feature. One goal of the
present project is to continue the work on noisy optimization.