* 9321481
* Dissertation Research: The Spatial Distribution of          Abundance: Analysis of the Geographic Range
* NONE,NONE
* 04/01/1994,09/30/1996
* James Brown, University of New Mexico
* Standard Grant
* Scott L. Collins
* 09/30/1996
* USD 5,000.00

9321481 Brown This dissertation research will use the North American Breeding
Bird Survey (BBS) to quantify the distribution of abundance across the
geographic range of a species. Two models of the distribution of abundance,
differing in the position of low abundance sites, are proposed that can be
tested with this data. Specific patterns either predicted in the literature or
arising as corrollaries of these predictions will be tested: (1) abundance is
highest toward the range center, (2) sites of highest abundance should be close
together in space, (3) sites of low or zero abundance should increase in
frequency near the range edge, and (4) the change in abundance from the center
to edge of range will be steeper near continental than interior edges. Temporal
stability of the distribution of abundance will be evaluated by examining
abundance through time at sites throughout the range. Several models of the
large-scale expansion and contraction of geographic ranges are proposed and
tested with data from species whose distribution and abundance are known to have
changed in the past 30 years. The magnitude of the effect of the environment on
variance in population growth rate will be quantified and related to population
size and position in the range in order to separate out these two simultaneously
acting factors. %%% This research will provide a key linkage between species
distribution-abundance relationships, ecology, and biogeography. The results
will provide vital information regarding the abundance of declining populations
of breeding birds. Such information is essential to developing a conservation
strategy to help mitigate the increasing loss of bird species in North America.
***