* 9321788
* Dissertation Research:  Molecular Phylogenetics and Patternsof Speciation in Gilia Section Saltugilia Sensu Grant       (Polemoniaceae)
* BIO,DEB
* 03/01/1994,08/31/1996
* Douglas Soltis, Washington State University
* Standard Grant
* James E. Rodman
* 08/31/1996
* USD 10,000.00

9321788 Soltis Species diversity in the plant genus Gilia of the phlox family
has provided a rich resource for numerous biosystematic studies of speciation
patterns and processes. The taxa were used as model systems for many of Verne
Grant's ideas about modes and rates of plant evolution in his classic text,
Plant Speciation. However, no explicit phylogenetic analysis of the ca. 70
species of Gilia has been made; consequently, the detailed affinities of
individual species are not well known, and much remains speculative about the
pattern of diversification and species divergence in this group. Under the
direction of faculty adviser Dr. Douglas Soltis, graduate student Leigh Johnson
is conducting field work and laboratory analyses of two major species groups of
Gilia , in order to amass new chloroplast and nuclear DNA evidence on species
relationships. In addition, numerous population samples will be analyzed for
protein variability to assay genetic polymorphisms and variability. A DNA based
phylogeny of Gilia will facilitiate the study of diversification of floral form
and of breeding systems in the genus by clarifying the direction of change and
identifying intermediate steps in evolution.