* 9321759
* Dissertational Improvement: Water and Energy Balance        Constraints on the Nesting Ecology of Tropical Seabirds
* NONE,NONE
* 03/01/1994,08/31/1996
* Robert Ricklefs, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* John A. Phillips
* 08/31/1996
* USD 5,616.00

9321759 Ricklefs Both energy and mass constraints are continually interacting to
influence the ecology of organisms. No where is this more clearly demonstrated
than in nesting tropical seabirds where there is strong selection to store
energy for the incubation shift and also to maintain water balance in this hot,
harsh, environment. In the Northwestern Hawaiian Islands, Wedge-tailed
Shearwaters compete for nesting burrows, and those without burrows (44% of the
population) must nest on the ground surface. If these sites have little
protection from solar radiation, only 5-11% will produce chicks. In contrast to
shearwaters, both Sooty Terns and Brown Noddies regularly nest in the open sun
and 85% of the nests produce chicks. To better understand this disparity in
ability to nest in a hot environment, the PI has constructed a conceptual model
that links energy and material balances so that their interactions can be
clearly understood. Since 1990, the PI has been collecting data to build this
model and hopes to finish it this year by determining the total body water,
water flux, and daily energy expenditure of shearwaters, terns, and noddies at
nest sites varying in amount of shade. These determinations can be made by
laboratory analysis of blood samples collected in 1991 from birds injected with
deuterium or doubly-labeled water. In addition, the PI hopes to analyze the
composition of meals, nasal secretions, urine and feces previously collected
from the above relative importance of various energy and water balance
variables. Some characteristics that may prevent shearwaters from successfully
nesting in hot microclimates are long incubation shifts (9 days), infrequent
drinking of seawater, and the formation of stomach oils that reduce the amount
of gastric space available for water. The model of interacting balances, formed
in this study, should be easily modified to evaluate the effect of other types
of competing balances on the ecology of organisms. ***