* 9321828
* Dissertation Research:  Phylogeny in the Genus Omphalina    (Basidiomycota Agaricales) and the Evolutionary             Consequences of Mutualism
* BIO,DEB
* 02/15/1994,07/31/1996
* Rytas Vilgalys, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* John R. Gold
* 07/31/1996
* USD 10,000.00

9321828 Vilgalys It has been suggested that mutualistic associations between
distantly related organisms can lead to the beginning of new phyla and may have
been instrumental in the colonization of land by plants. The highly speculative
content of the arguments supporting these hypotheses has led to much
controversy. This project will undertake empirical studies of the evolutionary
role of mutualism by studying a group of basidiomycete fungi, species in the
genus Omphalina and its relatives. This group is well suited for evolutionary
studies of mutualistic associations because it includes closely related
saprophytic (i.e. non-mutualistic) and mutualistic species (those associating
with algae to form lichens), suggesting that the transition to a mutualistic
state might be relatively recent (Lutzoni and Vilgalys, 1993). In this study,
both morphological and molecular characters will be utilized to infer the
phylogeny or relationships of species of Omphalina to each other, as well as
investigating the relationships of this genus to other groups. These first
results will be utilized to test hypotheses concerning features involved in
changing to a mutualistic/lichen forming life style. %%% This model system will
address important questions concerning the possible mutualistic association of
different organisms (in this case, fungi with algae to form lichens) leading to
new life forms.