* 9321187
* Dissertation Research:  The Effects of Inbreeding on        Parental Behavior and Reproductive Success in Two           Populations of Peromyscus polionotus
* BIO,IOS
* 04/15/1994,01/31/1996
* Jeanne Altmann, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* None
* 01/31/1996
* USD 9,112.00

9321187 Altmann The detrimental demographic consequences of inbreeding have been
well documented for many kinds of animals, including a number of mammalian
species. Although these deficits have been associated particularly with early
stages of life, such as mortality during the neonatal period and reduced litter
size at birth, proximal mechanisms producing these outcomes remain largely
unexplored. Furthermore, most previous studies have associated the detrimental
effects of inbreeding with some deficit in the offspring, and have not
considered the possibility that inadequate parental care may be the cause. The
doctoral-dissertation research of Ms. Susan W. Margulis will investigate
behavioral aspects of reproductive success, and those factors that may manifest
themselves later in an individual's life, such as behavioral adequacy of
parenting by inbred parents, and will distinguish between parental and offspring
effects. The effects of inbreeding on mating behavior, parental behavior, and
reproductive success will be studied in two captive populations of deermouse,
one derived from an isolated, island population, and one from a widespread,
mainland population. Differential reproductive success and adequacy of parental
behavior will be evaluated in pairs in which both parents are inbred, neither is
inbred, only the mother is inbred, and only the father is inbred. The
information gained from this study may be incorporated into management plans for
captive populations and endangered species.