* 9321614
* RPG:  The Role of Race and Class in Exposure to             Environmental Hazards
* SBE,BCS
* 06/01/1994,06/30/1996
* Laura Pulido, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Daniel B. Hodge
* 06/30/1996
* USD 18,000.00

9321614 PULIDO As geographers and other scientists become more aware of the
spatial distribution of pollution and other environmental problems, the tendency
of minority ethnic and racial groups to have disproportionate exposure to many
risks has become more evident. Unfortunately, much of the research on this topic
has tended to provide only "snapshot" views, examining relationships for a
limited time period. As a result, knowledge about the processes through which
minority groups are adversely impacted is limited. This Research Planning Grant
will enable a productive young investigator to explore new approaches to this
important problem. Both micro- and macro-level analyses will be examined through
a pilot study of the impacts of abandoned toxic-waste sites on African Americans
and Latinos in Los Angeles. The distribution of toxic-waste sites through the
city will be examined using historical records. In areas where abandoned sites
are located, the evolution of land-use, industrial, residential, and workplace
patterns will be studied. This information will be combined with information
about the changing demographic and social patterns of minority groups in order
to better assess the nature of minority exposure to toxic wastes. After research
methods have been refined through this pilot study, the investigator plans to
conduct parallel analyses of the exposure of these minority populations to other
environmental problems, including commercial hazardous-waste facilities and
toxic air pollution. Through the conduct of this project, new insights will be
gained regarding the factors that have resulted in many minority groups being
exposed to more severe environmental problems than other groups. Refinement of
methods that incorporate a historical dimension to empirical analyses will
significantly enhance theoretical discussions of "environmental racism." This
research planning grant also will provide valuable assistance to a promising
young Latino woman at a critical early stage in her independent research career.
***