* 9321503
* Settlement Archaeology at Xunantunich, Belize, Central      America
* SBE,BCS
* 01/15/1994,12/31/1997
* Wendy Ashmore, University of Pennsylvania
* Continuing Grant
* John Yellen
* 12/31/1997
* USD 199,124.00

9321503 Ashmore With National Science Foundation support Dr. Wendy Ashmore and
her colleagues will conduct two field seasons of archaeological research in the
Belize river valley, Belize Central America. Work will center in the vicinity of
Xunantunich, a Mayan civic center which was occupied from approximately 650 to
1000 AD. Two field seasons have been completed at the center itself and Dr.
Ashmore will now conduct archaeological and geomorphological investigation
beyond the area of monumental architecture to document the distribution of local
population in time and space. Archaeological survey and test excavation will be
conducted to document the nature and variability of local economic production,
consumption and general standard of living at the homestead scale. Extensive
excavation at one elite residential cluster will provide insight into
organization at this social level. Geomorphological research will document
changes in the local landscape itself, especially the evolving human use of
alluvial soils and how changing hydrological regimes affected preservation and
detection of archaeological remains. Archaeologists wish to understand how Mayan
peoples achieved a high level of social complexity which allowed for the
production of monumental architecture and the support of large populations in a
difficult and harsh tropical lowland environment. Recent data indicate that
Mayan prehistory was turbulent and characterized by abrupt changes in political
order and settlement organization. Because the site of Xunantunich spans much of
this period and underwent several such shifts, it provides an excellent context
to examine this question. Dr. Ashmore postulates that a great deal of
independence and continuity existed at the household level, that these units
provided the basic building blocks of Mayan society and that they remained
relatively unchanged during major political upheavals. Data produced by this
research will allow her to examine this issue. This research is important for
several reasons. It will provide data of interest to many archaeologists. It
will provide new insight into the development of complex society and shed light
on methods of organization adapted to tropical lowland environments. ***