* 9321298
* EVS Dissertation Research: Agenda Setting in Scientific     Research on Global Warning
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/1994,06/30/1995
* Shirley Gorenstein, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Rachelle D. Hollander
* 06/30/1995
* USD 3,265.00

9321298 Cozzens This dissertation research explores the roles of interest groups
in agenda setting for federally supported research. The focus is the case of
environmental research on global warming. Unlike the active involvement of
voluntary organizations in policy making for biomedical research, voluntary
organizations in the environmental arena have concentrated on regulatory rather
than research policy. The goal of the dissertation is to help to answer the
questions of whether and to what extent, and why this is so. Currently, elite
and technical groups dominate in many science policy arenas. Voluntary
organizations that specialize in particular substantive areas can play an
important role in these arenas, by organizing expertise and performing a
boundary-spanning, translator role between the broader public concerns and the
concerns of the scientific and technical communities. While the role of
voluntary organizations in regulatory policy has been studied, their role in
longer-term goal-setting has not. This study can therefore extend our
understanding of the role of voluntary organizations and provide a step towards
increasing democratic participation in setting science agendas. After he
completes a review of archival and other documents, the award allows the student
to conduct approximately 100 interviews with representatives from government
agencies, environmental organizations, and other groups that have been involved
in setting environmental research agendas. The final product of this research is
a doctoral dissertation, associated articles and presentations, and an executive
summary for interviewees and others from nonprofit voluntary organizations who
request it. ***