* 9321957
* Misfit Accommodation, Ordering, and Stability in            Semiconductor Thin Films
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/1994,06/30/1998
* Lourdes Salamanca-Riba, University of Maryland, College Park
* Continuing Grant
* LaVerne D. Hess
* 06/30/1998
* USD 360,003.00

9321957 Salamanca-Riba The proposed research addresses fundamental materials
science issues surrounding the mechanism of lattice mismatch accommodation in
semiconductor films, and the effect of lattice mismatch on the formation of
ordered phases and the stability of semiconductor heterostructures. Transmission
electron microscopy will be used to investigate the mechanism for misfit
accommodation, structural ordering, and stability of semiconductor alloys of
different systems and compositions grown on different substrates (buffer layers)
to study the effect of lattice mismatch on the structure of semiconductor films.
The misfit accommodation mechanism will be studied in systems with large and
small lattice mismatches. Materials will be grown using either molecular beam
epitaxy or metal organic chemical vapor deposition. The effects of growth
parameters and growth methods on the structure and quality of the films will be
investigated to obtain films with low defect density and single phase; special
emphasis will be placed on understanding the critical initial stages of growth.
%%% Most advanced electronic and photonic devices consist of compound
semiconductor heterostructures whose structural integrity and quality are of
critical importance, and very often determine the performance and applicability
of a device technology. In this context, the accommodation of lattice mismatches
between the different layers in a heterostructure and between the film and the
substrate, is of fundamental significance. The proposed research will
significantly benefit our basic understanding, control, and general ability to
achieve improved materials for devices and circuits needed in the general areas
of telecommunications, information processing; and high speed computing. ***