* 9321549
* Dissertation Research: Influences of Inorganic Sediment on  Productivity in Lotic Ecosystems
* BIO,DEB
* 03/01/1994,02/28/1997
* John Gulliver, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* None
* 02/28/1997
* USD 16,046.00

9321549 Gulliver Lotic ecosystems are composed of an array of biological
communities known o be heavily impacted by sediment loads originating from
mining, forestry, and agriculture. To date, few controlled experiments have been
conducted in which whole ecosystems are manipulated for the purpose of examining
variable sediment load effects on ecosystem functioning. %%% Using eight
constructed channels, a collaborative investigation will study different
sediment load impacts on fish populations, primary producers,, benthic
invertebrates, and microorganisms. This part of the project will evaluate models
of sediment effects on light regimes, free stream turbulence and nutrient
fluxes, as well as models of primary producer response to these factors. A
primary objective is to improve the accuracy of productivity measurements by
using modified enclosures that simulate channel hydrodynamic characteristics. In
addition, photosynthesis, stream productivity and benthic respiration will be
measured in each channel using the following techniques, respectively: oxygen
and 14C measurements; light/dark bottles and diel surveys; benthic respirometer
and microelectrodes. %%% Evaluation of sediment impacts on the above
environmental factors and more accurate measurements of productivity should
elucidate the lotic criteria which can protect stream communities from
deleterious land management practices.