* 9321126
* Collaborative Research in Decision, Risk, and Management    Science:  Understanding Gender Inequality:  The Relative    Influence of Institutional Power and Gender Consciousness
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/1994,02/28/1997
* Roberta Herzberg, Utah State University
* Standard Grant
* Jonathan Leland
* 02/28/1997
* USD 39,600.00

Game theorists and some feminist scholars would predict that individuals with
asymmetric access to institutional power (such as an exit opportunity) should
claim more resources than those without such access--regardless of the sex of
the individual. Other feminist scholars, in contrast, emphasize the ways in
which socialization and other mechanisms can produce gender-role internalization
such that men and women of equal power behave differently. Based on this latter
research, we would predict interactions between sex and institutional power. To
sort out these different arguments, this research pilot tests an experimental
study of two-person prisoners' dilemma (PD) games in which an asymmetric exit
opportunity is crossed with sex-of-subject. In some conditions, only men will
have the exit opportunity while in others only women will have the exit
opportunity. (Same-sex conditions are also explored.) The sex of an individual's
body, however, does not necessarily match the "sex" of his or her psyche. Thus,
in order to understand individual differences among women (and among men) the
research explores correlation between behavior and measures of gender-role
internalization (i.e., the "sex" of one's psyche) and "gender" consciousness,"
(i.e., beliefs about proper gender roles). The results of the longer term
research program may have important implications for the broader policy question
of how to lessen gender inequality. Can gender inequality be corrected by
changing the balance of institutional power (in this case access to an exit
option)? Or, are changes in the socialization process also necessary before
equal outcomes can be expected?