* 9321383
* Systems of Nonlinear Partial Differential Equations in      Transport Theory
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/1994,06/30/1999
* Robert Glassey, Indiana University
* Continuing Grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 06/30/1999
* USD 120,800.00

9321383 Glassey This award supports research on systems of nonlinear partial
differential equations and applications to plasma theory. The work involves both
analytical and numerical points of view. The emphasis is on collisional effects
in problems arising in plasma physics. This involves the modification of the
Vlasov- Maxwell systems through the addition of collision operators of
Boltzmann- and Landau-type. The major thrust of this effort is dedicated to the
study of Landau damping, in which the long time behavior the initial value
problem for the linearized Vlasov equation is prescribed. Work has already been
done on finding optimal decay rates in the relativistic case, in which the range
of validity is restricted by the fact that collisional effects are neglected.
Emphasis will now be placed on understanding decay in the nonrelativistic
setting. Studies will also be made on the Vlasov-Einstein system to include a
fully relativistic model for stellar dynamic problems. The work is important
because of its relation to cosmic censorship. Partial differential equations
form a basis for mathematical modeling of the physical world. The role of
mathematical analysis is not so much to create the equations as it is to provide
qualitative and quantitative information about the solutions. This may include
answers to questions about uniqueness, smoothness and growth. In addition,
analysis often develops methods for approximation of solutions and estimates on
the accuracy of these approximations. ***