* 9321665
* Combined Particle and Fluid Simulations of the Magnetosphere, Its Boundary Layers and Current Systems
* GEO,AGS
* 06/01/1994,11/30/1997
* Richard Steinolfson, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* kile baker
* 11/30/1997
* USD 204,518.00

9321665 Winglee MHD is one of the main tools used to model the dynamics of the
magnetosphere. We show both analytically and numerically that the resistive
Ohm's law on which MHD is based is not appropriate for the magnetosphere because
much of the plasma and energy transport occurs across thin boundary layers and
as a result gives an incomplete description of the magnetospheric current
system. We are able to identify for the first time the intrinsic particle
effects that control (i) the structure of magnetospheric boundary layers, (ii)
the dissipation in current sheets needed for reconnection and (iii) the currents
that map into and out of the dayside and nightside auroral regions. These
effects are determined from particle/two fluid simulations that provide an
advancement over single fluid MHD by removing ambiguities arising from the
imposition of anomalous resistivity and by resolving the mapping of the region 1
nd 2 auroral currents. The proposed work seeks development of (i) regional
particle simulations in both 2-D and 3-D to identify the structure, current
system, and properties of the particle distributions within the magnetopause,
LLBL and magnetotail, (ii) modified two-fluid simulations in 3-D to provide full
global mapping of the currents emanating from these regions into the auroral
region and their effect on the global dynamics through the dissipation they
produce on the magnetopause and magnetotail current sheets, and (iii) cross-
calibration between the particle and fluid simulations with the Tsyganenko model
to test the accuracy of the modeling and, more importantly, to aid in the
construction of a model that predicts the average response of the magnetosphere
and the auroral currents. The 3-D global simulations are to be based on a
modified set of two-fluid equations that have been test calibrated against
particle simulations. It uses a modified version of the generalized Ohm's law
and incorporates an additional equation describing the electron motion
responsible for the dayside and nightside auroral currents. The particle
simulations will incorporate a new finite-difference algorithm for the field
solutions that can enable variable grid spacing and thereby enable large scale
regional modelling of kinetic processes. The proposed work will have important
applications to magnetospheric physics by providing global mapping of both
magnetic field lines and currents into and out of the magnetosphere, and by
identifying the structure and particle distributions associated with critical
boundary layers. It has the potential of providing a direct link between ground-
based observations of magnetic field perturbations and the motion of the auroral
oval with in-situ spacecraft observations of magnetic field perturbations and
the motion of the auroral oval with in-situ spacecraft observations of energetic
particles. In addition, through the comparison with the Tsyganenko model we will
be able to construct an average magnetospheric model that can be used to predict
the magnetospheric activity as determined by Kp for prevailing solar wind
conditions. All these applications meet important objectives of NSF's
Magnetospheric Program. ***