* 9321354
* Predictability and Variability of the Present Climate
* GEO,AGS
* 04/15/1994,09/30/2000
* Jagadish Shukla, Institute of Global Environment and Society
* Continuing grant
* Jay S. Fein
* 09/30/2000
* USD 4,579,220.00

Abstract ATM-9321354 Shukla, Jagadish Schneider, Edwin K. Kinter, James L.
Straus, David M. Institute of Global Environment and Society, Inc. Title:
Predictability and Variability of the Present Climate This research encompasses
a number of closely related projects which are aimed at understanding the low
frequency (monthly to decadal) variations of the coupled climate system
consisting of the atmosphere, hydrosphere, land biosystems, oceans and ice,
primarily in the present climatic regime. Goals include both the ability to
simulate these low frequency variations with complex numerical models of the
individual and coupled systems, and to estimate the degree to which these
variations are predictable. The methods to be used will involve extensive
experimentation with existing numerical models and schemes to couple them, and
extensive diagnosis and analysis of observational data from both existing
records and from the retrospective assimilation of atmospheric data planned by
the major operational centers of the world for the near future. In addition to
the intrinsic importance of understanding and predicting the low frequency
variability of the climate system, this work will help to define the accuracy
and coverage requirements for current and future climate observing systems in
order to adequately monitor the current behavior of the climate system. 1.
Predictability of the coupled ocean-land-atmosphere system. The predictability
of this system on both the seasonal and interannual time scales will be
systematically explored, the former by a large number of seasonal atmospheric
simulations, and the latter from integrations of the fully coupled system. 2.
Land-surface-climate interactions. The importance of vegetation change, albedo
feedback and the global boundary conditions in the Sahel drought will be
explored. The potential impacts of man's activity on climate through the
(hypothetical) doubling of the world's deserts, global deforestati on and the
desiccation of the Aral Sea region will be addressed. 3. Climate diagnostics.
Diagnostics of the planned reassimilation of atmospheric data includes a
detailed examination of the hydrological cycle, and global energy cycle and the
critical tropical-extratropical interactions. These efforts will be aided by the
availability of consistent estimates of the subtle quantities of divergence,
specific humidity and diabetic heating. 4. Simulation of the present climate. To
test the ability of numerical models to simulate the observed low frequency
anomalies, the PIs plan an integration of the atmospheric model for about 100
years using observed boundary conditions. Similarly, they will integrate the
coupled climate system model for several hundred years in order to test the
realism of its overall statistical behavior. 5. Climate observing system
simulation. The PIs will estimate the sensitivity of the atmospheric circulation
to many types of changes in the boundary conditions. They will "observe"
numerically modelled climate system using methods similar to the current (and
future) observing systems for the real climate to explore their sampling and
accuracy characteristics systematically. This research is important because it
seeks to enhance knowledge about climate processes and improvements in
predicting climate variation and change. Part of this research is funded under
the USGCRP CMAP project.