* 9321856
* Arrays for High Resolution Imaging and Efficient Digital    Filtering
* NONE,NONE
* 09/15/1994,08/31/1998
* Saleem Kassam, University of Pennsylvania
* Continuing grant
* John Cozzens
* 08/31/1998
* USD 220,071.00

Many imaging systems use arrays of individual elements to sense the propagating
field produced by an object. Through signal processing techniques such as
beamforming, an image of the object may then be formed. In addition to such
passive arrays, imaging systems may use active arrays to both illuminate an
object with a radiated field and to record the reflected field. Examples of
imaging array systems occur in radio astronomy, sonar, microwave imaging and
ultrasound imaging. This research is aimed at developing fundamental new results
for array design and associated signal processing, based on recent developments
on the characterization of array performance in linear imaging. Active imaging
systems (e.g. ultrasound imaging arrays) are a particular focus of this
investigation, although some of the proposed work also addresses passive arrays.
Using the idea of the "coarray", this work will consider how to deploy array
elements (and associated hardware) in the most efficient way to obtain large
array apertures and high resolutions. The results will allow minimum redundancy
active arrays and minimum complexity active arrays to be specified. This
research on arrays includes a study of their characteristics under real
operating conditions, under real operating conditions, and will extend to some
experimental work with an acoustic array system.