* 9321533
* Marine Biotech Fellowship: Natural Products from Common Shallow-water Soft Corals of Guam: Reproductive Considerations
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/1994,08/31/1995
* Marc Slattery, University of Guam
* Fellowship
* Phillip R. Taylor
* 08/31/1995
* USD 43,120.00

9321533 Slattery The proposed research program will utilize analytical chemistry
techniques to evaluate the importance of secondary metabolites and steroids in
reproduction of the soft corals Lobophytum spp., Sarcophyton spp., Sinularia
spp., and Stereonephthya spp. from Guam. It is a continuation of an ongoing
project which has identified and examined the importance of secondary
metabolites, organic extracts, and morphological defenses in soft coral predator
deterrence. This research will expand upon the aforementioned program to
extract, isolate, and determine the structures of new secondary metabolites in
adult colonies and their eggs. Temporal changes in concentrations of these
compounds will be correlated with reproductive indices to assess the role of the
compounds in maturation and spawning. Standard bioassays will be conducted to
guide isolation natural products in egg release, sperm chemotaxis, and feeding
deterrence. Novel compounds identified in this project will expand upon a
growing database of metabolites that can be used as chemotaxonomic markers and
will be incorporated into existing pharmacological programs. Furthermore, this
project will contribute significant insights into the reproductive biology and
chemical ecology of the common soft corals on the shallow reefs surrounding
Guam. ***