* 9321371
* Coenzyme A Analogs as Probes of Enzymatic Reactions
* BIO,MCB
* 08/15/1994,07/31/1997
* Dale Drueckhammer, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* Marcia Steinberg
* 07/31/1997
* USD 300,000.00

9321371 Drueckhammer This project will use synthetic Coenzyme A (CoA) analogs to
study fundamental mechanistic questions in enzyme catalyzed reactions of CoA
esters. This work is based on methodology developed in the P.I.'s lab for the
convenient synthesis of CoA/CoA ester analogs. The largest effort will be
directed at probing the involvement of enolate and/or enol intermediates in
enzyme catalyzed reactions of acetyl-CoA and other CoA esters. Stable analogs of
the enolate and enol forms of acetyl-CoA will be prepared, and studied as
inhibitors of citrate synthase. The protonation state of these analogs in
isotopically enriched form bound to the enzyme will be studied by NMR and in
some cases FTIR. Similar studies will be conducted with related enzymes,
including malate synthase, crotonase, and acetyl-CoA dependent
acetyltransferases. This project is expected to provide new insights into the
enzyme catalyzed reactions of CoA esters and general principles of enzyme
reaction mechanisms. %%% Dr. Drueckhammer will study the reactions of enzymes
which require Coenzyme A for their function. Enzymes are catalysts which carry
out chemical reactions in biological systems. Understanding how these enzymes
function is at the heart of understanding biological processes at a fundamental
chemical level. About 4% of all enzymes require coenzyme A (CoA) for their
catalytic activity. CoA serves as a reactant or a reactant carrier in these
enzymatic reactions. CoA is also synthesized in biological systems by a series
of enzyme catalyzed reactions. In previous work in this lab, a method was
developed for using the enzymes which make CoA to make altered forms (analogs)
of natural CoA. This research will use this method to make a series of CoA
analogs designed to serve as probes for studying the reactions of CoA utilizing
enzymes. This will help reveal how enzymes form chemical bonds to make complex
biological molecules from simple building blocks, and how enzymes break down com
plex compounds in food to produce biological energy. ***