* 9321410
* International Postdoctoral Fellows:  Time-scales and        Analytical Units:  Identifying Patterns of Variability      and Change in the Late Pleistocene Archaeological Record
* O/D,OISE
* 07/01/1994,12/31/1995
* Leslie Hartzell, Individual Award
* Fixed Amount Award
* Susan Parris
* 12/31/1995
* USD 40,600.00

9321410 Hartzell This award is under the International Junior Investigator and
Postdoctoral Fellows Program, which enables U.S. scientists and engineers to
conduct three to twelve months of research abroad at research centers of proven
excellence. The program's awards provide opportunities for joint research, and
the use of unique or complementary facilities, expertise and experimental
conditions abroad. This award will support a twelve-month postdoctoral research
visit by Dr. Leslie L. Hartzell to work with Prof. Jim Allen, Drs. Richard
Cosgrove and Nicola Stern at La Trobe University in Bundoora, Australia. This
research will examine the long-term record of Pleistocene Human foraging
patterns through the chronostratigraphic analyses of archaeofaunal remains
excavated from three Pleistocene cave sites in southwest Tasmania, occupied ca.
30,000-14,000 years ago. Data on non cultural and cultural site formation
processes affecting each cave, its geochronologies and patterns of association
between the faunal remains and other categories of archaeological data will be
used to investigate the structure and time resolution of these assemblages.
Sites will be compared at similar temporal scales on the basis of the analyses
of their site formation processes, radiocarbon chronologies and faunal
assemblages. This research has particular consequences for discussions of
Australian archaeology where the rapidly expanding Pleistocene record across the
continent is forcing researchers to rethink views of the past as representing a
continuity with the ethnographic present and to direct attention to the more
difficult task of exploring spatio-temporal cultural variability within long-
term archaeological records. Collaboration with preeminent Australian
archaeologists exploring questions related to the construction of time scales
and explanations of change in the Pleistocene/Holocene archaeological record
will enhance the interpretive strategies presently being b rought to bear on the
North American record. ***