* 9321061
* Science and Popular Culture
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/1994,09/30/1998
* William Eamon, New Mexico State University
* Fixed Amount Award
* Michael M. Sokal
* 09/30/1998
* USD 80,000.00

9321061 Eamon The history of science is largely the history of "great men" who
develop the "great theories" or make the most exciting discoveries. Numerous
biographies have been written about Isaac Newton, Charles Darwin and Albert
Einstein. Their papers are published; theories-- indeed, even scientific
revolutions--are named after them. While the general public certainly knows of
these great men, they hardly ever understand the theories which they presented.
Instead, they embrace such popular theories as astrology, creationism, and the
occult. Legislatures in the United States pass laws to support the presentation
of creationism in the schools while whole cultures consult astrologers about
appropriate times for important events. Even the first lady of the United States
consulted one in order to determine when her husband should hold summit
conferences. What is the relationship of science and this popular culture? If we
are to understand the role of science and technology in our society, we must
examine how scientific theories that we in the scientific community accept as
correct relate to theories that capture the attention of popular culture. It is
this relationship that Professor Eamon is examining. Specifically, Professor
Eamon is examining the relationship between scientific and popular cultures in
Italy, focusing on the life, career, and intellectual milieu of the Italian
surgeon and natural philosopher Leonardo Fioravanti. Fioravanti appropriated
ideas and practices from both scientific and popular cultures, and developed an
empiricist natural philosophy that reflected both. He popularized his "science
of experience in a series of eight widely read books on medicine, natural
philosophy, and social criticism. By showing how Fioravanti understood (and
sometimes misunderstood) academic science and medicine, and how he integrated it
with his experiences, Professor Eamon hopes to explore the dynamics of cultural
appropriation of science and the crea tion of "popular science" that mirrors in
a very distorted sense the theories of the leading scientists of his day. ***