* 9321089
* Restrictive Legislative Procedures, Party Bargaining and    Political Performance in Advanced Industrial Democracies
* SBE,SES
* 03/01/1994,12/31/1997
* John Huber, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* JEANETTE CAMPBELL
* 12/31/1997
* USD 145,721.00

9321089 Huber This investigation examines the impact of parliamentary procedures
on policy-making processes in advanced industrial democracies. The project
focuses in particular on procedures that restrict the opportunities for elected
representatives to shape final policy outcomes through the amendment process.
Such procedures include confidence votes, delegated legislation, package votes,
and guillotines (or timetable procedures). One significant feature of the study
is that it is genuinely comparative. This is important because although existing
theories of parliamentary procedures yield predictions that should be
empirically testable across countries, previous empirical research focuses
almost exclusively on the U.S. Congress. Consequently, it is difficult for
scholars to defend claims about the comparative properties of legislative rules
and procedures, or to point to general theories that can guide the choice of
particular institutional arrangements. A second significant feature is that the
study explores linkages between parliamentary procedures and two important
aspects of political performance: the nature of policy outcomes and levels of
cabinet stability. With respect to policy outcomes, the research will focus in
particular on explaining how various institutional structures influence the
ability of politicians to adopt new policies (i.e., move away from the status
quo), and on explaining whether particular institutional structures encourage
policy outcomes that are systematically moderate or systematically extreme
relative to the preferences of the median member of the legislature. By focusing
on legislative rules and political performance in a genuinely comparative
context, the study will clarify choices that politicians make in designing their
rules of parliamentary procedure. This final point is especially relevant for
individuals in nascent democracies ho for the first time must design procedures
that will enable legislatures to pla y more than a symbolic role in the policy-
making process. ***