* 9321090
* Primate Numerical Competence
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/1994,08/31/1996
* Sarah Boysen, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Standard Grant
* George W. Uetz
* 08/31/1996
* USD 28,312.00

IBN 9321090 Boysen Linguistic, numerical, and some other cognitive capacities
have long been believed to be uniquely human, but recent studies of animal
behavior have revealed some surprising parallels. In order to understand how and
why our ancestors developed these capacities, it is important to find out how
widespread such abilities are in the animal kingdom and to learn what roles
these abilities play in the natural lives of the animals that have them.
Procedures developed for studying these abilities in animals have been put to
use in the training of people with brain injuries and developmental
disabilities. Dr. Boysen has been successfully studying numerical capacities of
chimpanzees. Now she will explore number-related skills of capuchin monkeys with
procedures that parallel her previous work on counting by chimpanzees. Capuchins
are known to use tools in their natural habitat, such as rocks to pound nuts
until they open and sticks to extract sap and insects. Because of this
demonstrated expertise, capuchins are excellent candidates for exploring complex
conceptual abilities such as counting and other number-related skills. The
monkeys' training and testing will be completed using a computer touch-frame
system that will permit them to make responses directly to a computer screen,
automatically recording all data. Each monkey will first be trained on matching
one, two, or three marks to an array of the same number of candies. Once the
monkey can do that, the marks will be replaced with Arabic numerals, and the
monkey must select the numeral that corresponds to the number of candies
presented. Number comprehension will also be tested by showing the monkey a
numeral on the computer monitor and having it choose an array composed of the
same number of items. These phases of training directly parallel Dr. Boysen's
earlier studies with chimpanzees, and thus will permit a direct comparison of
the abilities of monkeys and apes with the emergence of numerical competence and
cou nting in young children.