* 9321791
* 3He-Superfluid-4He Mixtures:  Convection, Anomalous Thermal Conductivity, and Boundary Resistance
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/1994,05/31/1997
* Robert Behringer, Duke University
* Continuing Grant
* Jean Toulouse
* 05/31/1997
* USD 210,000.00

Abstract Technical abstract: This project will address two scientific issues:
anomalous heat flow in very dilute superfluid helium mixtures, and convection in
superfluid helium mixtures. The objective of the anomalous heat flow study is to
understand experimental observations of a finite thermal conductivity of
superfluid mixtures as the helium 3 concentration goes to zero. These
observations conflict with theory that predicts that the thermal conductivity
approaches infinity as the helium three concentration goes to zero. The work
will use alternating current techniques in order to separate fluid and other
heat flow paths, providing information on the boundary resistance. The objective
of the convection study is to characterize convective flows in superfluid
mixtures. The experimental techniques will yield pattern and heat flow data
which pertain to a broad range of Prandtl numbers. The issues to be investigated
concern Rayleigh-Benard convection patterns and spatio-temporal chaos,
instabilities of pattern forming systems, and chaotic states. Non-technical
abstract: Convection and heat flow will be investigated in mixtures of helium 3
in superfluid helium 4. Superfluid helium 4 is interesting from a technical
viewpoint, because its effectively infinite heat conductivity makes it an
outstanding fluid for extracting heat from cooled electronic devices. It is
aimed to potentially reduce limits to heat flow in this system caused by the
naturally present helium 3. It is also planned to characterize nonlinear
dynamics and chaos in convecting helium. Convection occurs in the environment
(atmosphere, ocean, technical processes), and it is an outstanding system for
studying the broader topic on nonlinear dynamics and pattern formation.
Superfluid mixtures have similar properties to liquid metals and semiconductors,
and a better understanding of the convection in helium is potentially relevant
to purifying these materials.