* 9321603
* RUI:  Proyecto EK Balam Archaeological Research Project
* SBE,BCS
* 02/01/1994,10/31/1997
* George Bey, Davidson College
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 10/31/1997
* USD 248,900.00

9321603 Ringle With National Science Foundation support, Drs. Ringle, Bey and
colleagues will conduct two seasons of archaeological research at Ek Balam, a
Mayan site located in the Yucatan peninsula of Mexico. Ek Balam was occupied
during the height of prehistoric Mayan development and is one of the half-dozen
largest sites in this region. Settlement size is paralleled by architectural
investment and the largest mount measures 165 by 65 meters at the base and rises
31 m in height. Drs. Ringle and Bey wish to understand the internal organization
of the city, how the core area of monumental architecture relates to more
outlying regions and how Ek Balam itself interacted with other such entities. To
accomplish these goals they will carry out four related activities. They will
continue past mapping work at the site center and survey and record
architecture. Surface materials such as ceramics will also be collected.
Secondly, excavation at the site center will be begun. Stratigraphic excavations
will provide information on ceramic chronology, architectural style and the
sequence of building construction. Third, a survey will be conducted of Ek
Balam's hinterland - the region within 10-12 km. of the site - and both
architectural constructions and associated agricultural fields will be noted.
Finally a preliminary reconnaissance will be made within a 20 km wide corridor
between Ek Balam and the large site of Chichen Itza. The results, hopefully,
will shed light on the relations between these two large Mayan cities. In the
Yucatan peninsula and adjacent regions of Central America Mayan peoples were
organized into units which approached state level in size and thousands of
people subsisted in areas which are only sparsely inhabited today. Large sites
such as Ek Balam served as centers and populations arrayed themselves around
such places. Over the last several decades archaeologists have gained much
understanding of how these "centers" and associated hinterlands fun ctioned.
However how such units were organized - or not organized - on a larger scale has
been little investigated and is little understood. Drs. Ringle and Bey wish to
examine this issue. Because Ek Balam is located in the region of Chichen Itza,
another large center it will be possible to study the interaction between the
two. This research is important for several reasons. It will provide data of
interest to many archaeologists. It will increase our understanding of how, at a
regional level large scale societies emerge and interact. The project will also
help to foster research at an undergraduate institution and actively involve
undergraduates in the work. ***