* 9322544
* CRB:  Mating System and Effective Population Size:  An      Analysis of Philopatry and Multiple Paternity in Green Sea  Turtles
* BIO,DEB
* 06/15/1994,05/31/1997
* Patricia Parker, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Standard Grant
* Scott L. Collins
* 05/31/1997
* USD 96,027.00

9322544 Parker The behavior of animals determines the movement of alleles within
and among populations and thus defines basic characteristics of population
genetic parameters. In addition, gene flow is regulated by dispersal events from
natal to breeding sites, and by subsequent dispersal during the lifetime of the
individual. Finally, site tenacity (philopatry) may reduce genetic diversity in
a population because individuals return to the same breeding sites each year.
The purpose of this conservation and restoration biology research is to
determine the mating systems in two populations of the endangered green sea
turtle. Specifically, the PI will use molecular approaches to accurately
reconstruct parental genotypes in this species, and use these data to extend
existing models of the interaction between mating systems and effective
population size for different populations and rates of reproductive failure in
the green sea turtle. %%% To effectively understand the role of breeding systems
in the maintenance of genetic diversity in wild populations of endangered
species, it is necessary to measure patterns of within- versus between-
population paternity. Essentially, genetic diversity will be maintained under a
certain frequency of paternity from members of disparate populations. This
research is important because it will use molecular markers in a non-destructive
fashion to monitor the potential for enhancing genetic diversity in a species
whose behavior is difficult to observe in nature. ***