* 9322749
* Pseudo-Random Modulated Diode Laser for the Time Resolved   Fluorescence Spectroscopy
* TIP,TI
* 02/01/1995,01/31/1997
* Hyo Sang Lee, Science & Engineering Services Inc
* Standard Grant
* Sara B. Nerlove
* 01/31/1997
* USD 299,760.00

This proposal pertains to the development of a prototype sub-nanosecond
resolution optical sensor utilizing Pseudo-Random Modulation (PRM) Correlation
technique for time resolved fluorescence or photon migration measurements. The
results of the Phase I proof-of-concept experiment and accompanying simulation
studies clearly demonstrated the powerful capabilities of the technique for time
resolved measurements. The validity of the Time Resolution Enhancement Technique
was verified in both fluorescence and photon migration experiments. In addition,
a new method for correcting waveform deformation due to the signal droop, is
developed by using an ad-hoc reference code which is simply the measured pump
source waveform. Combining the powerful PRM-Correlation method with the ad-hoc
reference code and the Resolution Enhancement Technique, a simple, cost
effective fluorosensor with sub-nanosecond time resolution is now
conceptualized. In Phase II, a prototype sensor for photon migration measurement
with 50 psec resolution will be developed, and the system will be tested for the
measurement of time resolved reflectance from a simulated tissue sample to
retrieve the relevant parameters of the sample. In addition, research for
development of viable blue laser sources for PRM-Correlation fluorosensor will
also be performed.