* 9322817
* Mathematical Sciences:  "Markov Dependence in Statistics andInformation Theory and Statistical Problems in Physical     Mapping"
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/1994,07/31/1998
* Bin Yu, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* James E. Gentle
* 07/31/1998
* USD 33,000.00

One of the main goals of the Human Genome Project is to produce physical maps of
the human chromosomes. Such maps are important steps on the path to the complete
sequencing of chromosomes, and have other important applications, such as
assisting in the localizing of disease genes. A common method for constructing
physical maps is based on fingerprinting random clones. The proposed research
uses information theory notions to quantify information needed for the
completion of a physical map, and information obtained from random clone data.
Maximizing the mutual information between a configuration variable and data is
also proposed as a design criterion to select the hybridization probability
parameter. Numerical and analytic approximations to the criterion will be
considered in the simple pairwise comparison case, on which most current
physical mapping strategies are based. Optimal values of the parameter can then
be obtained using these approximations. Finally, it will be addressed how to
utilize mapping information to localize positions of genes of interest on the
chromosomes. The proposed research is on applying information theory to physical
mapping problems arising from the Human Genome Project. An information-theoretic
approach is proposed to address certain problems arising from physical mapping
in the Human Genome Project. The goals of a physical map will be clarified and
we will answer questions regarding the amount of information we need for and the
amount we learn about the map. A 3-clone approach is expected to extract more
information out of mapping data than from 2-clone data, and the possibility of
using mapping data to locate genes of biological interest will be better
understood.