* 9322499
* U.S.-Canada:  A Study of the Abitibi-Grenville Lithosphere  by Teleseismic Analyses:  Upper Mantle Anisotropy and       Heterogeneity
* O/D,OISE
* 05/01/1994,04/30/1998
* Thomas Hearn, New Mexico State University
* Standard Grant
* Harold Stolberg
* 04/30/1998
* USD 15,600.00

29322499 Hearn This Americas Program award will support a research collaboration
between Dr. Thomas Hearn of New Mexico State University, Las Cruces and Dr.
Marianne Mareschal, Ecole Polytechnique, Montreal, Quebec, Canada. They propose
to deploy a passive-source seismic array along the Lithoprobe Abitibi-Grenville
Geologic Transect to complement seismic reflection profiles and magnetotelluric
data. A primary goal of this study is to test the hypothesis that both mantle
seismic anisotropy and mantle structure in the region are related to Proterozoic
and Archean orogenic episodes. The site is a logical place to test such
hypothesis, both because the available Lithoprobe data and because the transect
lies over a portion of the Canadian shield that experienced major Proterozoic
and Archean deformation. This project combines the expertise of Lithoprobe,
Canada's national, earth science research project, with the unique capabilities
provided by the U.S. Incorporated Research Institutions for Seismology (IRIS).
While the Lithoprobe project has focused on investigating the crust using
exploration techniques, IRIS will provide its PASCAL portable seismic array,
which is more suited for investigating upper mantle structure. The Canadian
group will focus on the analysis of travel time data, while the U.S. group will
work primarily with the analysis of shear-wave data. ***