* 9322202
* REU: Honey Bee Neurobiology and Behavior Program
* BIO,DBI
* 05/01/1994,10/31/1996
* Gene Robinson, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Fred Stollnitz
* 10/31/1996
* USD 58,300.00

9322202 Fahrbach This award provides support to the University of Illinois to
continue a successful REU program. Summer research programs will be focused on
the behavior and neuroanatomy of honey bees. Students will have the opportunity
to combine compelling fieldwork with modern neuroanatomical techniques. Student
training will be a three-fold process. First, lectures will be given on the
structure and function of the insect nervous system; the hormonal regulation of
insect metamorphosis and neural development; and the experimental study of
animal behavior. Second, students will receive practical training in the safe
handling of colonies of honey bees and in observation of honey bee behavior,
with ample opportunity provided to practice these new skills. Third, students
will receive laboratory instruction in histological techniques for the light
microscopic study of the honey bee nervous system, including many aspects of
stereology. Students will then be divided into two teams of three students each.
These teams will then carry out a research project in which an aspect of brain
organization, nerve cell number, gene expression, or hormonal responsiveness,
etc. is studied in bees of known age and behavioral status. The goal of this
project is to introduce students who already have an interest in behavioral
biology to the value of social insects as models for the study of the
neurobiology of complex behavior, including learning and memory. This project
represents an extension of an ongoing collaboration between two laboratories in
the Department of Entomology and the Neuroscience Program at the University of
Illinois at Urbana-Champaign. It will be based in the University of Illinois Bee
Research Facility and in the co-PIs laboratories in the Department of
Entomology. This unusual combination of field and laboratory research
environments coupled with the different but complementary backgrounds of the co-
PIs will provide undergraduates with a rich summer research experience. The
program currently proposed reflects the success of a past REU Site program
centered around the same theme (offered Summer 1992), with a new emphasis on
research teamwork as a means of helping students complete meaningful research
projects. ***