* 9322427
* The Physics of Strongly Interacting Two-dimensional         Electrons in the Context of High Temperature                Superconductivity
* MPS,DMR
* 04/15/1994,09/30/1998
* Jose Rodriguez, California State L A University Auxiliary Services Inc.
* Standard Grant
* G. Bruce Taggart
* 09/30/1998
* USD 93,000.00

9322427 Rodriguez This is a Minority Research Initiation award to conduct
theoretical research on strongly correlated electrons in two dimensions within
the context of high temperature superconductivity. Within the framework of a
lightly doped antiferromagnet, the experimentally relevant question of the
magnetoresistance expected in such systems will be explored. Existing data on
magneto-transport will be interpreted within this scheme. Spin-charge separated
superconductivity itself will be studied in two dimensions with particular
emphasis on uncovering the Kosterlitz-Thouless transitions that exist in such
systems. Suggestions that Mott transitions in strongly interactiong two-
dimensional electron systems may induce corresponding structural phase
transitions will also be studied. The objective of the research is to provide a
theoretical understanding of the structural transitions present in oxide
superconductors. An additional project will involve studies of two-dimensional
quantum antiferromagnets having static defects. %%% This Minority Research
Initiation award involves theoretical research relating to the high temperature
superconductors. The Principle Investigator will use sophisticated theoretical
techniques to study systems of strongly interacting electrons in two dimensions,
i.e., in a flat plane. These models are thought to be relevant to the oxide
superconductors which consist of planes of atoms. Contact will be made to
experimental measurements. ***