* 9322546
* A CTD/Hydrographic Section Across the Arctic Ocean
* GEO,OPP
* 04/01/1994,09/30/1997
* Knut Aagaard, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Michael T. Ledbetter
* 09/30/1997
* USD 174,441.00

9322546 Aagaard Research conducted by this award is a component of the 1994
U.S./Canada Arctic Ocean Section (AOS). The AOS is a collaborative effort with
Canada that involves approximately 60 scientists participating on a Canadian and
a U.S. icebreaker during a 55-day field program in the summer of 1994. The AOS
is under the auspices of the Arctic Systems Science (ARCSS) Global Change
Research Program and research is jointly sponsored by the Division of Ocean
Sciences, the Office of Polar Programs and Office of Naval Research (ONR). Data
collected should be relevant to improving our under- standing of how the Arctic
is an indicator of changing global climate conditions and how it affects the
physical, chemical, and biological features of the more temperate oceans and
regions. This specific research project encompasses part of the hydrography
program. Precision temperature, conductivity, oxygen, and nutrient profiles will
be collected at intervals along the cruise track. Resulting data will be
analyzed to increase understanding of the structure and circulation of the
Arctic Ocean. Research will focus on three areas: 1) the structure of the
halocine, wherein density differences between masses of seawater may drive the
circulation and mixing of deep Arctic Ocean water with water from other parts of
the world's oceans; 2) seawater properties and gradients near major seafloor
features, and 3) the horizontal and vertical structure of the water column below
1500 meters. ***