* 9322598
* Role of Coenzyme Q in Regenerating Vitamin E
* BIO,MCB
* 07/01/1994,06/30/1996
* Valerian Kagan, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Rona Hirschberg
* 06/30/1996
* USD 50,000.00

Kagan 9322598 The reduction of ubiquinones by electron transport results in the
formation of ubiquinols which donate electrons to phenoxyl radicals of vitamin
E, thereby regenerating the vitamin and conserving its limited supply. In the
absence of vitamin E (in vitamin E deficiency), redox-cycling of ubiquinones may
result in the generation of oxygen radicals and oxidative damage of membranes;
these are prooxidant effects of ubiquinones. We suggest that the involvement of
ubiquinones: electron transport-dependent antioxidant function in the presence
of vitamin E and prooxidant in the absence of vitamin E is the subject of this
proposal. The present proposal is to undertake a limited feasibility study to
determine the limits of sensitivity in detecting phenoxyl radicals of vitamin E
generated from endogenous levels of the vitamin in microsomal membranes so that
the hypothesis can be critically tested. An increase in sensitivity and spectral
resolution is expected by using a pulsed Fourier transform ESR spectrometer
recently commissioned at London University. The instrument will be used to
characterize phenoxyl radicals of vitamin E and possibly ubisemiquinone radicals
and provide preliminary data for use in drafting a fuyll proposal for NSF
funding of a new initiative aimed to understand the role of coenzyme Q in
mechanisms of vitamin E regeneration in membranes. %%% Vitamin E and Coenzyme Q
(ubiquinones) are indispensible components of cellular membranes. In
mitochondria, ubiquinones act as key elements in energy producing machinery. We
suggest that ubiquinones have an additional function in mitochondria and other
electron transport membranes: they are involved in membrane antioxidant
protection by interacting with vitamin E. Vitamin E is the major lipid-soluble
antioxidant of membranes which protects membranes against oxidative stress. The
reduction of ubiquinones by electron transport results in the formation of
ubiquinols which can recycle vitamin E thus conserving its limited supply. This
antioxidant function of ubiquinones is vitamin E-dependent. Moreover, in the
absence of vitamin E (in vitamin E deficiency), ubiquinones may be involved in
the generation of oxygen radicals and oxidative damage of membranes. We suggest
that the involvement of ubiquinones in vitamin E recycling is the major
mechanism of the ubiquinone antioxidant action in electron transport membranes.
An investigation of these two roles of ubiquinones - as an electron transport-
dependent antioxidant in the presence of vitamin E and as a prooxidant in the
absence of vitamin E - is the subject of this proposal. ***