* 9322472
* Separation of Complex Materials by Field-Flow Fractionation
* MPS,CHE
* 05/01/1994,10/31/1998
* Joel Harris, University of Utah
* Continuing Grant
* Kenneth L. Busch
* 10/31/1998
* USD 564,720.00

This research, supported by the Analytical and Surface Chemistry Program, is
focused on the development of Field Flow Fractionation (FFF), a technique based
on the use of orthogonal force fields to separate large molecules and small
particles. The analyte mixture is pumped into a rectangular channel, and a force
is applied 90 degrees relative to the direction of flow. In particular, this
grant will explore the use of thermal gradients and gravitational forces to
effect the separation. In addition, analytical split flow thin cell (SPLITT)
fractionation, a method where the separation occurs along the channel width, and
where splitters are used at one or both ends of the channel, is investigated to
determine it's potential for analytical separations. Here, the separation is
based on hydrodynamic lift forces, which allows characterization of species
based on diffusion coefficients. These techniques can be used to characterize a
variety of biological and synthetic materials. This grant in the Analytical and
Surface Chemistry Program will support research into improved methods for the
separation of large molecules and small particles using field flow
fractionation. This is a procedure invented by Professor Giddings in which
crossed force fields are used to separate small (micron-sized) particles or
molecules based on differences in shape, density, and electrical
characteristics. This methodology will have wide-ranging applications in the
fields of biotechnology and materials science.