* 9322040
* Organized Polymer Assemblies on Conducting and              Semiconducting Surfaces
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/1994,08/31/1997
* James Whitesell, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 08/31/1997
* USD 240,000.00

9322040 Whitesell Advances in high technology areas such as electrooptical
interfaces are currently limited by methods for fabrication and processing of
new materials. For example, optical switches require materials with alignment of
the polar axis of the composite molecules. The synthesis of highly oriented
materials as thin films on surfaces using new synthetic methods and techniques
was recently reported. These studies represent the beginning of a major program
leading to unique materials with major practical applications. In the area of
alpha-amino acid peptides there is a great potential for practical applications
of these materials in photostable, electrooptical devices. Furthermore, it is
likely that a range of other polymers can be fabricated in new forms as thin
films on surfaces. Broadly stated, the goals of this program are: 1.
Fabrication: to study in detail ways of preparing alpha- amino acid peptides as
ordered arrays on metal and non-metal surfaces, including photolithographic
techniques for the construction of nanoscale structures; 2. Physical
characterization: to expand knowledge of the properties of these peptide layers,
especially as they relate to their unusual, highly polar nature; 3. Extensions:
to examine other polymer systems for applicability to ordered growth on
surfaces, with the aim of preparing novel thin films heretofore never examined.
%%% As a result of this research, methods of fabrication novel, highly oriented
thin films from alpha-amino acids will be developed. The films are promising
candidates for the construction of optical switches for the next generation of
electrooptical devices.