* 9322111
* REU:  Optical Materials and Lasers
* MPS,DMR
* 04/15/1994,09/30/1997
* George Dixon, Oklahoma State University
* Continuing Grant
* LaVerne D. Hess
* 09/30/1997
* USD 123,001.00

9322111 Dixon This REU Site award provides an opportunity for nine under-
graduate students to gain research experience in theoretical and experimental
studies of the physical properties of optical materials and lasers. The
participants will be involved in closely related, individual projects in nine
laboratories within the Department of Physics and Center for Laser Research. The
projects will focus on the properties of laser-host and electro- optic
materials, such as oxide and fluoride glasses, lithium yttrium fluoride, bismuth
silicon oxide, and III-V and II-VI semiconductor compounds and quantum well
devices, all of which have present or near term application in optical devices.
The participants will be actively involved in nine related projects involving
crystal growth, time-resolved site-selection spectroscopy, laser instabilities,
growth and optical characterization of quantum well structures, thermal and
electrical transport properties, light scattering, and thermally and optically
stimulated luminescence. %%% This program introduces outstanding undergraduate
scientists to the area of optical materials and lasers at a formative stage in
their careers. The materials to be investigated (e.g., laser host, electro-
optic, photo refractive and colloidal) are high technology materials for current
and future generation optical systems. All of the investigations will be
undertaken in state- of-the-art laboratories. All of the faculty mentors have
had successful experience with undergraduates in their laboratories. Particular
emphasis will be given to the participation of women and minorities. ***