* 9322792
* SBIR Phase II:  Piezoelectric Damping and Actuation Module  for Noise and Vibration Control
* TIP,TI
* 10/01/1996,09/30/1998
* Richard Lally, PCB Piezotronics Inc
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 09/30/1998
* USD 299,972.00

*** 9322792 Lally This Small Business Innovation Research Phase II project will
develop new structural-acoustic sensors and improved control strategies which
will result in active control systems which are more efficient, have greater
reliability, better global noise reduction capability and are less costly than
present systems. While the past two decades have seen striking progress in
active control technology, commercialization of active systems has been hindered
by the performance of the "working end" of the active system: the sensors and
actuators. This research will develop, test and demonstrate an acoustic
intensity sensor and acoustic impedance probe in an active panel. The key to the
anticipated advancements is the ability of these new sensors to obtain real-time
measurements of structurally-radiated sound power. To facilitate communication
of sensor arrays and improve system reliability, smart electronics will be
developed and incorporated into the sensors as an IC micro-chip. Automobiles,
trucks and aircraft which incorporate such active control systems can be
quieter, lighter and more fuel efficient than today's vehicles. The sensors also
have important applications in engineering test laboratories. Used as a design
tool, the sensor measurements will enable engineers to design quieter
automobiles, appliances, fans, compressors, air conditioners and other
machinery. Architects can use the design technology to improve the acoustics of
concert halls, lecture halls, meeting rooms and auditoriums. ***