* 9322797
* CRB: Ecological Consequences of the Recent                  Introduction of Green Crabs to the Pacific Coast of North   America
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/1994,09/30/1996
* Dennis Hedgecock, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Taber D. Allison
* 09/30/1996
* USD 195,000.00

9322797 Grosholz Introduced or exotic species represent a serious threat to the
integrity and sustainability of natural ecosystems. The rate and extent of
species introductions in natural habitats has been increasing over time, with
the potential to profoundly change community structure on a large scale. Our
knowledge of the impact of introduced species in marine ecosystems is
particularly poor, and thus our ability to predict the affects and assess the
risks are extremely limited. Our goal is this project is to investigate the
introduction of the predatory green crab, Carcinus maenas, into embayments along
the coast of California. Within the last year, C. maenas has been observed for
the first time on the reserve of the University of California Bodega Marine
Laboratory, where extensive data have been collected for ten years prior to the
introduction on the population dynamics of many species of invertebrates, and
the shorebirds which feed on them. We plan to use these data collected before
the introduction to quantify whether this predator can significantly reduce the
abundance of its invertebrate prey, and whether its impact could have a
cascading effect on the large wintering shorebird populations that depends on
these invertebrates for food. Our data from previous natural perturbation of
this system provides evidence that reductions in invertebrate abundance manifest
themselves as reductions at this higher tropic level. In this proposal, we will
rigorously monitor changes in the abundance of targeted taxa, and simultaneously
conduct a series of experiments to elucidate the mechanisms by which predatory
crabs might impact the native fauna. These experiments will involve short and
long term manipulations to document both the immediate response of the benthic
invertebrate communities to green crab predation, as well longer-term response
to this perturbation. These data will allow us to assess the broad consequences
o a novel alien predator in a nearshore marine habitat, and allow us to more
accurately predict the potential impact of future introductions. This will be
important in determining not only the risk posed by future introductions, but
how much of our resources should be devoted to reducing the rate at which new
introductions occur.