* 9322706
* CRB:  RUI:  Restoration of Structure and Function in a      Ponderosa Pine/Bunchgrass Ecosystem
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/1994,06/30/1997
* Michael Wagner, Northern Arizona University
* Standard Grant
* Scott L. Collins
* 06/30/1997
* USD 300,000.00

9322706 Covington This research has two primary objectives: (1) to determine
changes in selected ecosystem characteristics of a southwestern ponderosa
pine/bunchgrass ecosystem since Euro-American settlement, and (2) to determine
changes in these same characteristics after two restoration treatments. Trees,
shrubs, herbaceous vegetation, coarse woody debris and forest floor will be
mapped on plots in two study areas. These data will be used in conjunction with
dendroecological analysis and ecological simulation to estimate post-settlement
changes in aboveground biomass, primary production, decomposition, microbial
functional groups, nutrient cycling characteristics, and old growth tree
physiology and susceptibility to insect attacks. Experimental treatments include
(1) Control, (2) complete restoration (thin postsettlement trees, remove forest
floor, burn at natural burning intervals), and (3) partial restoration (thin
postsettlement trees). Previous research has shown that introducing fire without
first removing forest floor materials results in death of overstory trees and
damage to belowground systems. %%% This research will further our understanding
of the role of fire in ecosystem restoration in southwestern forest systems. In
addition to clear management implications, this research will enhance our
understanding of the interaction of net primary production, fire, decomposition,
microbial functional groups, and nutrient cycling in controlling ecosystem
structure and function, and enhance knowledge of the role of natural disturbance
regimes in forest ecosystems. ***