* 9322152
* REU:  Undergraduate Research in Biological Sciences at Duquesne University
* BIO,DBI
* 05/01/1994,10/31/1998
* James Garey, Duquesne University
* Continuing Grant
* William R. Gordon
* 10/31/1998
* USD 110,400.00

9322152 Garey This award will provide funds to the Department of Biological
Sciences at Duquesne University to establish a Research Experiences for
Undergraduates (REU) site involving 8 students per year for 3 years. Students
from over 100 small regional colleges who might be reluctant to attend an REU
site at a larger university will be recruited. Eight of the most enthusiastic,
research-active faculty have been selected to participate in the program.
Projects will be selected from the realm of the professor's research and of
sufficient quality and depth to be true learning experiences that will ask novel
questions and properly introduce students to research. The students will spend
ten weeks at Duquesne University working in research laboratories in direct
contact with faculty and other students. Weekly departmental-wide meetings will
take place during the ten week program to exchange ideas about scientific,
philosophical, and practical aspects of research and careers in research. These
meetings will also be used as peer review vehicles to ensure appropriate depth
and scientific content of the students' research projects. The program will
culminate in a poster session modeled after similar sessions common in
scientific meetings. The effectiveness of the program will be monitored by
participant evaluations and long term monitoring of the students careers. ***