* 9322132
* REU Site:  Research Experience for Undergraduates at the    Univ. of Iowa in Computer Vision, Robotics, Simulation,     Virtual Environments, and Mobile Communication Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 02/15/1994,07/31/1998
* Joseph Kearney, University of Iowa
* Continuing Grant
* Lawrence Burton
* 07/31/1998
* USD 233,672.00

9322132 Kearney This project supports undergraduate partcipation in research
projects in the areas of computer vision, robotics, simulation, virtual
environments, and mobile communication systems. Two programs are supported: A 10
week long, intensive summer program and a 30 week long program during the
academic year. Research projects include: programming behaviors of simulated
vehicles in virtual driving environments; simulating robot locomotion;
integrating three-dimensional vision and graphics; programming texture
description and stereo matching algorithms; and developing applications for
mobile computers. The projects provide hands-on laboratory experience with
state-of-the-art software and computing facilities working on challenging
research problems. u 5F5G5H5I5J5K5L5M5N5O5P5Q5R5S5T5U5V5W5X5Y5Z5 5\5
5^5_5`5a5b5c5d5e5f5g5h5i5j5k5l5m5n5o5p5q5r5s5t5u5v5w5x5y5z5{5|5}5~5 5 5 5 5 5 5
5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5
5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 59322132 Kearney This project supports
undergraduate partcipation in research projects in the areas of computer vision,
robotic ! ! G Times Symbol " Helvetica Chicago Times New Roman &amp; Arial 5
Courier New Palatino Arial Narrow Book Antiqua Bookman Old Style Century Gothic
Monotype Corsiva Monotype Sorts Century Schoolbook Wingdings MT Extra 1 Courier
" * e # me Tracey Zeigler