* 9322822
* Ab Initio Quantum Chemistry on Parallel and Distributed     Computers with Gaussian 92
* TIP,TI
* 10/01/1994,09/30/1996
* Stephen Weston, Scientific Computing Associates Inc
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Hennessey
* 09/30/1996
* USD 299,865.00

The goal of the proposed Phase II research is to adapt a variety of high
accurate, computationally expensive ab initio methods to run efficiently in
parallel on a network of workstations. This will extend the capacity and
availability of electronic structure theory methods to researchers, by
multiplying the computing resources applied to the problem. Feasibility was
established by Phase I research that parallelized Hartree-Fock SCF in Gaussian
92 through the use of the Linda parallel programming model and software,
resulting in good speedups on networks of 4-6 workstations. Working with the
Gaussian and Linda software, the principal objective is to parallelize (to the
same level as in Phase I) the computation of MP2, MP3, CID, CISD, MP4, CCD, BD,
QCISD, and CCSD energies, including non-interative triple excitation
corrections, and gradients up to QCISD. In the process we plan to develop
associated strategies for ERI transformations and iterative energy and gradient
methods, to minimize data movement and redundant computations. A second Phase II
objective is to enhance the parallel performance of SCF functions on larger
numbers of workstations. Candidates for parallelization include ERI (shell
quartet) selection, matrix diagonalization and other matrix operations used in
the ERI transformation and back-transformation.