* 9322014
* The Haystack Observatory as a Research Experience for       Undergraduates (REU) Site for Astronomy and Atmospheric     Science, Using Radio Techniques
* MPS,AST
* 04/01/1994,09/30/1997
* Joseph Salah, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing grant
* J. P. Wright
* 09/30/1997
* USD 133,800.00

9322014 Salah The Massachusetts Institute of Technology will host eight
undergraduate students annually at its Haystack Observatory to provide research
experiences for undergraduates. The Haystack Observatory is a multi-disciplinary
research center dedicated to radio astronomical research using its 37-m diameter
telescope and to studies of the earth's upper atmosphere using its 46-m and 67-m
high power radars. The students will be involved in the acquisition of data
using the instrumentation, analysis and interpretation of the measurements, as
well as development of hardware and software to improve capabilities of the
facility. Astronomical studies involve the characterization of stellar and
quasar radio emission, starburst galaxies, and masters in our galaxy.
Atmospheric studies will emphasize the effects of geomagnetic storms on the
structure and dynamics of the earth's atmosphere and on spectral studies of
periodic variations observed in the upper atmosphere. Technical projects include
the digital design of signal processing systems, tests of advanced recording
heads, and development of real-time control software. The students will work
closely with a staff mentor throughout the summer, and will prepare a report and
presentation on their projects. The presentations will be given at national
conferences, and opportunities will be provided to continue some of the projects
during the academic year. The students will be exposed to all aspects of the
research facility through seminars and demonstrations at the various unique
facilities, and will obtain a thorough practical experience of scientific
research at a facility dedicated to research. The Haystack Observatory has an
excellent record of providing research experiences to undergraduates.