* 9322623
* Photovoltaic Hydrogen Production, U.S.-Pakistan             Cooperative Research
* O/D,OISE
* 07/15/1994,06/30/1998
* T. Nejat Veziroglu, University of Miami
* Continuing Grant
* Osman Shinaishin
* 06/30/1998
* USD 86,604.00

9322623 Veziroglu Description: This project supports the participation of two
U.S. scientists, from the Clean Energy Research Institute (CERI), University of
Miami, with The National Institute of Silicon Technology (NIST), in Islamabad,
Pakistan, in a project to conduct theoretical and experimental studies for
photovoltaic hydrogen production. Two systems will be investigated, one with a
storage system to even out the diurnal and seasonal insolation, and the other
without such storage. The theoretical study will determine the optimum variables
of each of the two systems under various conditions. In the experimental
investigations, to be carried out in Pakistan, a PV Hydrogen Production
demonstration system will be designed, built, operated, and evaluated. The
results will be used to refine the theory. Scope: This project addresses one of
the major problems facing many developing countries. Pakistan is one such
country with no oil reserves, but which may be able, by virtue of being in the
sunbelt, to utilize solar radiation for energy and for industrial applications.
The collaboration by the CERI with the NIST in Pakistan provides a strong
combination of complementary capabilities. The NIST is backed by the Pakistan
Ministry of Science and Technology which has already allocated the necessary
resources for the major part of the project, the experimental part. The project
can lead to major benefits to the U.S. in supplying much of the materials and
technology needed, and can benefit Pakistan and other developing countries
utilize an endless source of energy for various applications and industries. ***