* 9322682
* Strategies for Using Advanced Computer Architectures in     Chemical Process Engineering
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/1994,07/31/1996
* Mark Stadtherr, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* george hazelrigg
* 07/31/1996
* USD 180,000.00

9322682 Stadtherr Advanced computer architectures, in particular those involving
some form of parallel and/or vector processing, provide the power to greatly
enhance the ability of the engineer to realistically model, simulate, design,
and optimize complex chemical manufacturing processes, steady- and unsteady-
state. The goal of this project is to develop techniques for solving such
problems, taking full advantage of this enhanced processing. One focus of this
work is the development of techniques for efficiently solving these systems on
vector/parallel computers. The techniques to be considered are based on the
frontal and multifrontal direct methods, and on iterative Krylov subspace
methods with incomplete factorization preconditioners. A second focus for this
project is the use of parallelism to maintain robustness in process simulation
and optimization computations. Techniques based on interval analysis will be
applied. Since interval methods are amenable to parallel computing, their use on
these problems is now feasible. The application of advanced computer
architectures in chemical process engineering is one of great potential. The
rapid turnaround that can be provided by vector/parallel machines improves
engineering productivity, meaning more critical deadlines met, faster times to
market, and more timely responses to changes in business, economic, and
regulatory conditions. The ability to use more complex and realistic process
models means a better understanding of process fundamentals, thus reducing the
need for overdesign, and providing the insights needed to better attain
environmental and quality control goals.