* 9322576
* CRB:  An Experimental Test of Minimum Viable Population     Concepts
* BIO,DEB
* 05/01/1994,10/31/1997
* Gary Belovsky, Utah State University
* Standard Grant
* Mark Courtney
* 10/31/1997
* USD 125,000.00

9322576 Belovsky In this Conservation and Restoration Biology research, the PI
will examine Minimum Viable Population (MVP) concepts experimentally to evaluate
quantitatively their validity and the precision of predictions from particular
theoretical formulations. experimental studies will use laboratory populations
of the Great Basin brine shrimp (Artemia franciscana) to examine MVP processes
in a hierarchical design. First, the persistence of isolated populations will be
examined with only demographic stochasticity operating and then with
environmental stochasticity added. Second, metapopulation dynamics will be
examined: 1) using a large number of constituent populations, whose dynamics are
uncorrelated, providing migrants (deterministic dynamics), (2) then using a
limited number of constituent populations, whose dynamics are uncorrelated,
providing migrants (stochastic dynamics), and 3) finally using autocorrelation
operating between the dynamics of the constituent populations. This simple
experimental system permits comparison of the observed mean persistence times
and their probability distributions with predictions from MVP models in the
literature. Furthermore, Artemia occurs naturally in small hypersaline springs
in the Great Basin. These simple ecosystems without competitors and predators
for Artemia permit extrapolation of laboratory results to a natural system. If
the laboratory observations agree with the MVP model predictions and the
presence/absence of Artemia in these small habitats is in agreement with
laboratory predictions, the validity of existing MVP formulations would be
indicated, strengthening their value for conservation management. %%% The idea
that there must be a minimum number of individuals in a population to ensure its
persistence for a given time period with a given probability (Minimum Viable
Population, MVP) is one of the cornerstone concepts of conservation biology and
a major reason for Population Viability Analysis in conservation management and
policy. Existing examinations of MVP concepts have either relied on theoretical
considerations or biogeographical correlations with few experimental tests.
Furthermore, most of the concepts to validate MVP have been qualitative rather
than quantitative. Validating MVP concepts in a quantitative fashion is critical
if their use is to be justified in the contentious area of conservation
management and policy, as well as in answering more basic scientific issues
regarding the forces controlling biodiversity in nature. ***