* 9322064
* Undergraduate Research in Molecular Biology at the          University of NC at Chapel Hill
* BIO,DBI
* 05/01/1994,10/31/1997
* William Marzluff, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Continuing Grant
* Fred Stollnitz
* 10/31/1997
* USD 150,000.00

9322064 Fried This award provides support to continue a successful REU SITE for
an additional three years. The Program in Molecular Biology and Biotechnology,
an independent campus-wide unit, created to promote genetic engineering research
and education at the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, will sponsor
the program. Academically successful students and students from disadvantaged
backgrounds who exhibit high scholastic promise and who would benefit from an
independent study experience will be chosen from a national applicant pool to
participate in research projects conducted by UNC faculty. A total of 10
students will be supported by the National Science Foundation REU program and
five additional students are expected to be supported with University funds.
Emphasis will be placed on recruiting students from schools with limited
research opportunities and students historically underrepresented in the
sciences. The primary focus of the training program will be encouraging pursuit
of, and providing preparation for, advanced degrees in the biological sciences.
To meet these goals students will (1) work for 10 weeks on faculty-developed
laboratory research projects, (2) meet with preceptors for informal seminars
about science and personal accounts of how and why faculty became research
scientists, (3) attend field trips to major research pharmaceutical companies
and the National Institutes of Environmental Health Sciences in Research
Triangle Park, NC, and to coastal marine labs operated by UNC and Duke
University, (4) attend a Graduate-Professional Student Roundtable to learn in
detail about life in graduate school, and (5) present the results of their
research in talks before the community. ***