* 9322326
* Mathematical Sciences: Boundary Behavior of Holomorphic     Functions of Several Complex Variables
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/1994,06/30/1997
* Edgar Stout, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* John V. Ryff
* 06/30/1997
* USD 60,000.00

9322326 Stout This award supports mathematical research on aspects of the theory
of boundary behavior of holomorphic functions of several complex variables and
related questions. One major direction of the work concerns removable
singularities for the boundary values of holomorphic functions, that is, when
can a function be extended to a point and a neighborhood as an holomorphic
function? These points are called removable singularities. A related direction
of the work focuses on the study of removable sets for holomorphic functions.
These are sets where the natural boundary values of an holomorphic function
agree with those of a continuous function. Work will also be done on domains
which are not necessarily bounded by smooth manifolds, an area of several
complex variables which has not received much attention to date. Finally, work
will continue on the study of Cauchy-Riemann functions in terms of one-
dimensional slices of their underlying domains. Several complex variables arose
at the beginning of the century as a natural outgrowth of studies of functions
of one complex variable. It became clear early on that the theory differed
widely from it predecessor. The underlying geometry was far more difficult to
grasp and the function theory had far more affinity with partial differential
operators of first order. It thus grew as a hybrid subject combining deep
characteristics of differential geometry and differential equations. Many of the
fundamental structures were defined in the last three decades. Current studies
still concentrate on understanding these basic mathematical forms. ***