* 9322251
* REU SITE - SIGNAL TRANSDUCTION
* BIO,DBI
* 05/15/1994,04/30/1995
* William Brinkley, Baylor College of Medicine
* Standard Grant
* Joanne G. Rodewald
* 04/30/1995
* USD 53,000.00

9322251 Brinkley This award provides funds to Baylor College of Medicine (BCM)
to continue a successful REU Program. Ten college undergraduates selected from a
nationwide pool of hundreds of applicants will be exposed to a research
atmosphere for 10 weeks in a summer career development program. Participants
will be selected by a committee of faculty from basic science departments.
Students will be matched with faculty mentors and become functioning members of
their labs. The unifying focus of the REU Site will be cellular signal
transduction. The faculty of BCM have already gained experience in designing
undergraduate research projects and interacting with college students through
participation in a five-year program, two years as an REU Site. Students will be
matched by interest and background to a project that will promote learning new
technical skills and development of an understanding of how to approach and
conduct research. Students will use advanced techniques, often in molecular
biology, that may not be available on their home campuses. The laboratory
oriented aspect of the program will be supplemented by participation in research
discussions, seminars, career development activities and social/cultural
activities sponsored by the SMART Program. NSF sponsored participants will have
the benefit of interacting with 100 undergraduates from throughout the nation
and of entering an established program that effectively promotes interest in
science and prepares undergraduates to enter research oriented careers. ***