* 9322371
* REU Site:  Research Experiences in Computer Science and     Computational Mathematics for Undergraduates at Liberal     Arts Colleges
* CSE,CNS
* 02/15/1994,07/31/1997
* David Berque, DePauw University
* Continuing grant
* Lawrence Burton
* 07/31/1997
* USD 123,885.00

9322371 Berque This program is intended to encourage talented undergraduates to
pursue graduate study and research careers in Computer Science and Computational
Mathematics. To achieve this goal, the program helps the students to experience,
first-hand, several of the most rewarding activities that characterize most
graduate programs and research careers. Specifically, the program gives eight
student participants during each of three summers the opportunity to: 1. Conduct
Research: Each of the eight students are paired with a faculty mentor who guides
the student in carrying out a research project. 2. Disseminate Information: The
program sponsors a seminar series in which the students regularly explain the
progress of their research to the entire group. Each student also prepare a
final written report summarizing the results of the research. As part of the
recruiting process, each student provides a letter of support from a faculty
member who agrees to arrange for the student to present the results of his/her
research at the student's home institution during the following academic year.
3. Participate in a Community of Scholars: By providing a set of common
experiences for the students, the program encourages these young researchers to
build an informal community of scholars among themselves. The common experiences
include participation in critiques of student talks, periodic group lunches, and
attendance at presentations given by faculty members and guest speakers on
various topics (e.g., discussion of a research interest, description of a
particular career option, and discussion of the process of applying to graduate
school.) u software design, and (4) The production of undergraduate research
papers which can be published and presented at regional or national conferences.
u projects from neural network based learning in robotics to machine vision to
VLSI design and implementation. This diversity makes it possible to stimulate
students with a broad spectrum of professional interests9322371 Berque This
program is intended to encourage talented undergraduates to pursue graduate
study and research careers in U W ! ! ! ! ! G Times Symbol " Helvetica Chicago
Times New Roman & Arial 5 Courier New Palatino Arial Narrow Book Antiqua Bookman
Old Style Century Gothic Monotype Corsiva Monotype Sorts Century Schoolbook
Wingdings MT Extra " & # me Tracey Zeigler