* 9322462
* Dissertation Research: Evolution of Plant Resistance to     Herbivory in Arabidopsis thaliana
* BIO,DEB
* 03/15/1994,02/29/1996
* Mark Rausher, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Mark Courtney
* 02/29/1996
* USD 10,000.00

&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;9322462&lt;br/&gt;Rausher&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt; Plants display and impressive array of characters thought to defend
them against attack by herbivores and pathogens. Many biologists have
interpreted the principal function of these plant resistance characters to be
the defense of the plant against its natural enemies. However, others have
suggested that these resistance characters serve other functions and that the
effects of these characters on herbivores are incidental. Despite this
ambiguity, the interaction between herbivores and plant resistance characters
has played a critical role in the development of theories on the coevolution of
plants and herbivores. &lt;br/&gt; Two assumptions mark theories on the
evolution of plant resistance characters such as secondary chemicals and
trichomes (1) resistance has evolved primarily as a defense against natural
enemies of plants and (2) resistance is costly in terms of fitness to the plant.
Neither of these assumptions has been adequately tested. This research aims to
test these assumptions using both laboratory strains and natural populations of
the annual plant, Arabidopsis thaliana (Brassicaceae), in both the field and a
growth chamber. In particular, this research will use quantitative genetical
techniques to determine: (1) whether herbivorous insects and pathogens exert
selection on genetic variation for resistance and (2) whether resistance
characters are evolutionarily costly. The results of this research will shed
light on the mechanisms of the evolution of resistance in plants to herbivores
and pathogens.&lt;br/&gt;