* 9322134
* Summer Program for Undergraduate Research in Biology
* BIO,DBI
* 05/01/1994,10/31/1997
* Carmen Mannella, Health Research Incorporated/New York State Department of Health
* Continuing Grant
* Fred Stollnitz
* 10/31/1997
* USD 150,000.00

9322134 Mannella This award provides funds for renewal of a summer REU program
held at the Wadsworth Center for Laboratories and Research (WCL&amp;R) in
Albany, NY. The research scientists who supervise the students in this program
are also faculty in the Department of Biomedical Sciences of the State
University of New York at Albany's School of Public Health. The WCL&amp;R is a
unique laboratory with state-of-the-art facilities, in which basic research
programs have developed alongside mission-oriented public health laboratories.
The research interests of the participating BMS faculty cover a broad range,
with emphasis in molecular genetics, cell biology and structural biology. Eleven
undergraduate students interested in research careers are recruited from
colleges in the Northeast and from historically Black colleges in the South.
Another 5 students participate in the program with stipend support from the
WCL&amp;R. Laboratory projects in basic biological research topics are chosen
that are interesting, likely to yield results within the time-frame of the
program, and allow for some degree of student development and independence.
Weekly group meetings are used to discuss science- and career-related issues and
to monitor student progress. The students make short oral presentations of their
work in a symposium in the last week of the program, and also submit written
reports before they leave, to stress the importance of communication skills
within science. ***