* 9322645
* Crustal Genesis and Mineralization in the Eastern           Dharwar Craton, South India
* O/D,OISE
* 02/15/1994,01/31/1996
* V. Rajamani, Jawaharlal Nehru University
* Standard Grant
* Marjorie Lueck
* 01/31/1996
* USD 31,194.00

9322645 Rajamani Description: This project supports collaboration by Dr. Gilbert
Hanson of State University of New York (SUNY) at Stony Brook with Dr. V.
Rajamani of Jawaharlal Nehru University (JNU) in New Delhi on geochemical study
of the Eastern Dharwar Craton (EDC) in South India. The study is aimed at a
hypothesis that the EDC is made up of accretionary terranes and that gold
mineralization occurred associated with accretion of the terranes. If there are
different terranes, it is intended to determine the histories of the rocks
within the various terranes and determine the timing of their assemblage. The
field work will continue geological studies in the Ramagiri Schist Belt, and
begin studies of the Hutti-Maski Schist Belt 500 Km north of the Kolar Schist
Belt along regional structural trend. The work will include collecting samples
by the U.S. and Indian scientists in the field, to be followed by chemical
analysis mainly at the SUNY laboratory by the U.S. and Indian co- investigators.
Some of the chemical analysis will be done at JNU by Dr. Rajamani and his
students. Scope: This project is building on a well- established working
relationship by the two scientists. They have several joint publications as a
result of their previous work. This project is likely to continue this
productive scientific cooperation. U.S. Graduate students and post doctorates,
from the SUNY at Stony Brook, are involved in the field work, and are expected
to gain experience in international research efforts. ***