* 9322719
* Estimating Lifeline Disruption from Earthquakes Based       on Flood Generated Disruption
* ENG,CMMI
* 02/15/1994,07/31/1995
* Anshel Schiff, American Society of Civil Engineers
* Standard Grant
* William A. Anderson
* 07/31/1995
* USD 36,815.00

9322719 Schiff The Midwest floods of 1993 provide a unique opportunity to
evaluate the impact of lifeline disruption and identify lifeline
interdependencies. The Central United States has the potential of experiencing a
catastrophic earthquake, as demonstrated by the New Madrid Earthquakes of 1811
and 1812. Recent experience in California and foreign earthquakes demonstrates
the vulnerability of lifelines. In many instances, lifeline disruption has a
significantly negative effect on the emergency response. The floods have
disrupted the water and/or sewer systems in over 300 communities, disrupted
barge and rail transportation shipments of coal to electric power generating
facilities, and flooded power substations. While flood damage to lifeline
facilities is likely to be different than that observed in earthquakes, the
extent of flooding and disruption provides an opportunity to gain insight into
the effects of lifeline disruption from a large earthquake in the region.
Procedures used by lifeline organizations for working around problems and hidden
interdependencies of lifelines can also be identified. Three tasks will be
performed in the conduct of the research. A) interviews will be conducted with
lifeline and emergency response organizations in Des Moines, Iowa, B) special
situations where disruption has had an impact will be investigated, and C) a
mail survey will be conducted of flood impacted lifeline organizations to get a
broader assessment of the impact of lifeline disruption. This study of lifelines
is related to NSF's Civil Infrastructure Systems Research initiative. A
complementary project will be carried out by the Disaster Research Center at the
University of Delaware to evaluate the economic consequences to business due to
lifeline failures. This award is made under the Small Grants for Exploratory
Research program. ***