* 9322199
* The Impact of Urban and Rural Activities on Water Quality   in Spearfish, South Dakota
* GEO,EAR
* 04/15/1994,09/30/1995
* Steven Anderson, Black Hills State University
* Standard Grant
* Michael A. Mayhew
* 09/30/1995
* USD 45,000.00

9322199 Anderson This proposal offers undergraduate research experiences in a
ten-week program integrating the research activities of ten investigators from
Black Hills State University, the University of Wyoming, the City of Spearfish,
South Dakota, and the United States Forest Service. The specific research
projects focus on the impact of urban and rural activities within the City of
Spearfish on the quality of surface and groundwater, and on possible remediation
techniques. All projects will utilize Black Hills State University's newly
purchased microcomputing facilities, including a Macintosh Quadra computer
laboratory and a IBM-compatible 486 lab equipped with GIS and AutoCAD software.
The goals of our proposed program are to give undergraduate students an
opportunity to 1) participate in environmental research projects that utilize
high-end microcomputing facilities, 2) become acquainted with a variety of
related scientific subdisciplines, 3) improve their scientific writing, 4)
present research to their peers at the National Conference on Undergraduate
Research, and 5) disseminate the research to the scientific community through
publication. The overlying theme of the program is to expose students who are in
the early stages of a research career to environmental projects that involve
application of field, lab, and microcomputing skills. We believe that exposing
students to a variety of related environmental research topics will convince
them to develop a strong, interdisciplinary science and math background, and
enhance their research abilities.