* 9322553
* REU Site:  A Center For Undergraduate Research in           Multi-Paradigm Design
* CSE,CNS
* 02/15/1994,07/31/1997
* Antonio Lopez, Loyola University New Orleans
* Continuing Grant
* Lawrence Burton
* 07/31/1997
* USD 116,200.00

9322553 Messa Many methodologies have been promoted for the development of
large, complex software systems. Among these the most prevalent have been based
upon the standard topdown structured analysis and design. This methodology is
associated with the traditional procedure-oriented paradigm. However, the
introduction of other paradigms such as logic-oriented, object- oriented and
database-oriented paradigms suggested the possibility of developing new design
methodologies. In particular, there is currently extensive research in
integrating the logic-oriented, object-oriented and database-oriented design
paradigms. The study of systems that are based on these multi-paradigms,
provides a rich spectrum for undergraduate research. Undergraduate research,
like any other kind of research, is open- ended, requires innovation, and
involves the incorporation of knowledge from a variety of sources. Research
experiences includes experimentation, the comparison and evaluation of different
viewpoints, and the production of publishable papers and their presentation to
peer groups and professional organizations. The undergraduate researchers will
review software development methodologies and will get instruction on the use of
CASE tools. They will gain insight into the multi-paradigms involved in the
study, and, they will learn how different paradigms encourage alternate
solutions to problems. This center has four primary goals: (1) The involvement
in research of undergraduates from underrepresented groups, (2) The exposure of
these undergraduates to the state-of-the-art software engineering methodologies,
(3) The research in multi-paradigm software design, and (4) The production of
undergraduate research papers which can be published and presented at regional
or national conferences. u projects from neural network based learning in
robotics to machine vision to VLSI design and implementation. This diversity
makes it possible to stimulate students with a broad spectrum of professional
interests9322553 Messa Many methodologies have been promoted for the development
of large, complex software systems. Among these the mo d f ) + } $ &amp; ! 4 ! 4
! 4 ! ! ! ! G ' ' Times Symbol " Helvetica Chicago Times New Roman &amp; Arial 5
Courier New Palatino Arial Narrow Book Antiqua Bookman Old Style Century Gothic
Monotype Corsiva Monotype Sorts Century Schoolbook Wingdings MT Extra " % " # me
Tracey Zeigler