* 9322300
* Morehouse College - Zoo Atlanta Undergraduate Research      Program In Animal Behavior and Conservation Biology
* BIO,DBI
* 06/15/1994,05/31/1995
* Debra Forthman, Morehouse College
* Standard Grant
* Joanne G. Rodewald
* 05/31/1995
* USD 30,912.00

9322300 Jackson This award provides funds to Morehouse College to establish a
Research Experience for Undergraduate Site which will give six undergraduate
African-American students an opportunity to participate in a unique research
experience at Zoo Atlanta. Students will conduct summer studies in animal
behavior and conservation biology. The goal of this program is to inspire and
motivate students to pursue an advanced degree, and ultimately, a research
career. Student participants will be drawn from the Psychology and Biology
departments of four historically black colleges (HBC's) in Atlanta (Morehouse
College, Spelman College, Morris Brown College and Clark-Atlanta University).
The program will last for eight weeks in the summer, followed by a Directed
Studies course in the fall with Project Director Dr. Jackson. Initially,
students will participate in an intensive three-day orientation to behavioral
research at Zoo Atlanta, during which they will finalize the methodology for an
original aspect of an ongoing research project. Following orientation, students
will work individually on these research projects under the guidance of Project
Director Dr. Jackson, Project Co-Director Dr. Forthman, and Project Participants
Drs. Maple and Stevens. Students will participate in weekly research seminars in
which they, along with other researchers at the zoo, will discuss the progress
of their research, and develop original strategies for investigating and
furthering ongoing research projects taking place at the zoo and their
prospective campuses. ***