* 9322658
* Global Manufacturing in the 21st Century; ORSA/TIMS         Conference; Detroit, MI; October 23-26, 1994
* ENG,CMMI
* 04/15/1994,09/30/1995
* Kenneth Chelst, Operations Research Society of America
* Standard Grant
* Pius J. Egbelu
* 09/30/1995
* USD 10,000.00

9322658 Chelst To excel in the first decades of the 21st century, manufacturers
must have a strategic and operational vision of design, marketing, and
distribution that encompasses the world. To implement this vision, a
manufacturer must also effectively utilize service systems in areas such as
finance, human resource management, information systems, and telecommunications
to support its global enterprise. Operations research and management science
(OR/MS) are some of the tools modern managers use to address complex strategic,
tactical and operational concerns. This project is designed to increase the
visibility and role of OR/MS techniques in improving the global competitiveness
of United States manufacturers and their suppliers. The theme of the Fall 1994
ORSA/TIMS conference is Global Manufacturing in the 21st Century. To insure the
relevance of the conference to practical problems, a major effort is planned to
increase the participation in the conference of OR/MS practitioners and managers
of manufacturing and related enterprises. This will include: 1) an expanded
marketing effort, 2) a special program for manufacturing managers with little or
no OR/MS background and 3) complimentary registrations for a limited number of
manufacturing manager speakers who are not members of ORSA or TIMS. All of these
efforts should enhance the practical value of the conference to the
manufacturing and related service support sectors of the United States economy.