* 9322248
* Intelligent Structures Group Research Experiences for       Undergraudates Site
* CSE,CNS
* 02/01/1994,07/31/1996
* W. Thomas Miller, University of New Hampshire
* Continuing Grant
* Lawrence Burton
* 07/31/1996
* USD 120,000.00

9322248 Miller A Research Experiences for Undergraduates Site is being formed
by the Intelligent Structures Group based within the Department of Electrical
and Computer Engineering at the University of New Hampshire for a two year
period starting in May, 1994. This REU site supports six students on a full-time
basis during each summer and six students on a part-time basis during each
academic year, allowing them to participate in research within the group.
Activities of the group include all system aspects from theoretical analysis to
prototype hardware implementation and evaluation. Basic research is performed in
the areas of distributed fault-tolerance, neural networks, synthetic vision, and
learning systems in control and signal processing. The organization of the
Intelligent Structures Group provides a combination of structure and diversity
to enhance the student experience. Group members often collaborate on research,
and meet to discuss research objectives, organize workshops for industry, and to
coordinate equipment proposals and acquisitions. Through such interaction,
student participants become familiar with the research programs of a number of
faculty and graduate students as well as general issues of research
administration. The diversity of the group's research offers a wide range of
projects from neural network based learning in robotics to machine vision to
VLSI design and implementation. This diversity makes it possible to stimulate
students with a broad spectrum of professional interests. u Miller A Research
Experiences for Undergraduates Site is being formed by the Intelligent Structure
s Group based with x z ! ! ! ! ! G Times Symbol " Helvetica Chicago Times New
Roman &amp; Arial 5 Courier New Palatino Arial Narrow Book Antiqua Bookman Old
Style Century Gothic Monotype Corsiva Monotype Sorts Century Schoolbook
Wingdings MT Extra " $ # # me Tracey Zeigler