* 9322078
* Aeronomical Effects of the Impact of Comet Shoemaker-Levy-9 with Jupiter
* GEO,AGS
* 03/15/1994,08/31/1996
* Thomas Cravens, University of Kansas Main Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Sunanda Basu
* 08/31/1996
* USD 50,000.00

9322078 Cravens Comet Shoemaker-Levy 9 is expected to enter the atmosphere of
Jupiter on about July 21-23, 1994. Significant amounts of water vapor will be
injected into the upper atmosphere of Jupiter. The photochemistry of both the
neutral gas and the ionosphere will be greatly altered by the influx of this
water vapor or the atomic oxygen generated by the dissociation of the water. The
odd oxygen (i.e., oxygen or water vapor or the hydroxyl radical) associated with
the cometary water influx alters the ion chemistry by removing ionized hydrogen
ions, which also has the effect of reducing the ionospheric electron density
because ionized hydrogen is ordinarily the main ion species in the Jovian
ionosphere. The oxygen atoms from the dissociation of the cometary water will
also react with the methyl radical and eventually form carbon monoxide deeper in
the atmosphere. The PI has a numerical model that was originally developed to
study the effects of odd oxygen on the auroral ionosphere of Jupiter. He
proposes to adapt this model to study the effects of comet Shoemaker-Levy 9 on
the thermosphere and ionosphere of Jupiter. These effects (e.g., severe
reduction of electron density) will be both global and significant even a couple
of years after the comet impact which will allow the Galileo spacecraft to study
the recovery from this event. ***