* 9322102
* Sequential Monte Carlo Techniques for the Solution          of Large Linear and Non-Linear Systems
* CSE,CCF
* 08/01/1994,07/31/1998
* John Halton, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Continuing Grant
* S. Kamal Abdali
* 07/31/1998
* USD 218,811.00

Almost all mathematical problems in science and engineering are approximated by
linear and non-linear systems of integral and/or partial differential equations,
which vary widely in number, form, and character. Since analytical solutions do
not exist for most problems of interest, numerical approximation techniques,
such as finite element and finite difference methods, are widely used,
ultimately resulting in a system of linear or non-linear algebraic equations,
which must then be solved. In the realistic representation of practical
applications over large and/or domains, such systems may contain m=104 to 107
unknowns. For non-linear or transient problems, the system requires the
repetitive solution of corresponding linearized problems for changing
parameters. Direct solution methods often cannot be used because of excessive
storage and time requirements (the latter are O(m3)). Iterative methods (such as
multigrid, conjugate gradients, SSOR, orthomin, and GMRES), which take time
O(m2) per iteration, are almost universally applied. Another candidate for
solving very large linear systems is the Monte Carlo method, which takes time
O(m) per iteration; but the high variances of the estimates and the very slow
convergence has tended to eliminate it from consideration. The sequential Monte
Carlo method is a promising modification which shows guaranteed convergence.
This method is applied to broad classes of large systems of linear and non-
linear equations. Preliminary computations show promisingly large improvements
in speed and efficiency over both plain Monte Carlo and deterministic methods.