* 9322618
* CRB: Restoration &amp; Preservation of Native Fish Populations: Use of Retrospective Data to Couple Life History, Recruit-  ment, &amp; Population Dynamics with Environmental Vicis
* BIO,DEB
* 05/01/1994,04/30/1999
* Richard Radtke, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* Scott L. Collins
* 04/30/1999
* USD 315,430.00

9322618 Radtke A pressing problem for conservation and restoration of freshwater
resources is the lack of sound biological and population information. To
approach this problem it is proposed to utilize amphidromous fishes (gobies and
eleotrids) which are predominant elements of the freshwater fauna on tropical
and subtropical oceanic islands worldwide. Information gathered for one species
will have implications for amphidromous fishes and freshwater habitats
elsewhere. The proposed research relates to such topics as island colonization,
life cycles, reproduction cycles, amphidromy, and recruitment. %%% A plan of
research is proposed which applies novel analytical techniques to evaluate the
critical periods in the life history of fishes that may be affected by
altercation, reduction or fragmentation of habitats. Recruitment from a
planktonic larval stage to a more sedentary adult stage is a common life-history
pattern in many fishes and invertebrates. Because of the disparate nature of
environmental conditions in planktonic and benthic systems, the interplay of
these two modes of existence strongly influences population structure of species
with this life-history pattern; as well as communities in which such species are
common. It is essential to identify which life-history stages and environmental
events are significant to recruitment into adult population. %%% Otolith
techniques have the potential to provide such life-history information. Both
micro structure and chemical composition of otoliths will be investigated, to
determine the causative agents involved in otolith formation. It will then be
possible to interpret past environmental histories of field-captured gobies.
Otolith increment analyses and elemental composition techniques will be applied
to investigations of recruits, juveniles and adult fishes collected from their
natural habitats. Age, growth rate and environmental perturbations will be
determined from otolith analyses. Otolith analyses will provide a chronologic
ally fixed history of each individual study. Otolith techniques are particularly
appropriate where large numbers of individuals can't be used. Also it will be
possible to use any specimens stored in alcohol, thus extending the technique to
museum material. These data sequences will be of great importance to the
management of endangered species since specimens that are in existing
collections could be examined to evaluate past life histories. As a result, the
proposed research will contribute to the development of effective strategies for
the preservation and restoration of populations and thus biodiversity.