* 9322283
* Ecology in Context:  Research Strategies and Applications   for the Undergraduate
* BIO,DBI
* 05/15/1994,12/31/1998
* Stuart Findlay, Cary Institute of Ecosystem Studies, Inc.
* Continuing Grant
* William R. Gordon
* 12/31/1998
* USD 158,628.00

9322283 Berkowitz This award provides funds to continue this successful program
for another three years. The Institute of Ecosystem Studies' Research
Experiences for Undergraduates (IES-REU) program immerses students in a highly
interactive, research-oriented environment. Our major tenet is that success in
science depends on understanding the context of research, as well as the
substance and procedures of a particular discipline. Program goals are: (1) to
provide intensive training in ecological research: (2) to broaden students'
perspectives on the societal, ethical and theoretical contexts of science: and
(3) to give students direct exposure to the life of a research scientist. Eight
students will be brought to the Institute for a twelve-week program in each of
the next three summers, building upon the strengths of highly successful
1988-1993 programs. The program includes the following components: (1) Student
Research Projects; (2) Research Strategies for the Undergraduate, providing
explicit training in and reflection on the research process; (3) Research in
Context, involving a diverse set of programs and activities to broaden students'
perspectives on the various contexts and applications of science; (4) a full-day
Forum on Opportunities in Ecology to expose students to a broad range of
perspectives on the role of ecology and ecologists in the modem world; (5)
Supporting Activities, for group-building, exposure to ecology, etc.; and (6)
Assessment of Student Growth, both to guide the program and to gauge the breadth
and quality of impacts on student career development and their confidence,
competence and understanding of science. Under the guidance of a mentor
scientist, each student delineates a research question and associated
hypotheses. selects appropriate methods, and develops a research plan. Students
then implement the project, ending with analysis and report writing.
Presentations in a formal Research Symposium conclude the summer program. Final
pa pers will be collated and published as an IES Miscellaneous Publication. ***