* 9322418
* Numerical Simulation of Vapor-Liquid Interfaces During      Saturated and Subcooled Film Boiling
* NONE,NONE
* 05/01/1994,04/30/1999
* Vijay Dhir, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Stefan T. Thynell
* 04/30/1999
* USD 201,480.00

ABSTRACT CTS-9322481 Dhir Vapor-liquid interface shape during saturated or
subcooled film boiling on a vertical surface is governed by Kelvin-Helmholtz
Instability whereas it is the Raleigh-Taylor instability that governs the
configuration of the interface during film boiling on horizontal surfaces. The
evolution of the interface and the induced flow field govern the heat and mass
transfer across the interface and in turn the heat transfer from the heater
surface. In this study a complete numerical simulation of the evolution of the
vapor-liquid interface and the accompanied flow and temperature field in the
vapor and the liquid is proposed. The simulation will be carried out without
introducing any empirical constants and will include both linear and non-linear
growth of the interfacial instabilities. In the first phase, the effort will be
limited to only two dimensions, and spectral collocation method along with
SIMPLE algorithm will be used to numerically integrate the governing equations.
The numerical results will also yield the wall superheats at which a continuous
vapor film could not be supported on the heater surface. Thus the results will
provide a completely theoretical basis for prediction of minimum heat fluxes.
The numerical effort will be supported with experimental data already reported
in the literature. If deemed necessary, existing experimental facilities will be
used to obtain the required data on vertical and/or horizontal plates.