* 9322829
* Dynamics of Alkane Oxidation Reactions on Vanadyl           Pyrophosphate Based Catalysts
* ENG,CBET
* 05/01/1994,04/30/1997
* John Gleaves, Washington University
* Continuing grant
* RAUL MIRANDA
* 04/30/1997
* USD 230,000.00

9322829 Gleaves The objective of this work is a dynamic model of alkane
oxidation over vanadium-phosphorus-oxide (VPO) catalysts (also called vanadyl
pyrophosphate catalysts) that explains how such components of the catalytic
system as the VPO lattice, the VPO surface, surface adspecies, and gas-phase
species interact to give products with or without selectivity. The model would
include the mechanism of carbon-hydrogen bond activation and of oxygen addition,
the mechanism of oxygen transport, and the roles of adspecies in determining
selectivity. To this end, the dynamics of the partial oxidation of alkanes
catalyzed by VPO are studied using a combination of transient response and in
situ spectroscopic techniques. A TAP (temporal analysis of products) reactor is
specially modified to permit simultaneous product analysis and in situ infrared
or Raman spectroscopy. The selective conversion of light alkanes to oxygenates
(alcohols, ethers, aldehydes, esters, etc.) is of great interest to the
petrochemical and energy industries. Oxygenates are intermediates for production
of a large array of chemicals, polymers, and plastics, and are also in great
demand as gasoline additives, both to improve octane rating and to reduce
tailpipe pollutants. They are often produced using VPO catalysts, usually from
an olefin feedstock. However, alkanes (paraffins) are a cheaper raw material if
the technology for their partial oxidation could be improved. ***