* 9322353
* Growth of Nickel-Base Superalloy Single Crystals
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/1994,08/31/1998
* Sindo Kou, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Bruce A. MacDonald
* 08/31/1998
* USD 214,580.00

9322353 Kuo Nickel-base superalloys are critical materials to our aerospace
industry and to some areas of our energy industry. Single crystals of nickel-
base superalloys have demonstrated excellent performance in high-temperature gas
turbines. This grant supports a university-industry collaboration on the growth
of shaped single crystals of nickel-base superalloys by pulling from liquid
melts. Single crystals are grown at the University of Wisconsin and tested at
Howmet Corporation, a major producer of single crystals of nickel-base
superalloys for high-temperature gas turbines in the U.S. The objective is to
demonstrate the feasibility of growing low-cost, high-quality single crystals of
constant cross-sections (rods, bars, sheets and tubes). These crystals are
useful for applications where complicated shapes are not required, e.g., single
crystal sheets for turbine engine combustor liners (where gas mixtures ignite).
An advantage is that numerous steps involved in the preparation and removal of
ceramic shell molds are not required and the crystals are not limited to
relatively short lengths, unlike conventional crystal growth of nickel-base
superalloys by investment casting. Attention is focused on growth of single
crystal sheets up to 2 feet long. An improved technique for pulling shaped
crystals, recently developed at the University of Wisconsin's crystal growth
laboratory, is used and heat treating and preliminary screening tests of the
single crystals are conducted by Howmet. %%% A videotape movie showing the
results of the proposed work will be made and copies distributed to the
superalloy industry. It will also be used in two undergraduate materials
processing courses at the University of Wisconsin. ***