* 9322177
* Research Experience for Undergraduates in Prairie Ecology at Prairie Research Natural Area
* BIO,DBI
* 06/15/1994,11/30/1996
* John Zimmerman, Kansas State University
* Standard Grant
* Fred Stollnitz
* 11/30/1996
* USD 54,000.00

This award will establish an REU Site at the Konza Prairie/Long-Term Ecological
Research Site. The program will offer ten undergraduates the opportunity to
study tall grass prairie ecology. Foci of Long-Term Ecological Research (LTER)
project on Konza Prairie include the study of fire and grazing on native
tallgrass prairie. To facilitate investigation of these impacts, watersheds on
Konza Prairie have been assigned to different burn regeims. Additionally, native
and domestic grazers have been introduced to many watersheds. Thus, Konza
Prairie offers a unique opportunity for the study of many aspects of prairie
ecology. The REU project will involve several components including, independent
student research, rotation through existing LTER core research projects, student
journal discussion groups correlated with faculty seminars, an eight- week
ethics course, and several field trips. In order to enhance their professional
development, students will participate in two national scientific meetings. Each
REU student will have both a faculty and graduate student mentor to support
their research research efforts. At the conclusion of the summer, students will
make an oral presentation of the results of their research and, in conjunction
with their mentors, will prepare and submit projects to journals for
publication. The Konza Prairie REU experience will offer students a unique
opportunity to study the ecology of the tallgrass prairie in a productive and
supportive environment.