* 9322699
* CRB:  Conservation and Biodiversity of Mammals Inhabitating Fragmented, Old Growth Forest of the Olympic Peninsula
* BIO,DEB
* 05/01/1994,10/31/1997
* Mark Lomolino, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Standard Grant
* Scott L. Collins
* 10/31/1997
* USD 65,000.00

9322699 Lomolina The proposed study will provide important insights on two
issues central to global efforts to conserve biodiversity, the effects of
fragmentation and the potential benefits of corridors. These studies will
determine the effects of fragmentation on biodiversity of mammals inhabiting
old-growth forests of the Olympic Peninsula. We will use spatial analysis
techniques to investigate how the structure of old-growth forest communities
reflects differences amount species, forest fragments and surrounding
landscapes. Subsequently, we will use these patterns to assess the importance of
corridors and the habitat matrix, on the biodiversity of old-growth forest
mammals, and landscape features which favor immigrations of forest mammals. %%%
We will adopt a multiscale, or hierarchical approach in our attempt to assess
the effects of fragmentation of old-growth forests. Field studies will employ a
combination of livetrapping, sign (tracks, scats, etc.), habitat and camera
surveys conducted in nine continuous forest sites, 30 fragments of old-growth
forest, and 10 locations along corridors and within clearcuts. Resultant data
will be subjected to Monte Carlo, regression and correlation analyses to test
predictions regarding fragmentation and biodiversity. %%% The information we
will provide on distribution patterns in the fragmented landscape of Olympic
National Forest will facilitate efforts to manage these forests for mammals and
dependent species such as spotted owls. This research also will provide general
insights regarding forest fragmentation by serving as a rigorous case study that
documents the effects of fragmentation and assesses the influence of key
processes influencing biodiversity.