* 9322795
* CRB: Collaborative:  The Importance of Hybridization in the Evolution and Ecology of Carpobrotus Species in California
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/1994,02/29/1996
* Kristina Schierenbeck, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Scott L. Collins
* 02/29/1996
* USD 49,764.00

9322795 D'Antonio The widespread occurrence of biological invasions offers the
opportunity to study changes in the dynamics and genetics of populations and the
ecological effects of those changes. Such changes are important in light of the
increasing mixing and homogenization of the world's species and habitats. This
study will address the evolutionary and ecological importance of genetic changes
resulting from hybridization between two closely related plant species which
have recently come into contact as a result of human activity. Carpobrotus
edulis is an aggressive South African perennial introduced into California in
the early 1900's where it invades coastal dune, grassland and scrub habitats.
Carpobrotus chilensis is a less aggressive species that was common throughout
California before the introduction of C. edulis. It exhibits little competitive
pressure on native dune species. In this study, the investigators will combine
genetic techniques and field experiments to establish the extent to which
hybridization is occurring between these species and examine the effect of
hybridization and introgression on morphological, ecological and fitness
characteristics important to successful establishment and invasion. Also, some
of the community-level consequences of hybridization will be identified. %%% The
historical separation of these species provides the ideal system in which to
measure gene flow and corresponding changes in fitness and ecological
adaptation. The results of this study will contribute to understanding the
impact of hybridization on the genetic integrity of native species and the
conservation of native ecosystems.