* 9322776
* Chemical Defense in Marine Organisms
* MPS,CHE
* 05/01/1994,04/30/1998
* William Fenical, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Continuing Grant
* Kenneth M. Doxsee
* 04/30/1998
* USD 345,000.00

The focus of this research is a chemically-based program to explore the natural
products chemistry and chemical ecology of marine plants and animals. Chemical
studies of new, bioactive natural products from ascidians, gorgonians and
bryozoans will be carried out, involving the application of new methods in
separation science and organic structure determination. Also studies to
comprehend the regioselective reactivities and skeletal interrelationships of
selected secondary metabolites will be explored. Working with marine ecologists
studies will be performed to illustrate the possible functions, such as chemical
defense, of secondary metabolites in competitive marine habitats. The project
emphasizes ecologically relevant testing of pure substances using natural
predators in controlled experiments in a natural marine setting. With this
award, the Synthetic Organic Program is supporting the research of Dr. William
H. Fenical of the Marine Research Division at the University of California, San
Diego's Scripps Institution of Oceanography. Professor Fenical will focus his
work on exploring the natural products chemistry and chemical ecology of marine
plants and animals. The project will study the sources, types and reactivities
of molecules produced by marine organisms and will explore the natural functions
of these molecules in the interspecies interactions within marine habitats. By
creating a linkage of chemists and biologists, the program will allow one to
understand how these organic molecules influence the biological composition of
tropical marine environments.