* 9322655
* CRB: Inbreeding Depression and Adaptive Genetic Variation   in Gila Topminnows
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/1994,11/30/1997
* Wendell Minckley, Arizona State University
* Continuing Grant
* Mark Courtney
* 11/30/1997
* USD 228,161.00

9322655 Hedrick In this research, the PI's will examine inbreeding depression
over two generations for several components of fitness in different populations
of the endangered species, the Gila topminnow. In a series of experiments, the
PI's will compare fitness values between progeny of sib matings and the progeny
of random matings between individuals within the same population. Next, the PI's
will measure the effect of crossing individuals from different populations on
the same fitness components. Populations of topminnows were thought to undergo
periodic oscillations with population bottlenecks, local extinctions,
recolonizations, and even crossing between populations. As a result, it is
important in determining the pattern of genetic variation over populations
whether crosses between individuals from different populations are no different
than within population crosses, are heterotic, or show outbreeding depression.
These crosses should give information on whether the different populations are
fixed for detrimental alleles that can be covered up by outcrossing or are so
different that F1 and F2 progeny have reduced fitness. The major
histocompatibility complex may be the most important adaptive genetic region in
mammals, conferring resistance to various pathogens. Recent work in fish has
demonstrated that there is extensive variation for MHC in several species and
that the pattern of variation is consistent with that in mammals. The PI's will
document the extent and pattern of MHC in the four metapopulations of the Gila
topminnow to determine if this species, which is fixed for allozymic variation
in all populations except one, has variation in this important adaptive region.
%%% The primary principles of conservation genetics are related to inbreeding
depression and the retention of potentially adaptive genetic variation. It is
therefore of fundamental importance to characterize both the extent of
inbreeding depression and adaptive genetic variation in particular endangered
species. In this study, the PI's have a unique opportunity to measure these
values in the endangered Gila topminnow which exists in only four natural
populations in sub-basins of springs and headwater streams in Arizona. In
addition, this research will add further information on variability in the major
histocompatibility complex which has received only limited attention in fish.
***