* 9322269
* U.S.-Australia Cooperative Science Program:  International  Chautauqua Short Course Program in Australia
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/1994,08/20/1999
* Francis Collea, California State University, Trustees
* Standard Grant
* Alexander P. DeAngelis
* 08/20/1999
* USD 128,056.00

9322269 Collea The Chautauqua Short Courses are an annual series of forums in
which scholars from various sciences meet for several days with undergraduate
faculty to communicate new knowledge, concepts and techniques which are
immediately beneficial to teaching and research. This program, which was
initiated in 1970, continues to receive National Science Foundation funding.
This award, under the direction of Dr. Francis P. Collea, Director of Research
and Sponsored Programs for the California State University System, and Prof.
Nicholas Eror, Executive Director of the U.S. Chautauqua Program and Chair of
the Materials Sciences Department at the University of Pittsburgh, will examine
the transferability of this mechanism from an American to an Australian setting.
Prof. Terry Hore, Director of the Higher Education Advisory and Research Unit at
Monash University in Clayton, Victoria, serves as the primary Australian
counterpart. Australia was selected for this internationalization of the
Chautauqua Program based on the belief by the U.S. organizing group that
Australia offered the greatest opportunity for the widest dissemination of the
courses, the Australian counterparts would aggressively promote attendance, and
that nine Australian universities have agreed to participate in the program.
Over the past three years ten Chautauqua Short Courses received outstanding
reviews in that every participant gave it an outstanding rating. In consultation
with the Australian organizers, three of these courses have been selected for
use in Australia. These courses are: Research on Learning Physics and
Implications for Instruction; Molecular Approaches to the Study of Genetics,
Evolution, Ecology, Systematics, Behavior, and Conservation Biology; and,
Creating Interactive HyperMedia Using HyperCard. Each of the three courses will
be offered three times, thus the nine participating Australian universities will
each serve as a course site. This award primarily covers the travel and per diem
expenses of the American scholars providing the course instruction. Some
additional support costs including supplies, publications and evaluation costs
are also included. It is anticipated that through the support of the American-
Australian Studies Foundation a reciprocal program will be mounted during the
1995-1996 academic year in which Australian scholars will present short courses
in the U.S.