* 9322613
* Mathematical Sciences: Problem in Set-Theoretic Topology
* NONE,NONE
* 07/15/1994,06/30/1998
* Peter Nyikos, University of South Carolina at Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Ralph M. Krause
* 06/30/1998
* USD 84,000.00

9322613 Nyikos This project is aimed at some problem areas where interaction
between topologists and set theorists seems likely to lead to significant
progress in both areas. Set-theoretic topology has grown explosively in the last
two decades as a result of such interaction, stimulating much fruitful research
in set theory as well. In the last few years, however, the flow of results has
shown signs of abating, and the development of new set-theoretic axioms and
techniques will probably be needed to keep this area of topology in good health.
The problem areas on which particular stress will be laid are hereditary
normality; the structure and products of countably compact spaces; and the
theory of nonmetrizable manifolds. Set-theoretic topology is more of a
foundational subject than the rest of topology, primarily concerning itself with
very abstract spaces and with the impact on topology of the adoption of variants
of the axioms of set theory. Secondarily, it has applications not only to set
theory and the rest of topology, but also to analysis and algebra, particularly
the theory of Boolean algebras. Nyikos's research has emphasized all these
aspects. For example, he has done an extensive study of the differential
structures (i.e. smoothings) that can be imposed on the long line, and of the
associated 2-dimensional manifold of its tangent vectors, providing valuable
heuristics for those wishing to understand nontrivial smoothings of more
familiar but higher-dimensional manifolds. (This is a subject of major
importance today, especially in 4 dimensions, where the interplay with
theoretical physics is strong.) Some of the smoothings of the long line required
axioms outside the usual axioms of set theory. Nyikos has been a leader in the
use of these axioms in set-theoretic topology ever since his involvement over a
decade ago in the discovery that a famous unproved conjecture concerning Moore
spaces was actually independent of the usual basic axiom s of set theory.
Moreover, this conjecture was shown to be inconsistent with the Cantor Continuum
Hypothesis, a far more familiar proposition that most working mathematicians
would be likely to choose if they had to make a choice. This result suggests the
flavor of the best set-theoretic topology. ***