* 9322221
* Research Experiences in Marine Physiology
* BIO,DBI
* 06/01/1994,05/31/1996
* Barbara Kent, Mount Desert Island Biological Laboratory
* Continuing Grant
* Fred Stollnitz
* 05/31/1996
* USD 100,000.00

9322221 Kent This award provides funds to establish an REU Site at the Mount
Desert Island Biological Laboratory in Salsbury Cove, Maine. Ten undergraduate
biology students, the majority of whom are expected to be African-American, will
spend eight weeks during the summer working at the bench, paired with a senior
scientist leading a research team working on timely questions involving marine
physiology. Using sharks, skates, flounder and other sea animals, students will
explore questions involving marine physiology. Using sharks, skates, flounder
and other sea animals, students will explore questions at the mechanistic level
concerning reproduction, osmoregulation, acid base balance, and ion transport.
Orientation lectures on basic concepts of marine physiology and molecular
biology during the first week will be supplemented by weekly evening lectures on
these subjects designed to encourage discussion by the students. Undergraduates
will attend the three weekly laboratory-wide science seminars on topics related
to marine physiology. They will participate in a special ethics course taught
around expert lectures and group discussions of cases illustrating the ethical
issues with which scientists are confronted. The research experience will be
completed by each student giving a talk to the lab community on his/her results
and writing a research paper for publication in the laboratory Bulletin. ***