* 9322240
* Conference Support for BETECH '94; March 16-18, 1994 in     Orlando, Florida.
* ENG,ECCS
* 03/15/1994,02/28/1995
* Alain Kassab, The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Standard Grant
* George K. Lea
* 02/28/1995
* USD 10,700.00

9322240 Kassab The 9th International Conference on Boundary Element Technology
(BETECH 94) will be hosted by the University of Central Florida in Orlando,
Florida during March 16-18, 1994. The Boundary Element Method (BEM) has now
reached a stage in its development where it is no longer purely a research tool
used by academics but a viable analytical technique for engineering analysis and
design. Indeed, the BEM is making inroads with industrial users. There exists a
need for an international forum for researchers to exchange ideas and expose
industrial users to their developments and conversely for industrial users to
expose researchers to novel issues arising form their experience in using the
BEM. The ninth Boundary Element Technology Conference to be held in Orlando will
provide a forum for the exchange of ideas between, industrial users, boundary
element researchers, and commercial and research code developers. It is co-
organized by the Wessex Institute of Technology which is part of the Florida
State University System. There is much local industrial interest in the BEM as
is evidenced by the letters provided by the industrial members of the Local
Organizing Committee. Further, the Florida Section of the ASME has sponsored the
conference and will be instrumental in publicizing and supporting the
Conference. The International Society for Boundary Elements (ISBE) will sponsor
the Conference and will publicize it in its newsletter. The Proceedings of the
Conference will be published by Computational Mechanics and Elsevier Press, will
be distributed to all delegates, and will serve as an important source of
reference in the applications of the BEM. The proceeding will be disseminated
worldwide by the publishers. ***