* 9322104
* REU SITE:  Research Experiences for Undergraduates at the   University of Virginia
* MPS,PHY
* 05/01/1994,04/30/1997
* John Gordon, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Rolf M. Sinclair
* 04/30/1997
* USD 229,600.00

The excellent research facilities, the dedicated teaching and research faculty,
and research staff and the commitment to higher education by the State
establishes the University of Virginia in Charlottesville as an ideal setting
for an REU Site. This program will continue with 16 undergraduate students with
approximately half from U Va and the other half from other institutions.
Projects cover a broad range of experimental research including nuclear and high
energy physics, atomic, molecular, condensed matter and biological physics
providing an opportunity for students with a wide range of interests. In
particular, students will learn about the structure of light nuclei, electron
and proton scattering from nuclei, momentum analysis with magnetic
spectrometers, scintillator and surface barrier particle detectors, gas handling
systems for accelerators, digital and analog electronics, computer hardware and
software, ultra-low temperature, adiabatic demagnetization, ultra high- vacuum
techniques, studies of gas adsorption on graphite, laser spectroscopy techniques
for the study of molecules and atoms interacting with external fields, x-ray
diffraction from macromolecules, hyperthermia studies of deep seated brain
tumors, optical absorption studies of hemeproteins and gravitational phenomena.
Students will participate over a ten week period in the summer and U Va students
will continue throughout the academic year.