* 9322342
* Research Experience for Undergraduates Site Project:        Undergraduate Research in Plant Biology
* BIO,DBI
* 06/01/1994,05/31/1998
* Richard Blanton, Texas Tech University
* Continuing Grant
* William R. Gordon
* 05/31/1998
* USD 171,250.00

9322342 Blanton This award provides funds to the Department of Biological
Sciences at Texas Tech University to establish a Research Experiences for
Undergraduates Site. The goal of this project is to involve undergraduate
students in basic research in plant biology. Students often have an inherent
bias towards research involving animals. This program will try and overcome this
bias by presenting the students with the opportunity to participate in a plant-
focused program involving a variety of disciplines, approaches, and techniques.
Eleven plant scientists in three department have volunteered to serve as
mentors. They included biochemists, cell biologists, developmental biologists,
molecular biologists, physiologists and systematists. Opportunities exist for
both field-oriented and laboratory- oriented research. Available research
techniques include DNA sequencing, protein electrophoresis and immunoblotting,
immunocytochemistry, light and electron microscopy, in situ hybridation,
analysis of genomes using PCR-based methods, isozyme analysis,
spectrophotometric analysis of enzyme activities, plant tissue culture, plant
transformations, and a variety of molecular biological methods. Aspects of the
program that should enhance its potential for success include: (1) a group
orientation session in which the students will learn basic laboratory skills,
engage in radiation and chemical safety training, and be introduced to using the
library to find scientific literature; (2) an effort to develop student
camaraderie by presenting the students with the opportunity to participate in
group activities with the other plant biology students as well as a larger group
of biology undergraduate research students; and (3) the provision by a related
program of funds for quests speakers in the plant sciences, student travel funds
to attend meetings, and student research supply funds. ***