* 9322162
* Research Experiences for Undergraduates in Ecology and      Conservation Biology
* BIO,DBI
* 05/01/1994,04/30/1998
* Jeremy Hatch, University of Massachusetts Boston
* Continuing Grant
* William R. Gordon
* 04/30/1998
* USD 162,000.00

9322162 Hatch This award provides funds to continue a successful REU SITE at the
University of Massachusetts, Boston for another three years. The two
complementary components of the program are: (1) individual research projects in
which each student works closely with an advisor/mentor experienced with
undergraduates, and (2) weekly lectures/discussions for all the students. Eleven
undergraduates will participate in research with nine faculty sponsors in the
Department of Biology. Students will be recruited intensively in the Boston area
and also elsewhere in New England and further afield, with particular attention
to women, minorities and non-traditional students. The research is focused on
issues of biodiversity and conservation ecology but topics are intentionally
diverse. They include three on the behavioral ecology of rare/endangered
vertebrates, and others on the physiological ecology of Lepidoptera, the
diversity of bacteria, the genetics of endangered plants, and the genetic
diversity of deep-sea mollusks. Each student will prepare a report and present a
short paper in a student research symposium. The group meetings will address the
theory and practice of research and its conduct or its implications, including
ethical issues. Some of these ethical components will be shared with REU
students at Wellesley College and Boston University. Participants will also
visit two or more field sites and learn directly about each others' projects. A
small hands-on workshop on molecular techniques will show the great potential of
such methods for ecology. An end-of-session retreat at the University Field
Station on Nantucket Island will serve to articulate impressions, explore
philosophical issues, and weave together some of the summers' threads. ***