* 9322188
* Dissertation Research:  Combining Physiological and         Ecological Approaches to Decision and Choice
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/1994,01/31/1996
* Andrew Sih, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* None
* 01/31/1996
* USD 3,853.00

A central goal in behavioral ecology is to understand factors that explain
variations in mating systems. The role that ecological variation plays in
structuring mating systems is poorly understood. In Mr. Timothy Sparkes'
doctoral-dissertation research, he will use a combination of physiological
techniques and laboratory experiments to examine the role that ecological
factors play in affecting mate-choice decisions. The focal organism is a
freshwater crustacean, Lirceus fontinalis. Completed work has documented that
variation in ecological factors (in particular, predation risk) among
populations results in population-specific optima for life-history traits.
Population differences in life histories, in turn, influence the optima for
other traits, e.g., mate choice. The research will test hypotheses about the
role that ecological variation plays in determining mate-choice decisions.
Overall, this research program should provide an usually complete synthesis on
the effects of ecological factors on a suite of interrelated prey adaptations.
There are 3 components: (A.) Behavioral experiments to determine mate-choice
criteria for individuals of each sex. (B.) A combination of physiological and
behavioral experiments to examine variation in mating behavior as a consequence
of physiological state. (C.) A behavioral experiment to determine the role that
predation plays in explaining variations in mate-choice decisions.