* 9322619
* Mathematical Sciences:  Inverse Boundary Problems
* MPS,DMS
* 04/01/1994,09/30/1997
* Gunther Uhlmann, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 09/30/1997
* USD 123,000.00

9322619 Uhlmann This award supports a continuation of mathematical research on
problems arising in electrical impedance tomography. In particular, work will be
done extending known results in the isotropic case to the physical case of non-
smooth conductivities, to characterize, in two dimensions, all the possible
outcomes of the experiments performed at the boundary and to consider the
identifiability problem for anisotropic conductivities in dimensions three or
greater. The project furthers work on other inverse boundary value problems
arising in applications. They include the question of determining the Lame
parameters of a medium by making measurements of displacements and stresses at
the boundary and the problems of determining the magnetic and electric
potentials of a body by making measurements at the boundary. Plans to consider
two formally determined inverse problems which involve scattering observations
will also be carried out. One is the inverse scattering problem at a fixed
energy in two dimensions; the other is the inverse backscattering problem for
singular potentials. Finally, work will be done on the admissibility problem in
tomography, i.e. determining families of k-planes on which the k-plane transform
is injective. It is planned to find relative inversion formulas (modulo
smoothing) in such cases. This work falls within the general area of research on
nonlinear partial differential equations and inverse problems. The questions
often lie close to physical applications arising from diverse areas as
tomography, conductivity and scattering. That is, to find characteristics of
some unknown by observing the effect of some physical process which involves the
unknown. ***