* 9322013
* Research Experiences for Undergraduates in Neuroscience at  the University of Maryland, College Park
* BIO,DBI
* 05/01/1994,10/31/1997
* Joelle Presson, University of Maryland, College Park
* Continuing Grant
* Fred Stollnitz
* 10/31/1997
* USD 149,850.00

9322013 Presson This award provides funds to the University of Maryland to
continue their successful REU program in the area of Neuroscience for an
additional three years. In this extension, the PIs have built upon their
experience to focus on fostering critical thinking skills in student
participants. The inclusion of both spring introductory activities, and a final
fall "independent contribution" assignment further integrate the program.
Students will truly experience the development of their understanding of, and
contribution to, a scientific project. In addition, we have expanded the
students' involvement in extracurricular activities so that their time here is
even more fully integrated around their research experience. The REU program is
run by the site Director, Dr. Joelle Presson, who is intimately involved with
the students. She runs the summer journal club, and is a mentor for REU students
in her own lab. The 17 participating REU faculty are all active, productive
researchers in the Center for Neuroscience at University of Maryland, College
Park. These faculty come from diverse departments on campus, and form an
interactive Neuroscience community here. We are all supportive of the goals for
our new program, and look forward to giving students these valuable
opportunities. ***