* 9322471
* Research Experience for Undergraduates in the Geosciences
* GEO,EAR
* 04/15/1994,09/30/1996
* Paul Layer, University of Alaska Fairbanks Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Michael A. Mayhew
* 09/30/1996
* USD 90,000.00

9322471 Christensen Research Experience for Undergraduates (REU) site grant
support is requested for 8 students in Solid Earth Geophysics for each of the
next three years at the Geophysical Institute, University of Alaska Fairbanks.
The program will give undergraduates majoring in geology, geophysics, physics,
and closely related disciplines, experience working in a research environment.
The program objective is to acquaint undergraduates with exciting research
opportunities in the various fields of geophysics concentrating on seismology,
volcanology, geochronology, geochemistry, paleomagnetics and tectonics and
encouraging the undergraduates to go on to graduate school in these or other
scientific fields. Women and minorities will be particularly encouraged to
apply. Many of the students will be recruited from small liberal arts colleges
throughout the Nation, and programs like this are likely to be their only
opportunity for in depth exposure to the fields of solid earth sciences before
they must make decisions regarding graduate school. In their contacts with
graduate students and by attending seminars and thesis defenses, the students
will obtain an accurate perspective of graduate student life. In this program,
students are assigned to work with individual faculty investigators on projects
assigned by the investigators. In addition there will be an organized series of
weekly lectures and field trips to expose students to other fields of research
beyond the scope of their own project.