* 9322498
* Mathematical Sciences: Shift Dynamics, Symmetry and         and Algebriac K-Theory
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/1994,08/31/1998
* John Wagoner, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing grant
* Ralph M. Krause
* 08/31/1998
* USD 156,000.00

9322498 Wagoner This project will investigate the dynamics of shift spaces and
flows, their symmetry groups, and connections with algebraic K-theory. There are
generally many ways of describing or constructing shift systems which have
essentially the same dynamical behaviour. Even in the one-dimensional case,
effectively recognizing when two concrete models are equivalent is a fundamental
open problem. Another natural and related problem is to understand the different
equivalences or symmetries between two systems. One approach to the
classification and symmetry group problems for one-dimensional shift systems
which has led to progress on some of the main problems in the field in recent
years involves analogies from algebraic K-theory. In turn, the geometry of both
discrete-time and continuous-time dynamical systems and their symmetry groups
has very naturally given rise to a new type of positive algebraic K-theory for
ordered rings, using the usual row and column operations on matrices, but with
certain inequalities imposed. The main mathematical structures under
investigation here, shift dynamical systems and Markov chains, are useful models
for phenomena in areas ranging from differential equations, to statistical
mechanics, to information and coding theory. However, their usefulness is
impaired by the surprising difficulty of deciding when two shift systems which
arose in different ways enjoy essentially the same dynamical behaviour. This is
related to understanding the different equivalences or symmetries between two
systems. (Symmetries of a given system are often called reversible cellular
automata.) Now the investigator has shown that a very abstract algebraic theory
known as algebraic K-theory can be invaluable in addressing some of these
problems. Analogies from algebraic K-theory have led unexpectedly to exciting
progress on some of the main problems in symbolic dynamics. Moreover, looking at
matters the other way round has led to a new type of K-theory, whose problems
are of interest both intrinsically and for the insight they will bring back to
dynamical systems and their symmetries. ***