* 9322274
* Mathematical Sciences: Mathematical Problems in Compressible Fluid Flow
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/1994,11/30/1997
* David Hoff, Indiana University
* Continuing Grant
* Deborah Lockhart
* 11/30/1997
* USD 79,000.00

- The proposer will investigate various questions relating to the existence,
stability, regularity, large-time behavior, and numerical approximation of
solutions of systems of certain partial differential equations arising in the
theory of viscous, compressible fluid flow. Discontinuous solutions are of
particular interest, and play a unifying role in the project. A fairly well-
developed theory has been attained in previous work for flows in one space
dimension and for flows which are spherically symmetric. More recent research
has extended some of these results to general multidimensional flows. A great
deal of work remains to be done for multidimensional flows, however, and this
will occupy the greater part of the project. It is also proposed to continue
work on various issues remaining for one-dimensional flows, especially the
rigorous mathematical analysis of viscous contact discontinuities. The proposer
will study various mathematical questions concerning important models of
compressible fluid flow. These models arise in a broad range of applications,
from supersonic flight to dynamic meteorology, among many others. While the main
purpose for constructing these models is to achieve a predictive capability,
they are far too complicated to be "solved" in any explicit sense. On the other
hand, adequate approximate solutions can often be generated by computer methods.
However, the intelligent design of such methods depends crucially on a rigorous
understanding of why solutions do exist, in what sense, and in what ways they
are sensitive to noise in the data. The primary goal of this project is
therefore to provide such a rigorous mathematical analysis for these models; a
secondary objective is to apply these mathematical insights to the intelligent
design and analysis of algorithms for generating approximate solutions.