* 9322288
* Undergraduate Neurosciences Summer Research Program in      Mechanisms of Behavior
* BIO,DBI
* 05/01/1994,10/31/1997
* Warren Hall, Duke University
* Continuing Grant
* Fred Stollnitz
* 10/31/1997
* USD 150,000.00

9322288 Hall This award provides funds to the Undergraduate Neurosciences
Program at Duke University plans a summer research program for undergraduates
who will have the opportunity to become involved in neuroscience research at a
major university Research and training experiences will be organized around the
theme of "Mechanisms of Behavior" The emphasis on integrative, systems, and
behavioral neuroscience that unifies faculty research interests within this
interdisciplinary field at Duke serves as the common theme for the individual
projects available to student participants in the program The focus of the ten
week summer program for each student will be a research mentorship with a
participating faculty member Three weekly seminar series -- "Research in the
Neurosciences," "Science Basics," and "Science Ethics and Practice" -- will be
included in the summer schedule "Research in the Neurosciences" will focus on
ongoing faculty research so that students gain exposure to the field of
neuroscience research beyond their own mentor's specific interests "Science
Basics" will address practical matters pertaining to science careers"Science
Ethics and Practice" will bring in outside speakers to address ethics issues
such as fraud and animal welfare, and will also involve panel discussion of
practical topics such as balancing career and family, life as a science graduate
student, and continuing research as an undergraduate The summer program will
begin with a two day Orientation Conference and will close with a Research Forum
at which students present their results Applications to participate in
"Mechanisms in Behavior" will be accepted from sophomore undergraduates. The
Program is especially interested in receiving applications from undergraduates
at liberal arts colleges. ***