* 9322687
* The Morphological Evolution of Particles in Elastically     Stressed Solids
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/1994,06/30/1998
* Peter Voorhees, Northwestern University
* Continuing Grant
* Bruce A. MacDonald
* 06/30/1998
* USD 250,016.00

9322687 Voorhees The properties of many alloys of engineering significance are
related to the morphology and spatial distribution of coherent second-phase
particles. In many cases elastic stress is present in these two-phase systems
resulting from either a difference in lattice parameters between the minority
phase particles and the matrix, or an applied stress. As an understanding of the
factors controlling the morphology of a particle in a stressed crystalline solid
is not at hand, it is difficult to predict the properties of these multiphase
materials. This lack of understanding can be traced to the limited number of
studies that have investigated the factors controlling the equilibrium shape of
a coherent misfitting particle, i.e. the shape that minimizes the total energy
of the system subject to all possible variations in particle morphology.
Nevertheless, these few studies have shown that the presence of elastic stress
can lead to qualitatively different phenomena than in the absence of stress,
such as multiple equilibrium shapes for a given set of materials parameters,
particle splitting and non convex, hourglass-like, equilibrium shapes. %%%% A
major goal of this project is to provide a picture of the generic role elastic
stress plays in the development of the equilibrium morphology of a misfitting
three-dimensional particle. As the equations which determine the equilibrium
shape of a misfitting particle are highly nonlinear, a far more complex particle
shape bifurcation structure is present in three-dimensions than observed in
previous work on the equilibrium shape of a particle in two- dimensions. Despite
the numerical nature of the study and the specific assumptions employed in each
section of the work, a general framework for understanding and predicting the
morphological evolution of particles in stressed solids will be provided.
Finally, this theory will be used in concert with experiments to investigate the
effects of a nondilation al misfit on the morphology of misfitting particles in
an elastically anisotropic system. ***