* 9322700
* Atmosphere-Ocean Radiative Interactions in the Arctic:      A Shipboard Measurement Program
* GEO,OPP
* 05/15/1994,04/30/1998
* Dan Lubin, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Continuing Grant
* Michael T. Ledbetter
* 04/30/1998
* USD 235,248.00

9322700 Lubin Research supported by this grant is under the auspices of the
Arctic Systems Science (ARCSS) Global Change Research Program and is jointly
sponsored by the Division of Ocean Sciences and the Office of Polar Programs.
The research will be centered around a unique and intensive, multidisciplinary
research expedition to parts of the Arctic Ocean that have never been
extensively studied. The 1994 U.S./Canada Arctic Ocean Section is a
collaborative effort with Canada that will involve approximately 60 scientists
on a Canadian and a U.S. icebreaker during summer 1994. NSF-funded projects will
focus on hydrography, biology, paleo-, and sea-ice studies. Data collected will
be amongst the first ever from several regions of the Arctic Ocean and will be
highly relevant to improving our understanding of how the Arctic is an indicator
of changing global climate conditions and how it affects the physical, chemical,
and biological features of the more temperate oceans and regions. This component
of the program involves shortwave and longwave measurements of the surface flux
and optical properties of clouds, haze, and the clear atmosphere in the Arctic.
The CalSpace FTIR spectroradiometer will be installed on the U.S. icebreaker to
measure zenith emission spectra in the longwave. These data will be used to
compile a climatology of cloud emissivity, optical depth, and effective radius
of droplet size distribution. Shortwave measurements will be taken using a four-
channel solar radiometer system. A zenith sky camera will be included, along
with a standard Eppley Pyranometer and Pyrgeometer for monitoring purposes along
the ship track. Satellite data from the NOAA Polar Orbiters and the Defense
Meteorology Satellite Program will be recorded using the on board TereScan
facilities such that Arctic radiative processes can be studies from "both sides"
of the atmosphere. This will allow for refining cloud detection and radiation
budget algorithms. These integrated measurements have direct bearing on our
understanding of how clouds affect the transfer of heat between the atmosphere
and the Arctic, which in turn impact on our ability to understand and predict
climate variability. ***