* 9322801
* SURFing the Physics Lab:  A NIST/NSF Partnership for        AMO Physics
* MPS,PHY
* 03/15/1994,08/31/1997
* Marc Desrosiers, NATIONAL INSTITUTE OF STANDARDS AND TECHNOLOGY
* Interagency Agreement
* Terrence W. Rettig
* 08/31/1997
* USD 165,461.00

9322801 King This activity will partially support a summer undergraduate
research group at NIST/Gaithersburg. To strengthen undergraduate AMO physics
curricula, the program director will work with department chairs and directors
of centers of excellence to identify two undergraduates from each institution
who are prepared for, and would benefit from off-campus summer research in AMO
physics. The selected 20 students will spend 12 weeks actively engaged, one-on-
one with NIST staff physicists in projects combining quests for fundamental
knowledge with direct applications to problems of national importance. Seeing
how they can make a difference and learning about non-academic alternatives for
research careers are side benefits. Student and advisor will be paired based on
background and interests, to facilitate dialogue between the student, the
student's physics professors and NIST advisor about the intended project -
ensuring the student arrives at NIST ready to contribute, and preparing the
student's professors for follow-up in the fall. The students will collectively
live in a nearby furnished apartment complex and participate in the many NIST
seminars and in a weekly SURFing the Physics Lab Summer Seminar Series. The
students will all present their research in a seminar at NIST and be encouraged
to participate in a scientific conference during the following year. Costs for
this program will be shared by NIST, NSF and the participating schools. Given
the significant lack of diversity in the present physics work force, this
partnership will aggressively seek out competitive students from
underrepresented group s and with disabilities. *** ! ! B 3 Times New Roman
Symbol &amp; Arial 1 Courier r r 0 0 r " h G ' C R:\WW20USER\ABSTRACT.DOT Denise
Henry Denise Henry