* 9341271
* Predictability of the Monthly and Seasonal Average Circulation of the Atmosphere
* NONE,NONE
* 06/01/1993,11/30/1994
* Jagadish Shukla, Institute of Global Environment and Society
* Standard Grant
* Jay S. Fein
* 11/30/1994
* USD 959,055.00

The PI will carry out modeling and diagnostic studies to investigate the
interannual variability and predictability of the monthly and seasonal average
circulation of the atmosphere. The long term goal is to investigate the
predictability of the coupled ocean-atmosphere-land system. To accomplish this
objective, the strategy is to utilize realistic models of the individual
components (atmosphere, ocean, and land surface processes) to carry out
sensitivity and predictability studies first to examine the predictability of
each component separately, and ultimately to examine the predictability of the
coupled interactive system. The PI and his group will continue their ongoing
research on the predictability of space-time averaged atmospheric circulation to
establish a physical basis for, and demonstrate and the feasibility of dynamic
extended range forecasting. To accomplish the above objective the PI will
continue to improve the NMC-derived atmospheric general circulation model so
that its ability to simulate the annual cycle and interannual variability
including space-time fluctuations is further improved. He will also use this
model in conjunction with real conditions at the earth's surface to investigate
the predictability of the regional space-to,e averaged circulation of the
atmosphere. This research is important because it will provide a readily applied
basis for improvements in operational weather and climate prediction models.