* 9344212
* Dynamic Reassimilation of Atmospheric Observations for Global Climate Change Studies: A Feasibility Study
* NONE,NONE
* 06/01/1993,11/30/1994
* James Kinter, Institute of Global Environment and Society
* Standard Grant
* Jay S. Fein
* 11/30/1994
* USD 554,055.00

The PIs will produce a four-dimensional internally consistent gridded data set
for the global atmosphere for the period May 1982 to November 1983. They will do
so by assembling the most complete set of atmospheric and oceanic observations
made during that period and by using a state-of-the-art multivariate optimal
interpolation scheme for atmospheric data assimilation. The primary motivation
or this work is to demonstrate the feasibility of reanalyzing past atmospheric
observations using a state-of-the-art global model and a global data
assimilation system. Such a feasibility study is needed before making plans for
reanalysis of long term (> 10 years) historical data sets for climate research.
The data assimilation system to be used will include the COLA general
circulation model, the forecast of which will provide the first guess, and most
accurate optimum interpolation gorithm available. The observational data se will
be a combination for level II-data archived in real time during the period and
delayed mode data, including the comprehensive Ocean-Atmosphere Data Set
(COADS), which have been assembled at NCAR. The critical evaluations of the
analyses will include general circulation statistics; global and local energy
spectra; global energetic diagnoses including generation and dissipation of
energy; a detailed examination of the global hydrologic cycle including regional
budgets for the tropical Pacific, North America, the Amazon basin, and sub-
Saharan Africa; and computations of surface wind stress and total heat flux to
force a global ocean model. The PIs will archive the various measures of
analysis error obtained during the assimilation cycle to study the quality of
the analyses and to provide confidence estimates and error bars. This study will
be extremely useful to support the scientific objectives of national and
international research programs such as the Tropical Oceans Global Atmospheric
(TOGA), World Ocean Circulation Experiment (WOCE), Global Energy and Water Cycle
Experiment (GEWEX) and International Geosphere Biosphere Program (IGBP). The PIs
have chosen the 1982--83 period for this study because it witnessed the most
outstanding example of ocean- atmosphere interactions as manifested by the El
Nino-Southern Oscillation phenomenon and its related world-wide effects.