* 9350079
* Rapid In Vivo Testing of Tissue-specific Promoters Using an Insect Virus Vector System (Biological Science)
* EHR,HRD
* 07/01/1993,06/30/1996
* Sara (Sally) Tobin, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Margrete S. Klein
* 06/30/1996
* USD 194,422.00

The action of regulatory components during development is a crucial issue for
biological research, but investigations of such components are restricted to a
few well known model systems. Dr. Tobin will undertake a novel system for
analysis of complex, tissue-specific regulation of developmental genes in
insects by utilizing baculovirus vectors to carry promoter-reporter constructs
into lepidopteran larvae. She will test application of this approach by
investigating the elements responsible for expression of actin in the
microvillae of the intestinal brush border cells. She will then address the
ability of this system to define similar elements of the 5C Drosophila actin
gene in lepidopteran larvae. This system will permit rapid, in vivo testing of
DNA promoter fragments to regulate activity of the reporter gene and detect both
temporal and tissue-specific regulation. Interactive activities at the host
institution include: co- teaching a freshman course that is part of a Howard
Hughes Foundation program designed to attract minorities and women into
biological sciences. Dr. Tobin will also teach a graduate seminar course in
Insect Molecular Genetics, speak in the Entomology Seminar Series, and interact
informally with female undergraduates, graduate students, and postdoctoral
fellows who intend to pursue careers in academia and industry. This project
furthers VPW program objectives which are (1) to provide opportunities for women
to advance their careers in engineering and in the disciplines of science
supported by NSF and (2) to encourage women to pursue careers in science and
engineering by providing greater visibility for women scientists and engineers
employed in industry, government, and academic institutions. By encouraging the
participation of women in science, it is a valuable investment in the Nation's
future scientific vitality.