* 9350101
* Chemical Signal Interception by Insect Antennae (Biological Sciences)
* EDU,EES
* 07/01/1993,12/31/1995
* Catherine Loudon, Kansas State University
* Standard Grant
* Margrete S. Klein
* 12/31/1995
* USD 148,677.00

Insect antennae intercept vanishingly small quantities of chemical signals from
the air with great efficiency. Our ability to evaluate how antennae function is
hampered by our lack of knowledge about the role of physical factors such as air
speed or antennal size and geometry on signal capture. That is, there is no
appropriate null hypothesis available against which to compare measured antennal
performance. In engineering terms, this exchange of material between the
environment and an object is called mass transport. The objective of this study
is to quantify the rate of pheromone interception by real antennae under
different flow conditions and to compare these results with predictions from
mass transport calculations. These calculations require knowledge of mass
transfer coefficients, values that are specific for a given geometry, flow
situation, and diffusing material. To determine these currently-unknown mass
transport coefficients, physical modeling will be done using dynamic scaling
methods. This biomechanical approach will allow predictions to be made for
antennal performance under different flow conditions, such as when an insect
flies at different speeds. This approach will also allow differentiation between
the rate of physical events and neurological events. Interactive activities at
the host institution include: teaching a course in Insect Biomechanics; giving
guest lectures in Insect Physiology, External Insect Morphology and Insect
Behavior; participating in a new course on mentoring in science entitled "Topics
in Women Studies: Women in Science;" and advising undergraduate students in
independent research. This project furthers VPW program objectives which are (1)
to provide opportunities for women to advance their careers in engineering and
in the disciplines of science supported by NSF and (2) to encourage women to
pursue careers in science and engineering by providing greater visibility for
women scientists and engineers employed in industry, government, and academic
institutions. By encouraging the participation of women in science, it is a
valuable investment in the Nation's future scientific vitality.