* 9350925
* Intergration Of Computational Chemistry Across The          Undergraduate Chemistry Curriculum
* EHR,DUE
* 06/01/1993,11/30/1995
* Raymond Dominey, University of Richmond
* Standard Grant
* Gene G. Wubbels
* 11/30/1995
* USD 38,366.00

The project will incorporate modern molecular modeling and computational
chemistry methods throughout the undergraduate chemistry curriculum.
Implementation of this project will involve establishing a network of high
resolution graphics workstations equipped with sophisticated molecular modeling
software packages to emphasize visualization of the three- dimensional aspects
of molecular structure of both small molecules and biologically important
macromolecules, visualization of physical/ chemical properties of molecules and
how they relate to structure, and an introduction to the wide range of molecular
orbital theory/quantum mechanics based computational methods now available as
tools in the arsenal of the modern practicing chemist. Students will use
molecular modeling to generate structures, calculate energy minimized geometries
exploring the stereochemical aspects of how the molecule "fills space",
calculate and display LUMO's and HOMO's in 3D, explore the notion of
stereoselective chemical reactivity in terms of the three-dimensional
relationship of LUMO's and HOMO's to molecular structure, predict the
stereochemical selectivity of a borohydride reduction and compare their results
to experiment, import X-ray crystal structures of proteins and explore the
motifs of substructure and the concept of macromolecular surface topology,
assign the vibrational spectra of gas phase molecules and compare their results
to experiment.