* 9350708
* A Laboratory for Object-Oriented Software Development
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/1993,12/31/1995
* R Kline, West Chester University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Theodore J. Sjoerdsma
* 12/31/1995
* USD 35,378.00

9350708 Epstein The aim of the undergraduate computer science curriculum is to
provide quality, pre-professional training for students, most of whom will
become practitioners of computing. Improvements have been made in the
undergraduate curriculum that emphasize the following aspects of software
development: rigorous thinking at a high level of abstraction, formal
specifications and design techniques, use of state-of-the-art software
development tools, and cooperative work. Many of these objectives are encouraged
by migration away from the procedural (or imperative) language paradigm embodied
by Pascal towards the object-oriented paradigm embodied in C++ and Common Lisp
(with CLOS). This project aims to establish an undergraduate laboratory that
supports these curriculum changes. This undergraduate laboratory enables
students to use object-- oriented programming environments running on the UNIX
platform. These environments (specifically, ObjectCenter for C++, Allegro
Composer for CLOS and ObjectStore for object-oriented data- bases) enable
students to utilize the sort of visual software engineering environments that
are becoming commonplace in industry. Such environments are especially important
for object-oriented systems development where developers are confronted with the
enormous complexity of large numbers of related classes and interacting objects.
This project also encourages the use of modern telecommunications to support
cooperative work among students, electronic interaction between students and
faculty, and student access to the larger intellectual community over
newsgroups.