* 9350053
* PPD:  A Third Edition of the AAAS Resource Directory of     Scientists and Engineers with Disabilities
* EDU,EES
* 06/15/1993,08/31/1995
* Virginia Stern, American Association for the Advancement of Science
* Standard Grant
* None
* 08/31/1995
* USD 195,795.00

The AAAS Project on Science, Technology and Disability is conducting a project
to prepare, produce and disseminate a third edition of the Resource Directory of
Scientists and Engineers with Disabilities. The current Directory, published in
1987, is outdated and lacks data on many outstanding scientists and engineers
with disabilities whom AAAS has identified since the publication of the last
edition. A number of individuals listed in the 2nd edition have new degrees or
positions, and some are deceased. A new edition is needed so that students with
disabilities, teachers, administrators, counselors, families, program officers
and employers can network with working scientists and engineers with
disabilities who can provide knowledge and experience in eliminating barriers
and successfully managing their education and entry into a science or
engineering career. The Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990 requires public
facilities and programs to be made accessible to people with disabilities. The
individuals who will be listed in the Resource Directory are familiar with this
law and, even before its inception, were designing adaptations and providing
technical assistance on accessibility issues. They will be available through the
Directory to assist others in restructuring their science and engineering
environments. The products of this project will be three: a print edition of the
Resource Directory, an alternative format (disk) edition of the Resource
Directory for people who are blind or print-impaired, and lists of scientists
and engineers with disabilities in specific science disciplines on disk for use
by NSF program officers in selecting peer reviewers and committee members. The
revised edition will be cross-referenced by scientific specialty, disability,
location and gender and will list approximately 1,200 individuals.