* 9350106
* Comparative Studies of Floral Genes in Paleoherbs and       Gnetales (Biological Science)
* EDU,EES
* 07/01/1993,06/30/1997
* Elizabeth Zimmer, California Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Margrete S. Klein
* 06/30/1997
* USD 106,279.00

Dr. Zimmer's research will highlight benefits of combining comparative molecular
and classical approaches to the investigation of major biological questions. In
Meyerowitz' laboratory at the California Institute of Technology she will
isolate and characterize "floral genes" from planet species identified by
phylogentic analyses of morphological and DNA characters as important to
understanding angiosperm origins. These include the gymnosperm Gnetales and
paleoherbaceous angiosperms (water lies, monocots and Piperales). Heterologous
gene isolation strategies, successful for isolating homologues from divergent
dicots and monocots, will be used to obtain "similogues" from Gnetales and
paleoherbs. Expression studies on developing reproductive materials, combined
with phylogentic analyses of coding sequences, will then be performed to
determine molecular homologies for each key gene or class of genes. Among
hypotheses to be tested are homology of Gnetalean reproductive structures will
specific angiosperm whorls and the history underlying perianth absence in
Piperales. Interactive activities at the host institution include: teaching
undergraduate and graduate seminar courses and sponsorship of visiting speakers.
Speakers will interact formally and informally with students and faculty.
Invitees include researchers using interdisciplinary approaches to various
biological questions and professionals in the fields of science education and
science writing. This project furthers VPW program objectives which are (1) to
provide opportunities for women to advance their careers in engineering and in
the disciplines of science supported by NSF and (2) to encourage women to pursue
careers in science and engineering by providing greater visibility for women
scientists and engineers employed in industry, government, and academic
institutions. By encouraging the participation of women in science, it is a
valuable investment in the Nation's future scientific vitality.