* 9350853
* Optical Image Processing And Acquisition Tools For The      Undergraduate Optics Labs
* EHR,DUE
* 06/01/1993,11/30/1995
* Robert Bunch, Rose-Hulman Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Daniel B. Hodge
* 11/30/1995
* USD 28,069.00

One of the most compelling reasons students want to study applied optics is
because it is a visual science. Even though students can easily visualize the
physical phenomena of interest during a particular laboratory experiment they
often find it difficult to record and quantify their experimental results.
Recording optical images and subtle changes in optical images using standard
photography can sometimes be difficult and time consuming. Fortunately, computer
hardware and software along with cameras of sufficient resolution are now
available to assist in this image acquisition process.The acquisition and
processing of images has grown into a routine tool used in research and industry
today. Digital image processing tools and optical techniques have come together
to form a powerful processing environment, optical image processing. Students in
physics and applied optics need to be well versed in the use of these modern
image acquisition tools, observe the benefits of optical processing techniques
as well as understand the basic science of the phenomena that they are
studying.The equipment requested in this proposal will be used to upgrade and
enhance the undergraduate physics and applied optics program at Rose- Hulman
Institute of Technology. We will: (1). develop a standard "Image Acquisition and
Analysis Experimental Lab Station" for general use in optics labs, (2). expand
and upgrade the laboratory component of our Principles of Image Processing
course to include experiments on optical image processing, image acquisition and
analysis of infrared images, and (3). enrich several of the experiments in other
applied optics laboratories by introducing computer-based acquisition of images.