* 9350841
* A Real-Time Systems Laboratory to Improve Undergraduate     Instruction Computer Science
* EDU,DUE
* 06/01/1993,11/30/1995
* Roger Webster, Millersville University
* Standard Grant
* Theodore J. Sjoerdsma
* 11/30/1995
* USD 26,500.00

Many of the manufactured products of the future will be computer controlled by
real-time software embedded in microchips as we have already seen, for example,
with microwave ovens, refrigerators, and fuel-injected automobiles. In addition,
real-time industrial control systems are becoming one of the fastest growing
fields within computer science. Automated manufacturing is leading the advanced
technology revolution as companies vie for the competitive edge utilizing real-
time robotic automation systems. It is crucial for today's computer science and
engineering graduates to be exposed to these complex real-time programming
techniques and experiment with them in a laboratory, so that they may develop
the skills necessary to write the software embedded in microchips in these
sophisticated products and control systems. A Real-Time Systems course is seldom
incorporated in a typical computer science program at a liberal arts college. At
the nation's larger engineering schools this is addressed. As we compete with
the Japanese and other industrialized nations developing the products and
control systems of the future, all computer science and engineering students
will benefit from exposure to these skills.This project improves the quality of
instruction in computer science by providing students with a powerful computer
workstation and a laboratory of three real- time platforms from which to study
and experiment with the techniques of real-time systems: (1) a real-time model
railroad switching yard system, (2) real-time robotic automation, and (3) real-
time ROMable microchip code development. With this equipment, students majoring
in computer science, computer engineering, and physics will be able to develop
advanced real- time software projects. Also, students in senior research
projects, independent study projects, and in the honors program will be able to
develop sophisticated real-time engineering software using this laboratory. This
laboratory project will give students who wish to pursue careers in industry,
exposure to skills that are in high demand as we compete in a world marketplace
developing the products and control systems of the future. The laboratory will
also provide better preparation for students who wish to go on to graduate
school because of the opportunity to engage in advanced software projects. The
grantee will provide funds for this project that are an equal amount for this
NSF proposal.