* 9350778
* Fluorescence Microscopy for Cell Biology Laboratory
* EHR,DUE
* 08/01/1993,01/31/1996
* Robert Prusch, Gonzaga University
* Standard Grant
* Saundra H. Oyewole
* 01/31/1996
* USD 29,076.00

9350778 Prusch The Biology Department at Gonzaga University is attempting to
both increase and strengthen the laboratory component of a newly-revised and
expanded Cell Biology course and to increase research opportunities for
undergraduate majors. The former upper division one semester Cell and Molecular
Biology course has been expanded to two semesters and is now directed at
sophomore level biology majors. The laboratory component of this expanded Cell
Biology course will introduce students to a variety of techniques used in cell
biology as well as reinforce concepts introduced in the lecture portion of the
course. One of the most basic as well as important techniques used routinely in
cell biology is fluorescence microscopy. Fluorescence microscopy can be used to
follow a wide variety of events in living cells in real time, as well as the
distribution of specific substances in fixed cells. For example, students will
be able to study endocytosis in living cells from the initial interaction of a
signal with receptors on the cell surface to endosome or phagosome formation.
Cytoskeletal rearrangements in response to environmental stimuli and localized
biochemical events in living cells will be studied. Acquisition of fluorescence
microscopes will give biology students new experiences in their laboratories and
greatly broaden the opportunities for the use of modern technology in their own
research projects. ***