* 9350914
* Scanning Tunneling Microscope Instrumentation for           Introductory Electronics and Materials Characterization     Courses
* EDU,DUE
* 04/15/1993,03/31/1996
* Laurie McNeil, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Ruth H. Howes
* 03/31/1996
* USD 19,285.00

Courses Scanning tunneling microscope technology (STM) is being used as a
unifying project in our introductory electronics course and as a bridge to our
laboratory course in materials characterization techniques. By having the
students build an STM and the compare their homebuilt version with a commercial
unit, we address two major problems endemic to electronics courses: the failure
to truly interest students in the wide range of circuit techniques presented and
the lack of student exposure to the full scope of a complex design project. We
have chosen the STM because of its intuitive appeal and range of applications
engage our students who come from a variety of scientific backgrounds. We are
building 13 scanning tunneling microscope workstations, each consisting of
several separate circuit modules. In weekly laboratory sessions students
breadboard and study the circuits in each module, then interconnect previously
built units to make a working STM. The classroom lectures use the performance
requirements of the STM project as a guide to exploring component and circuit
specifications. We have purchased a commercial instructional STM which the
students use after they have demonstrated their homebuilt version. They gain an
appreciation of the results of the development efforts of an expert team and
come to understand that a complex instrument is composed of simpler subunits.
Most students who take the electronics course subsequently take the materials
characterization laboratory course. They study the physics of scanning tunneling
microscopy in experiments using the commercial STM, which complements present
experiments in x-ray diffraction and scanning electron microscopy. This is
excellent preparation for independent research projects with active graduate
research programs in scanning probe microscopies. Students pursuing these
courses have thorough knowledge of a state-of-the-art instrument and technique
which gives them confidence to master any technology they will encounter in the
future.