* 9350144
* Exploring the Intersellar Spectrum at Sub-millimeter        Wavelengths (Astronomy)
* EDU,EES
* 08/01/1993,07/31/1997
* Lucy Ziurys, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Margrete S. Klein
* 07/31/1997
* USD 139,876.00

At present, the sub-millimeter band is one of the few regions of the
electromagnetic spectrum yet to be studied in detail by astronomy. Recent
developments in detector and telescope technology are now making sub-mm
observations feasible. One of the newest instruments that is becoming available
for scientific measurements at these wavelengths is the SMT (Sub-mm Telescope)
at the University of Arizona. Using this new telescope, observational studies in
astrochemistry will be conducted that will focus on two main areas of research:
1) detection of diatomic hydrides in interstellar gas, including AIH, CaH, Ch+,
MgH+ and SiH, and 2) spectral line surveys of Orion and other objects in the
unexplored sub-mm windows at 600-700, 450, and 350 um. Measurements of these
hydrides has important implications for shock chemistry, dust grain composition
and electron densities in molecular clouds. The surveys should yield new
unidentified lines, as well as constrain chemical and physical parameters of the
sources observed. The astronomical measurements will be supported by a
laboratory spectroscopy effort to measure rest frequencies and establish the
carriers of unidentified spectral features. Interactive activities at the host
institution include: teaching a graduate and undergraduate course, conducting an
interdepartmental seminar series, and mentoring graduate students. This project
furthers VPW program objectives which are (1) to provide opportunities for women
to advance their careers in engineering and in the disciplines of science
supported by NSF and (2) to encourage women to pursue careers in science and
engineering by providing greater visibility for women scientists and engineers
employed in industry, government, and academic institutions. By encouraging the
participation of women in science, it is a valuable investment in the Nation's
future scientific vitality.