* 9350061
* High Energy Theory (Physics)
* NONE,NONE
* 11/01/1993,06/30/1994
* Ann Nelson, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Margrete S. Klein
* 06/30/1994
* USD 61,827.00

Dr. Nelson will carry out research in particle theory. The time period that she
will be at University of California-Santa Barbara coincides with the workshop
"Weak Interactions" which will take place at the Institute for Theoretical
Physics at Santa Barbara. This subject overlaps with her research interests and
she will collaborate with several of the people attending the workshop. Dr.
Nelson's research will focus on several aspects of the general area of
electroweak symmetry breaking: electroweak baryogenesis, and dynamical
supersymmetry breaking in the visible sector. Interactive activities at the host
institution include: presenting a participatory seminar course for UCSB upper
division physics majors on theoretical physics in order to encourage talented
undergraduates to continue their involvement in physics, attending and giving
research seminars and collaborating with the faculty, postdocs, and graduate
students. This project furthers VPW program objectives which are (1) to provide
opportunities for women to advance their careers in engineering and in the
disciplines of science supported by NSF and (2) to encourage women to pursue
careers in science and engineering by providing greater visibility for women
scientists and engineers (2) to encourage women to pursue careers in science and
engineers employed in industry, government, and academic institutions. By
encouraging the participation of women in science, it is a valuable investment
in the Nation's future scientific vitality.