* 9350091
* Urban Systemic Initiatives in Science, Mathematics and      Technology Education
* EDU,ESR
* 01/15/1994,06/30/1995
* William Douglas, Indianapolis Public Schools
* Standard Grant
* Madeleine J. Long
* 06/30/1995
* USD 99,014.00

9350091 Douglas The Indianapolis Public Schools (IPS) is planning to conduct an
indepth assessment of its K-12 Mathematics and science programs and to develop
plans for implementing changes based on the outcome of the study. The District
will established a Self-Study Steering Committee and seven Action Committees to
assist the Project Director in the study. The Steering Committee will include
members with math, science, and/or technology backgrounds representing the
School Board, teacher's association, universities, and local cultural
institutions. The Action Committee members will come from the mathematics and
science communities at Purdue University, Indiana University, Ball State
University, and other area universities. They will assist in the collection and
analysis of data and in developing recommendations. The Self-Study will use the
NCTM Standards, AAAS's Science for All Americans, and the benchmark from Project
2061 as criteria and points of reference to determine the status and direction
of the mathematics and science programs. The Project Director will coordinate
the work of the Steering Committee and Action Committees. The study process will
have three phases: the self- evaluation phase, the visiting committee phase (1
year), and the follow-up phase for implementation (5 years). It will follow the
principles of the National Study of School Evaluation and adapt it approach to
data collection. ***