* 9350868
* Computer Based Laboratory Instruction in Human Information  Processing
* EHR,DUE
* 04/15/1993,03/31/1995
* Roberta Klatzky, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Myra O. Smith
* 03/31/1995
* USD 32,809.00

The University of California at Santa Barbara is developing a facility for
computer based laboratory instruction in experimental psychology. Each work
station has ancillary hardware which enables it to be used in specialized
experimental exercises. The primary courses improved by this project are in
upper level laboratory courses in the area of psychology known as Human
Information Processing. Research in Human Information Processing is concerned
with how humans perceive, learn, remember, and think about information. The
three laboratory courses have the same general structure. Students work together
in small groups to conduct a series of psychological experiments. As the course
progresses, students take progressively more responsibility for the design of
their experiments. The course concludes with students conducting an extended
experimental project of their own design. Each of the three courses is focusing
on a separate content area: one on memory, learning, and reasoning, one on
attention and performance, and one on perception and psychophysics. In addition
to teaching general laboratory techniques, a goal of these courses is to
introduce students to the use of computers in modern research and data analysis.
The ability to use computers to organize and analyze information is a necessary
skill for many of today's professional jobs; therefore, it is an important part
of the teaching mission of a university to acquaint students with the techniques
available on personal workstations. For students who go in science, these
courses are teaching students how to use of computers for data acquisition and
analysis.