* 9350179
* Modeling the Interaction Between Speech and Gesture         (Linguistics)
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/1993,06/30/1995
* Justine Cassell, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Margrete S. Klein
* 06/30/1995
* USD 152,900.00

The relationship between speech and gesture in narrative discourse will be
investigated by animating the interaction between the two media on a three-
dimensional interactive animated model -- a graphic figure on a computer screen
that would ultimately be able to "communicate" with a listener, gesturing
appropriately while producing speech. Research demonstrates that gesture is
intimately linked to speech both in the production and the comprehension of
narrative discourse. This interaction exists at many different levels of
organization. The relationship between speech and gesture can be specified at
the level of the timing of gestures with respect to the prosodic contour of a
clause. It can be specified at the level of semantic and pragmatic descriptions
of an utterance, and at the level of narrative structure with respect to the
types of gestures found at different points in a narrative. Interactive
activities at the host institution include: meetings once every two weeks, open
to graduate students and junior faculty, to discuss particular problems in
accomplishing work and constructing a supportive environment for achieving
professional goals; hour-long meetings the alternate weeks of the month with
undergraduate students, to discuss similar topics; sponsorship of two visiting
cognitive scientists per semester, where these will be women who have made 'non-
standard' career choices and/or have written about professional issues facing
women in academia; co- teaching a seminar in Computational Linguistics with
Ellen Prince on discourse processing and gesture. All of the parts will be
carried out under the aegis of the Computer Science Department, but will be open
to other members of the Cognitive Science community at the University of
Pennsylvania. This project furthers VPW program objectives which are (1) to
provide opportunities for women to advance their careers in engineering and in
the disciplines of science supported by NSF and (2) to encourage women to pursue
careers in science and engineering by providing greater visibility for women
scientists and engineers employed in industry, government, and academic
institutions. By encouraging the participation of women in science, it is a
valuable investment in the Nation's future scientific vitality.