* 9350076
* Effect of Crumb Rubber Modifier on Asphalt Concrete         (Engineering)
* EHR,HRD
* 09/01/1993,02/29/1996
* Rita Leahy, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Margrete S. Klein
* 02/29/1996
* USD 186,299.00

The Intermodal Surface Transportation Efficiency Act (ISTEA) of 1991 mandates a
minimum utilization requirement of crumb rubber for all asphalt placed as
outlined in the schedule below. 1994 5% 1995 10% 1996 15% 1997 20% (and each
year thereafter) The conclusion of the Strategic Highway Research Program (SHRP)
in March 1993 and the legislative requirement for inclusion of scrap tire rubber
in asphalt paving applications represent a unique timely opportunity for
immediate utilization of products emanating from SHRP's asphalt research program
to assess the likely performance and economic viability of crumb rubber modified
asphalt concrete. Accordingly, this research project addresses the use of crumb
modifier in asphalt concrete. Specifically, Dr. Leahy will carry out a
comprehensive laboratory investigation utilizing the SHRP accelerated
performance tests to evaluate the potential benefits crumb rubber modification
may impart to asphalt concrete in terms of permanent deformation. Interactive
activities at the host institution include: teaching an undergraduate and a
graduate course; participating at monthly research colloquia; serving as
research advisor to one undergraduate and graduate student; hosting a seminar
with presentations from three women, all professional engineers; hosting a
seminar for University of Oregon women enrolled in math and sciences; and
coordinating participation of women graduate students in the undergraduate
mentoring program. This project furthers VPW program objectives which are (1) to
provide opportunities for women to advance their careers in engineering and in
the disciplines of science supported by NSF and (2) to encourage women to pursue
careers in science and engineering by providing greater visibility for women
scientists and engineers employed in industry, government, and academic
institutions. By encouraging the participation of women in science, it is a
valuable investment in the Nation's future scientific vitality.