* 9350062
* Geophysics, Solid Mechanics and Geomechanics (Earth Science)
* EDU,EES
* 07/01/1994,12/31/1995
* Ruth Harris, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Margrete S. Klein
* 12/31/1995
* USD 124,930.00

Thousands of small earthquakes rupture the earth's crust every hour, but few of
these events ever evolve into the large earthquakes which threaten the human
social structure. The question of what stops most small earthquakes from
cascading into larger, more dangerous earthquakes remains a scientific enigma
whose solution could provide a key to earthquake hazard mitigation in many
populated regions of the world. Two possibilities have been presented for
determining what stop earthquakes. The first is that earthquakes are stopped by
barriers of stronger material. The second is that earthquakes stop simply
because they run out of energy and cannot continue propagating. This project
will use 3-D finite difference computer modeling of spontaneous rupture
propagation to assess the contrasting models of earthquake rupture arrest.
Interactive activities at the host institution include: leading seminars on
static and dynamic fault interaction and presenting at least one guest lecture
per quarter. Dr. Harris's visibility as an active researcher in the field of
earthquake seismology will both encourage more women students to apply their
expertise to scientific endeavors and encourage the existing majority of male
scientists to promote more women into the upper echelons of research and
teaching. This project furthers VPW program objectives which are (1) to provide
opportunities for women to advance their careers in engineering and in the
disciplines of science supported by NSF and (2) to encourage women to pursue
careers in science and engineering by providing greater visibility for women
scientists and engineers employed in industry, government, and academic
institutions. By encouraging the participation of women in science, it is a
valuable investment in the Nation's future scientific vitality.