* 9350534
* CAO Special Project - Mathematics/Science/Technology        Initiative
* EHR,ESR
* 08/01/1993,07/31/1994
* Maurice Sykes, District of Columbia Public Schools
* Standard Grant
* Madeleine J. Long
* 07/31/1994
* USD 50,000.00

Program Summary: The District of Columbia Public Schools will mount a
comprehensive five-year initiative for systemic reform of mathematics, science,
and technology education in partnership with key scientific institutions of the
nation's capital. This initiative will create the curricular and technological
infrastructure to carry the school system into the twenty-first century. The
effort focuses on improved instruction based upon a new curriculum, improved
methods of content presentation, and enhanced opportunities for both students
and teachers and improved school system functioning through improved
accountability systems, restructured staffing patterns and shared decision-
making and governance structures at the local school. The District of Columbia
Public Schools requests $18,208,995 from the National Science Foundation to
mount this five-year initiative. Program Highlights: After establishing baseline
data on the current condition of mathematics and science education in the school
district, DCPS will: o Develop Mathematics/Science/Technology Curriculum
Framework; o Select Mathematics/Science/Technology Fellows to provide
instructional leadership; o Establish Instructional Support Teams to provide on
site staff development and classroom assistance; o Train all teachers (K-8) in
content and pedagogy in three cycles to implement the National Council of
Teachers of Mathematics Standards and the emerging science standards; o Upgrade
classroom learning environments; o Strengthen and expand partnerships with
community-based scientific institutions; o Provide internship/mentorship
experiences for teachers in the scientific community; and o Create two state-of-
the-art Mathematics/Science/Technology Resource Centers. The
Mathematics/Science/Technology Initiative will have a significant impact upon
58,297 students and 2,872 teachers in grades K-8. Expected program outcomes
include significantly increased levels of student achievement in the target
disciplines; the creation of a community-wide infrastructure to support the
learning and teaching of mathematics, science, and technology; and a broadened
pipeline giving all children an opportunity to pursue advanced study in these
fields.