* 9350808
* Acquisition Of An X-Ray System For Undergraduate Instruction
* EHR,DUE
* 06/15/1993,05/31/1995
* Ian Baker, Dartmouth College
* Standard Grant
* Daniel B. Hodge
* 05/31/1995
* USD 20,000.00

The purpose of this proposal is to obtain an x-ray set complete with Laue camera
and a Straumanis camera for the Debye-Scherrer powder method. The x-ray set will
be used in the undergraduate Materials Laboratory at the Thayer School of
Engineering. This laboratory is utilized primarily for an undergraduate course
in Materials Science, which is a required course for both the A.B. and B.E.
degrees in Engineering Science. The Materials Science course is offered twice
per year. The acquisition of an x-ray set, with radiation enclosure, will
provide the students with a hands-on experience for performing measurements
which are some of the most accurate in Materials Science. Whilst an x-ray set
may not be considered to be a state-of-the-art piece of equipment, the
undergraduate projects for which it will be used are. These include: high
temperature superconductivity; optical properties of point defects phase diagram
determination; mechanical properties of polymers; production and properties of
metallic glasses; recovery, recrystallization and grain growth; processing and
properties of nanocrystalline metals; and thin film processing of materials. The
equipment chosen is a "no frills" set-up that can be used for orientation
determination, phase identification, crystallization studies, and grain or
subgrain size determination.