* 9350546
* Montana Research Infrastructure Enhancement Program
* O/D,EPS
* 09/01/1993,08/31/1999
* Gary Strobel, Montana University System Office
* Cooperative Agreement
* James Hoehn
* 08/31/1999
* USD 7,391,000.00

93-50546 Strobel Montana Research Infrastructure Enhancement Program The State
of Montana has initiated a statewide plan to improve the quality and
effectiveness of its science and technology infrastructure. In a series of
statewide meetings, involving hundreds of volunteers from the University System,
the State, and Montana science and technology businesses, the State produced the
Montana Science and Technology Policy and Plan which was followed by a detailed
Action Agenda. This Plan and Action Agenda form the basis for this proposal to
NSF EPSCoR. Montana proposes to support research, human resource development,
and technology transfer activities to improve the state's research
infrastructure and competitiveness. Because biotechnology infrastructure and
human resource development are high priorities in the State Plan, four specific
research teams in biotechnology will be supported (peptide receptors, plant
biotechnology, microbial surface interactions, and environmentally influenced
mutagenesis) and the Montana Biotechnology Center will be expanded to coordinate
and promote biotechnology research statewide. Montana will also support teams of
researchers in optical science/laser technology and non-linear science
(mathematics), and an individual from a group under- represented in science,
engineering and mathematics. All projects included in this proposal have been
extensively peer reviewed by an external mail review and state panel system. A
Science Enhancement Program (SEP) will be established to fund activities
statewide which can contribute to the overall goals of the State Plan and Action
Agenda. Start-up grants, research opportunity awards, visiting scientists,
technicians, graduate students, travel, scientific conferences, technology
transfer activities, and public education will be supported through the SEP on a
competitive basis. All EPSCoR-supported activities will be coordinated and
integrated with other NSF initiatives in Montana, including the En gineering
Research Center (ERC), the Systematic Initiative in Mathematics and Science
(SIMMS), and the Alliance of States Supporting Indians in Science and Technology
(ASSIST), and other EPSCoR agency programs where appropriate. Interaction and
collaboration with industry will be encouraged, and an aggressive education and
information campaign will be supported to keep Montanans informed about the
importance of science and technology in the state. The State of Montana has
pledged a dollar-for-dollar match for this proposal to NSF. The NSF EPSCoR
program will result in the development of two sustainable Montana Research
Centers (in biotechnology and advanced materials) and in measurable improvements
in the number and quality of competitive research programs statewide. As a
result, Montana will attract higher quality graduate students, post-doctoral
researchers, and new faculty, and will be viewed, within and without of the
state, as a significant contributor to the nation's science and technology goals
for the 21st century.