* 9350576
* SSC:  Exploring Contemporary Biological Dilemmas
* EDU,EES
* 08/15/1993,04/30/1997
* Alan Harker, Oklahoma State University
* Continuing Grant
* Alexandra King
* 04/30/1997
* USD 180,000.00

SSC-9350576 Oklahoma State University Stillwater, Ok Harker, Alan "Exploring
Contemporary Biological Dilemmas" The NSF summer science camp will be executed
within a larger ongoing program to enhance recruitment and retention of Native
American students in the biological sciences. It will employ an investigative
approach to a local environmental problem. Interdependent research groups of
students will focus on different areas of a common problem and cooperate to
propose a solution. The proposed research will combine field and laboratory
components. The environmental emphasis will allow students to focus on many
disciplines including: life sciences, physical sciences, statistics,
engineering, economics, library, writing, and presentation skills. The groups
will attend joint meetings once each week to inform others of their progress,
share information, and offer suggestions, Students will see how the various
disciplines work together using technology to meet the needs of society. Local
industry, community, and university professionals will provide diverse
presentations on relevant research activities and career opportunities. Local
tribes will provide cultural evenings and speakers to address issues relative to
the preservation of culture, traditional ways, and tribal views of the
environment and science. Advisory boards composed of parents, tribal leaders,
teachers, and administrators within the cooperating tribes and school districts
will coordinate recruitment of participants. Summer Science Camp activities will
be coordinated with school year programs established within the larger program.
These include science clubs, equipment loans, speaker programs, problem-oriented
curriculum development, etc.