* 9350097
* Application of the Adjoint Technique to the Study ofMarine  Physical-Biological Models (Ocean Sciences)
* EDU,EES
* 07/01/1993,12/31/1994
* Linda Lawson, Old Dominion University Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Margrete S. Klein
* 12/31/1994
* USD 63,312.00

The goal of this project is to study the application of data assimilation
techniques to the problem of incorporating ocean color measurements into
physical-biological models. This will be accomplished through the development
and implementation of a series of numerical models of marine systems and will be
rely heavily on the adjoint method. This project is significant in that it will
provide a basis for incorporating vast amounts of data obtained from the Coastal
Zone Color Scanner and data expected from SeaWiFS into marine systems models.
This study is well-matched with Dr. Lawson's background which includes many
years of modelling experience and is a natural extension of recent research in
which she applied this optimization technique to an ocean surface wave modelling
project. The research aspect of this proposal includes a collaborative effort
with Eileen E. Hofmann, Old Dominion University, who has an on-going research
program in the assimilation of ocean color data into ecosystem models.
Interactive activities at the host institution include: teaching a course in the
mathematics department, and participating in seminars and lectures connected
with the modelling effort, including data assimilation, adjoint methods and
optimization techniques. Dr. Lawson will interact with graduate students
involved in similar modelling efforts. This project furthers VPW program
objectives which are (1) to provide opportunities for women to advance their
careers in engineering and in the disciplines of science supported by NSF and
(2) to encourage women to pursue careers in science and engineering by providing
greater visibility for women scientists and engineers employed in industry,
government and academic institutions. By encouraging the participation of women
in science, it is a valuable investment in the Nation's future scientific
vitality.