* 9350276
* Presidential Faculty Fellows Award
* SBE,BCS
* 09/15/1993,08/31/1999
* Louis Tassinary, Texas A&M University
* Continuing Grant
* Bonney Sheahan
* 08/31/1999
* USD 500,000.00

9350276 TASSINARY This award provides support to Dr. Louis Tassinary under the
National Science Foundation's Presidential Faculty Fellows (PFF) Program. The
PFF Program was established at the request of the President of the United States
to recognize and support the scholarly activities of some of the Nation's most
outstanding science and engineering faculty members early in their careers.
Awards are intended to allow Fellows to undertake self-designed, innovative
research and teaching projects, to establish research and teaching programs, and
to pursue other academic related activities. This award will allow the
investigator to pursue his research agenda of attempting to specify the
necessary and sufficient conditions for the use of physiological signals as
measures of psychological processes and states. Although converging scientific
evidence from laboratories throughout the world suggests that non- invasive
measurement of physiological activity within specific assessment contexts can
provide information on the duration and character of specific psychological
processes, the generalizability of these relationships to real-world settings
remains untested. Dr. Tassinary will test the boundary conditions on these
relationships through the experimental assessment of typical human transactions
with simulated built and natural environments. The theoretical level of analysis
will not be restricted to isolated components of the body or the environment,
but will focus on the level of organismic-environmental transactions, with
reference to both the physical and socio-cultural environment. This research
addresses a critical question involving whether human contact with ambient
conditions of varying physical form and content influence our cognitive and
emotional reactions. Thus far, there exists only self-report data to make
judgments about how different configurations of the design environment influence
individuals. Using a combination of environmental simulat ion and state of the
art psychophysiological recording and data analysis resources, Dr. Tassinary is
at the forefront of a new field of research in environmental psychology. This
five year award will also enable him to train undergraduate and graduate
students in this critically important field. ***