* 9350145
* Roles of Structural MAPs in Cytoplasmic Organization        (Biological Science)
* EDU,EES
* 07/01/1993,06/30/1995
* Joanna Olmsted, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Margrete S. Klein
* 06/30/1995
* USD 94,815.00

Dr. Olmsted's research will primarily involve investigating the role of
structural microtubule-associated proteins (MAPs) in microtubule organization
and function. Approaches that combine immunological and high resolution light
and electron microscopy will be used to determine the distribution of MAP 4 in
male gametic cells and differentiating myoblasts. Genetically engineered
constructs transfected into cells will be examined for their effects on the
organization of endogenous microtubule arrays and other cellular structures.
Phenotypes generated by antisense experiments will be studied to see how absence
of MAP 4 affects miotic structures. Electron microscopic analyses of
microinjected MAP 2 interactions with the Golgi will also be carried out. Pilot
experiments to identify a MAP 4 homolog in Schizosaccharomyces pombe will also
be undertaken. Interactive activities at the host institution include:
presenting a seminar on the choice of science as a career and the attraction and
retention of women into science; a graduate seminar on cytoskeletal-organelle
interactions; guest lectures in introductory and cell biology courses; and
participation in weekly laboratory meetings and seminars. This project furthers
VPW program objectives which are (1) to provide opportunities for women to
advance their careers in engineering and in the disciplines of science supported
by NSF and (2) providing greater visibility for women scientists and engineers
employed in industry, government, and academic institutions. By encouraging the
participation of women in science, it is a valuable investment in the Nation's
future scientific vitality.