* 9350864
* Modern Astronomy In The Classroom:  Introduction To CCDs AndImage Processsing
* EHR,DUE
* 06/01/1993,11/30/1995
* Richard Binzel, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Duncan E. McBride
* 11/30/1995
* USD 29,364.00

Observational astronomy and planetary science are vital parts of the
undergraduate science curriculum at MIT. There are two (one freshman, one upper
level) laboratory courses which teach astronomical observing techniques using
8-, 14, 16- and 24-inch telescopes. Rapid advances in digital imaging have
rendered most astronomical laboratory teaching out of date and in critical need
of improvement. Further, planetary science courses can be substantially improved
by providing hands on access to spacecraft imagery. The undergraduate astronomy
laboratory curriculum is being fully modernized through the purchase of charge-
coupled device (CCD) camera systems to be used on existing telescopes. High
quality and low cost astronomical CCD cameras for small telescopes have become
commercially available only within the last year. Thus it is now possible to
bring the state-of-the art technology in astronomical instrumentation into the
classroom for both freshman and upper level laboratories. The CCD camera systems
require Macintosh II computers for their operation. As these computers will also
be used for the subsequent manipulation of images, the curriculum is being
further improved through the introduction and teaching of image processing to
all laboratory students, including freshman. The overall science and technology
impact for educating students will therefore become enormous as image processing
now pervades all areas of science, engineering, and medicine. In addition, the
scope of this project is being expanded beyond astronomy laboratories to at
least two planetary science courses through the availability of Voyager and
other planetary mission images on compact disks. Daytime use of the Macintosh
computers gives hands-on experience with real digital images to a very broad
cross section of students. In this way the project increases the educational
impact in terms of the number of students, in addition to bringing the latest in
science and technology into the classroom.