* 9350772
* Microcomputer-Based Interactive Laboratory For Introductory Physics
* EHR,DUE
* 09/01/1993,05/31/1998
* David Jenkins, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Duncan E. McBride
* 05/31/1998
* USD 57,317.00

9350772 Jenkins A series of laboratory experiments, based on the use of a
microcomputer, is being developed for a one-year, introductory physics course.
The experiments are using a Macintosh microcomputer in a traditional two-hour
period supervised by graduate teaching assistants. The computer allows real-time
acquisition of data and, by simplifying data collection, it permits the study of
phenomena with different experimental situations in the two-hour lab period. In
addition, the computer simplifies data analysis through the use of spread sheets
and graphics packages. Interactive tutorials with graphics and animations
illustrate concepts and show their relationship to real life experiences. The
experiments make use of the Authorware software to provide an interactive
experiment for students performing the laboratory experiments. Authorware is a
software developmental tool for creating instructional presentations including
tutorials and simulations. Virginia Tech has acquired a site license for this
software allowing free access to the software by both faculty and students. The
experiments incorporate materials developed for the program Tools for Scientific
Thinking from Tufts University as well as concepts from Workshop Physics from
Dickinson College. With an annual enrollment of over 500 students, good
statistics are being obtained of measurements of changes in performance by pre-
and post- testing.