* 9350004
* Mathematical Discourse in Japanese and American Elementary  School Classrooms
* EHR,DRL
* 05/15/1993,04/30/1997
* James Stigler, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing Grant
* Larry E. Suter
* 04/30/1997
* USD 427,451.00

Current reform efforts in mathematics education call for changing patterns of
classroom discourse to ones that foster students thinking and problem solving,
and that more closely resemble discourse used among mathematicians. Yet
classroom discourse has proven highly resistant to change. One reason for this
resistance may be a lack of concrete examples, i.e., classrooms in which
desirable patterns of discourse are actually used. Japanese classrooms may
provide us with just such a set of examples. Although no in-depth studies exist
of Japanese classroom discourse, prior work by the Principal Investigator and
colleagues suggests that discourse in Japanese classrooms may conform closely to
recommendations contained in the NCTM Professional Standards. The goal of this
study is to evaluate this suggestion, and to determine the extent to which
American reform efforts might be aided by empirical descriptions of Japanese
classroom discourse. The project proposed will be completed in 6 steps: (1)
Existing videotapes tapes of 160 classroom mathematics lessons-half from the
United States- will be transcribed, translated, and entered into a multimedia
database that coordinates the verbal transcriptions with the video; (2) Tools
for analyzing the tapes in order to characterize and compare classroom discourse
in Japan and the United States will be developed and applied; (3) Using the
analyses from Step 2, classroom discourse in Japan will be examined in light of
the NCTM standards and other current reform documents the focus on talk in the
mathematics classroom; (4) In those cases where Japanese classrooms are judged
to exemplify ideal patterns of discourse, tasks, materials, and techniques used
by Japanese teachers to achieve these patterns will be identified; (5)
Exploratory research will be conducted in collaboration with American teachers
to investigate the usefulness of Japanese techniques in American classrooms; (6)
Results of the project will be disseminated in both written reports and video
presentations, and the full multimedia database will be made available to other
researchers.