* 9350110
* Metastable Effects in a-Si:H Thin Film Transistors          (Engineering)
* EDU,EES
* 07/01/1993,12/31/1995
* Tatiana Globus, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Margrete S. Klein
* 12/31/1995
* USD 189,182.00

This project will achieve a quantitative understanding and description of
instabilities of the current-voltage characteristics of amorphous silicon Thin
Film Transistors (a-Si TFTs), and will link these phenomena with the deep defect
states in the a-Si bandgap. Studies of current-voltage characteristics of TFTs
in the subthreshold regime (at gate voltages substantially smaller than
threshold) and, especially, studies of the leakage current can be very useful
for understanding degradation phenomena. Dr. Globus will analyze the results of
the time and temperature dependence measurements of current-voltage
characteristics under the voltage stress, annealing at elevated temperatures,
and relaxation after quenching. She will study the leakage current in a-Si and
poly-Si TFT; derive information about the density of states in a-Si:H and poly-
Si using measured data in subthreshold regime; and will obtain more detailed
information about the density of states in a-Si:H, the structure of defect
absorption modes, the energy levels, and optical spectra of defects from IR
optical measurements on a-Si and poly-Si thin films. The understanding, and
control of metastable defect formation in a-Si are essential because this
process is a principal obstacle to the practical use of a-Si:H, and for the
insight into fundamental physics of amorphous silicon. The interactive
activities at the host institution will include teaching a course entitled "Thin
Film Transistors", presenting guest lectures, and counseling and advising
students. Dr. Globus will share, with the student body, her experiences as a
scientist in Russia, where almost half of scientists and engineers are female.
This project furthers the VPW program objectives which are (1) to provide
opportunities for women to advance their careers in engineering and in the
disciplines of science supported by NSF and (2) to encourage women to pursue
careers in science and engineering by providing greater visibility for women
scientists and engineers employed in industry, government, and academic
institutions. By encouraging the participation of women in science, it is a
valuable investment in the Nation's future scientific vitality.