* 9350734
* An Electromagnetic Compatibility Laboratory
* EHR,DUE
* 06/01/1993,11/30/1996
* Thomas Van Doren, Missouri University of Science and Technology
* Standard Grant
* Daniel B. Hodge
* 11/30/1996
* USD 75,829.00

Government and commercial organizations that design and manufacture state-of-
the-art electronic systems are well acquainted with electromagnetic
compatibility (EMC) difficulties. Circuits and systems are requiring wider
bandwidths, must operate at lower power levels, and are more compact. These
trends render them susceptible to interference from numerous sources. Designing
and implementing electronic systems that function correctly in a complex
electrical environment, as well as meeting government emissions regulations,
requires engineers that have a sound knowledge of electromagnetic field
concepts. This project introduces laboratory exercises based on industrial EMC
applications into three undergraduate electromagnetics courses. Experiments
illustrate such common problems as crosstalk, electrostatic discharge., circuit
radiation, and RF susceptibility. These experiments reinforce fundamental
principles and topics covered in the undergraduate electromagnetics courses,
including electric and magnetic fields, inductance, capacitance, wave
propagation, transmission lines, and radiation. The laboratory exercises are
designed to: 1) stimulate creativity and motivate students at the introductory
level to learn electromagnetic field fundamentals, while providing them with
invaluable practical experience in EMC applications; 2) allow students in a
junior/senior level EMC elective course to pursue in-depth lecture and
laboratory EMC studies; and 3) provide facilities for students to pursue
independent senior design and honors student projects in electromagnetic
compatibility. The experience gained in applying electromagnetic field concepts
to EMC are essential to the practicing engineer for meeting the design
challenges associated with faster electronic technologies and strict government
regulations on emission of electromagnetic energy.