* 9350108
* In-situ TEM Heating Studies of Nanoscale and Submicron      Sized Ceramic Oxide Powders (Engineering)
* EHR,HRD
* 09/01/1993,06/30/1996
* Janet Rankin, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* Margrete S. Klein
* 06/30/1996
* USD 160,000.00

A preliminary study of the insitu heating behavior of single- crystal cubes of
100-300 nm MgO smoke particles has shown that the stability of neck formed
between 2 sintering single-crystal cubes is directly related to the contact
geometry of the particles. This research project is a logical extension of the
initial MgO cube study. It will focus on the following objectives: determination
of the specific mechanism(s) responsible for mass transport in vacuum heated,
sub-micron-sized MgO single crystal cubes; insitu TEM heating studies of
coalescence and material transport in isolated pairs of nanoscale, single
crystal, spherical particles of ceramic oxides; insitu heating studies of larger
arrays of nanoscale particles; and exsitu heating studies to examine the effects
of the sintering atmosphere on neck morphology and stability. The neck
instabilities observed in the preliminary studies have never before been
observed or predicted. This research will develop our understanding of this
phenomena, and further insitu experiments are likely to lead to additional new
insights into the sintering of fine particles. Interactive activities at the
host institution include: organizing and teaching two new courses (one course
will study noncrystalline solids by examining both bulk and thin-film glasses,
and the other course will be an engineering/technology survey course for non-
engineers, based on materials science topics); and participation as a discussion
leader in Women in Science and Engineering, an organization for women
undergraduates. This project furthers VPW program objectives which are (1) to
provide opportunities for women to advance their careers in engineering and in
the disciplines of science supported by NSF and (2) to encourage women to pursue
careers in science and engineering by providing greater visibility for women
scientists and engineers employed in industry, government, and academic
institutions. By encouraging the participation of women in science, it is a
valuable investment in the Nation's future scientific vitality.