* 9350967
* Teaching with Combinatorica and Semantica
* EDU,DUE
* 06/15/1993,05/31/1996
* David Warren, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Theodore J. Sjoerdsma
* 05/31/1996
* USD 51,027.00

The Computer Science and Linguistics departments at Stony Brook have been drawn
together by a common situation. At present, both departments are pursuing
undergraduate science and mathematics projects that involve the creation and
development of innovative educational software and curricula.The project
emphasizes the experimental nature of computer science and linguistics. It
builds on the software developed by the PIs Combinatorica, developed by Steven
Skiena, has become the most widely used combinatorial computing environment for
research and education. The system is implemented in Mathematica, and comprises
over 230 functions for combinatorics and graph theory. In 1991, Combinatorica
received an EDUCOM Higher Education Software Award for Distinguished Mathematics
Software, and has been used at over 200 educational institutions around the
world. Semantica is an interactive workbook for linguistic semantics currently
under development by Richard K. Larson (Dept. of Linguistics) and David S.
Warren (Dept. of Computer Science), through a three-year grant from the National
Science Foundation's Course and Curriculum Development program. Based on a
Prolog computing engine, and with extensive visual and natural language support,
Semantica will form the basis of an undergraduate course in linguistic
semantics.Exposing students to a tool like Combinatorica encourages viewing
computer science as an experimental discipline. By observing phenomenon, such as
combinatorial explosion, that ıstudents! ... hear discussed in class, they will
gain a deeper appreciation for how the theory arises from practice. Using
Syntactica, students will be able to directly create, observe and experiment
with the formal rules governing well-formedness of linguistic expressions. The
interactive, hands-on manipulation of rule systems will strongly reinforce the
experimental nature of the linguistics enterprise, and the scientific chanracter
of its results.