* 9350074
* Multiwavelength Studies of X-ray Binaries (Astronomy)
* EDU,EES
* 07/01/1993,12/31/1997
* Saeqa Vrtilek, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Margrete S. Klein
* 12/31/1997
* USD 169,398.00

Compact objects (neutron stars and black holes) are known principally from the
effects of mass transfer onto them, thus the understanding of mass transfer and
its consequences are fundamental to our understanding of many aspects of the
final stages of stellar evolution. Dr. Vrtilek will use a set of narrow spectral
features in the X-ray, ultraviolet, and visible, selected because they provide
important diagnostics of plasma conditions, to study mass transfer processes and
accretion disk structure in X-ray binaries. Emphasis on multiwavelength spectral
analysis is important as binary X-ray sources are strong emitters over a broad
range of the electromagnetic spectrum with each part of the spectrum
contributing distinct and often time-variable information. Recently developed
theoretical models that predict the characteristics of line emission over the
range from the Hell recombination line at \4686m to the iron K-shell emission
between 6-7 keV will be tested against the observations. This work relies on a
balanced mix of existing data, approved observations with currently operating
spacecraft, and detailed plans for the use of future missions. Interactive
activities at the host institution include teaching a graduate course in X-ray
astronomy, a field not currently represented on the faculty of the host
institution. Dr. Vrtilek will also organize a series of guest lectures, drawing
upon experts who will discuss the programs and functions of other area
institutions, supplemented by lectures on techniques of scientific presentation,
proposal preparation, and other "survival skills" for graduate students. A
workshop on careers in the physical sciences will be held for area high school
students, particularly women and minorities. This project furthers VPW program
objectives which are (1) to provide opportunities for women to advance their
careers in engineering and in the disciplines of science supported by NSF and
(2) to encourage women to pursue careers in science and engineering by providing
greater visibility for women scientists and engineers employed in industry,
government, and academic institutions. By encouraging the participation of women
in science, it is a valuable investment in the Nation's future scientific
vitality.