* 9350147
* The Impact of Banking Sector Distress on Lending and the    Monetary Aggregates (Economics)
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/1993,02/28/1995
* Cara Lown, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Margrete S. Klein
* 02/28/1995
* USD 104,805.00

A thorough empirical evaluation of the role that recent banking sector distress
has played in the slowdown of the credit and money aggregates will be
undertaken. The research involves examining cross-sectional data at the state
and bank level, prior to, during, and after the official quarters of the 1990
recession. The results of this study will have important implications for the
role of the banking system in the economy, which in turn will have implications
for how best to regulate banks without unduly inhibiting them. In addition, a
better understanding of the role that banking sector problems have played in the
sluggish money growth will help to shed light on the appropriate role of the
aggregates in the monetary policy process. Interactive activities at the host
institution include: teaching one to two masters level classes in monetary
economics, participating in the weekly monetary workshop, having informal lunch
meetings with female graduate students, and conducting workshops for
undergraduate women to encourage them to pursue careers in economics. This
project furthers VPW program objectives which are (1) to provide opportunities
for women to advance their careers in engineering and in the disciplines of
science supported by NSF and (2) to encourage women to pursue careers in science
and engineering by providing greater visibility for women scientists and
engineers employed in industry, government, and academic institutions. By
encouraging the participation of women in science, it is valuable investment in
the Nation's future scientific vitality.