* 9350498
* Public Views of Business and Corporate Responsibility (Law  & Social Science)
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/1993,02/28/1995
* Valerie Hans, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Margrete S. Klein
* 02/28/1995
* USD 95,494.00

Despite increasing liability for businesses and corporations in contemporary
society, very little is known about how the public conceptualizes and judges
corporate wrongdoing. In prior work, Dr. Hans used three different
methodological approaches to provide converging evidence about lay views of the
moral and legal responsibility of businesses and corporations, including juror
interviews, experiments, and a public opinion survey. In this project, she will
undertake additional work to elaborate and integrate the research findings more
fully and to place them within a broader framework of scholarship on the
relationship between law and business. A resulting monograph will provide a
unique and important portrayal of how the public views the ethical and legal
responsibilities of business. Interactive activities at the host institution
include: co-teaching an undergraduate course entitled "Corporate Responsibility
and Ethics;" providing guest lectures to both undergraduate and graduate
students in other Legal Studies courses; and holding special sessions for women
students on careers in science. This project furthers VPW program objectives
which are (1) to provide opportunities for women to advance their careers in
engineering and in the disciplines of science supported by NSF and (2) to
encourage women to pursue careers in science and engineering by providing
greater visibility for women scientists and engineers employed in industry,
government, and academic institutions. By encouraging the participation of women
in science, it is valuable investment in the Nation's future scientific
vitality.