* 9351478
* Enhancing Calculus Instruction Through The Use Of TechnologyIn Laboratories
* EHR,DUE
* 04/15/1993,09/30/1995
* Sue Henderson, Georgia Perimeter College
* Standard Grant
* Tina H. Straley
* 09/30/1995
* USD 64,770.00

Increasing the number of students, particularly the under- represented groups of
non-white and female students, who major in mathematics and science is essential
to the economic well- being of our country; and success in calculus is essential
to majoring in mathematics and science. Engaging students in calculus courses
when they work in small groups, explore mathematics with the use of technology,
and produce a final product of which they can be proud is attracting many
students who have not previously been attracted to mathematics or science.
DeKalb College has a student population that is 29% non-white, and female
students outnumber male students in a ratio of three to two. To provide calculus
courses which open the door to the year 2000 and beyond for these and other two-
year college students, this project is incorporating technology-based
laboratories in DeKalb's calculus courses. These laboratories are actively
engaging students in doing mathematics, and constructing coherent written
arguments to support their laboratory findings is help these students form and
understand important underlying mathematical concepts. Another advantage to two-
year college students of technology- based laboratories is that it forces them
to become members of laboratory groups, to meet outside of class, and to become
familiar with available technology. Most students who attend residential
colleges have these experiences, while students commuting to college and working
part-time usually study alone and away from the campus. To accomplish the goal
of providing technology-based laboratories in calculus courses, the project is
providing four computer laboratories. DeKalb College is supporting workshops for
faculty to select and modify laboratory materials and to train the faculty in
the use of Mathematica. Local high school teachers of AP calculus and an
advisory team of faculty from sister senior institutions is involved in the
workshops. This provides valuable bridges for our college and its students as
they progress from high school, to two-year college, to other colleges and
universities.