* 9351271
* Metabolic System for Physiology Teaching
* EDU,DUE
* 06/01/1993,11/30/1995
* Mark Cooper, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Saundra H. Oyewole
* 11/30/1995
* USD 13,977.00

In recent years physiologists in the Department of Zoology have made a major
effort to incorporate computerized data acquisition as a regular component of
our undergraduate laboratory courses. Our long-term goal is to customize data
acquisition so that students can quickly get down to the business of doing
physiology rather than wasting time and energy struggling with antiquated
equipment. Student enthusiasm has been so exceptional that we are encouraged to
continue to modernize undergraduate (primarily major) courses in laboratory
physiology and in physiological ecology. A computerized "turn- key" system is
being used to measure the metabolic rates of both aerial and aquatic animals,
with capacities to measure small ectotherms such as insects. Metabolism is a
basic physiological focus that is relevant to diverse aspects of biology. The
facility is being used primarily by students doing original research projects
(e.g., "cost" of locomotion in insects, metabolic consequences of acid rain on
plankton) in the laboratory sections of our physiology courses. The system is
superbly suited for a student laboratory setting. Moreover, it is remarkably
flexible and can measure and analyze the instantaneous metabolic rate of animals
ranging in size from individual Drosophila or Daphnia to humans. The equipment
used consists of a sensitive C02 analyzer, a compatible O2 analyzer, dissolved
O2 meter and oxygen electrode, respiration cell, mass-flow meter, A:D board,
computer, as well as data- acquisition and analysis software. Students using
this sophisticated but user-friendly system are able to explore physiological
problems (and organisms) previously inaccessible to them and indeed even to most
professional physiologists. This system is not only enhancing the physiological
training of students, but also encouraging them to consider a research career in
physiology.