* 9351104
* Innovative Use Of Digital Video Technology In Instructional Physics Laboratories
* EHR,DUE
* 04/15/1993,09/30/1995
* Thomas Greenslade, Kenyon College
* Standard Grant
* Ruth H. Howes
* 09/30/1995
* USD 56,977.00

Digital Imaging is an emerging discipline with widespread applications in
science and engineering. We are introducing digital image acquisition and
processing as standard techniques throughout our laboratory curriculum. Recent
advances in digital video and in the power of microcomputers have made imaging
technology a powerful and cost-effective new tool for data acquisition and
analysis in undergraduate physics laboratories. Inexpensive systems are now
available which can capture full-motion digital video directly to computer disk
at live video rates. We are using these systems to improve laboratory
instruction in our introductory, modern physics, and advanced laboratories. Each
laboratory station is being networked and equipped with a television camera,
video acquisition hardware, and a computer capable of processing and displaying
video images. In the introductory laboratory these systems are being used to
study motion, wave phenomena and optical diffraction and interference. Live
video is especially well suited for the quantitative motion studies since it is
capable of capturing and quantifying a wide variety of phenomena without the
construction of special apparatus. With video, motion is recorded far more
completely than is possible with photogates even when trajectories cannot be
predicted. For advanced laboratories we have purchased an instructional scanning
tunneling microscope (STM) and a powder camera and develop experiments using
digital image processing techniques to compare images of atomic structures (ATM)
with electron and x-ray diffraction patterns. Standardization of imaging
hardware and software across our curriculum allows students to build skills
efficiently, preparing them for research with four faculty members who use
digital imaging techniques. We make full-motion and still frame images and
curricular materials available to others by maintaining a listserver and
supporting anonymous file transfers (FTP) via the Internet.