* 9351910
* Scanning Tunneling Microscope for Undergraduate Experiment  and Demonstrations
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/1993,08/31/1996
* Charles Rogers, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Ruth H. Howes
* 08/31/1996
* USD 8,175.00

9351910 Rogers We have acquired a scanning tunneling microscope (STM) for use by
undergraduates in supervised laboratory course work, in classroom demonstrations
and for scheduled use in undergraduate independent research projects. The STM
offers new and dramatically better ways to introduce students to the physics of
materials and to the basic quantum mechanical nature of our world. However,
because the STM technique is quite new, its use in physics and chemistry courses
is extremely rare. We are harnessing the instructional potential of STM by
integrating it into our undergraduate curriculum. We are initially implementing
this plan in three specific ways. First, we introduce a set of quantitative STM
experiments for use in our senior level experimental laboratory course. We are
designing a laboratory section in which the students explore quantum mechanical
tunneling and learn how it can be used to study the properties of materials.
Second, we are developing two classroom demonstrations which use the STM to
illustrate the atomic structure of surfaces and molecules respectively. Third,
we are tapping the potential of STM for high quality hands-on research
experience for undergraduates by scheduling the use of the STM for undergraduate
independent research projects. We believe that it is important to bring modern
research results into the classroom as soon as it is practical to do so. We are
integrating the new field of molecular imaging and manipulation into our
curriculum to give students a more concrete understanding both of our physical
world and the fundamental principles underlying modern technology. ***