* 9351422
* Instrumentation And Laboratory Improvement For              Undergraduate Environmental Analytical Chemistry
* EHR,DUE
* 06/15/1993,11/30/1995
* Kimberly Gray, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* Daniel B. Hodge
* 11/30/1995
* USD 68,756.00

The aim of this ILI project is to develop a two semester undergraduate course in
Environmental Analytical Chemistry covering both inorganic and organic analysis.
The course will provide students with the analytical skills to make precise and
accurate measurements on environmental samples using state-of- the-art
instrumentation. In addition, this endeavor seeks to achieve the following
objectives: 1) demonstrate and reinforce principles taught in the general
curricula of geological sci- ences and environmental engineering; 2) improve
integration of science and engineering cultures. Methodology will be taught with
careful attention paid to common analytical problems. This course, however, will
not focus solely on teaching specific techniques, but instead will seek to
illustrate the critical relationship between analysis and elucidation of process
dynamics. Moreover, special emphasis will be placed on interpretation of results
and critical reasoning. The equipment purchased with this grant will be used in
combination with instruments on hand to perform trace inorganic and organic
analysis, quantify and characterize natural organic material and compare
techniques of pollutant analysis in water, sediment and soil samples. It is
hoped that this project will spark student interest in environmental research
and in the pursuit of advanced degrees. The development of this laboratory
course and facility is consistent with the educational mission of UND, the
federal mandate of environmental education and the future needs of our society.