* 9351813
* Instrumentation to Provide Undergraduate Students           Opportunities For Field Studies in Ergonomic Analysis
* EHR,DUE
* 09/01/1993,02/29/1996
* Robert Wygant, Western Michigan University
* Standard Grant
* Daniel B. Hodge
* 02/29/1996
* USD 17,500.00

9351813 Wygant The purpose of this project is to use portable oxygen and heart
rate equipment to improve the ergonomic components of four undergraduate
courses. The telemetric data gathering system requested in this grant will allow
undergraduate students to perform ergonomic and physiological experiments on-
site, in local industries. Typical projects that students will work on with the
portable equipment will include: 1. Energy expenditure measurement for
physically demanding jobs. 2. Cardiac measurement and evaluation of alternative
ergonomic task designs. 3. Biomechanical and physiological job analysis of
industrial operations. 4. Job stress analysis of different tool and machine
designs. 5. Job evaluation of work task for improvements in enabling
technologies and assistance with conformance with the Americans with
Disabilities Act (ADA). Expanding laboratory experiments to include data
collection from actual work sites will enhance students' educational experiences
and provide a stronger foundation for them to become practicing engineers.
Giving students multiple opportunities to work on-site throughout their
undergraduate engineering program will allow them to gain the perspective of
real world problem solving. We believe this will greatly strengthen the
undergraduate engineering curricula.