* 9351877
* Tools for Teaching Undergraduate Geophysics in the Field    and Laboratory
* EDU,DUE
* 08/01/1993,01/31/1996
* Steven Sheriff, University of Montana
* Standard Grant
* Gene G. Wubbels
* 01/31/1996
* USD 25,437.00

9351877 Sheriff For undergraduate geology students exploration geophysics can be
abstract and difficult. A new course in geophysical methods, taught in the field
and directed towards local problems suitable for undergraduate research, is
being developed. Five systems are being incorporated into the course: 1) a
portable 12 channel seismograph, 2) magnetic equipment for susceptibility, total
field and vertical gradient measurements, 3) an electromagnetic induction system
for near surface conductivity mapping, 4) a global positioning system to extend
our gravity work into the surrounding mountains, and 5) a generic MS/DOS
computer with graphics software to facilitate data analysis and presentation.
Electrical resistivity equipment, a gravimeter, a field computer, and modeling
and interpretation software also are being used in the course. All of the
equipment also is being used for senior thesis research, and the gravity,
magnetic and seismic equipment is being integrated into labs for the honors
course in introductory geology. The focus of the geophysics methods course is to
geophysically characterize the Missoula aquifer which is the sole source of
Missoula's drinking water. The aquifer is recharged by the Clark Fork River
which drains the nation's largest collection of EPA superfund sites. Significant
ground water and geochemical research has focussed on contaminant, water
quality, and water abundance problems. Geophysical studies are greatly
benefitting this research; geophysically the aquifer is poorly known. This
situation is providing an excellent natural laboratory for obtaining data that
is publicly important and of ample scope for a long term research project and
for dissemination in the professional literature.