* 9351838
* Laser-Based Experiments For An Improved Upper-Division      Physics Laboratory
* EHR,DUE
* 05/15/1993,04/30/1996
* Daniel Spiegel, Trinity University
* Standard Grant
* Ruth H. Howes
* 04/30/1996
* USD 41,194.00

This project is upgrading an existing one-semester Modern Physics Laboratory
into a two-semester Junior Physics Laboratory through the development of new
experiments in laser spectroscopy and modern optics.Physics majors at Trinity
receive an excellent introduction to experimental physics. We have established a
first-rate lower-division laboratory sequence, including an exceptional program
on the use of computers in physics. However, we are convinced that students at
Trinity and many of its peer institutions do not obtain sufficient experience
with the advanced experimental techniques employed in today's research
laboratories. We are therefore introducing revisions in our curriculum,
including a required Senior Thesis research project, to bring students much
closer to the research capabilities of contemporary physics. By placing a very
high priority on modern experimental techniques, we intend to attract a much
larger number of talented majors interested in careers in advanced physics
research, and to prepare these majors for study in highly competitive graduate
programs.The laboratory improvements defined in this proposal is providing the
capstone of our new emphasis on contemporary experimental methods. We are taking
advantage of the wide range of advanced experimental topics that can be
investigated using moderate-cost lasers, and the high level of student interest
in laser-based experiments. A nitrogen-pumped dye- laser system, a Fabry-Perot
spectrometer, and Macintosh computer systems are the major apparatus that have
been purchased for the experiments. These equipment items are quite versatile;
most are being used in more than one investigation. The laser-based experiments
proposed here can thus serve as models for the next generation of upper-division
physics laboratories.