* 9351608
* Incorporation of Flow Visualization, Computational Fluid    Dynamics and Data Acquisition into Laboratory Instruction & Classroom Activity
* EHR,DUE
* 05/15/1993,10/31/1995
* Noel Bormann, Gonzaga University
* Standard Grant
* Daniel B. Hodge
* 10/31/1995
* USD 88,072.00

The Civil Engineering program at Gonzaga University includes a laboratory course
that provides instruction in fluid mechanics, hydrology, hydraulics and
environmental engineering. This course will be made more effective by
introducing new equipment that allows students to perform activities which
combine "seeing" by using flow visualization, "doing" by using data acquisition
systems (DAS) in flow models or field measurement exercises and "thinking" by
using computational fluid dynamics (CFD) analysis to simulate flow. This same
equipment will be used to perform in-class activities that will make the
instruction more vivid in the fluid mechanics course. The new equipment will
allow velocity and turbulence to be measured easily. Video cameras will be used
by student during demonstrations to provide a record of the work and to increase
student interest and participation. In elective CE courses, flow model equipment
will be used to clarify the complex behavior in alluvial channel hydraulics.
Students will be able to measure the scour at differently shaped piers at
various velocities. In another course, water quality (WQ) sensors will be used
to collect data from local streams and lakes using the PC-based DAS. Students
will benefit from making WQ calculations using "real" WQ data collected in these
local water bodies. This equipment will also accommodate inter-disciplinary use
by students in the Mathematics and Computer Science (MCS) Department who will
use the equipment as an illustration of a physical process that can be simulated
by sophisticated numerical models. Results from the CFD software can be directly
compared to the physical flow situation. The CFD software can also be used to
support senior projects for CE, ME and MCS students.