* 9351237
* Development of Geotechnical/Geoenvironmental Design         Demonstration Laboratory
* EHR,DUE
* 05/01/1993,12/31/1996
* Aaron Jennings, University of Toledo
* Standard Grant
* Daniel B. Hodge
* 12/31/1996
* USD 18,382.00

This project will fabricate a design demonstration support system for use in
undergraduate civil engineering education. A computation center and two physical
modeling support centers will be fabricated for use with demonstration modules
to enable students to observe physical phenomena and failure mechanisms in soil.
The project includes funds for data acquisition capabilities so that students
will be able to obtain measurements of displacements, loads and pressures within
soil in order to verify design procedures common in engineering practice. The
apparatus will provide the opportunity to incorporate novel laboratory
experiences and design projects into civil engineering education. Course
modifications will be made in order to incorporate the laboratories into the
geotechnical/ geoenvironmental program. The laboratory demonstrations will
enhance the students' understanding of material behavior and mathematical
methods used to solve engineering problems. The behavior of soil and pore water
will be observed in the laboratory. Failure mechanisms that are predicted from
theory will be demonstrated. Flow paths and total heads will be observed in flow
through porous media experiments. Mathematical solutions to governing
differential equations which are used to solve engineering problems will be
verified in the laboratory with the aid of the computation center.