* 9351740
* An Innovative Cross-Disciplinary Motion Control and Energy  Management Laboratory
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/1993,02/29/1996
* Nagy Bengiamin, University of North Dakota Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Daniel B. Hodge
* 02/29/1996
* USD 29,657.00

9351740 Bengiamin It has been nationally recognized that the nature of present
day control engineering practices pose the challenging question of "how to
educate engineers to span the multiple disciplines used in the control field".
This project involves the implementation of scientific equipment for developing
a cross- disciplinary controls laboratory. The objective is twofold: first, to
broaden the horizon of electrical engineering students and further their
understanding of multidisciplinary problems; second, to equally satisfy the
desire of a cross- departmental student body in grasping realization concepts.
The requested equipment, usually found in typical industrial processes, is used
to design three work cells; an engine- generator system, a robot arm mechanism,
and a variable speed AC drive with simulated fan/pump loads. The applications
contribute in a coherent way to the understanding of fundamental concepts in
feedback control, systems modeling and analysis, and instrumentation and data
acquisition. EE and ME students indiscriminately are asked to look at both the
electrical and mechanical engineering aspects of the system. To bridge the gap
between EE and ME in a non-superficial way, the students work in groups and at
their own pace on small projects. Many schools may find the developed
experiments and facility of special interest by combining departmental resources
and providing an effective controls education. The experiments will be
documented and made available to other schools, and the outcomes will be
communicated in professional society coferences. ***