* 9351916
* EOS - An Operating Systems Laboratory
* EHR,DUE
* 05/01/1993,10/31/1995
* Carl Erickson, Grand Valley State University
* Standard Grant
* Theodore J. Sjoerdsma
* 10/31/1995
* USD 38,282.00

The study of operating systems requires an understanding of some of the
fundamental concepts in computer science: concurrency, synchronization,
deadlock, communication, and efficiency. The traditional method of lecture and
reading does a disservice to students who are being exposed to these difficult
concepts for the first time. Undergraduate computer science students need
creative, innovative ways of learning these concepts in the context of the
operating systems course. The future of computing is in distributed and parallel
processing. The operating systems course is the best place to assure every
computer science student receives a solid foundation in these fundamental
concepts.The EOS operating system lab is designed to increase the number of ways
a student has to learn major operating systems principles. Computer laboratory
exercises actively involve students with concept- relevant programming and
graphical simulations. The ease-of-use and graphical output of the lab
applications encourage exploration of operating system subject matter and allow
for a more effective teaching mode; that of directed discovery learning. The
exercises developed for the EOS lab provide a high learning to coding ratio for
programming assignments, and elucidate fundamental computer science concepts in
an exciting, interactive manner through simulation. Assignments associated with
the subject content of each lab are performed on the workstation and are
submitted and graded through electronic mail.