* 9351186
* Development of Design Facilities to Facilitate Curriculum   Revision of the Engineering Design Graphics Sequence
* EHR,DUE
* 04/15/1993,09/30/1995
* Thomas Krueger, Texas State University - San Marcos
* Standard Grant
* Daniel B. Hodge
* 09/30/1995
* USD 79,965.00

In recent years, engineering programs have developed courses that teach
sketching and computer applications to design as separate concepts. The next
step is needed in the development of these programs - that of integrating the
sketching and computer aided design into a unified course with clearly defined
purposes and goals. Courses are still taught by using the manual drafting lab
for half of the course and using a computer laboratory for computer experience.
The time has arrived to admit that the computer is the design tool of the
present. There is a need to teach sketching skills that encourage problem
solving and planning and then using the computer for the practical computer
applications of design and analysis. It is essential to integrate the sketching
process into the instruction of computer aided design. This method of
instruction will enhance the correlation between sketching and the computer. The
complete integration of the computer in the first course of the design sequence
will accelerate the students' progress toward its applications in the areas of
solid modeling, finite element analysis, computer aided manufacturing, computer
integrated manufacturing, and computer numerical control. The concept of solid
modeling and how it relates to the field of manufacturing has become an
important issue and must be addressed. This issue will be addressed and the
development of curriculum materials will be enhanced with the equipment
requested in this proposal.