* 9351449
* Computer-Assisted Laboratory with Multi-Concept Experiments for Introductory Physics
* EHR,DUE
* 07/01/1993,12/31/1995
* Philip Anderson, Ramapo College of New Jersey
* Standard Grant
* Ruth H. Howes
* 12/31/1995
* USD 35,952.00

9351449 Anderson The laboratory sequence of the introductory physics courses
required of all science majors, "Fundamentals of Physics I and II", have been
redesigned and upgraded through the addition of computer-assisted laboratories
(CAL) that focus on multiple concept experiments (MCE), and that employ "state-
of-the art" data acquisition techniques. Although the multi-concept approach
normally entails complicated set-ups and complex data collection, the use of
data acquisition instrumentation simplifies the procedural aspects of such
experiments. The MCE series being implemented are based on magnetoelastic
phenomena; simple harmonic motion and resonance; elastic properties, speed of
sound, and modulus; damping, Q and efficiency; magnetic fields in induction; and
ferromagnetism, permeability, and magnetostriction. CAL software is being
utilized that is portable between different computer platforms and that can be
easily programmed to do sophisticated control and analysis of any type of
experiment. The selected software - Lab View II - employs real and virtual
instruments. The students simply use a window interface to select the
experiment. After reviewing the procedure and performing an optional tutorial
and simulation, the students set-up the experiment using both real and virtual
instruments. Computer-assisted instructional modules (not part of this grant)
enable students to engage in self-paced study and review of course content,
including the laboratory experience. ***