* 9351904
* A Prototype Computer-Aided Meteorological Analysis          Workstation for Undergraduate Instruction
* EHR,DUE
* 09/15/1993,02/29/1996
* Gregory Tripoli, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Gene G. Wubbels
* 02/29/1996
* USD 58,257.00

9351904 Merrill "Meteorological analysis" is the process of estimating the four-
dimensional distribution of temperature, pressure, humidity, and velocity in the
atmosphere from irregularly spaced measurements. Objective computer methods
which produce gridded fields are available, but educators agree that the
underlying principles are best learned by drawing "weather maps" of isopleths of
the above variables. Manual methods are also used in both research and
prediction when the highest quality analyses are needed. The necessary
visualization, reasoning, and graphical abilities are learned in a series of two
or more undergraduate courses. There are three main drawbacks to manual
analyses: 1) teaching and applying it is very time consuming, 2) quantitative
physical constraints (such as balance between the pressure force and the wind)
are difficult to incorporate, and 3) the resulting analyses (maps) are not
readily usable for subsequent calculations of physical processes, which
typically require values on a grid for finite differences. We are developing a
Computer-Aided Meteorological Analysis (CAMA) laboratory which will overcome
these limitations while retaining the advantages of manual analysis. Analysis
students are able to draw isopleths on a pen tablet attached to the CAMA
workstation and have them immediately recast as a gridded field. The
workstations provide immediate feedback about the accuracy and consistency of
their work, allowing the instructor to spend more time on interpretation and
less on mechanics. CAMA also links the existing analysis curriculum directly
with theoretical meteorology by allowing students to diagnose dynamic processes
directly from their analyses. CAMA also is finding immediate applications in
research and eventually in weather forecasting as well, and has wider
application wherever analyses of state variables of fluids must be made.