* 9351503
* Sage Junior College of Albany Physics Laboratory            Enhancement
* EDU,DUE
* 07/15/1993,12/31/1996
* George Tucker, Russell Sage College
* Standard Grant
* Juan Garcia
* 12/31/1996
* USD 13,243.00

9351503 Tucker The project's main goals are to enhance Sage Junior College of
Albany students' understanding of the basic concepts of physics and to encourage
more students to consider careers in science. This is being accomplished by
introducing microcomputer-based experiments into our physics laboratories and
the physics elective courses, Astronomy and Energy and the Environment. Students
are employing the computers to collect, analyze and graph experimental data. The
immediate feedback students receive encourages participation and innovation.
Support was obtained for software and hardware for six, networked Macintosh Si
color computers each equipped with a Universal Lab Interface and a variety of
probes and sensors and a networked printer. A modem is used to obtain software
from remote locations. A CD-ROM drive improves the curriculum of the elective
courses. Software, including a spreadsheet, physics and astronomy simulations,
and utilities, has also been purchased. This project is stimulating the teaching
of physics related courses at the College. It exposes students to modern
apparatus and data collection techniques. It will prepares and encourages
students, especially women, minorities, and mature students, to consider careers
in science. Without this grant, implementation would have taken many years to
accomplish. ***