* 9351052
* Eastern Kentucky University Mathematica Project
* EDU,DUE
* 07/15/1993,12/31/1995
* Kirk Jones, Eastern Kentucky University
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Teles
* 12/31/1995
* USD 49,529.00

9351052 Bland The mathematics faculty at Eastern Kentucky University is using
the software package Mathematica for teaching calculus, linear algebra, and
differential equations. This is being accomplished through non-traditional
instruction which is taking place in a technology classroom. The emphasis of the
program is on having students explore problems of such computational complexity
that they will have to use Mathematica to analyze and solve the problems. This
is leading to good problem solving skills and to a deeper understanding of
important principles in mathematics. In the technology classroom students are
being placed in an environment where they are required to use approximation
procedures, graphical analysis, and data analysis in order to solve problems.
Computing is being used as a tool for experimental problem solving as opposed to
the usual deductive and theoretical approach most often found in the traditional
classroom setting. Students are required to submit written reports on their
technology classroom projects. Student understanding is being enhanced since
they are required to write a clear and concise explanation of their
results.Mathematica materials are being developed for use in teaching these
courses. The faculty is building on Mathematica materials developed at other
institutions under NSF grants as well as developing new materials. New
Mathematica materials developed are being made available to the mathematical
community upon request. ***