* 9351994
* Leadership In Laboratory Development For Visual Reasoning InEngineering Education
* EHR,DUE
* 06/01/1993,11/30/1996
* Michael Pleck, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Daniel B. Hodge
* 11/30/1996
* USD 75,328.00

This project will develop an innovative instructional software system which will
increase visual reasoning capabilities of engineering students. We will provide
a learning system with which a student can develop visualizing and spatial
reasoning capabilities in a self-paced series of exercises. Specifically, we
will take the missing view problem which forms the foundation for all visual
reasoning processes. This problem requires both visual analysis and visual
synthesis, and has been identified as the one for which students show immense
diversity in their solving capabilities. We will draw from solid modeling and
artificial intelligence technology and the power of interactive computer
graphics to implement such an instructional system. The system will capture and
critique the reasoning steps of each student. The system will select a suitable
level of difficulty based on perceived capability of the student in solving
previous problems so that a suitable path of exercises can be provided for each
student. The system will provide a discovery-oriented learning environment where
the students develop visual reasoning skills from their own accumulated
experiences guided by the system. The software system will be tested and
evaluated in the laboratory curriculum of Engineering Graphics and Design course
at the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign. This is a required course of
most disciplines in the College of Engineering. The software system will then be
ported to diverse computing platforms and disseminated to other institutions
nationwide. The project results will also be disseminated by holding workshops
in ASEE meetings.