* 9351677
* Video On The Computer: A Microcomputer-based Physics        Laboratory
* EHR,DUE
* 05/01/1993,10/31/1995
* R. Daryl Pedigo, Austin Community College
* Standard Grant
* Ruth H. Howes
* 10/31/1995
* USD 44,082.00

This project will demonstrate the use of video lab exercises as part of a
complete program of microcomputer-based laboratory physics instruction. Recent
technological developments which allow live video to be captured directly on
standard computer memory will be exploited to eliminate the need for laser video
discs. This should prove to be a very cost-effective method for creating and
storing new physics video experiments. A Local Area Network composed of twelve
Macintosh IIvx student workstations and two Macintosh Quadra video capture
stations will be assembled. Each workstation will be interfaced with appropriate
sensors and probes, allowing data acquisition and analysis as well as video
playback and editing. Students will perform selected video experiments in
addition to more standard laboratory work. Physics and pre-Engineering students
will design, shoot and analyze their own video lab experiments. Students in all
courses will produce electronic lab reports-- audio/video clips stored in
computer memory together with text and graphics detailing their analyses. Along
with their video work, students will employ spreadsheets in analyzing data from
experiments modelled on those developed under previous NSF- and FIPSE-sponsored
work -- notably Workshop Physics and Tools for Scientific Thinking. The focus
will be on active involvement of students and conceptual development based on
hands-on experience.