* 9351758
* Intergrating Molecular Modeling into the Chemistry          Curriculum at UNCW
* EHR,DUE
* 05/01/1993,10/31/1995
* Jack Levy, University of North Carolina at Wilmington
* Standard Grant
* Gene G. Wubbels
* 10/31/1995
* USD 27,704.00

The project will integrate molecular modeling into six existing undergraduate
chemistry courses in an innovative way which consists of combining modeling
results with laboratory results, thus using an integrated approach to problem
solving. The process of integrating modeling techniques will be progressive,
starting with basic operations in lower level courses, adding more sophisticated
applications in subsequent courses, until the student is capable of carrying out
a mini-research project as part of a senior level course. Fundamental
applications of modeling will be introduced in Organic Chemistry and in Chemical
Applications of Microcomputers.Progressively more sophisticated applications
will be taught in Advanced Techniques of Organic Chemistry and Biochemical
Techniques and Instrumentation Lab, ultimately allowing students to perform
mini-research projects in the senior level Advanced Organic Chemistry and
Medicinal Chemistry. The impact of these changes will be to allow students for
the first time to visualize molecular structures in their minimum energy
conformation, calculate the relative energies of conformers, measure distances
and angles between atoms and bonds, predict the outcome of physical measurements
made later in the laboratory, or even predict the product of a chemical reaction
that they will confirm by synthesis and subsequent instrumental analysis.
Students will learn how chemistry is really done today in the chemical and
pharmaceutical industries, using a discovery based approach to learning that
should stimulate and sustain students' interest in chemistry.