* 9351488
* Scientific Visualization Computer Graphics Technology       Associate Degree Program
* EHR,DUE
* 05/01/1993,10/31/1995
* Sunny Christensen, Wake Technical Community College
* Standard Grant
* Theodore J. Sjoerdsma
* 10/31/1995
* USD 100,000.00

Wake Technical Community College of Raleigh, North Carolina, is establishing a
curriculum to provide education and training to area adults and non-traditional
students (minority adults, women in transition and re-entry, and employed or
unemployed adults seeking retraining) who wish to learn the techniques and
applications of scientific visualization computer graphics. This program,
designed by the originator and several of the teachers of the highly successful
Parkland College of Illinois program, blends mathematics, physical and computer
sciences with art and humanities in a unique and powerful new way. It is
necessary to revise and upgrade the first program's structure and curriculum to
take into account the greater and more diverse local employment needs of the
four area universities (UNC, NC State, Duke, and NC Central) and the major high
technology firms in the Research Triangle Park area counties. A recent
feasibility study in this tri-county area found over 225 potential positions
that employers would create if graduates of such a associate degree program were
available to hire. By all accounts, this is a conservative estimate of the
growing demand in this field. In designing the new curriculum, consideration is
being given to area demographics, the availability of local and non-local
expertise, recent updates in available graphic software and hardware technology,
and the fact that no formal undergraduate training now exists in North Carolina
for scientific computer visualization graphics. This is a new field where, in
most states, the demand for trained people far exceeds the number of qualified
candidates. Thus, Wake Tech's curriculum development will focus or creating an
effective educational model for establishing similar degree programs in other
states by fostering col laborative efforts among local academic, industrial, and
private sector resources. Funding for this proposal will assist in the
establishment of a state-of-the-art computer visualization laboratory crucial to
the success of this program.