* 9351527
* Undergraduate Experiments In Polymer Science
* EHR,DUE
* 06/01/1993,11/30/1995
* Davide Hill, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* Daniel B. Hodge
* 11/30/1995
* USD 62,787.00

This project involves the formation of an undergraduate polymer laboratory
course. The instruments acquired are used in an existing undergraduate
laboratory course, for additional experiments. The two instruments are: a Size
Exclusion Chromatography unit to determine polymer molecular weight
distribution; and a Torsional Rheometer to characterize the rheological behavior
of the material. The project also involves the construction of controlled-
environment glove boxes to run polymer synthesis reactions. Students are guided
through the three basic stages of synthesis, characterization, and fabrication.
Several groups are formed, each with the responsibility of producing and
characterizing a sample of given molecular weight. The characterization involves
measurement of the polymer's molecular weight distribution and its moments,
study of the thermo-rheological behavior of the material, and establishment of a
correlation between the two. Samples from different groups are blended to
achieve predetermined characteristics and finally processed in model operations
such as extrusion, molding, or spin coating. By being allowed to experiment with
the above instruments, the students develop a natural feeling for cause-and-
effect relations associated with material properties. The instruments have been
selected to minimize operator-training times, while achieving a most favorable
compromise in terms of versatility, sophistication, and cost.