* 9352670
* Seeing Through Symmetry
* EDU,DUE
* 06/01/1993,11/30/1995
* Donald Buckley, University of Hartford
* Standard Grant
* Herbert H. Richtol
* 11/30/1995
* USD 57,154.00

Symmetry is utilized as a fundamental paradigm in a multidisciplinary course
whose purpose is to guide humanities students to both comprehend and become
excited about the scientific world. Through sensory-rich examples of symmetry in
a domain they know, these students are then stimulated to journey across this
bridge into the realm of science.The course begins by illustrating pleasing
patterns in the sciences and in the arts; this leads to a general definition of
symmetry. We then characterize symmetry using elementary mathematical notions.
Next we go on to see examples of symmetry in art and in mathematics as well as
in poetry and in music. Then we display the existence of symmetry in physics,
chemistry, biology, and cosmology. A brief excursion into asymmetry ends the
course.Students are able to explicitly develop their quantitative abilities and
analogical thinking by using concepts of symmetry both as a method within a
discipline and as a bridge between disciplines. They develop these abilities, in
part, through the medium of a highly graphical laboratory experience that
utilizes computers for understanding many facets of symmetry and for generating
their own patterns through the use of exploratory-based software packages.
Written and oral communication are emphasized through classroom discussions,
exams, laboratory discussions and reports, and through a term project. The
multimedia course is taught in an assembled lecture-discussion setting, and the
labs are an opportunity for students to engage in collaborative learning. A term
project requires each student to choose a topic from one of the science-based
categories discussed in the course. Every student will submit an essay
explaining his or her project as well as demonstrating the project to the class.
Occasional guest lectures and a trip to a science museum are planned to promote
further enjoyment of the course.