* 9352083
* Expansion of Reformed Calculus Using Computer Lab Projects
* EDU,DUE
* 08/01/1993,01/31/1996
* Lynn Garner, Brigham Young University
* Standard Grant
* Tina H. Straley
* 01/31/1996
* USD 43,935.00

9352083 Armstrong Brigham Young is developing an environment both physically and
pedagogically which will bring the capabilities of technology into direct and
frequent contact with large numbers of calculus students. The vision is to
involve a specific, well planned, well organized and well managed computer lab
component into the two different reformed calculus settings as well as the
traditional calculus setting which currently exist at BYU. The plan involves
student centered projects in calculus which will be carried out regularly
(weekly) but independently of the students' particular course enrollment. The
pedagogical portion of the plan involves designing, producing, and cataloging of
well thought out, insight provoking projects which can be implemented through
technology. In addition to the hardware and software (projects), they are
training a cadre of dedicated and intelligent teaching assistants who are
assisting students in the laboratory setting in ways consistent with the
instructional aims of the mathematics programs. A large number of the calculus
students at Brigham Young are mathematics education majors. A primary goal of
the project is for prospective teachers to be exposed directly to examples of
the best pedagogy in the use of technology. In particular, they will implement
the NCTM standards on the use of technology in the mathematics classroom in
their calculus classes. It is planned for all prospective teachers to take one
of the reform calculus courses. ***