* 9352868
* Mathematica Laboratory Projects for Calculus and Applied    Mathematics
* EDU,DUE
* 06/15/1993,11/30/1995
* Robert Knapp, Bowdoin College
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Teles
* 11/30/1995
* USD 77,871.00

The project directors are designing and constructing Mathematica computer
laboratory notebooks for calculus and applied mathematics. This builds on
Bowdoin College's three years of experience as the Mathematica laboratory
development site for Project CALC, the calculus reform program from Duke
University. The primary focus of the development efforts is on applications from
other disciplines which are new to the calculus and applied mathematics
curriculum. The calculus laboratory development effort has multivariable
calculus as a primary emphasis. The materials produced are being disseminated,
and instructors using the laboratories are being supplied with training and
ongoing support. Dissemination of the laboratories and support of instructors
using the materials is being accomplished by (1) a three-day summer faculty
workshop entitled "Laboratory Instruction with Mathematica," (2) a dissemination
network which includes distribution of Mathematica notebooks via FTP and disk
mailings, (3) publications, and (4) presentations and workshops at regional and
national meetings. This project is adding Mathematica laboratory notebooks to
the collection of materials currently available for revitalized courses in
calculus and applied mathematics. These notebooks are distinguished by their
complete development of topics under study, their focus on models from other
disciplines, and their use of graphics routines to develop geometric
understanding. Aggressive dissemination of the notebooks is encouraging the
adoption of Mathematica into calculus and applied mathematics courses, providing
students with a research-level tool which can be carried on to other courses in
mathematics, the sciences, and economics.