* 9352534
* Upgrading of the Undergraduate Chemistry Laboratories with a200 MHz Pulsed FT NMR Spectrometer
* EDU,DUE
* 04/15/1993,09/30/1995
* Jonathan Lindsey, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Gene G. Wubbels
* 09/30/1995
* USD 82,278.00

Acquisition of a 200 MHz (protons) NMR spectrometer operating in the pulsed FT
mode, with variable temperature and two- dimensional (2-D) spectroscopy
capability will improve the educational experience in the undergraduate
chemistry teaching laboratories. The new instrument will be used by
undergraduate students in three of the four core laboratory courses in the
chemistry program of CMU. The new spectrometer will provide undergraduate
students the opportunity to carry out modern NMR spectroscopy to elucidate the
molecular structure of organic and inorganic compounds, to do studies of
chemical kinetics including rapid exchange reactions, and will permit variable
temperature 1H, 13C, and 29Si NMR spectroscopy. The undergraduates will become
familiar with more sophisticated FT techniques and modern NMR data processing by
computer. An off- line PC will be interfaced with the spectrometer to increase
the throughput of the system and to enhance the familiarization of students with
the application of a PC in the laboratory. A hands-on approach will be pursued
throughout the three undergraduate courses. During summer the spectrometer will
be used by students participating in the Pennsylvania Governor's School for the
Sciences. A strong dissemination plan will be developed using publication in the
appropriate journals, and by distribution of packets with comprehensive
descriptions of selected experiments, containing sections on feedback from
students and on pedagogical results.