* 9352691
* Computer-Integrated Manufacturing Laboratory Enhancement
* EDU,DUE
* 07/15/1993,12/31/1995
* Douglas Pine, University of Northern Iowa
* Standard Grant
* Daniel B. Hodge
* 12/31/1995
* USD 36,336.00

This project seeks to enhance the application of modeling techniques that
support full implementation of computer- integrated manufacturing. The
curricular areas primarily affected are the Manufacturing Technology program and
the Electro-Mechanical Systems program. The four key areas of coursework will be
impacted directly range from freshman-level studies of automated manufacturing
to senior-level research projects. The University has been supportive in program
development especially through the establishment of computer laboratories in the
Industrial Technology Center. Students gain experience with key software
applications in numerous areas including computer-aided design (CAD), numerical
control programming, computer-aided manufacturing (CAM), process planning, cost
estimating, statistical process control and computer simulation. This proposal
seeks support for phase-one of a two-phase plan to upgrade the automated
manufacturing laboratory facilities. Phase one establishes an automated
manufacturing cell using industry-standard benchtop CNC machine tools with robot
material handling and vision system for automated inspection. The cell would
also serve as a focal point for student application of simulation and SPC
techniques. Phase two would expand the cell to create a flexible manufacturing
system (FMS) including ASRS, palletized automated conveyor and bar code I.D.