* 9352257
* A Track-Based Advanced Physics Laboratory Course
* EDU,DUE
* 05/01/1993,01/31/1997
* Kenneth Libbrecht, California Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Duncan E. McBride
* 01/31/1997
* USD 93,760.00

This proposal aims to develop and implement a new "track-based" advanced physics
laboratory course, where students undertake a series of related experiments in a
single area of physics. The experiments in a given track begin simply, and
expand into greater levels of sophistication as the course progresses. Although
the experiments themselves cover only one area, the experimental techniques used
apply to many other areas of physics. A comprehensive tutorial is to accompany
and describe the experiments, providing the necessary background and motivation
for the laboratory investigations. It is believed that such a track-based lab
course is more effective than traditional physics laboratory courses at teaching
students experimental physics, and at instilling in students a higher level of
confidence and competence in the laboratory.Two tracks will be created: 1)
laser-based atomic/molecular/optical physics, and 2) acoustics. The first track
makes use of new and significant advances in semiconductor diode laser
technology. Applying recently-developed techniques, visible 670-nm diode lasers
are being made into tunable narrow- linewidth laser light sources, which emit at
the wavelength of the D-lines of lithium. Using these laser tools, fundamental
phenomena in atomic and optical physics are being demonstrated. The second track
explores several aspects of classical and modern acoustics, with special
attention paid to recent advances in quantum and non-linear acoustics.