* 9352500
* Development of a Simulation Laboratory for Chemical         Engineering Instruction
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/1993,06/30/1995
* Michael Ryan, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* Daniel B. Hodge
* 06/30/1995
* USD 97,251.00

This project will demonstrate the feasibility of a Chemical Engineering
Simulation Laboratory (CESL) as a tool for instruction of chemical engineering
concepts. The CESL is designed to instill an intuitive feel for the operation of
chemical processing equipment, an understanding that is ordinarily obtained by
chemical engineers only after several years of on-the-job experience. Simulation
can complement traditional classroom and laboratory experiences by providing the
students with realistic exposure to processes and phenomena that are too
expensive, large, time-consuming, or dangerous to examine otherwise. This
project will develop three "process" modules. The first shall characerize the
draining of a tank. This simple, but interesting problem, will allow
concentraing on the general problme of module development. The other two modules
will be selected buased upon experience with the first but will are expected to
involve several process units (e.g., pumpts, heat exchangers, reators). One will
be appropriate for use in steaty-state operation, and the other in unsteady-
state oepration. In addition to these three process modules, the project will
develop a high-level "control" program that governs the way the process modules
are used. The control program will allow the modules to be run in any of three
modes (Laboratory, Steady, or Unsteady operation). Flexibility in the design of
the control program will allow for the incorporation of additional modules in
the future. The seven faculty co-investigators will work closely with industrial
consultants, student assistants, the computer vendor, and graphics programming
experts to develop the simulation modules. The modules will be introduced into
two undergraduate courses (Unit Operations in the fall and Kinetics in the
spring). Assessment will be made of pedagogic impact of the modules via parallel
control groups to compare quantitative metrics and exit interviews to capture
student impressions. Plans are in place disseminate the present the project
results at annual meetings of the AIChE and ASEE. The developed software and
documentation will be distributed to chemical engineering departments across the
nation via an ftp server on the Internet.