* 9352734
* Industrial-Standard Control Teaching Laboratory with        Reconfigurable Real-Time Architecture
* EHR,DUE
* 09/15/1993,08/31/1997
* Wojtek Kolodziej, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Daniel B. Hodge
* 08/31/1997
* USD 62,789.00

9352734 Shor An industrial-standard control laboratory with reconfigurable real-
time VME-bus-based architecture is being established for undergraduate control
engineering instruction.The motivation for this novel proposed laboratory setup
is to make the setting both flexible for individual project design and
accessible from remote sites. The flexibility of the architecture permits
multiple projects to be developed and tested concurrently without interfering
with each other. The VME-bus architecture allows the projects to share VME-bus
devices such as data- acquisition boards and real-time controllers. Further,
since the equipment is accessible from the network, students may develop their
software and algorithms from remote sites and take advantage of available
network resources. This also makes the proposed laboratory accessible to persons
who are disabled. The extensive video network together with the network
accessibility of the laboratory, provides interactive demonstration capabilities
for laboratory-classroom instruction. This contributes to the effort to develop
decentralized classroom technology.The laboratory provides reliable, modern,
industrial-quality equipment to familiarize the student with the current
industrial standards. This quality setup enables the students to focus on the
challenges of controlling non-ideal dynamical systems and to experiment with
innovative ideas. A sequence of experiments is designed to improve student
understanding of the basic principles and challenges of digital control. ***