* 9352786
* Scanning Tunneling Microscope for Undergraduate Instruction in Thin Film Science
* EDU,DUE
* 06/15/1993,11/30/1995
* Leslie Allen, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Daniel B. Hodge
* 11/30/1995
* USD 11,000.00

The "Scanning Tunneling Microscope for Undergraduate Instruction in Thin Film
Science" project is proposed to enhance the undergraduate Electronic Thin Film
laboratory for seniors in the Materials Science and Engineering Department.
Because surface thermodynamics and kinetics play a key role in the growth and
processing of thin film electronic materials, we seek to expand the topics for
our laboratory to include surface atomic structure and surface thermodynamics
and kinetics. The invention of the STM allows undergraduate students the
opportunity to actually observe not only atoms individually but also to measure
fundamental properties of materials on the most basic level. It will be used in
our laboratory to observe the dynamics of the interactions between the atoms on
the surface which is key to understanding the basic materials processes such as
diffusion, coalescence and grain growth. Drawing on our personal experience with
STM and the input of colleagues we have assembled set of experiments to be
investigated for their suitability for undergraduate instruction. Experiments
include tunneling phenomena, structure and microstructure characterization
including atomic resolution of individual organic adsorbates and the 2-D
ordering of polymers. However the majority of the development of this work will
be focused toward designing experiments which emphasis core concepts in
materials science: Nucleation and Growth. A report which details these
experiments will be written as a laboratory manual.