* 9352333
* Multi Media Communication Networks Laboratory
* EHR,DUE
* 08/01/1993,01/31/1996
* Myung Lee, CUNY City College
* Standard Grant
* Daniel B. Hodge
* 01/31/1996
* USD 77,474.00

9352333 Saadawi This project establishes a Multimedia Communication Networks
Laboratory by enhancing the current Local Area Networks Laboratory, to instruct
senior undergraduate students to understand and lead this technological
evolution. The focus of the Laboratory is placed on the practical hands-on
experiments that deal with identifying and resolving problems associated with
network operation and management, performance and communication protocols,
particularly with multimedia service applications on the state-of-the-art
facilities. New experiments include a series of increasingly complex problems
ranging from monitoring performance of each network component to designing an
application program to multiplex, transmit and receive multimedia services at
different service access points. The Laboratory includes representative
standardized networks and services from LAN and WAN: Ethernet, FDDI, ISDN, X.25,
Frame Relay and ATM (Asynchronous Transfer Mode). Multimedia workstations
equipped with video and voice capabilities and protocol analyzers are access
points to the networks for laboratory students. Interface, bridge and switching
equipment connects the networks. TCP/IP, OSI protocols and network management
softwares are implemented. The laboratory gives students practical experiences
of the real network environment with advanced multimedia services. Furthermore,
this laboratory enhances and strengthens the undergraduate communication network
design course, encouraging students to pursue further research activities. ***