* 9352301
* Design Of Mechatronic Systems
* EHR,DUE
* 07/01/1993,12/31/1995
* Stephen Derby, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Daniel B. Hodge
* 12/31/1995
* USD 93,911.00

9352301 Craig Design of Mechatronic Systems is the proposed senior-elective
course and laboratory for mechanical engineering undergraduates. It builds on
the current successful course, Mechatronics, and focuses on mechatronic design.
With the support of industrial sponsors - real customers- student design teams
will design, build, and test a microprocessor-based mechatronic system to
satisfy the customer defined problem/need.Funds are requested for course
development and for laboratory equipment. Course development will focus on
microprocessor instruction, the design process taught by example, and design
practice taught by scheduled written and oral presentations, culminating with a
prototype. The testing/debugging equipment requested here is essential for
successful microprocessor-based design. They, together with the current
inventory of sensors, actuators, computers, and microprocessors in the
Mechatronics Laboratory, and the project-specific equipment supplied by the
industrial customer, will give the student design teams all the tools necessary
to learn good mechatronic design methodology by experience and produce winning
designs.This course sequence represents the one of the first known offerings in
mechatronics at the undergraduate level. Aspects of course will also be modified
for collaborative use within the curriculum of Hudson Valley Community College
via instructor tutorials, transferred laboratory and experimental procedures,
shared resources and student interaction. Furthermore, the course and its
associated laboratory equipment will be used to attract 7th- 10th grade
precollege students, especially women and minorities, to engineering. ***