* 9352400
* Flight Testing for Undergraduate Instruction, Minority and  Community College Recruitment, and K-12 Outreach
* EHR,DUE
* 05/15/1993,04/30/1995
* Robert Hirko, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Daniel B. Hodge
* 04/30/1995
* USD 36,092.00

We propose to instrument our Cessna 172 aircraft with scientific equipment so
that we may implement a cohesive flight test program. The engineering
instructional capability of the instrumented aircraft will strengthen and unify
our undergraduate Aerospace Engineering program, our minority student community
college outreach program, and our K-12 engineering outreach programs. We
envisage a scenario similar to that existing in a corporate aircraft company
whereby a problem is defined by top administrators, a flight test program to
solve that problem is designed by the engineering staff, and support for the
flight test program is provided by the various branches. In the university
analogy, the faculty will pick a flight test problem such as an aircraft
stability problem. The senior level Stability and Control class will develop a
flight test and become program managers. Other classes will support that effort:
Low Speed Aerodynamics students will calibrate the instrumentation, the Design
class will design and construct wing mounts for the instrumentation, the
Instrumentation class will be responsible for integration of the instruments,
community college students will perform data analysis, and middle school
students will assist at the airport with aircraft preparation. All students will
participate in the actual flight tests. To carry out this project, we require a
data analysis and display system, a flow visualization system, a pressure
measurement system, a flight dynamics system, and a global positioning system.