* 9352849
* Development Site for Complex, Technology-Based Problems in  Calculus
* EHR,DUE
* 09/01/1993,08/31/1996
* Roger Lautzenheiser, Rose-Hulman Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Teles
* 08/31/1996
* USD 100,000.00

9352849 Winkel Faculty and students at Rose-Hulman Institute of Technology in
cooperation with several high school teachers are developing and disseminating
complex problems in calculus. These calculus problems are based on applications
in science and engineering and offer an opportunity to use computers as part of
the problem-solving strategy. These technology-based problems are
interdisciplinary in nature and integrate concepts from calculus, engineering,
and physics. During the academic year, faculty are locating resources and
developing significant problems, testing them in courses, summarizing student
reactions and solution strategies, and modifying and extending problems. Student
developers are assisting in evaluating solutions submitted by student solvers,
assessing prerequisite knowledge needed for attempting these problems, and
determining the level of effort and time needed for success. In the summer,
teams of faculty, students, and associate high school mathematics teachers are
developing new problems, polishing established problems, preparing standard
formats for problem presentation, loading the materials for electronic access
through anonymous "ftp" site facilities (Bitnet and Internet) at Rose- Hulman,
producing Mathematica resources to accompany problems, and writing up guidelines
for using problems in high school and college calculus settings. Suggestions for
non-Mathematica users are being offered in each situation as well as guides on
how to use the materials. About 50 problem sets are being developed. Faculty
from Rose-Hulman are conducting short courses in problem use and development at
local, regional, and national meetings.