* 9352783
* Department Mac/PC Lab For Core Mathematics
* EHR,DUE
* 06/15/1993,11/30/1995
* Donald Small, United States Military Academy
* Standard Grant
* Tina H. Straley
* 11/30/1995
* USD 36,283.00

The United States Military Academy has implemented a daring and innovative core
mathematics program that addresses the 7-into-4 problem and the concerns of the
calculus reform movement. A vital element of this program is progressive student
development in certain threads of continuity - one of these threads being
scientific computing. This project is equipping a computer laboratory/classroom
for use in teaching students exciting and innovative uses of technology through
structured laboratory instruction. This laboratory is also being used by the
Center for Faculty Development to train instructors on how to effectively use
technology in teaching mathematics. A third use of this laboratory is in a
series of outreach workshops, where the laboratory is being used to "spread the
word" both regionally and nationally on the use of technology in teaching
mathematics.By implementing this laboratory within their highly structured
curriculum, each of the 2250 students enrolled in core mathematics is attending
a laboratory session at least 5 times over each of their first four semesters.
Thus every graduate of this institution will have at least 20 attendances in
this laboratory. Each cadet also has his or her own personal computer. The
synergism generated between periodic laboratory attendances and assignments and
projects on personal machines is assuring that students use technology in
learning mathematics.