* 9352305
* GC/MS and IR Spectrometer Workstations for an Environmental Science Laboratory
* EHR,DUE
* 07/15/1993,06/30/1995
* Edward Chen, University of Houston - Clear Lake
* Standard Grant
* Herbert H. Richtol
* 06/30/1995
* USD 31,779.00

9352305 Casserly Gas Chromatography/Mass Spectrometry (GC/MS) and Infrared
Spectrometry (IR) will be incorporated into curricula and offer research
opportunities to undergraduate students in Environmental Sciences. We will
establish three new computerized laboratory workstations consisting of a GC/MS,
a IR spectrometer and a 486 computer containing tutorials and environmental
software. These workstations will greatly enhance the undergraduate laboratory
experience for students learning analytical methods, chemistry, and
environmental fate of compounds. The GC/MS and IR are well suited for this
endeavor since together they can effectively analyze the majority of OSHA and
EPA regulated pollutants. The development plan features hands on experience,
instruction in principles of GC/MS and IR spectrometry, interpretation of
spectra, analytical techniques, and applications. Specific experiments will be
conducted to allow comparison of conventional GC, GC/MS and IR techniques.
Analysis for atmospheric gases, vapors and priority pollutants will be covered,
so they may be used as investigative tools in research topics and result in
scholarly works with undergraduate coauthors. Since chemistry, biology and
environmental science students will take laboratory courses using these
workstations, the project will impact a significant number of students. i