* 9353129
* CRCM:  Northeastern University Comprehensive Regional       Center for Minorities
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/1993,10/31/1997
* David Blackman, Northeastern University
* Cooperative Agreement
* Alexandra King
* 10/31/1997
* USD 1,641,580.00

HRD-9353129 Blackman, David and Gilmore, Maurice Northeastern University Boston,
MA "Northeastern University Comprehensive Regional Center For Minorities" This
proposal describes a plan to establish the Northeastern University Comprehensive
Regional Center for Minorities in science, engineering, and mathematics,
bringing together academic, community, and industry resources in a coalition
committed to increasing the number of minorities in technical and scientific
professions, by providing students with the continuity and support they need as
they progress through the pipeline from grades K-12. The Center will serve both
as a sponsor of its own activities and as a coordinating body for external
projects, providing funding, resources, and access to expertise. The initial
consortium will consist of Northeastern University, the Boston Public School
System then adding Cambridge schools and other area institutions, and business
and community groups; the initial target population will be elementary school
children participating in after-school and summer math and science enrichment
programs, and middle and high schools students and teachers from selected Boston
schools. The number of schools, students, parents, and teachers will be
increased each year. The NUCRCM's goal is to at least triple the number of
minority students taking and successfully completing SEM courses in the first 5
years. Long-term objectives are to establish working coalitions among existing
programs, develop and implement new programs and curriculum, coordinate efforts
to ensure that students successfully complete algebra by the end of 8th grade
and pre-calculus by the end of high school, provided teachers with extensive in-
service training, and get parents involved in the education of their children.
Our strategy is to funnel more and more students into already-existing programs
such as the Explorers Club and MassPEP, new programs such as SteppingStones and
COSMOS II, and programs to b e developed. Over time the evaluation process will
identify those programs which are successful and should be expanded and those
that need to be modified or even dropped from Center sponsorship. The Center
Staff will consist of a full-time Director, a full-time Program Coordinator; a
Senior Co-Investigator and Math Coordinator; Co-Investigators in chemistry,
physics, and biology; a Senior Evaluator; Advisory Board; and Industry Pane.