* 9353912
* Difference and Differential Equations and Recent            Developments in Population Biology
* EDU,DUE
* 01/01/1994,01/31/1997
* A. Duane Porter, University of Wyoming
* Standard Grant
* Lee Zia
* 01/31/1997
* USD 69,102.00

9353912 Porter This conference brings together a group of thirty college
teachers of mathematics and biology to learn about the content and uses of
difference and differential equations in modeling problems of biology and
ecology. Participants train on existing software packages and in their use as
classroom instructional tools. The materials cover fundamental topics from both
difference and differential equations and how they are used to understand
problems in population dynamics and other related biological and ecological
areas. The goal is to modernize undergraduate courses in which these topics can
be a vital part. Applications of mathematics to and from biology and ecology are
a main theme throughout the conference. Mornings are devoted to lectures and
demonstrations by the speakers. Afternoons involve hands-on computer activities,
problem solving, modeling of biological problems, group discussions, participant
presentations and the construction of a module or course outline. The conference
is followed by class testing of the module/outline along with models and
computer activities during the 1994-95 school year. The reports are submitted to
the project director for distribution to all participants. Each report will
include a revised copy of the module/outline/other activity along with an
evaluation of classroom success. A selection of reports will be distributed
nationally. ***