* 9353520
* Science Alliance 2
* EHR,DRL
* 09/01/1993,02/28/1999
* Stephen Koontz, Somerset/Hunterdon Business Education Partnership, Inc.
* Continuing Grant
* Debbie Jones
* 02/28/1999
* USD 1,519,131.00

9353520 Egreczky This proposal is the extension of a highly successful project
called 'Science Alliance' which is an older private sector partnership project.
The first project was a two county alliance and 50 school districts. The new
project will involve four new counties. The project will do the following: o
recruit and preprogram train of local scientists/engineers and teachers. o
pairing of scientists/engineers and teachers based on appropriate areas of
expertise and interest. o development of industry/teacher/student networks that
will bring practicing scientists and engineers into the classroom to provide
appropriate role models and provide teachers and students opportunities to hear
about up to date science from those actually doing the work. o development of a
program of science modules by teams of scientists/engineers and teachers,
complete with appropriate supplies, which focus on consumer relevant issues,
including technological advances in the physical sciences, environmental
science, product chemistry and product use biology, that teachers can use in the
K - 12 classroom. o provision for the implementation and expansion/dissemination
of the program through extensive teacher training by their peers in the modules
developed in the section described above. The training of the teachers to be
lead teachers in the training of their peers is critical to this project and has
been successful in the previous project. The cost share is 89% of the face value
of the award from the Foundation. ***