* 9353787
* MPWG:  Symposium on Graduate Study in Science for           Undergraduate Women
* EHR,HRD
* 09/01/1993,02/28/1998
* Corinne Manogue, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Larissa Rogers
* 02/28/1998
* USD 93,538.00

9353787 Krane We propose to develop a model program for an annual symposium for
undergraduate women majoring in science. This symposium will provide them with
information related to graduate study in various disciplines of science, and it
will also bring them into close contact with women scientists. We expect to be
able to demonstrate that the knowledge and encouragement gained from this
experience not only increases the number of women who undertake graduate study
in science , but also will make them better prepared for graduate study and
therefore more likely to see it through to an advanced degree. A pilot program
along these lines was successfully held for 120 undergraduate women in April
1992. This program revealed several needed areas of development which require
that the symposium be repeated before an exportable model can be finalized. This
proposal requests funding to continue the symposium for three years, which will
permit us to accomplish the following: (1) The continuation will allow us to
evaluate the success of the program over several years and track the
participants through a few years of graduate study. (2) We will develop a
package of materials that the participants can take with them to enable them to
stage a similar event on their home campuses. (3) We will design and disseminate
this model to other regions of the U.S. to enable them to establish similar
programs. ***