* 9353226
* Resource for Science Education:  An Infrastructure for High Performance Computing and Communications in Education
* EHR,DRL
* 01/15/1994,06/30/1997
* John Ziebarth, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Michael Haney
* 06/30/1997
* USD 504,134.00

9353226 Lathrop This is a seed project to help establish a program which would
accept visitors to do research at the National Center for Supercomputing
Applications. The funds are used to set up the program that is expected to
become self sustaining. Teachers, and others, apply directly to the center with
their research proposals. The advisory board screens these, the staff helps to
find funding, and a visiting position is awarded. The center is donating space
and support for up to four at any one time and the facilities could support as
many as twelve. It is anticipated that the projects will range from 15 to 90
days and that the participants will have sabbatical leave from their home
schools or institutions. Follow- up support is integral to the project and
network access is seen as crucial to this. Future projects will vary in scope
and discipline, but it is expected that visualization and networking will be
integral to all. Educators in science and mathematics with strong interests in
their disciplines and a commitment to hands-on education will be actively
recruited. Because of tools NCSA and others have developed, programming is not
essential for participation. The cost sharing includes salaries of the Principal
Investigators, the space for the RSE staff, the space for four visitors, access
to NCSA responses, and space/staff for workshops, institutes and seminars. It is
estimated at 28%