* 9353788
* MPWG:  Career Development Intervention for Math/Science     Talented At-Risk Young Women
* EDU,EES
* 01/01/1994,06/30/1996
* Sharon Robinson-Kurpius, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Larissa Rogers
* 06/30/1996
* USD 92,088.00

9353788 Kerr This project is a research-thorough-service effort aimed primarily
at math/science talented at-risk girls. It involves the development, evaluation,
and dissemination of guidance strategies for helping girls to set and work
toward career goals in math, science, and engineering. Career development
interventions designed to encourage young women in math and science are often
ineffective. Possible reasons for the failure of most interventions include the
fact that they treat career choices in isolation from relationship decisions;
that they do not focus on girls' deeply held values (especially social ones),
and needs; and, that they do not use mentors and science activities effectively.
This project proposes to create a career development intervention which is
relationship-oriented, values-based, and girl-friendly, and to test the
intervention in an experimental study with young women who have been identified
by their counselors as math/science talented young women at risk for giving up
career goals. The study will evaluate the effects of the career development
intervention on goal-setting, math/science self-efficacy, self-esteem, at-risk
behaviors, and career-oriented behaviors. The results of the study and a
description of the project will be disseminated through journal articles and
presentations for guidance counselors, as well as through direct experience of
participating pre-service and in-service counselors. It has the potential for
creation of of an innovative approach to career counseling for young women which
may be effective in helping them to choose meaningful career goals related to
math, science, and eengineering, and to persist toward those goals. ***