* 9353481
* Computation-Enhanced Science Learning (CESL):  ScienceWorks as Technological Scaffolding for Model Creation
* EDU,DRL
* 08/01/1993,04/30/1997
* Roy Pea, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Nora Sabelli
* 04/30/1997
* USD 1,519,690.00

9353481 Soloway At the heart of a working science literacy is the ability to
create models that explain real-world phenomena. However, constructing,
simulating, and validating models poses a serious challenge for students. Just
as professional computational scientists rely on technology in their model
creation activities, we propose developing a Computation-Enhanced Science
Learning (CESL) educational approach that provides comparable technological
support for students and teachers. ScienceWorks, the technological component of
CESL, will provide scaffolded, computational modeling tools that enable students
to create computational models; this activity should lead to a deep
understanding of the science phenomena. The disposition to then see scientific
phenomena as analyzable systems should also develop as students gain expertise
over successive investigations. ScienceWorks will afford students access to a
broad range of functionality, e.g., video simulations, data visualization
representations; the actual computations will be carried out by off-the-shelf,
professional software mediated through ScienceWorks' open architecture.
CESL/ScienceWorks will be used on a daily basis at a public high school;
additionally, an informal network of ScienceWorks-using schools will be
supported over the Internet. A longitudinal assessment will be conducted to
determine the impact that CESL/ScienceWorks has on student's learning of science
content and science process; transfer ability will also be assessed. Findings
from this effort should provide guidelines for the development of next-
generation, educationally-sensitive software. ***