* 9353454
* Integrating Science Across the Elementary and Middle        School Curriculum
* EHR,DRL
* 10/01/1993,10/31/1999
* E.Wendy Saul, University of Maryland Baltimore County
* Standard Grant
* Susan P. Snyder
* 10/31/1999
* USD 774,060.00

9353454 Saul The Elementary Science Integration Project (ESIP) promotes
integration of hands-on inquiry-centered elementary school science instruction
with language arts and other subject areas. Teachers are encouraged to work as
classroom researchers engaged in "action research" with students on a variety of
topics that arise in the classroom. A 1990 NSF Teacher Enhancement award has
supported professional development for approximately 50 teachers who are now
prepared to act as teacher-consultants in training 65 new ESIP participants.
Teacher enhancement activities would include two summers and the intervening
academic year. This approach stresses the strengths shared by many elementary
schoolteachers -- the ability to recognize and pursue topics of interest to
their students. Past ESIP participants have been extremely productive in writing
and publishing the results of their classroom research, and in sharing their
experiences with other teachers through presentations and inservice workshops.
Expansion of ESIP to more teachers will create a critical mass of classroom
teachers who are capable of fostering inquiry activities that cross disciplinary
boundaries. Their teaching and writing will serve as a model for an innovative
approach to the professional development of teachers. Cost sharing on this
project represents 23% of the NSF contribution. ***