* 9353099
* Teaching for conceptual understanding and self-regulation   through collaborative problem solving
* EDU,DRL
* 07/15/1993,12/31/1995
* Charles Anderson, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Barbara Lovitts
* 12/31/1995
* USD 149,423.00

9353099 Anderson The project is a three year investigation of collaborative
problem solving in science for the purpose of developing accounts of learning
and problem solving by middle school students and developing instructional
strategies and materials that improve both students' conceptual understanding of
science and their capacities for self-regulation in complex problem solving
situations. Year 1 is an intervention study investigating the comparative
effects of three instructional conditions: a) mediated independent problem
solving, b) group problem solving, and c) mediated group problem solving. This
investigation will be conducted in eight classrooms as the students study a unit
on the nature and properties of matter. Analyses of Year 1 data will occur in
Year 2 for the purpose of: a) evaluating the success with which the desired
outcomes were achieved across the various conditions in terms of conceptual
understanding, self-regulatory abilities, and internalization of the social
norms practiced across the three conditions, b) evaluating the reasons for the
outcomes, principally through microanalysis of classroom interactions, and c)
revising the instructional procedures. In Year 3, we will investigate the
implementation of the revised instructional program in eight classrooms. The
proposed study will contribute both to research on problem solving and
conceptual understanding in science and to the improvement of educational
practice, focusing on the opportunities for teachers and students to work
together in "learning communities." ***