* 9353782
* MPWG:  TAP:  Transition.. Assimilation.. Preparation A      Program to Retain and Prepare Women Engineering Students
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/1993,02/29/1996
* Firouzeh Keshmiri, Milwaukee School of Engineering
* Standard Grant
* Lola E. Rogers
* 02/29/1996
* USD 79,167.00

9353782 Keshmiri The TAP Program is aimed at mining the rich vein of talent that
women can offer. Encouraged by the enthusiastic response to the earlier IDEAS
effort, the TAP Program is built upon the best of IDEAS. TAP TEAMS will be
formed on the basis of major fields of study and will consist of incoming women,
returning women, and women alumnae. The teams will be formed during the two-day
"Transition" experience, maintained throughout the "Assimilation" experience,
and widely utilized for the "Preparation" experience. The Transition component
will provide a two-day on campus experience designed to make incoming women feel
comfortable and connected to MSoE. All activities will promote interaction,
bonding, and networking with other incoming women students, returning women
students, and women representing the faculty, staff, and alumnae of the college.
The Assimilation component will strengthen the friendships and networks begun
during the Transition stage and provide new opportunities for feeling connected
to the School and to the field of engineering. These opportunities will include
shadowing MSoE women as they work on their senior design projects, designing and
implementing new programs that meet the special needs of women on the MSoE
campus, and participating in a lecture-discussion series led by professional
women engineers. The Preparation component will help women formulate realistic
career goals and strengthen their commitment to the filed of engineering. This
will be achieved through an extensive shadowing program linking sophomore
students to professional women engineers, through quarterly forums in which
students share their experiences, and through increased student participation in
professional organizations on campus. Evaluation of the effectiveness will
involve external consultation, students and faculty/staff. ***