* 9353177
* SSC:  Junior Aquarist Summer Science Camp
* EDU,EES
* 09/15/1993,02/28/1997
* Renita Jagan, National Aquarium in Baltimore
* Continuing Grant
* Alexandra King
* 02/28/1997
* USD 151,670.00

SSC-9353177 National Aquarium in Baltimore Baltimore, Maryland James, Sylvia M.
and Retina S. Jagan The National Aquarium in Baltimore is a major resource for
marine and aquatic science in the mid-Atlantic region. Its live and interactive
exhibits along with its on-site and outreach programs focus on creating an
attitude of respect for the environment and the ecological balance of life. The
Summer Camp will offer instruction in marine and aquatic science, hands-on
projects and information on career strategies. Additionally, the program is
designed to encourage the Junior Aquarists to continue their interest and
involvement in the sciences beyond the four weeks of Summer Science Camp. As
Junior Aquarists, participants are immersed in an environment unseen by general
Aquarium Visitors -- the day to day routines involved with maintaining a world-
class institution. They go behind-the-scenes and interact with professionals in
the field. Students gain hands-on experience working alongside the individuals
who have chosen to pursue careers as aquarists, mammalogists, herpetologists and
aviculturists. Students acquire and understanding of the secondary and
undergraduate educational requirements needed to pursue various fields of study
and how "book learning" is applied to the real world. Finally, Junior Aquarists
"do science" by designing, carrying out and presenting to their families and
friends, research projects using the National Aquarium in Baltimore's renowned
collection of poison arrow frogs. The program provides the foundation for a
lifelong interest in science and research as well as an extended relationship
with the Aquarium. Following participation in the NSF-funded Summer Science Camp
program, students can continue to meet on a monthly basis as part of an ongoing
Junior Aquarist Club. Further, completion of the Junior Aquarist program can be
followed by participation in the High School Internship Program and ultimately
the High School Studen t Guide program. The latter carries high school students
through the Aquarium's rigorous seven-week volunteer training program, provides
paying summer jobs and culminates in certification as full-fledged volunteer
exhibit guides. While still in middle and high school, students can apply to the
Henry Hall Scholarship Fund for additional marine science opportunities. Should
students attend college, they are also eligible to participate in the Aquarium's
College Internship Program. Therefore, the Junior Aquarist Summer Science Camp
is not a four- week, one-shot experience. Rather, it is both the beginning of a
potentially longlasting fascination with marine and aquatic science, and
possibly the catalyst that produces a future scientist.