* 9353808
* MPWG:  GENDERWISE:  Concerning Women in Mathematics
* EDU,EES
* 10/01/1993,03/31/1995
* Charlene Morrow, Mount Holyoke College
* Standard Grant
* Larissa Rogers
* 03/31/1995
* USD 103,079.00

9353808 Morrow The purpose of project GenderWise is to facilitate the
development and implementation of new mathematics intervention programs modeled
after SummerMath. For eleven years, SummerMath has been providing young women in
high school with new opportunities in mathematics. Each summer, as a result of
participating in SummerMath, young women return to schools with increased
confidence, problem solving skills, and independence. The SummerMath curriculum
will be revised and expanded, teacher guides for that curriculum will be
developed, classroom videotapes will be produced, and a workshop for
intervention program developers will be conducted at Mount Holyoke College.
Among the modifications of SummerMath curriculum are the addition of geometry
units incorporating the use of Geometer's Sketchpad software, expansion the
algebra units, incorporating the use of Function Probe software, and revision of
existing curriculum, including the integration of more extensive calculator-
based problems. Teacher guides to the curriculum will be written that outline
equity considerations for young women, as well as supportive strategies for many
types of effective classroom interactions. They will also include the goals and
objectives of each unit, mathematical connections between units, and assessment
activities for each unit. The set of videotapes developed will demonstrate
"learning in action": teachers interactions with students, and student
interactions with mathematical materials and with each other, including student
presentations to other students. Finally, a five day intensive workshop for
teams of intervention program developers will be held in the summer of 1994 at
Mount Holyoke College. This workshop will be a training session for the
materials and pedagogy that have been developed. Workshop participants will
learn strategies for teacher feedback and student self-evaluation. Programs
developed by the workshop participants will enable many young women to exp
erience the positive effects of a gender equitable mathematics learning
community. The curricular materials produced will have significance for the
larger mathematics education community as an example of rich and stimulating
mathematics and teaching practices that are connected to the lives of young
women. ***