* 9353287
* SSC:  "Minority Family Workshop:  Water Ecology Project"
* EHR,HRD
* 09/15/1993,02/28/1997
* Richard Smartt, New Mexico Museum of Natural History
* Continuing Grant
* Alexandra King
* 02/28/1997
* USD 109,829.00

SSC-9353287 New Mexico Museum of Natural History Albuquerque, NM Matthew,
Kathryn and McGuire, Susan "Minority Family Workshop: Water Ecology Project" The
New Mexico Museum of Natural History and Science seeks to improve the science
literacy of Native American middle school students through an expansion of its
successful Water Ecology Project. This program takes Native American youngsters,
a group that is under-represented in science, and exposes them to hands-on
activities to give them a more realistic understanding of science careers. To
carry out this project, partnerships have been formed between the Museum and
governmental agencies and educational institutions. These partnerships have been
designed to provide middle school students with a broad exposure to science-
based careers in New Mexico. Using water quality monitoring as a theme unifies
all of the student activities associated with this project. Water quality, water
conservation, and the ecology of riparian areas are of great concern to the arid
southwestern US. This theme has been chosen to facilitate the involvement of
whole families and rural communities in the program. The community-and family-
support produced through the choice of this theme is intended to reinforce the
shifts in student attitudes toward science. Thus, this project is wellsuited for
Native American students whose sense of self if often strongly influenced by
family.