* 9353573
* Latino Children's Constructions of Arithmetical             Understandings in Urban Classrooms That Support             Thinking
* EDU,DRL
* 02/15/1994,01/31/1998
* Karen Fuson, Northwestern University
* Continuing Grant
* Larry E. Suter
* 01/31/1998
* USD 990,916.00

9353573 Fuson The research will focus on cultural and social contexts of urban
Latino children's mathematics learning. It will trace multiple paths of
children's construction of addition, subtraction, place value, and problem
solving understanding within primary school classrooms that contain social,
material, linguistic, and cultural supports for such construction. Teaching
studies will be carried out in cooperation with teachers of English-speaking and
Spanish- speaking classrooms to discover culturally relevant conceptual and
social supports that facilitate children's mathematical thinking in the
specified areas. The project will also focus on ways to invole low-literacy
parents of poor urban Latino children in supporting their children's
mathematical thinking at home and in school. The results will involve developing
theories in four areas: tenstructured methods of single-digit addition and
subtraction like those used so effectively by Asian children, multidigit and
place- value thinking, word problem solving, and classroom conceptual supports
for children's mathematical thinking. The resulting improved theories, as well
as the descriptions and analyses of individual children's learning, will provide
a basis for large- scale teacher development and school change activities in
urban schools. The results will also contribute to our understanding of all
children's thinking in these mathematical areas. ***