* 9353797
* MPWG:  Females as Science Tutors (FaST)  Enhancing Science  Education at the Secondary Level
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/1993,08/31/1994
* Eloy Rodriguez, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Lola E. Rogers
* 08/31/1994
* USD 107,920.00

9353797 Rodriguez Female undergraduates (42), from science, engineering and
mathematics (SEM) fields at the University of California, Irvine (UCI), will
serve in local high schools as positive role models and laboratory instructors.
This activity is part of an effort to increase the representation of women in
SEM fields. The project extends a previously successful model program designed
to promote interest and academic instruction in these disciplines for
underrepresented minorities. The participating local high schools are populated
by ethnic groups having historically high attrition rates in secondary and post
secondary education and low representation in SEM related occupations. Success
in science, engineering and mathematics for women is often dependent upon the
internalized interpretation of female roles in society. Additional motivation
and training is needed for women to enter the male dominated (SEM) professions.
The project will help create a supportive environment for both the high school
participants and the female undergraduate mentors. The project also provides
critical instructional assistance for secondary laboratory classes. Low ratios
of instructors to students (1:35) at the participating high schools contribute
to the inability to understand the basic scientific principles taught in the
classroom. Female undergraduates receive positive reinforcement in their science
instructor/mentor roles, which give them added motivation to complete the course
work necessary for careers in SEM. The participating undergraduates will receive
a $2,000 stipend to help them complete their course work. ***