* 9353804
* MPWG:  Science for Young Leaders
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/1993,02/29/1996
* Kathleen Sullivan, Seattle University
* Standard Grant
* Lola E. Rogers
* 02/29/1996
* USD 99,776.00

9353804 Sullivan Seattle University proposes an activity-based, team-focused
model program for female eighth grade students of color for academic year
1993-94. The program will serve students who are able and well motivated, but
who might well lose interest in science and mathematics without special
attention. The model program will extend and enhance a four-week NSF-supported
Summer Science Camp, which will serve the same girls in August 1993. In that
camp, called "Summer Science Splash: The Mathematics and Physics of Water,"
students will use group discussions, experimentation, and field work to learn
about physical properties of water, principles of waves, issues of water
quality, and the role of water in the Northwest ecology. In the model program,
each student will build on knowledge and skills gained during the summer by
carrying out a challenging science project on a water-related issue of
particular interest to her. It is our hypothesis that year-long reinforcement of
the excitement generated by the summer program will heighten many students'
continuing interest in science. Each student, or pair of students, will direct a
project team consisting of a middle school teacher, a Seattle university
undergraduate science student, and a professional scientist who works in the
community. Working closely together, each team will design and carry out a
project over a five month period. Possible project areas include stream
monitoring, hydroelectric power, water in weather, avalanches, and marine
biology. Projects will involve reading, field work, experimentation, team
discussion, model-building, and writing. A curriculum designer will work with
each team to design a project that is significant and appropriate for the time
frame. The project will culminate with four spring events: 1) the student's
presentation of her project methods and results to her classmates; 2)
participation in "Expanding Your Horizons," a career workshop for middle school
girls; 3) a mar ine science and environmental education camp experience in
Washington's San Juan Islands; and 4) Science Day, an on-campus colloquium and
celebration in which each team presents its project to the entire group. In
addition to the value of the science content and the time devoted to science,
students will gain leadership and project management skills, experience in
cooperation and working as part of a team, verbal presentation experience, and
experience interacting with professional scientists as friends and role models.
***