* 9353407
* Project Grow:  The Development of Hands-on, Inquiry-Based   Middle School Mathematics and Science Teachers
* EDU,DRL
* 02/15/1994,07/31/1996
* Aaron Burke, Dayton City School District
* Continuing Grant
* Joyce B. Evans
* 07/31/1996
* USD 1,381,620.00

Abstract ESI 9353407 This 3 year project is designed to build upon and to extend
the reform of school science and mathematics begun with Ohio's Statewide
Systemic Initiative, Project Discovery. The project will : * Increase the number
of inquiry based middle school science and mathematics teachers in the Western
Region from 180 to 600 in the period 1994 to 1996. * Provide institute training
to 54 mathematics and science coordinators or administrators. * Recruit and
train 9 West Region college and/or university faculty to be content experts in
the summer institutes * Recruit 18 additional middle school teachers to serve as
institute faculty. Academic leadership teams to staff the summer institutes for
teacher enhancement consist of one scientist, one mathematician and two master
teachers. Three teams will be trained for each region one in mathematics and one
each in physical and life sciences. These teams will then offer intensive summer
institutes to groups of teachers and administrators from every school in the
West Region. Each teacher will receive 144 contact hours in one content area in
a summer institute with 48 contact hours in the academic year follow up. In
addition the training of a large group of regional science and mathematics
coordinators and administrators in the same inquiry model, will provide a
mechanism for horizontal and vertical translation of the model in every school
district. The Western Region of Ohio serves a large urban, racially and
ethnically mixed population as well as a more homogeneous group scattered over a
large rural area. Cost share is 120%.