* 9353746
* MPWG:  An Intervention Model Program for Girls Using        Laboratory Activities in Science, Math and Engineering
* EDU,EES
* 01/01/1994,12/31/1995
* Helen Oujesky, Texas A&M Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Lola E. Rogers
* 12/31/1995
* USD 97,936.00

9353746 Holland The purpose of this project is to develop an Intervention Model
Program that will enhance the probability that girls will eventually choose
careers in science, engineering, and math (SEM). The program is to be developed
jointly between Texas A&amp;M University (TAMU) and the University of Texas at
San Antonio (UTSA). UTSA is a subcontractor to TAMU. The developed program will
be replicated at junior colleges across the state. This project is designed to
place 120 girls entering the seventh grade in a university residence setting
(TAMU) and allow them the opportunity to have a successful "hands-on" laboratory
experience with complex (to them) scientific equipment. The program is designed
to enhance their self confidence at a crucial transition period between
elementary and middle school. The laboratory activities include introductions to
microscopy, electronics, strain, material testing, computer-aided design,
chromatography, and chemical reactions. A field trip to the TAMU School of
Veterinary Medicine is planned since many of the girls at this age express a
desire to be a veterinarian. This experience has proven to be a motivator in the
past. The participants will be selected from the Expanding Your Horizons (EYH)
Conferences held at TAMU and UTSA. Participation in the EYH Conference
demonstrates an initial interest in SEM. The UTSA participants are for the most
part Hispanic with several physically disabled. The TAMU participants are well
distributed. The participants will be evaluated before and after the summer
session to determine if their interests and perceptions of themselves having
careers in SEM have changed or increased. The girls will be followed through
high school by the TAMU Center for Academic Enhancement to evaluate the long
term effectiveness of the program. In addition to publications and
presentations, a workshop will be held for primary and secondary teachers and
junior college professors to introduce the model and enc ourage them to spread
the program across the state using the materials provided at the workshop.