* 9353938
* Integrating the First Two Years of Mathematics at Two and   Four Year Colleges
* EDU,DUE
* 01/01/1994,12/31/1997
* Robert Decker, University of Hartford
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Teles
* 12/31/1997
* USD 200,000.00

9353938 Williams As a result of the calculus reform movement good curriculum
materials which involve the use of technology, modeling, and problem solving are
now widely available for the first two semesters of calculus. Similar materials
are also becoming available for courses which lead into calculus like
precalculus and college algebra. In this project a coalition involving both two-
and four-year colleges and universities in Connecticut is working to integrate
the materials and approaches so that students taking a reformed precalculus
course can move into a reformed calculus course with an expectation of
continuity. It is particularly important both two-year colleges and four-year
colleges and universities are involved in this process because many students
take precalculus at two-year colleges and then transfer to a four-year
institution for calculus. Three different workshops are being held in each of
two summers on precalculus and algebra, first two semesters of calculus, and
calculus of several variables and differential equations for instructors at two
and four-year colleges and universities. In addition, key faculty at 7
institutions are identifying and evaluating materials for precalculus and
calculus and developing further materials which assure a smooth transition of
students between the identified courses. ***