* 9353141
* SSC:  MACINTOSH USING SCIENCE TEAMS (MUST) Summer Camp
* EHR,HRD
* 04/01/1994,09/30/1997
* Judy Brown, Museum of Science, Inc.
* Continuing Grant
* Alexandra King
* 09/30/1997
* USD 187,500.00

SSC-9353141 Miami Museum of Science, Inc. Miami, FL Chen, Judy, Ramirez, Alberto
and Raymond, Catherine "Macintosh Using Science Teams (MUST) Summer Camp" A
collaboration between in Miami Museum of Science and the University of Miami's
Rosenteil School of Marine and Atmospheric Studies (RSMAS) to introduce and
interest minority youth to the fascinating world of marine science and its many
related careers. The project, entitled Macintosh Using Science Teams (MUST), is
a five week commuter enrichment summer camp for students in grades 7- 9.
Students, organized into four-member cooperative research trams, study man's
impact on the marine environment. Field investigations, supervised by Museum
project staff and RSMAS graduate student mentors, take place in nearby
locations, in Biscayne Bay and the Atlantic shorelines. MUST teams use
scientific methods to collect information about their selected topic and conduct
qualitative and quantitative surveys of the coastal marine ecosystems
information is discussed, analyzed and processed the following day in a
Macintosh computer laboratory. Each tram produces a culminating research report
on their findings and using multimedia technologies, presents it to their
families and peers at a Family Night at the Museum. An extensive follow up
academic year component provides students with an internship opportunity to
explore several Museum based science careers as well as participation in a
Saturday science and computer club. Additionally, students will participate in
field expeditions and interactive seminars with local scientists and
mathematicians to explore science and mathematics college and career
opportunities.