* 9353820
* Affective Aspects of Teachers: Transforming Their           Mathematics Practice
* EDU,DRL
* 09/15/1993,08/31/1995
* Lynn Goldsmith, Education Development Center
* Standard Grant
* Barbara Lovitts
* 08/31/1995
* USD 49,962.00

9353820 Goldsmith In the proposed 12 month project, Education Development
Center, Inc.(EDC) will undertake a research project designed to investigate the
role of affect in the process of teacher development in mathematics instruction.
The research will use a case study methodology to investigate how it feels for
teachers to undertake to change their mathematics practice, and how teachers'
affective states influence the process itself. Five or six teachers
participating in a newly beginning teacher intervention project at EDC will
serve as the subjects for the investigation. The study will use both interview
protocols and observations of teachers in their classrooms and in teacher
inquiry groups to gather data. Analysis will focus on articulating the kinds of
feelings teachers experience as they work to transform their practice; the kinds
of conditions that stimulate strong emotional responses in teachers;
articulating the ways in which emotions can energize or interfere with the
process; teachers' awareness of their own affect and its influence on their
practice; and whether there are "signature" emotional mixes that characterize
certain phases of the process of teacher change. Outcomes of the study will be
written up for publication and presentation at relevant professional meetings.
The results of this preliminary investigation will also be used to develop
future plans for more comprehensive investigations of this issue. ***