* 9353422
* EXCEL-MAS
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/1993,08/31/1998
* Lori Orum, National Council of La Raza
* Continuing grant
* James R. Oglesby
* 08/31/1998
* USD 996,818.00

The National council of La Raza (NCLR), the nation's principal Hispanic
constituency-based organization, seeks funding from the National Science
Foundation's Informal Science Education Program for a four-year community-
centered demonstration program. Project EXCEL-MAS, the Math and Science
component of its EXCEL-MAS is designed to develop and encourage the adoption of
supplemental math and science programs for at-risk Hispanic elementary and
middle school students and their parents, using thematic, hands-on approaches;
and ultimately help to increase the numbers of Hispanic student enrolling and
succeeding in paths which lead to advanced study in math and science. Hispanics
-- the youngest and fastest-growing major U.S. population, numbering 22.4
million or 9% of the U.S. population according to the 1990 Census -- continue to
be most undereducated major U.S. population. Only about half of Hispanics are
high school graduates, and fewer than one in ten have completed college; only
about one-quarter of high school graduates have followed curricular tracks
including the math, science and language arts needed for college attendance;
national studies suggest that Hispanic 17-year-olds on average have math and
science skills at the level of White 13-year- olds. Contributing to these
problems are a lack of culturally appropriate, meaningful parent involvement or
family-wide approaches to education, supplemental programs to motivate and
support at-risk students, wrap-around social services for low- income students
and their families, and efforts to promote more equitable Hispanic access to the
full school curriculum. ***