* 9353078
* Urban Systemic Initiative for Reform in Science and         Mathematics Education Jacksonville, Florida
* EHR,ESR
* 02/15/1994,07/31/1995
* Larry Zenke, Duval County School Board
* Standard Grant
* Madeleine J. Long
* 07/31/1995
* USD 100,000.00

9353078 Zenke Collaborating Organizations: City government, University of North
Florida, Jacksonville Chamber of Commerce, Florida Comprehensive State Center
for Minorities, Florida Department of Education, National Center for Excellence
in Science, Mathematics and Technology Education, Florida SSI, Florida Institute
of Education. The Jacksonville USI planning grant will coordinate resources and
solicit input from a broad based constituency to accomplish the following
objectives: conduct a comprehensive self-study of the current status of science
and mathematics education in Duval County achieve consensus on a shared vision
for science and mathematics education develop a comprehensive systemic plan for
improvement of mathematics and science education establish a dynamic system to
evaluate and refine systemic reform. A Stakeholder Steering Committee will
select recognized community leaders to chair task forces that will meet and
gather data. The planning process will produce a self-analysis based on valid
data, a shared vision, and an USI implementation proposal for the city of
Jacksonville. Using principles adapted from total quality management as the
basis for the self-study, representatives from the major city stakeholders will
form a Stakeholder Steering Committee. This committee will select community
leaders to chair self-study task forces, acquire additional funding and
resources to support the self-study and gather data from their constituencies.
The task forces will gather data by observation, interviews, surveys and focus
groups. This information will be used to assess the current state of mathematics
and science education in Jacksonville and to develop a collective vision for
reform. The planning effort will result in the development of an implementation
proposal based on information gathered during the self-study process. ***