* 9353241
* SSC:  Summer Science and Technology to Advance Research     Skills (SSTARS)
* EHR,HRD
* 09/15/1993,09/30/1997
* Cynthia Park, San Diego State University Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Alexandra King
* 09/30/1997
* USD 329,780.00

SSC-9353241 San Diego State Univ. Fdn. San Diego, CA Park, Cynthia D. "Summer
Science and Technology to Advance Research Skills (SSTARS) The Math/Science
Regional Center at San Diego State University proposes a three-year Summer
Science and Technology experience to Advance Research Skills (SSTARS) for 50
students entering 9th grade. The San Diego County schools which are located in
the South Bay and Skyline areas include representation from each of the
predominant ethnic/racial groups in those areas. The project consists of two
closely related parts: a four-week summer residential program on the San Diego
State University campus and an academic year follow-up for students selected in
Spring 1993. The summer session offers entering 9th graders an experimental pre-
geometry class and a geometry computer lab, as well as an interdisciplinary
earth science course which integrates a workshops in career exploration and
adolescent problems. A technical writing class using Hypercard allows students
to document their findings in innovative and expressive ways. All students
participate in a research project, as well as environmental field trips which
supplement the courses. This includes a mentoring program in which university
science faculty will work up to four hours weekly with small groups of students.
Each succeeding project year (1994, 1995) will be a recapitulation of the 1993
project year described in detail on the pages which follow. Students graduating
from SSTARS will be able to continue summer science study at any one of 15
specialized Upward Bound Math/Science Centers in Federal Region IX. ***