* 9353164
* SSC: Miami University-Science-Engineering Mathematics Project (MU-SEMP)
* NONE,NONE
* 08/15/1993,06/30/1997
* Anita Roychoudhury, Miami University
* Continuing grant
* Alexandra King
* 06/30/1997
* USD 328,309.00

SSC-9353164 Miami University at Oxford Oxford, OH DeLoach-Johnson, Iris,
Roychoudhury, Anita and Carnes, Nate "Miami University-Science-Engineering
Mathematics Project (MU- SEMP)" Miami University's minority summer science camp,
referred to as Miami University-Science Engineering Mathematics Program (MU-
SEMP), is carefully designed to build upon the experience of its principal
investigators, to extend the scope and effectiveness of two major projects in
Southwestern Ohio, and to provide a holistic approach to developing in minority
youth the knowledge and skills needed for entrance to and retention in the
scientific and technological pipeline. The project's location (Oxford, Ohio)
will allow it to recruit from the large concentrations of minority, specifically
African-American, youth in the Cincinnati and Dayton metropolitan areas as well
as from minority youth who are isolated in rural schools surrounding those urban
areas. In order to reach its goal of assisting people of color in becoming more
active members of the science, engineering, and mathematics pipeline, both as
American citizens and as potential employees in related career fields, MU-SEMP
will combine inquiry-based content courses in science, mathematics, and computer
science with a supportive living and learning environment for four weeks.
Students will also attend field trips, receive training in technical writing,
communications, and research and study skills. Guest speakers who work in
science, engineering, and mathematics careers will also provide reflections from
the real world. Furthermore, in order to assure that the supportive environment
continues after the duration of the camp, parents as well as college students,
college faculty, and middle and high school teachers will be involved as staff
and mentors. MU-SEMP will build upon and expand the strengths of two systemic
initiatives in its geographical area. First, Ohio's Statewide Systemic
Initiative is also located at Mia mi University, and MU- SEMP will use teachers
trained by Discovery as well as adapt Discovery materials and curricula. In
addition, Discovery teachers will have opportunities to work with MU-SEMP youth
while both groups are in residence in the summer. MU-SEMP staff have been
involved previously in developing and teaching Discovery courses. Second,
Minorities in Mathematics, Science, and Engineering (M2SE), one of the regional
Alliances for Minority Progress centers is located in Cincinnati. Recruitment,
sensitivity, and retention techniques used in that project will be adapted for
the young teenagers who participate in the summer science camp. Two of the
project's investigators have also been trained by this program. In summary, by
combining rigorous education in science and mathematics with a supportive,
pleasant, residential environment, MU-SEMP will attract, motivate, and retain
more minority students in the education pipeline.