* 9353310
* Chicago Public Schools Science & Mathematics Education      Self-Study
* EHR,ESR
* 02/01/1994,07/31/1995
* Richard Daley, Chicago Public Schools
* Standard Grant
* Madeleine J. Long
* 07/31/1995
* USD 100,000.00

9353310 Daley This project will impact the total MST education enterprise,
including finance; governance and management; content, pedagogy, and delivery;
community partnerships; teaching, learning and assessment; and opportunities to
learn. Representatives of various stakeholder populations will assist in
designing the self-study process. School staffs will address the condition of
MST education in the school and indicate needed changes. All school staff
(including custodial and lunchroom staff) will complete questionnaires.
Questionnaires and brainstorming sessions will be used to solicit information
regarding the state of MST education in Chicago, the changes needed, and
contributions that can be expected from stakeholders. During these sessions
local teachers will discuss current conditions and explore strategies for
improvement. Local school councils (LSC) members will assist in gaining input
from parents and react to the statements from stakeholder groups and all school
staff, including custodial staff and cafeteria workers. Input from various
stakeholder groups will be presented to the Coordinating Committee who will
develop a final report. Based on the information and data from this report, a
subgroups of stakeholders will write a comprehensive MST education
implementation proposal. The Department of Research, Evaluation and Planning
will develop and implement an evaluation design. Evaluation will address the
effectiveness with which the needs in MST are identified and the relationship of
the proposal to the identified needs. Evaluation will also measure the quantity
and quality of involvement in the self-study process.