* 9353405
* Penn-Merck Collaborative for the Enhancement of Science     Education
* NONE,NONE
* 07/01/1994,12/31/2001
* Carlo Parravano, University of Pennsylvania
* Continuing grant
* Patricia K. Freitag
* 12/31/2001
* USD 2,114,354.00

9353405 Pica A five year program is proposed which will promote effective
inquiry based science teaching and learning in the elementary grades of the
school district of Philadelphia. It has three principle objectives: 1. to
improve the teaching of science through the establishment of a cadre of Leader
teachers to serve as mentors and change agents; 2. to deepen and extend
students' knowledge and understanding of science by integrating science learning
with instruction in the language arts, and 3. motivate students from
historically underrepresented groups to pursue further study and career
selection in science and technology. The Collaborative brings together teachers,
university faculty and professional scientists who share a commitment to the
enhancement of science teaching and learning. The Collaborative will focus its
efforts in the District's southwest region, whose 25 schools have a
predominantly minority population. Teams of 4 elementary teachers (grades 1-3)
from these schools will participate in the first two years to build up a
critical mass of Leader Teachers. They will attend an intensive three week
summer institute, a graduate level continuing education seminar during the
academic year and a three week institute during the following summer. Teachers
will work with materials which they will use in their classroom-the Franklin
Institute hands-on science kits-as the sprongboard to exploring basic science
concepts and discovering strategies for engaging students in their own
explorations. Pre- service teachers will be invited to attend the summer
institutes. An annual spring conference will bring together current and former
participants share information and experiences. By the end of the five years the
school district will have in place approximately 250 leader teachers. The funds
requested amount to $1,780,796 for 5 years with cost share estimated at
$784,039.