* 9353997
* Fiber Optics for Engineering Technology
* EDU,DUE
* 01/01/1994,06/30/1996
* Bruce Sargent, Wentworth Institute of Tech
* Standard Grant
* Norman Fortenberry
* 06/30/1996
* USD 89,102.00

9353997 Awad The two week seminar, "FIBER OPTICS FOR ENGINEERING TECHNOLOGY" is
designed to introduce 30 faculty members from community and undergraduate
colleges to the fundamental principles and applications of optical fiber
technology, especially as related to engineering technology education at the two
and four year level. The seminar/workshop is planned for June, 1994 with follow-
up activities throughout the following academic year and beyond. The program is
a collaborative effort involving a four year technical college and three
community colleges in the Boston area. Eighty hours of training will be offered,
half of which will be in the fiber optic laboratory, and the remainder
consisting of lectures, simulation and analysis using computers as well as
visits to local companies that use fiber optic technology. Substantial hands-on
involvement by industry representatives is integral to the program. The
laboratory exercises are designed to allow participants to handle optical fibers
and several of the specialized instrumentation and test equipment developed
specifically for fiber optics. Women, minorities and faculty who intend to
introduce/enhance fiber optics at their home institutions will receive priority.
No prior knowledge of fiber optics or communications is required. Follow-up
outreach to regional community colleges is planned for the summer of 1995. ***