* 9353281
* SSC:  Pre-College Community Laboratory
* EHR,HRD
* 09/15/1993,02/28/1997
* Victor Gee, East Bay Consortium of Educational Institutions Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Alexandra King
* 02/28/1997
* USD 193,055.00

SSC-9353281 East Bay Consortium of Educ. Oakland, CA Jaquez, Dolores and Gee,
Victor "Pre-Collegiate Community Laboratory" This summer science camp, to be
operated by the East Bay Consortium of Education Institutions, Inc., and
interagency collaboration of 19 Oakland-area schools, colleges, and
universities, will serve 50 Black and Hispanic seventh and eighth graders who
attend seven schools in a severely educationally and economically disadvantaged
area of Southeast Oakland (CA). The project site will be Merritt College
(Peralta Colleges). Learning experiences will be offered for five weeks per
summer, with 12 Saturday follow-up activities scheduled during the following
academic year. Classroom instruction will follow an integrated,
multidisciplinary, thematically organized model. Themes have been chosen which
highlight applications of science and mathematics to events, issues, and past-
times of interest to the young target population. These include the Loma Prieta
earthquake and the accompanying collapse of the Nimitz Freeway, the recent
Berkeley fire, issues related to pollution, development, and economic potential
of San Francisco Bay; the physics of sports movement; and implications of
mathematics for strong and durable construction. Each class section of 25
students will be under the care of an instructional team composed of a fully
credentialed teacher quali- fied in both mathematics and science, an upper
division mathematics or science major planning to teach in the public schools,
and an older high school peer mentor/role model. The instructional team will
themselves model appropriate individual responsibility and cooperative problem
solving. Instruction will follow accepted research practice. Participants will
first observe phenomena and gather data. They will then analyze this information
in an effort to form explanatory/ predictive hypotheses. After testing their
assumptions, they will fine-tune their hypotheses and share their fi ndings with
others. Classroom activities will be supplemented by field study/research
throughout the greater Oakland area. A culminating event of each summer session
will be a two and one-half day ecological camping expedition at Pinnacles
National Monument, jointly sponsored by Naturalists at Large, who will provide
onsite explanations and guidance. Additional field experiences will be offered
in academic-year follow-up sessions.