* 9353771
* MPWG:  Stony Brook's Women in Science Excel Project
* EDU,EES
* 03/01/1994,02/29/1996
* Hanna Nekvasil, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Lola E. Rogers
* 02/29/1996
* USD 100,000.00

9353771 Nekvasil The year-long project, known as Women in Science Excel (Project
WISE), is designed to encourage women to continue their science and math
education in college. The project will be directed at women entering Stony Brook
who show academic promise and a demonstrated aptitude for math, science, or
engineering (MSE), and will consist of five components: 1) an orientation that
will educate the women about Stony Brook, and particularly its research milieu
in the sciences; 2) an innovative two-semester sequence on Becoming a Scientist
that will expose them to a range of scientific disciplines, help them develop
critical skills, give them hands-on research experience, and address gender-
focused considerations that might influence their educational and professional
plans; 3) a basic calculus course using an enhanced version of the Harvard
Consortium curriculum that will be taught interactively and emphasize a group
approach to learning; 4) a multiple-tired mentoring system involving advanced
women undergraduates majoring in a science, women graduate students, and women
faculty; and 5) informal programs and social activities that will foster
collegiality and socialization with women scientists. While the broad goal of
Project WISE is to engage participating women in the excitement and challenge of
mathematics and science early in their college careers, before they make
academic decisions that will shape their subsequent education, the Project has
several specific objectives: 1) to motivate the women at the critical juncture
between high school and college to continue their mathematics and science
education; 2) to help them develop confidence in their ability to learn and
perform well in mathematics and other quantitative courses; 3) to promote
awareness of the range of educational and career opportunities open to
individuals with quantitative and empirical skills; 4) to create a supportive
social environment that will encourage continuation; and 5) to create a model
program that can be readily "main streamed" at Stony Brook, and replicated or
adapted at other centers of higher education. Project WISE is being developed in
response to both national and Stoney Brook needs to increase participation by
women in MSE education and careers. Few programs exist that target female
students specifically and focus on their recruitment and retention. The project
concentrates on the period that bridges high school and college, through the
first year of college, because this has been identified as the period of
"highest risk" in the MSE pipeline, when a high proportion of college-bound
students, but especially women, make the decision to discontinue their study of
these subjects. ***