* 9353447
* Bridging Preschool and Kindergarten through Teacher         Enhancement in Science and Mathematics
* EHR,DRL
* 04/01/1994,09/30/1999
* Kimi Hosoume, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Virginia M Horak
* 09/30/1999
* USD 912,133.00

9353447 Hosoume This project, sponsored by the University of California-Berkeley
(Lawrence Hall of Science), will develop, conduct and disseminate a science and
mathematics content and methods institute for preschool and kindergarten
teachers in the San Francisco Bay area and the nation as well. The curriculum is
based upon the PEACHES and GEMS materials. Project activities include:
introduction to science and mathematical concepts through the life and physical
sciences; participation in hands-on sciecne and mathematics experiences
integrated with language arts; introduction to appropriate instructional
strategies for young children; participation in early childhood professional
conferences in the area of science and mathematics and presentation of
orientation sessions on project curriculum by participants to teachers and
parents at their schools. The project will develop and conduct 3 summer
institutes, each three weeks in length and each enrolling 40 pre-school and
kindergarten teachers. In addition two academic year sessions will be conducted
each year for project participants to carry out dissemination to the schools.
Fifty parents, administrators and teachers from participants' schools will be
involved in one academic session each year at the Lawrence Hall of Science. The
Handbook for Early Childhood Science and Math Explorations for teachers and
parents will be revised and published by year four of the project.