* 9353408
* Purdue Instrument Van Project:  A University/High School    Collaboration for Enhancing Learning in the Laboratory
* EHR,DRL
* 08/15/1993,01/31/2001
* Diane Burnett, Purdue University
* Continuing Grant
* Rowena S. Douglas
* 01/31/2001
* USD 1,527,220.00

9353408 Morrison This five-year project will provide 120 secondary school
biology and chemistry teachers, from Indianapolis and rural districts in
Indiana, with workshop opportunities to gain content knowledge and skills in
using modern laboratory instrumentation. In three week summer workshops, ten
two- person teams of a biology and chemistry teacher from a district will use
analytical instrumentation common to both disciplines and design laboratory
curriculum modules using the instrumentation in their classroom. During a second
summer these same teachers will attend another two-week workshop to learn new
content, use of more instrumentation and to resolve problems they have
encountered in classroom use of the instrumentation. Teachers may earn nine-
credits for the first summer and six-credits for the second. A Chemobile will
support the summer activities during the academic year. It is a van equipped
with the instrumentation the teachers have used. It will deliver the instruments
to local districts to support instruction in the teacher's classroom.
Instrumentation in the van is provided by Purdue University. The van driver is a
teacher qualified to use the instruments and provide appropriate on-site
instructional support. Indianapolis schools will be further served by a Purdue
Visitation Team composed of a university faculty member and an industrial
scientist. The project builds on an earlier pilot project which served a limited
number of chemistry teachers. ***