* 9353225
* High-Performance Computing and Communications Education     Affiliations in Support of K-12 Education
* EHR,DRL
* 12/01/1993,05/31/1997
* John Ziebarth, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Michael Haney
* 05/31/1997
* USD 867,799.00

9353225 Blackmon This project extends the highly successful Affiliates program
at the National Center for Supercomputing Applications to include educational
affiliates. The program is essentially underway and includes well over one-
hundred institutions nationwide. These institutions designate a representative
who interfaces with NCSA for support and resources. Under this project, the
program is extended to educational organizations. The initial four Educational
Affiliates would be the Montana State Mathematics Network, the Texas Education
Agency, the Kansas ShareNet and one school system. Through working with these
organization, NCSA will learn what types of supports are necessary for
educational institutions using technology. The goals of the program are to
insure computer literacy and integration of networking and visualization into
normal school activities, to improve science and mathematics education for all
students, and to provide opportunities for interested students and teachers to
engage in special research or exploration projects using HPCC technology. The
project provides local first level awareness; integrates this support with
regular activities available for teachers, students and schools; and creates a
mechanism for additional activities. The cost sharing includes salaries of the
Principal Investigators, the space, access to NCSA responses, and space/staff
for workshops, institutes and seminars. It is estimated at 20%