* 9353347
* Vermont Rivers Teacher Enhancement Project
* EDU,DRL
* 12/15/1993,05/31/1999
* Nancy Keller, Saint Michael's College
* Standard Grant
* David B. Campbell
* 05/31/1999
* USD 706,623.00

9353347 Hessler This project will provide an intensive 3-week inservice,
residential summer institute for Vermont middle level and ninth and tenth grade
teachers. The content focus is on activity-based aquatic ecology as a vehicle
for developing and teaching a model of integrative mathematics, science and
technology to teachers and students. Thirty different teachers will come to the
Saint Michael's campus each summer for three summers beginning in 1994. Each of
the 90 teaches will commit to restructuring curricula in their schools to
support their teaching of integrated aquatic ecology content to their students
for at least three years following their Summer Institute and to learn
development within their schools. Schools will be linked by modem and Vermont
Ed-Net telecomputing to one another and to the campus, for data-sharing.
Emphasis will be on the interpretation of data generated by collecting from
points along each river and subsequent analyses. Data collected by Rivers
Project schools will be shared with local, state and federal agencies. This
proposal is appropriate for teacher enhancement because it is designed to
prepare teams of Leader Teachers who will work with colleagues to being
interdisciplinary science to middle school students through an integrative local
rivers science project. It also meshes will with the initiatives of the Vermont
Statewide Systemic Initiatives grant from NSF which is designed to teach
integrative science, math, and technology. Non-NSF cost-sharing is approximately
22% of the amount requested from NSF.