* 9353251
* SSC:  Science Summer Camp - (Camp Promise)
* EDU,EES
* 10/01/1993,09/30/1995
* Louis Iozzi, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Continuing Grant
* Alexandra King
* 09/30/1995
* USD 84,604.00

SSC-9353251 Rutgers University Busch Campus New Brunswick, NJ Iozzi, Louis,
Husain, Daulat and Johnson, Patricia "Science Summer Camp - (CAMP PROMISE) This
camp will act as a feeder to the college bound programs as well as initiate a
consolidated and coordinated effort to effect minority participation in science
and science education. The goals set by this project are to significantly
increase the participation and commitment of minority students in the sciences,
and to heighten the level of awareness of students with potential careers in
science and mathematics, including school teaching. Forty eight minority
students from underrepresented and disadvantages groups, who have completed
their 7th and 8th grades, will be eligible to attend the camp. Recruitment will
be from the state of New Jersey, based on "need" and interest in the field of
science, mathematics and engineering. The summer session of Camp PROMISE will be
the key component, and consist of three inter-related components: a) an
enrichment apprenticeship component, where students will be assigned as
apprentices to faculty/scientists for a week at a time; b) a remedial academic
component which will offer classes in mathematics and English) a cultural
resident component where participants will room and board on campus during the
week. The program will operation weekdays only. The academic year component will
have two follow-up meeting, one in Fall 1993 and the other in Spring 1994.
Portfolio assessment of students' progress using lab books, and other daily
lesson plan data will be primarily anecdotal and qualitative. However, student
attitude test will be analyzed and the progress of the student monitored by
selected teachers. A broad range of participatory activities, not experienced in
school classrooms, will help bring the "wonder" of science and encourage
students to select science courses at high school. The ultimate aim is to
influence minority students to make academic preparat ions in middle and high
school so as to be able to make career choices in the are of science,
engineering and mathematics. Funding for this program is therefore solicited.