* 9353582
* Gender Differences in Middle-Grade and Secondary Level      Science Learning:  Largest for the Most Able Students
* EDU,DRL
* 11/15/1993,04/30/1997
* Valerie Lee, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Larry E. Suter
* 04/30/1997
* USD 202,439.00

9353582 Lee As students progress through the educational pipeline from
elementary and high school, into college and graduate school, the proportionate
representation of females interested in studying science or pursuing it as a
career declines sharply. While it is reasonable that the group who persists in
science becomes increasingly selective academically at points further along the
pipeline, the fact that this "select" group contains so few young women is more
difficult to explain. The study aims to develop an educational (rather than an
individual choice) explanation for this phenomenon. Using data from the current,
large, and nationally representative National Educational Longitudinal Study of
1988 (NELS:88), preliminary investigation reveals a gender advantage in science
achievement for 8th grade boys. More important, the largest gender differences
in science achievement are for students of the highest ability. Since future
women scientist are likely to be drawn from this pool, these findings suggest a
possible cause of the underrepresentation of women in scientific careers. The
study's major focus is on students' school and classroom experiences in science
as they move through the pipeline. Using the first three waves of NELS:88 data,
the study aims to capture the educational trajectory of the same students in
their 8th, 10th, and 12th grade years. The focus is on the opportunities schools
provide students to learn science, and how these opportunities differ by
gender-- espcecially for the ablest students. ***