* 9353449
* Leadership for Urban Mathematics Reform
* EDU,DRL
* 07/01/1994,12/31/1998
* Mark Driscoll, Education Development Center
* Continuing Grant
* diane spresser
* 12/31/1998
* USD 2,536,046.00

9353449 Driscoll This is 3-year project by the Education Development Center
(EDC) that continues a collaboration with 6 of the Urban Mathematics Coalitions
(UMCs) in major cities around the country. It consist of two 2-year cycles
(staggered by one year). Each cycle will have 16 participants at each of 6 sites
--impacting a total of 192 teachers over its 3-year life. To encourage cross-
grade dialog, participants are selected in teams consisting of both middle and
high school teachers. The aim of the project is to prepare the participants to
become change agents and assume leadership positions in a systemic reform of
mathematics teaching, curriculum, and assessment in their respective districts.
The project consists of 3 phases: In Phase 1, teachers are asked to initiate 4
"structured experiments" (i.e. open-ended problems) in their classrooms, and
meet some 10 times during the semester to reflect on, critique, and discuss what
these experiments reveal about the nature of mathematics, and how it can be
effectively taught and learned. They also develop individual "action plans" for
further changes in their teaching practices. Phase 2 consists of an intensive
4-week institute, in which the teachers themselves do mathematical inquiries at
their own level, continue their discussions of the teaching of mathematics, and
learning and practicing leadership skills. In phase 3, they examine and help
reshape their district's reform plans, continue changing their own classrooms
practices, and--with support of project staff--begin outreach programs in their
districts. An external evaluation seeks to document and understand the strengths
and weaknesses of the project, which is based on the assumption that reform must
come from within the system itself. Cost-sharing is 22% of the total NSF
contribution.