* 9353760
* MPWG:  Female Role Models in Science:  Out of the Periphery and Into the Core Curriculum
* EDU,EES
* 09/15/1994,02/28/1997
* Martin Frank, American Physiological Society
* Standard Grant
* Dawn M. Pickard
* 02/28/1997
* USD 115,080.00

9353760 Frank The goal of the project is to increase the curricular resources
available for improving the science education of both females and males. These
curricular resources will help middle school life sciences students and high
school biology students to: o view science as an exploratory activity, done by
real people, and involving hands-on, inquiry approaches; and o expand their
image of scientists to include women from diverse groups and time periods.
Specifically, this short-term, highly-focused project will develop, review, and
test a set of instructional and motivational drop-in modules for middle school
life science and introductory high school biology classes which will allow
teachers to easily integrate information about female science role models into
the curriculum while increasing the hands-on, inquiry approaches used in class.
These materials will be coordinated with curricular goals for introductory
biology and with the goals and methods proposed by national standards projects,
including the National Research Council's Science Education Standards Project,
AAAS' Project 2061, and NSTA's Scope, Sequence, and Coordination. The modules
will be evaluated in middle and high school classrooms for their usefulness and
student impact. Teachers participating in this in-class evaluation will include
participants in the American Physiological Society's (APS) Summer Research
Program for High School Teachers and in the Ohio State Systemic Initiative -
Project Discovery. In addition, the modules will be evaluated by participants in
a series of workshops for high school and middle school teachers at meetings of
the National Association of Biology Teachers, the National Science Teachers
Association, the American Association for the Advancement of Science, the
Association for Women in Science, and the American Physiological Society.
Finally, the modules will be reviewed by the National Association of Biology
Teachers' Publica tions Review Team, the APS Education Committee, and the APS
Committee on Women in Physiology. The materials will be disseminated widely
through workshops and notices from an alliance of professional associations,
including the APS, AAAS, AWIS, NABT, and NSTA. In addition, the APS will
disseminate the materials via workshops with teachers at each of its annual
meetings in coming years. ***