* 9353610
* A Comprehensive and Collaborative Program to Increase the   Number of Well-Prepared Minority Mathematics and Science    Teachers
* EDU,DUE
* 08/15/1993,01/31/1995
* Shirley McBay, QUALITY EDUCATION FOR MINORITIES NETWORK
* Standard Grant
* None
* 01/31/1995
* USD 60,000.00

9353610 McBay Economic and social trends have greatly reduced the number of
minorities entering the teaching profession while, simultaneously, demographic
trends have greatly increased the number of minority students and the number of
predominantly minority schools, particularly in urban areas. Minority teachers
are especially needed to address the crisis in educational quality existing in
urban communities, particularly in schools attended by students residing in low-
income public housing. The Quality Education for Minorities (QEM) Network will
conduct a small Working Conference to: focus on the issues, review results of
current efforts, and consider potential designs for a comprehensive and
collaborative strategy to significantly increase the number of well-prepared
minority mathematics and science teachers; and produce and disseminate a set of
written guidelines for developing a comprehensive strategy. The 32 participants
will include representatives of two- and four-year colleges and universities and
of middle and junior high schools serving predominantly minority students
bodies; residents of neighboring low-income public housing served by these
institutions; non-minority institutions with strong teacher education programs
and track records in serving minority students; and professional educational and
scientific organizations. ***