* 9353106
* Aspects of Tertiary Volcanism in the Basin &amp; Range:         Thermal Modeling of Magmetism in Eastern Nevada and IsotopicAnalysis of Rhyolites in Southeastern Oregon (Earth Scie
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/1993,02/28/1995
* Anita Grunder, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Margrete S. Klein
* 02/28/1995
* USD 79,614.00

9353106 Grunder Dr. Anita Grunder will spend six months at the University of
Washington in the Department of Geological Sciences. She will use the radiogenic
isotope facilities to obtain reconnaissance Nd, Sr, and Pb isotope date for
rhyolites from the northern margin of the Basin and Range Province in
southeastern Oregon. In conjunction with ongoing work, these data will provide
insight into the nature of the continental crust and the relationship between
rhyolites and contemporaneous basalts. Geochemical and thermal/physical aspects
of magmatism will be integrated. In particular, well-studied and voluminous
middle Tertiary volcanic rocks of eastern Nevada will be used as a case study.
Chemical models will be refined and tested using Ghiorso's MELTS computer
program and the temporal, volume, and compositional constraints will be used as
input for a thermal and physical model (with Bergantz) of basalt injection and
progressive melting of the middle crust. Interactive activities at the host
institution include: teaching a volcanology course, and organizing a workshop on
graduate education and geoscience careers for undergraduate women (with the
assistance of the Northwest Center for Research in Women). Dr. Grunder will also
give a lecture on her research, and participate in faculty meetings. This
project furthers VPW program objectives which are (1) to provide opportunities
for women to advance their careers in engineering and in the disciplines of
science supported by NSF and (2) to encourage women to pursue careers in science
and engineering by providing greater visibility for women scientists and
engineers employed in industry, government, and academic institutions. By
encouraging the participation of women in science, it is a valuable investment
in the Nation's future scientific vitality. ***