* 9353645
* PMSA:  Accessing Accelerated Achievement
* EDU,ESR
* 09/01/1993,08/31/1999
* Paula Potter, Hamilton County Department of Education
* Continuing Grant
* Joseph Reed
* 08/31/1999
* USD 2,902,765.00

HRD-9353645 Potter, Paula/Reynolds, Harry and Greene, Edward Chattanooga Public
Schools Chattanooga, TN "Accessing Accelerated Achievement" Accessing
Accelerated Achievement in Science and Mathematics for Minority Students (AAA)
is a five-year teacher development and student support program designed to
increase the number of minority students who pursue upper-level secondary and
college level studies in the areas of science, mathematics, engineering and
technology., The project is a joint venture between the chattanooga Public
Schools, Ventures in Education, the National Paideia Center, the Southeast
Consortium for Minorities in Engineering (SECME), the University of Tennessee at
Chattanooga, the Lawrence hall of Science's Project Equals, and others. AAA aims
to increase student participation in the math and sciences by increasing the
level of expectation for all students, while simultaneously redefining the
teaching and learning equation in elementary, middle, and high school
classrooms. Included in the redefinition of math and science are:
interdisciplinary planning teams, the Socratic seminar, cooperative learning,
Hawaii Algebra and hawaii Geometry, science/technology exhibitions, and the
implementation of authentic student assessment processes. Strong emphasis has
been placed on incorporating reading and writing to learn strategies in
mathematics and science classrooms at all grade levels. Implementation of the
many classroom innovations will be facilitated by the project's three full-time
lead teachers. Beyond the reform of teaching and learning at the classroom
level, a number of intervention programs have been selected to enhance minority
student performance and attitudes as well as parental participation. These
include student visits to regional university campuses, Family Math and Family
Science, SAT/PSAT preparation courses, SECME programs, and science camps.
Project monitoring and evaluation will be facilitated through the implementation
of Hall and Hord's Concerns-Based Adoption Model and the use of numerous
traditional and alternative modes of student and teacher assessment.