* 9353998
* Community College Physics Faculty Development Project
* EDU,DUE
* 01/15/1994,06/30/1997
* Curtis Hieggelke, Joliet Junior College
* Standard Grant
* Kenneth S. Krane
* 06/30/1997
* USD 219,654.00

9353998 Hieggelke This two-year national program, based on a successful pilot
project, will provide eight workshops (four each year) designed for experienced
community college physics teachers at several geographically-dispersed community
college campuses. One set of workshops acquaints participants with (1) the use
of microcomputer-based laboratories; (2) the construction of physics
simulations; or (3) the development of conceptual exercises and overview case
studies. Another workshop provides an update and an opportunity for more
advanced experiences with microcomputer-based lab technology for previous
workshop participants. Each three-day workshop is being led by two community
college physics professors and two university/college physics professor who play
a major role in these areas. These workshops acquaint participants with the
contemporary use of the recent developments and findings of cognitive physics
research and participants are provided with extensive materials based on these
findings. As a result of these intensive workshops, participants are able to
evaluate these developments and they are able to return to their campus to start
implementing the workshop findings. Thus, these workshops facilitate the rapid
incorporation of this knowledge and technology at community colleges. The impact
of the workshop is being reinforced by the establishment of a networking system
employing a telecommunications bulletin board system and a newsletter. The
ultimate goal of this project is to help community college students develop a
stronger understanding of classical and contemporary physics. The task of
updating physics programs at community colleges is difficult but essential for
the nation and for science because of the large number of students, particularly
women and minorities, attending community colleges. ***