* 9353784
* MPWG:  Introduction to FEMME Program
* NONE,NONE
* 11/01/1993,05/31/1995
* Howard Kimmel, New Jersey Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Lola E. Rogers
* 05/31/1995
* USD 74,498.00

9353784 Kebbekus The twelve months New Jersey Institute of Technology
Introduction to FEMME Program will is designed to offer post fourth and fifth
grade high-potential girls from Newark, Irvington and East Orange school
districts an opportunity which will improve their science and mathematics
achievement, promote healthy self-esteem and self confidence, and inspire
feelings of competency while challenging fear of failure. The non-residential
program will introduce students to science, engineering, and mathematics (SEM)
careers, while encouraging them to attain their academic potential through
hands-on SEM activities. Monthly spring semester workshops, a four week summer
camp component, and a follow-up fall workshop will be held to provide
participants with positive learning experiences, exposure to appropriate role
models, and activities inspiring teamwork and cooperation. Instruction will be
provided in science, math and engineering, and oral and written communication
skills, as well as field trips to the Pocono Environmental Education Center in
Dingmans Ferry, Pennsylvania, the Marine Science Consortium in sandy Hook, New
Jersey, the Franklin Institute in Philadelphia and the Liberty Science Center in
Jersey City. In addition, students will receive academic and career counseling
and will be exposed to formal and informal interaction with female
professionals, faculty and students already engaged in SEM careers. Participants
will be involved in daily structured athletic events to encourage teamwork and
cooperative efforts. Study groups will be formed to investigate scientific, math
and engineering concepts to teach and promote cooperative learning habits.
Elementary and secondary teachers will form teams to work with the students,
under the leadership of NJIT faculty. The partners in this project are the
Newark, Irvington, and East Orange school districts, the New Jersey Marine
Science Consortium, and the Liberty Science Center. Additionally, all participa
nts will be provided information and applications for existing precollege
enrichment programs in SEM during summers following students' initial
participation. The activities will promote students' skills and motivate them
toward attainment of academic skills necessary for college preparatory courses
in middle and high school, thus giving them the option to continue with post-
secondary education. ***