* 9353155
* SSC: Michigan Summer Science Camps
* NONE,NONE
* 09/15/1993,02/28/1997
* Irvin Vance, Black Child and Family Institute
* Continuing grant
* Alexandra King
* 02/28/1997
* USD 674,504.00

SSC-9353155 Black Child and Family Institute Lansing, MI Vance, Irvin, Lang,
Mozell and Pollard, John "Michigan Summer Science Camps" Michigan State
University Mathematics Department, in collaboration with the Mathematics and
Science Program of the Michigan Department of Education and the Black Child and
Family Institute of Lansing, will offer a five-week summer science camp program
combined with an academic year program for underrepresented minority students.
This will be a statewide program with science camps offered in three Michigan
sites each year. These sites will be in Lansing/East Lansing, Pontiac and Benton
Harbor. Each site will operate with its own staff but with a common set of goals
and a common disciplinary focus. A professional development workshop for staff
will precede the camp. The young people served will be African-American,
Hispanic-American and Native-American students from the Lansing, Pontiac and
Benton Harbor areas. These students will be entering the seventh, eighth and
ninth grades in the fall of 1993. Three commuter camps, each enrolling 60
students, will be held. In addition, a five-day residential camp, with an
environmental focus will be held at the Kellogg Biological Station at Gull Lake.
One Hundred and eighty students will participate in a program that will include
mathematics, science, and environmental and computer science. Parents of
participants will be expected to attend selected sessions and work periodically
as program volunteers. Nine Saturday morning sessions for participants will be
held at each site during the academic year. A recognition program for all
participants, funded by Macmillan/McGraw Hill Publishing Company, will be held
at Michigan State University in the spring of each year. The summer science camp
program will address the need for a scientifically literate population and
reversing the declining aptitude, interest and participation in science by
underrepresented groups. The science c amps will offer: o an environment,
conducive to learning science and mathematics, with tools, resources and expert
teachers. o mentor relationships to nurture skills and predisposition for
science and mathematics o four-week commuter summer science camp plus a one-week
residential camp with opportunities to practice science and mathematics with a
problem-solving, exploratory approach o a series of half-day Saturday programs,
one each month during the academic year o strong parental involvement to support
and guide the interest and direction of the child