* 9353416
* Computational Training for Teacher Enhancement, Action,     and Motivation
* EDU,DRL
* 09/15/1993,02/28/1997
* Johnny Houston, Camden County Schools
* Standard Grant
* Michael Haney
* 02/28/1997
* USD 383,823.00

9353416 Denning This 36 month project links a small rural North Carolina school
district to community, university and computational resources. It supports them
in building curriculim units ties to local issues and in training teachers to
deal with the concomitant technologies. Teachers are central to school change
and become local mentors and change agents supporting their colleagues in
adopting computational interdisciplinary approaches. Initial plans target
specific skills taught in the context of wetlands, which are vital to the local
area. A multi-grade sequence of activities is envisioned which ties together the
work of students in the elementary, middle and high schools. In the early
grades, teachers and students focus on simple simulations and viusual
representations. In the middle grades, they deal with dynamic models and student
representations. In the high school, they work with numerical methods and
computational methodologies and have access to software on the Cray at the North
Carolina Supercomputing Center. Eighteen K-12 teachers are trained in each of
the first two years and 24 in the third year. The partners in the project
include Elizabeth City State University providing access to the network,
equipment and technical expertise, East Carolina University helping with
curriculum change, teh North Carolina Supercomputing Center training the staff
in computational science, and the N.C. Science and Mathematics Alliance
extending the goals of the state systems initiative to the Camden school
district. Cost sharing is estimated at 45%