* 9353813
* ASPIRA Mathematics and Science Planning Grant
* EHR,DRL
* 08/01/1993,01/31/1995
* Janice Petrovich, ASPIRA Association Inc
* Standard Grant
* Wayne Ransom
* 01/31/1995
* USD 76,650.00

The ASPIRA Association, Inc., proposes to develop a national applicable model
of community-based model to increase the number of Latino middle-school youths
with adequate preparation in math and science education. Latino community-based
organizations are uniquely capable of reaching youth that are often difficult to
reach by non-Latino organizations. The importance of out-of-school informal
science experiences for young people to reinforce their interest in science and
mathematics is of interest to the National Science Foundation, and to the ASPIRA
Association. However, not enough is known about what works in informal science
in the Latino community and with the Latino students. The ASPIRA Association is
requesting support from the National Science Foundation to undertake a project
to answer the following question: How can informal science programs have a
greater impact on Latino middle school youth in science and mathematics? The
perceived benefits of the project are: Identification of exemplary informal
science education efforts undertaken by organizations in working with Latino
youths. Identification of effective curriculum models in informal science
education for reaching Latino youths. Identification of characteristics of
successful programs. Encouraging partnerships among CBOs, educators, schools and
family. Identification of supplemental resources for supporting informal science
education programs. ASPIRA is the only national nonprofit organization devoted
to serving Puerto Rican and other Latino youth through leadership development
and education. With a thirty-one year old track record of proven effectiveness,
ASPIRA's work with Latino youths is based on the belief that all youths can
succeed.