* 9353219
* CRCM:  Comprehensive Regional Center for Minorities in      Mississippi
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/1993,02/28/1995
* Felix Okojie, Jackson State University
* Cooperative Agreement
* Betty Ruth Jones
* 02/28/1995
* USD 1,100,292.00

HRD-9353219 Mohamed, Abdul K. Jackson State University Jackson, MS
"Comprehensive Regional Center for Minorities in Mississippi" One of the most
important goals of the nation's education system is to produce students who are
first in the World in science and mathematics achievement by the 2000. Recent
reports indicate that the gap between United States and other industrialized
nations in these areas is abysmally widening. The gravity of the problem is even
more conspicuous in the case of minority students, where they are significantly
under-represented in science, mathematics and engineering. Minority students
must be provided, from the time each enters school, and intellectually
stimulating and academically enriched learning environment. The Mississippi
Quality Education for Minorities (QEM) Network Alliance is a partnership among a
plethora of colleges/universities, school districts, community organizations and
other constituencies which will address the need to increase and enhance
educational opportunities for minority children and youth in Mississippi. The
Alliance is the only organization of its kind in the state and given the
successful experiences of programs of similar kind in the past it will be highly
successful in implementing this project. This project has five components: (i)
Pre-college Outreach (Summer residential academies, Saturday academies and
Teacher Enhancement); (ii) Special Support Services: (iii) Family Math-Science;
(iv) Dissemination; and (v) Evaluation. The Pre-college component exposes and
provides middle school students with challenging approaches to science,
mathematics, communication skills and computer science learning. Students in
grades 6-8 will participate in the residential summer academy each year. Other
activities in the pre-college component include: role-modeling, field trips,
demonstrations by college faculty, cross-tutoring by college students, science
fairs, parental involvement, etc. Special Support Services component provides
family involvement and Business/Industry/Government interface with the pre-
college component. Linkages, additional networks and partnerships with major
agencies and stakeholders in education will be encourage to leverage support and
resources. The teacher enhancement component will target middle school teachers.
The primary goal is to strengthen their content knowledge and teaching skills to
enable them to develop and implement a plan for improving math and science
instruction at their school site. The achievements of this project will be
disseminated throughout the state and the nation. The strength of this proposal
is native to its design which has been worked out by building from past
experiences. This project will impact the whole state of Mississippi and may
become the vehicle for revitalizing pre-college education in science and
mathematics in the state of Mississippi. Expected outcomes include; (i) Greater
interest in careers related to Math and Science (ii) High achievement in Math
and Science courses; (iii) Increased enrollment in Math and Science courses;
(iv) Increased enrollment in Pre-algebra; Algebra and Geometry; (v) More schools
offering Pre-algebra, Algebra and Geometry; (vi) Increased number of teachers
trained in these subjects; and (vii) Increased time devoted to Math and Science
in the classroom.