* 9353462
* Carnegie Academy for Science Education
* EDU,DRL
* 12/15/1993,06/30/1999
* Charles James, Carnegie Institution of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Susan P. Snyder
* 06/30/1999
* USD 3,952,532.00

9353462 Singer This comprehensive project will serve 450 elementary teachers in
the District of Columbia Public Schools. More teachers will be served through
mentor teacher activities: peer-led workshops for new teachers and as school
science coordinators. In the first year (1993-94) 50 teachers from five schools
will participate; each year thereafter 100 different teachers from 10 different
schools. In intensive summer workshops teachers will: be instructed in the basic
concepts of science, experience the best interactive activities, hear scientists
share the excitement of doing science, and take field trips; use computers for
writing and organizing data, explore strategies for teaching and assessing
students, and design an integrated science unit (covering about 6-weeks of
study). During the AY teachers will be supported further in monthly workshops
and on-site visits by project staff. Each year 10-mentor teachers will be
selected from those who attended the previous year. The six themes for the
summer institutes are: Earth, Environment, Life, Materials, Energy and Space.
Scientists from local research institutions and Carnegie Institution of
Washington, DC will provide the science instruction. The style of instruction in
the institutes is Instructional Dialogues. A "Users Group" will link teachers
and ideas of a speaker to the realities of the classroom. A concerted effort
will be made to use and adapt materials from exemplary NSF funded projects:
SS&amp;C, Project 2061, NSRC, CEPUP, FOSS, etc. consistent with the DCPS
science/mathematics curriculum. Teachers will learn how to plan, develop and use
alternative forms of assessment imbedded in the curriculum. Teachers will earn
college credits upon completion of the training from Trinity College,
Washington, DC. ***