* 9353565
* Magic School Bus Museum Collaborative
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/1993,02/28/1997
* Beverly Sanford, Discovery Place, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Hyman H. Field
* 02/28/1997
* USD 697,264.00

9353565 Sanford The Magic School Bus Museum Collaborative, requests through
Discovery Places, Inc., NSF support for six science museums and Scholastic
Productions, Inc., to develop science education materials that capitalize on the
interest and excitement in the forthcoming Magic School Bus television series
and the Magic School Bus books. Over a three year period the collaborative will
provide basic science education activities and demonstrations through museum
educational programming. The collaborative will provide tools and support for
teachers to use the Magic School Bus themes in their science curriculum and
provide hands-on science classroom experiences using mobile museum exhibits.
Working with the National Urban League, ASPIRA, the AAAS Black Church Project,
and other youth serving organizations, the collaborative will encourage multi-
ethnic participation in these museum programs. The numbers of children and their
families who will be reached by the Magic School Bus Museum Collaborative are
significant. The components of the project are a planetarium program (100
copies), two 1200 square feet traveling exhibits, and activity and programming
guide, table-top exhibits and program, and 2 teacher enhancement workshops.
Collectively, these components can reach conservatively over 5 million museum
visitors in the first year. Coupled with the new television series, the Magic
School Bus can have a tremendous impact on the education of young people in the
sciences. ***