* 9353470
* Native American Mathematics and Science Education Leadership
* EHR,DRL
* 02/01/1994,12/31/1996
* Mark Ward, Sinte Gleska University
* Continuing Grant
* Joyce B. Evans
* 12/31/1996
* USD 1,087,499.00

9353470 Bordeaux Sinte Gleska University proposes to develop leadership teams
and educate teachers to improve mathematics and science education for over 1000
American Indian elementary students. The three year project coordinates with the
State SSI, the SKILL (Scientific Knowledge for Indian Learning and Leadership),
Dakota BBS a small Indian owned business and several local school districts. No
less than 94 teachers and 21-24 administrators from at least 8 target schools
will participate in the project during the three years. 32 teachers (16 from
grades K-4, 16 from grades 4-8) will enter the project at the beginning of the
first Summer Institute. This group will participate fully in the project at
least until the end of the second Summer Institute. Teachers may attend the
entire three years of the project but in the third year they would be expected
to act as mentors and facilitators. Mathematics and science education courses
will be offered for 6 hours of graduate credit. An additional 2 graduate credits
will be earned each summer through education practicum 1. Class members will
develop integrated culturally-relevant learning units, learn and practice
leadership skills, interact in small learning groups and with administrators and
conduct individual or group learning projects. The entire program will support
integrated mathematics and science for elementary students and will focus on
both content and pedagogy. At least two administrators from each target school
are expected to attend at least one Summer Institute for one week and to fully
participate in mathematics and science education improvement in their school.
American Indian families including both children and adults will participate in
Family Math in-service programs. Follow-up activities include: * monthly
Saturday Seminars beginning in November and ending in May; * a project Bulletin
Board System will provide peer support for teachers, opportuni ties for
collaborative teacher/student project undertakings both among program schools
and nationally and world wide access to information. * the Rural Development
Telecommunications Network (RDTN), a two way interactive TV network which links
thirteen strategic locations in the state via fiber-optic cable, will be used to
link project sites. No less than four 2- hour teleconferences will be held each
year. Cost share on the project is 13%