* 9353154
* SSC: Science With A Twist-Technology Education Attracting Minorities (SWAT TEAM)
* NONE,NONE
* 10/01/1993,03/31/1997
* Howard Hardin, Jefferson County Public Schools
* Continuing grant
* Alexandra King
* 03/31/1997
* USD 170,541.00

SSC-9353154 Jefferson County Public Schools Louisville, KY Harding, Howard
"Science With A Twist - Technology Education Attracting Minorities (SWAT TEAM)"
The Jefferson County Public School (JCPS) District's SWAT TEAM is a precollege
project that focuses on developing African-American middle-school students'
interest in science and mathematics, engineering and other careers requiring
knowledge and skills in science and mathematics. The project also encourages the
students to enroll and achieve in science and mathematics during their tenure in
high school. SWAT TEAM consists of three consecutive 4-week, 5-day summer camps,
with school-year follow-up activities. Extending over a three-year period, each
year the camps will enable 50 African-American middle school students to
participate in classroom and field learning experiences. The students will learn
about environmental science and structural design, biological science, aviation
and aerospace dynamics, and forensic science as it applies to criminal justice.
They will engage in the scientific methods of observation, data collection and
analyzation, and draw conclusions through the use of non-hazardous performance
events. They will use microscopes and computer technology, where appropriate, to
complete hands-on learning experiences. Career exploration will be a part of
each instructional activity. Students will interact with African-American
chemists, engineers, pilots, etc. to explore careers the require science and
mathematics. The success of the project will be based on the students' ability
to perform events using science and mathematics, their increased interest in
science and mathematics, their perceptions of their learning experiences, and
follow-up data showing the science and mathematics classes taken by the students
in high school.