* 9353651
* Industrial/University Interaction for Stimulation-Base      Process Improvement in Electronic Manufacturing
* EDU,ESR
* 08/15/1993,07/31/1995
* John Evans, University of Alabama in Huntsville
* Standard Grant
* Richard J Anderson
* 07/31/1995
* USD 75,000.00

93-53651 Farrington Swain Messimer Industry/University Interaction for
Simulation-based Process Improvement in Electronic Manufacturing Electronics
manufacturing is one of the most critical and highly competitive industries
within the U.S. economy. In the automotive electronics industry, these
electronics are used to control an increasing number of engine and safety
functions. Unlike the computer and consumer electronics arenas the harsh under-
the-hood environment of automotive electronics often stresses electronics
devices to their limits. In addition, technological developments are occurring
that improve functionality, decrease package size, and increase reliability
while maintaining efficient, high-volume assembly operations. To succeed, firms
must balance the complex and competing requirements of electronics design,
materials processing, manufacturing, and reliability at the earliest stages of
product development to insure that the finished product can be produced in a
timely, highly reliable, cost effective manner. The difficulty of this task has
led manufacturers to build a network of shared knowledge among vendors and
assemblers, and to reach out to research institutions for specialized knowledge
and assistance in the integration of the tasks noted above. This proposal aims
to establish a cooperative process improvement initiative between UAH and
Chrysler's Huntsville Electronics Division (HED). This project will focus on the
development of simulation tools to support all aspects of product and process
development, in order to evaluate a variety of design, materials, and
manufacturing alternatives. In particular, generic simulation models of existing
process lines will be developed which can be easily maintained, modified, and
expanded thereby speeding the modeling process in the future. The principal
investigators will also assist Chrysler's HED in establishing procedures for
validating and analyzing these models. The net result of this project will b e
increased university/industry interaction, mainstreaming of junior faculty, as
well as the development of advanced simulation tools, and the transfer of
knowledge about their development and use.