* 9353427
* Math Matters
* NONE,NONE
* 02/15/1994,07/31/1999
* Thomas Lester, California State Department of Education
* Continuing grant
* David B. Campbell
* 07/31/1999
* USD 5,401,883.00

ESI-93-53427 Kepner Math Matters Abstract This program is a four-year
collaborative mathematics teacher enhancement project of the California
Department of Education and a network of universities, mathematics education,
compensatory education and migrant education organizations in California. The
project goal is to enhance the mathematics instructional effectiveness of
elementary educators working with compensatory education and migrant students
and accelerate the rate of systemic school wide change in targeted schools.
Approximately 2,000 teachers, administrators, and paraprofessionals in 100
elementary (K-6) schools, comprised predominantly of compensatory education and
migrant students, will be served. The project will use a teachers-teaching-
teachers model starting with the selection and intense preparation of five
Teacher Consultants. They will work with the Project Director and staff to
enhance their skills and prepare regional training programs. Teacher Consultants
will strengthen the curricular and instructional leadership skills of 25
regional Cluster Leaders selected from participating districts. The Consultants
will participate in 10 days of planning with the Project Director. Then each
will engage five Cluster Leaders in planning and providing nine days of in-
service training to project participants in a different grade level each year.
The staff development will focus on strengthening mathematical knowledge and
instructional expertise. Participants will receive a minimum of nine days of
follow-up activities the first year and five days in subsequent years designed
by the Consultants and Cluster Leaders. These will focus on modeling research-
based instructional methodology, promoting teacher reflection using case
studies, teaching replacement units, and phasing in school-wide in-service
activities. Project activities will be based on participant evaluations and
needs, local school requests and coordinated with state systemic initiatives.
Project evaluation w ill be conducted by an independent firm. They will assess
subject-matter knowledge change of teachers, paraprofessional, and
administrators and teachers' instructional effectiveness. Programmatic and
schoolwide reform will be monitored. The project's effectiveness will be
measured by comparing student outcomes on the standardized California Assessment
Program for grades three and six with student performance at comparable schools
in the targeted counties.