* 9353076
* San Antonio Urban Systemic Initiative in Science,           Mathematics and Technology
* EHR,ESR
* 09/15/1993,08/31/1996
* V Rodriguez, University of Texas at San Antonio
* Standard Grant
* Gerald E. Gipp
* 08/31/1996
* USD 99,925.00

WPCL 2 B P Z Courier 10cpi #| x g x 6 X @ 87 X @ HP LaserJet III HPLASIII.PRS x
@ , \ , ' QX @ #| x 2 Z B # X HP LaserJet III (lpt3:) HPLASIII.PRS x @ , \ , '
QX @ Courier 10cpi Courier 10cpi (Bold) ? x x x , g x 6 X @ 87 X @ ? x x x , x `
B7 X SQV& t 1 ( < t &: u CF & ? t & ?.t 4 6 ^Y P & t . u r> 9 G z XtR P - > $ u>
> tC : : ; u G * = ! 2 J 9353076 Rodriguez The San Antonio Independent School
District self study/planning grant will focus on five areas: (1) vision, (2)
professional development (3) resources (4) learning opportunities, and (5)
policy reforms. The self assessment process will address key educational issues,
establish consensus and provide direction for systemic in mathematics and
science education. The study will begin by involving community task forces in
town meetings, surveys and questionnaires. Visions from San Antonio's 15 school
districts will be developed and synthesized into a common plan that identifies
of barriers and outlines implementation strategies. SAISD, key city stakeholders
and current school partners will build upon successful education strategies
initiated as a part of the City of San Antonio's Target '90 Goals strategic
planning effort. The self assessment will yield a report that will summarize
baseline data and outline an action plan that addresses systemic reform of
mathematics and science education. ***