* 9354978
* Graduate Research Traineeships in "Integrating High         Performance Computing into Research on the Physics of       Complex Materials"
* EHR,DGE
* 10/01/1994,09/30/1999
* David Campbell, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Paul Jennings
* 09/30/1999
* USD 557,500.00

The Department of Physics of the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
(UIUC) proposes a Graduate Research Traineeship (GRT) Program in "Integrating
High Performance Computing into Research on the Physics of Complex Materials"
(henceforth ICPCM). The program will train five graduate students to the Ph.D.
level in physics and will prepare them for careers in industry, research
laboratories, and teaching in colleges and universities. The fields represented
in ICPCM -advanced computation, materials science, and complex systems - are all
critical and emerging areas of science, engineering, and technology. Further,
ICPCM is a natural area in which to train students, for the combination of
skills required to master this area provides excellent preparation for a variety
of later careers. The UIUC provides an ideal environment for such a ICPCM
program, for it combines internationally recognized research strengths across
the whole range of materials with equally distinguished strengths in computation
and computational physics. The ensuing proposal details the scientific focus of
the proposal, describes the commitment of the Physics Department to provide
additional courses, supplemental training, and new workstation and laboratory
space, and outlines plans for summer school and other activities, including
providing advanced training for students and faculty at historically minority
institutions to facilitate the transition to graduate programs for talented
minority students.