* 9354637
* Use of Multimedia in an Introductory Chemistry Course for   Student Analysis of Real-Life Situations
* EDU,DUE
* 06/01/1994,05/31/1997
* Melvin Joesten, Vanderbilt University
* Standard Grant
* Susan H. Hixson
* 05/31/1997
* USD 200,000.00

9354637 Joesten The laboratory of introductory college science courses provides
an excellent opportunity to improve both the attitudes and scientific literacy
of liberal arts students and prospective teachers. This project is developing
six ten-minute videodisc programs with associated HyperCard stacks that add a
"real-life" component to the laboratory experience in an introductory chemistry
course for nonscience majors. Since elementary school teachers will play a key
role in increasing scientific literacy and in changing public attitudes toward
science, the six videodisc programs include elementary classroom scenes where
elementary students are doing exploratory activities based on the experiment the
college student has just completed. This provides both prospective teachers and
other liberal arts students an opportunity to look for misconceptions and
science content errors. Students view the appropriate videodisc program at the
end of the laboratory period, and their responses to the questions raised in the
program are an integral part of the experimental writeup. After class testing,
the videodisc programs with accompanying HyperCard stacks will be transferred to
CD ROM discs to allow for individual viewing by students when they are preparing
laboratory reports. The interactive videodisc and CD ROM programs will provide
an effective way to add a component missing from all introductory college
chemistry laboratory courses - an immediate illustration of applying the
chemical principles of a specific experiment to a real-life situation.