* 9354419
* Constructing Knowledge of Statistical Concepts Through      Modern Technology
* EHR,DUE
* 05/01/1994,04/30/1997
* Dennis Wackerly, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Tina H. Straley
* 04/30/1997
* USD 99,992.00

9354419 Wackerly Many of the students who register for college-level
introductory statistics courses have relatively weak backgrounds in mathematics
and, more importantly, poor quantitative skills. Although many of these courses
have been developed with only high school level algebra as a pre-requisite, the
typical content of these courses is really rather sophisticated. Students are
expected to understand concepts such as: conditional probability, Bayes' Rule,
independence, sampling distributions of statistics, confidence intervals and
tests of hypotheses. The level of student understanding of these
(nonquantitative) students depends upon how well they are able to envision what
might happen if a process (sample, computation, etc.) were repeated over-and-
over. This project will focus on the use of the computer as a device for
illustration and "discovery" of important concepts that students have difficulty
grasping. Rather than imagine what might happen if a process were repeated over-
and-over, the computer can be used to show the students what actually DOES
happen. The computer demonstrations are a tremendous aid in classroom
presentations of the concepts and are also very valuable in the hands of
students, where they can discover important facts and concepts for themselves.
This project will produce (a) the demonstration software in topic modules for
Macintosh computers, and (b) manuals for instructor and student use of the
software. Student learning and attitudes will be evaluated.