* 9354371
* Planning Grant to develop a Center for the Enhancement of   Mathematics &amp; Science Teacher Education through Advanced    Technologies
* EDU,DUE
* 05/01/1994,10/31/1995
* Daniel Schwartz, Vanderbilt University
* Standard Grant
* Tina H. Straley
* 10/31/1995
* USD 51,170.00

9354371 Pellegrino Faculty at Vanderbilt University are developing a new course,
Computer Algebra Systems in Mathematical Modeling, that is open to any student
who has had at least one semester of calculus. The course has two primary
objectives: (1) to introduce students to a computer algebra system (CAS); and
(2) to use this technology to investigate applications that are accessible to
all undergraduates who have some calculus background. Besides the development of
the course, this project serves as one of the planning exercises for the
creation of the Vanderbilt University Center for the Enhancement of Mathematics
and Science Teacher Education through Advanced Technologies (CEMSTEAT). The new
course emphasizes applying mathematics to problems that arise in the real world.
Modules for the course are being developed and will be assembled into a course
supplement. These modules treat applications in the natural and social sciences.
The development team is employing the expertise of the Learning Technology
Center at Peabody College of Vanderbilt University. Experts at the Center are
advising the development team on how multimedia and other technology components
can be used. The development team is consulting also with faculty members in the
sciences and teacher education in choosing applications that meet the needs of
their students. Evaluation of the course addresses three issues: (1) the nature
of student and faculty use of a CAS and mathematical concepts in conjunction
with the proposed modules; (2) student learning and understanding of
mathematical modeling; and (3) students' applications of the CAS to modeling and
other mathematical concepts. As activities of CEMSTEAT, the materials and
knowledge of student learning developed are available to a national audience.
***y