* 9354038
* Systemic Renewal of Teacher Preparation and Mathematics     and Science Education
* EDU,DUE
* 04/01/1994,09/30/1995
* Paul Cox, Brigham Young University
* Standard Grant
* Herbert Levitan
* 09/30/1995
* USD 94,680.00

9354038 Cox The primary goal of this proposal is to redesign the curriculum for
preparing teachers of K-12 mathematics and science. It is based on a philosophy
that emphasizes the integration of mathematics, science and teacher preparation
using inquiry- based, experiential learning by setting up design teams, which
will be linked electronically. This is to be accomplished through experiential
and service learning (especially through environmental service learning
projects). The project features a summer institute in which prospective
teachers, practicing teachers, and science, math and education faculty will
participate. The purpose of this institute for 40 students and teachers, is to
prepare the participants to develop integrated mathematics-science service-
learning approaches that will be implemented in the fall of 1994. Mentoring
teams, consisting of a scientist, mathematician, a teacher educator, a
practicing teacher and a pre-service teacher, will be formed during the
institute and will continue their discourse during the fall via an electronic
mail network. Information will be shared among the participants and with teams
at the Partner Schools of National Network for Educational Renewal (NNER) in
Utah, South Carolina and Texas. An external evaluation of the pilot project will
be conducted to assess the summer institute and the fall semester's activities.