* 9354525
* Active Learning Environment For Large Nonscience-Majors     Astronomy Classes
* EDU,DUE
* 05/01/1994,04/30/1998
* David Taylor, Northwestern University
* Continuing Grant
* Duncan E. McBride
* 04/30/1998
* USD 273,412.00

9354525 Meyer Almost all universities teach large introductory astronomy classes
for nonscience majors. These classes are typically among the larger and more
popular science classes aimed at nonscience majors, and in many cases constitute
the last formal science education the students will ever have. Unfortunately,
these classes are typically organized around large lectures, and demand little
or no participation from the students. This creates an environment in which the
students too often resort to an uncritical memorization of facts, and therefore
do not learn the lessons which astronomy is trying to teach them. This project
is developing an astronomy class aimed at nonscience majors which as much as
possible actively engages the students in critical thinking. Modern and
relatively inexpensive CCD technology is now being used at many universities to
teach astronomy observation laboratories to small numbers of astronomy students;
the project incorporates this technology into laboratories designed for large
classes of nonscience majors as a method of increasing the degree of student
participation. It also takes advantage of the nearly ubiquitous presence of
computer classrooms which most universities have implemented over the past few
years, and expands the analysis part of the laboratories into a separate
computer-homework component. This component is used to enhance the lecture part
of the course as well, and thus serves not only to increase active learning, but
also to break down the barrier between the lecture and the laboratory. The
project pays particular attention to the practical difficulties of achieving
these goals in classes which may well enroll 200 students, most of whom are not
exceptionally computer-literate. It also focuses on how such an environment can
be maintained in the long term without burdensome and unrealistic demands on
faculty time and/or other teaching resources.