* 9354676
* Combining Computers and People to Reform Academic Advising  in Engineering Education
* EHR,DUE
* 01/01/1994,12/31/1995
* Richard Taylor, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Jack L Waintraub
* 12/31/1995
* USD 99,999.00

9354676 Wankat Weak academic advising programs in the engineering education
system contribute to considerable dissatisfaction among successful students and
to the decision of other students to leave engineering. This research will
develop a proactive engineering academic advising system which will provide
better quality academic advising to all students, particularly those who need it
the most. The academic information computer program will use hypermedia to
provide both career and specific academic advising information at both
engineering colleges and remote sites such as community colleges. The advisor
contact computer program will keep track of all of the student's significant
contacts with advisors and professors, and will guide the efficient use of
scarce advising resources so that the students who most need help will receive
it. The new advising system will use people to provide the personal contact
which many students now miss in engineering education. Formative and summative
evaluations will also be done of the different parts of the project.
Transferability of the entire system will be tested at Purdue North Central and
at Clemson University. Workshops and papers will be presented to encourage
adoption of aspects of this advising system at other universities. The
deliverables from this project are: 1. development of a proactive advising
procedure and a computer program to keep track of student contacts, and 2.
development of an engineering-specific, academic advising computer program. ***