* 9354708
* Visual Programming Labs for Teaching Computer Science       Concepts to Undergraduates
* EDU,DUE
* 01/15/1994,09/30/1997
* Patrick Krolak, University of Massachusetts Lowell
* Standard Grant
* Herbert Levitan
* 09/30/1997
* USD 89,996.00

9345708 Williams Both the ACM Task Force on the Core of Computer Science and the
NSF Disciplinary Workshops on Undergraduate Education recommend scheduled,
structured laboratory sessions for undergraduates studying computer science. In
our experience, students can make little progress during a lab session when they
are working in a traditional programming language. Therefore, we are creating
lab software and manuals for a series of "visual labs" in which students use a
visual programming environment instead of a traditional programming language.
They create and test models (of a CPU, a robot's sensor configuration, a finite
state machine , a database query, or a genetic algorithm, for example), rather
that write code. Each set of labs is based on one knowledge area from the Task
Force curriculum. We have previously created labs for computer architecture,
programming languages, and robotics. We are now creating labs for database and
information retrieval and for two other knowledge areas (tentatively artificial
intelligence and software methodology and engineering). Each set of labs is
created by: defining pedagogical goals; designing user interaction; developing
specifications and designs for the software; implementing the software in the C
programming language and in the EYES visual programming toolkit; writing and
desktop publishing a manual; conducting user tests of the software and manual;
and revising the software and manual based on the results of the user tests. The
software and manuals are then used in class. Our previous studies revealed that
visual labs improve student performance, compared to no lab at all. We are
currently conducting formal studies to compare visual labs to traditional
programming labs that cover the same concepts. We are using an experimental
design developed in conjunction with the university's human subjects committee.
These studies will reveal whether visual labs are a useful adjunct to the
undergraduate computer scie nce laboratory curriculum and will yield information
about the usefulness of visual programming for instruction. Results will be
published in journal and conference papers. The lab software and manuals are
available for distribution to other interested colleges and universities.