* 9354647
* Earth Algebra To EarthMath: An Expansion And Dissemination  Of The Methods Of Earth Algebra
* EHR,DUE
* 01/01/1994,12/31/1997
* Nancy Zumoff, Kennesaw State University
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Teles
* 12/31/1997
* USD 31,979.00

9354647 Zumoff This project is broadening and disseminating the concept of Earth
Algebra. Earth Algebra is an entry level college algebra course which
incorporates the spirit of the NCTM Curriculum and Evaluation Standards for
School Mathematics at the college level. The context of the course places
mathematics in the center of one of the major current concerns of the world,
i.e., environmental issues and global warming. In this project mathematicians at
Kennesaw are developing and testing materials (EarthMath Studies) designed in
the spirit of Earth Algebra which can be used in a wider range of courses.
Specifically, the Earth Algebra concept is being expanded into two areas:
precalculus, both algebra and trigonometry, and mathematics education courses as
a tool for training preservice teachers. The EarthMath Studies are in the form
of studies of environmental issues which involve modeling and analysis of real
data, use of technology, group work, written and oral reports and student
research. In addition to Kennesaw State College, seven institutions are testing
and piloting the materials. The goals of the use of EarthMath materials are to
improve students problem solving and decision making ability, to offer insight
and increase interest in and appreciation of the role of mathematics in society,
enhance the learning of the mathematical skills and concepts prerequisite to
calculus, and to provide preservice teachers with a model of how the Standards
can be implemented.