* 9354477
* Developing Critical Thinking & Content Mastery in           Non-Traditional Students: A Comprehensive, Technologically  Enhanced Approach
* EHR,DUE
* 01/01/1994,12/31/1997
* Daniel Lemons, CUNY City College
* Standard Grant
* Terry S. Woodin
* 12/31/1997
* USD 400,000.00

9354477 Lemons A significant mismatch exists between what traditional Anatomy
and Physiology (A&P) courses offer and what many non-traditional students need.
As a result these students are not learning how living human systems function,
but rather are memorizing many often disconnected facts about them. We propose a
new, innovative curriculum which: 1) presents function first, in the context of
a broad organizing theme, and then introduces anatomical and physiological
details to explain the function, 2) reverses the order of the traditional
teaching process by beginning with hands-on exploration with physical models,
and then progressing to higher level thinking, 3) places the highest priority on
critical thinking about physiological systems so students learn to solve
problems, 4) uses computer technology as a tool to support all stages of
learning, not as the focus of it, 5) provides structured out-of-class support
and 6) uses assessment as an integral part of the learning process, not just an
endpoint. To demonstrate this new approach, we present in detail our modified
learning cycle method for the unit on the heart. When this new curriculum is
completed, we plan to: 1) Facilitate its implementation, a) in other CCNY
courses, b) at the three community colleges whose faculty are involved in the
project and c) at three local high schools. 2) Disseminate widely the learning
cycle exercises and the student assessment plan. 3) Publish about, and present
the project at the national level. Nothing could be more important from our
perspective, than to introduce competent, critical thinkers into the science
pipeline from our courses, and we expect the new A&P sequence to be a model
curriculum for doing this. We also expect to see significant improvement in the
critical thinking ability and A&P content mastery of women and minorities who
makeup the overwhelming majority of our student. ***