* 9354037
* Los Angeles Urban Mathematics and Science Teacher           Preparation Collaborative
* EDU,DUE
* 04/01/1994,09/30/1995
* Eunice Krinsky, California State University, Dominguez Hill Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Terry S. Woodin
* 09/30/1995
* USD 50,000.00

9354037 Krinsky Los Angeles Urban Mathematics and Science Teacher Preparation
Collaborative Development Grant In order to refine the present course of study
and to integrate mathematics, science and technology in the preservice content
preparation of undergraduate students a comprehensive course syllabi is being
developed for: a) courses specifically aimed at prospective teachers which will
infuse technology into the entire preservice education of prospective teachers;
b) content specific/integrated lower division beginning level science courses
for future mathematics and science teachers, with a stress on integrated science
content which includes themes of evolution, Energy, Patterns of Change, Scale
and Structure, and Systems and Interactions (as specified in the California
Science Framework); c) bridge courses in the mathematics curriculum which help
the prospective mathematics teacher make the difficult transition from lower
division calculus based courses to upper division theory based courses; d) an
upper division "hands on-minds on" geometry course for prospective secondary
teachers; and e) an upper division course for prospective secondary teachers
which integrates the many disciplines related to environmental science.
University faculty, including outstanding mathematicians and scientists will
work together with secondary mathematics and science teachers to revise course
syllabi and pilot the targeted courses. Cooperating campuses include three of
the California State University campuses (Dominguez Hills, Los Angeles and
Northridge), the University of California, Santa Barbara, and Loyola Marymount.
***