* 9354528
* Reform of the "Non-Calculus" Introductory Physics Course    from a Constructivist Perspective
* EHR,DUE
* 08/15/1994,07/31/1998
* Wendell Potter, University of California-Davis
* Continuing grant
* Duncan E. McBride
* 07/31/1998
* USD 310,071.00

9354528 Potter There is widespread and growing agreement that very serious
problems exist in the introductory courses in all science disciplines. Many of
the factors at the root of the problems in these courses have only recently been
identified by researchers in cognitive psychology and science education. We
believe that most of the problems with introductory science courses and the
"non-calculus" introductory physics course in particular, stem directly from the
way in which instructors conceptualize the teaching and learning process. The
goal of this proposal is to construct and fully implement a new introductory
physics course which will replace the standard "non-calculus" course at UC
Davis. The model we are proposing is grounded in the direct implications for
instruction that are emerging which support a constructivist theory of how
learning and conceptual understanding actually develops in an individual
student. The course will by necessity have to be taught within the constraints
normally found at large universities and so will serve as a viable model for
other institutions. The objectives of this proposal are to transform the
traditional non-calculus introductory physics course into a constructivist based
course, to produce instructor and TA training materials in constructivist
methodologies, to produce a student textbook along course lines, and to give
support and guidance to other institutions desiring to make these changes. The
expected outcomes include an increase in student conceptual understanding and
appreciation of physics, an increase in math and critical thinking skills in
students, and a pedagogically appropriate model of a science course for pre-
service teachers.