* 9354156
* MIE:  Expanding Excellence in SEM
* EDU,EES
* 10/01/1993,02/28/1995
* John Perez, Texas A&M University-Kingsville
* Standard Grant
* Albert L. Bridgewater
* 02/28/1995
* USD 74,945.00

9354156 Compton Texas A&amp;I University seeks planning grant funding to develop
a full proposal under the Model Institution of Excellence (MIE) project.
Planning activities will explore, evaluate, and develop programs in eight
principal areas. The fundamental objective will be to dramatically increase the
quantity and quality of the SEM graduates of Texas A&amp;I University, a major
national producer of BS degrees to Hispanic Americans. Our institutional mission
is to establish within South Texas a large, first generation of college educated
Hispanic professionals in those SEM careers vital to bringing our educational
economic infrastructure into parity with the rest of Texas and the nation. The
planning focus will be on a broad-based institutional program of enhancement of
the SEM disciplines at Texas A&amp;I. Texas A&amp;I University President, Dr.
Manuel L. Ibanez, named a four member Council of Principal Investigators led by
Dr. Phil Compton, Dean of Engineering, and including Dr. Mario Medina, Dr. Mauro
Castro, and Dr. John Perez, to develop the Phase I and Phase II MIE activities.
Four to seven member Focus Groups were named to fully explore the initial
directions in eight principal areas, including: 1) Center for Innovation and
Teaching Excellence. The CITE will explore SEM curricula integration;
collaborative and team learning; faculty incentives, development and rewards;
university teaching and monitoring; and undergraduate research; 2) Human
Interface Development. HID will explore programs to bring about fundamental
cultural change in the SEM experience and enhance the climate for the successful
recruitment and retention of Hispanics, particularly women, to SEM degree
programs; 3) SEM Bridges and Orientations. SEMBO will explore the development
and programmatic structure of three bridge programs (Jump-Start SEM, SEM and
Parent's Bridge) and two orientation programs (community college and second
tier); 4) Technology Enabled Learning. TEL will explore MIE needs in laboratory
equipment, student computational needs, and telecommunications and electronic
networking; 5) Community College Collaboration. CCC will explore faculty
exchanges, engineering core curriculum development, transfer and colleges; 6)
Industry Participation. Broad-based industry participation in the MIE will be
sought; 7) Evaluation, Assessment and Cost Effectiveness. Continuous evaluation,
assessment and cost effectiveness analysis will be an integral part of the
planning process; and 8) Budget Allocations. The Council of Principal
Investigators in consultation with President Ibanez will determine the final
budget allocations during the development of the full proposal based on a cost
effectiveness model that will maximize the goal attainment o increased quantity
and quality of Hispanic SEM graduates.