* 9354518
* Materials Chemistry Case Study Approach to Facilitate       Learning the Fundamentals of Chemistry: Introductory        College and Secondary Level
* EDU,DUE
* 03/01/1994,08/31/1997
* Mary Jane Shultz, Tufts University
* Standard Grant
* Stanley Pine
* 08/31/1997
* USD 150,000.00

9354518 Shultz The project will develop an introductory chemistry course based
upon the properties of materials. It will be discovery based in that students
will observe phenomena in the laboratory, then use those observations to develop
an understanding of the chemistry involved. A principal goal of the project is
to provide an exciting learning experience for the students. Many science
courses deny students access to the joys of discovery and understanding that so
delights both young children and practicing scientists. While for individuals,
this situation is regrettable, for aspiring teachers it is disastrous since they
are the ones who will shape the understanding of tomorrow's leaders. This
project would put the joy of discovery back into science courses. For example,
atomic structure and bonding would start with a hands-on examination of the
material properties of a variety of metal samples. The brittle ones have
restricted spatial directionality in the bonding with few nearest neighbors
while the soft, ductile ones have expanded bonding spheres with many nearest
neighbors. Students will be sent into the laboratory for an adventure in
exploring first. The class will then be encouraged to develop an hypothesis for
their observations. Only after this process, will the instructors, through
directed questions, guide the students to realize the importance of bonding and
structure. The class will then be encouraged to extrapolate and extend this
understanding to materials not examined. A educational evaluator is a member of
the project team. Initial contact with a publisher could lead to widespread
dissemination via a textbook. ***