* 9354986
* Traineeships in Environmental Physical and Mathematical     Science and Engineering
* EHR,DGE
* 07/15/1994,06/30/2002
* Richard Browner, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Paul Jennings
* 06/30/2002
* USD 557,500.00

A graduate program is proposed to develop expertise and research skills in the
discipline of Environmental Sensors and instrumentation. The program will
combine the science and engineering teaching and research resources of the
Georgia Institute of Technology and Clark Atlanta University in an
interdisciplinary program leading to a career in the burgeoning field of
environmental measurement. Students will select a primary major area (e.g. Earth
and Atmospheric Sciences, Civil Engineering, Chemistry, Environmental
Engineering or Biology) while pursuing a 24 credit-hour graduate certificate
course. This course will be structured around a 15 credit-hour core of basic
studies, with additional optional specialist topics. Students will select their
research projects from a wide range of science and engineering disciplines,
working with highly qualified faculty members. The program will heavily recruit
minorities and females, and their progress through the program will be monitored
for maximum retention and success. Students with appropriate interests will have
the opportunity for collaborative and international research programs with
industrial and Government sponsors, primarily Hewlett-Packard Analytical
Instruments Division, Electricite de France, and Savannah River Site. An
additional four traineeships beyond the NSF commitment will be co-sponsored by
the participating universities.