* 9354135
* MIE:  Excellence in Science, Engineering, and Mathematics
* EDU,EES
* 04/15/1994,09/30/1995
* Isai Urasa, Hampton University
* Standard Grant
* Albert L. Bridgewater
* 09/30/1995
* USD 75,000.00

9354135 Urasa Hampton University will undertake a plan which will be equivalent
to an institutional self-study in science and engineering programs. It will
document the accomplishments made in the last fifteen years, identify
weaknesses, and by learning from past experiences, develop new and more
effective ways by which the institution's capacity to produce science and
engineering graduates will be considerably enhanced. The six month planning
process will include reviews of all aspects of the science and engineering
programs, starting as far back as fifteen years ago. The accomplishments made
will be evaluated in relation to the resources available for these activities.
Those factors which will be determined as having impeded the institution's
progress in science and engineering will also be evaluated and documented.
Following the review process, a plan which is expected to contribute
significantly to the university's future objectives and goals in science and
engineering will be developed. Included in the plan will be the establishment of
new areas of study to expand or augment existing academic programs, putting a
special emphasis on identified areas of national and global needs. New
approaches of recruiting and retaining students in science and engineering will
be developed. The planning process will also develop cost effective mechanisms
for providing qualified science and engineering students financial support;
obtain new laboratory and other instructional facilities to improve existing
ones and to expose students to new technology; and enhance student involvement
in undergraduate research both here on campus and at other sites, including
industrial research facilities and National laboratories.