* 9354116
* Native American Telecommunications Forum
* NONE,NONE
* 09/15/1993,08/31/1994
* Karen Buller, Americans for Indian Opportunity
* Standard Grant
* Nora Sabelli
* 08/31/1994
* USD 50,444.00

9354116 Buller Although relatively slow to start, Native American
telecommunications has in recent years begun to flourish and diversify. By
Native American telecommunications, we refer to the use of computing and
telecommunications technologies by Indian people for any purpose related to
education in the broadest sense of the term, including the cultural, legal and
educational framework within which these technologies are employed. There exist
numerous independent, autonomous efforts by Native Americans and others working
with them to design and implement telecommunications systems. Disregarding for a
moment the relative merits of these efforts, and the cultural and social
barriers to their success, the fact remains that most of these projects are
being carried out in isolation and therefore their creators are not taking full
advantage of the power of integrative technologies. This is unfortunate because
some of this integration will be very difficult to achieve later or done so only
at comparatively great expense and labor. In addition, the opportunity is lost
for creative and culturally significant collaborative efforts, ones which could
promote telecommunications technologies as positive forces with Native American
culture. Finally, in a time of more restrictive national funding, cooperation
rather than competition will be viewed positively by political leaders. To
bridge some of these problems and draw attention to the potential power
resulting from the combination of collaboration and technology, we propose to
hold a two-day forum on Native American telecommunications. Forum participants
would include recognized leaders in Native American telecommunications and
selected others from the public and private sectors. The forum would be small,
on the order of 25-30, and consist of both informational presentations and small
group sessions in which Native communities will share and hopefully create
technological partnerships which reflect the soverei gnty of the tribes and
other Indian bodies.