* 9354375
* Promoting Physics Learning Through Writing and Peer         Evaluation of Explanations
* EHR,DUE
* 01/15/1994,05/31/1996
* Fred Goldberg, San Diego State University Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Kenneth S. Krane
* 05/31/1996
* USD 126,004.00

9354375 Bendall Students who enroll in introductory physics courses already have
ideas about how the world works. Very often these beliefs are in contradiction
with those of the expert physicist. There is evidence that traditional
instruction has little impact on the pre-instruction beliefs of students. What
is lacking on the students' part is an integrated conceptual understanding of
the fundamental principles, laws and concepts of physics. In contrast,
physicists understand and utilize comparatively few principles and concepts of
physics to explain a wide variety of phenomena; principles such as conservation
of energy and concepts such as acceleration. In order for students to develop a
conceptual understanding in physics, they need the opportunity to make sense of
the physics principles and concepts for themselves. Our goal is to provide them
with this opportunity through a two part learning strategy. First, students will
write extensive explanations which require the use of specific physics ideas.
The act of writing well constructed explanations externalizes students'
thoughts, helps them to organize their thoughts in meaningful ways, and helps
students to make qualitative connections between ideas. The explanation
assignments will require consideration of traditionally difficult issues such as
the differentiation between velocity and acceleration. These assignments will be
developed based on a taxonomy of conceptual change proposed by Dykstra. Second,
students will participate in a collaborative peer evaluation of the
explanations. Through peer evaluation students are able to see how others think
about physics concepts and principles, individuals can clarify their own
thinking, and they can receive immediate feedback from peers. We have proposed a
number of evaluations to guage the impact of our strategies on student
understanding. If successful, our learning strategy could be implemented in both
the university algebra-based and calculus-based physics courses , and with
modifications could be used at other course levels.