* 9354641
* Hypermedia Textbook for Computer Science 1 and Beyond
* EHR,DUE
* 05/01/1994,04/30/1996
* David Spooner, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Theodore J. Sjoerdsma
* 04/30/1996
* USD 102,430.00

9354641 Skolnick The problem addressed by this work is the development of a
hypertext/hypermedia "textbook" for use in the teaching of introductory computer
science to undergraduates. There are two factors that are unique to the milieu
in which this course is being taught: 1. it is a required course for all
undergraduates and 2. the course uses a network of over five hundred workstation
computers (in lecture halls, labs and dorms). Thus, the course is aimed at a
wide range of students who need to learn the basics of programming and the
fundamental concepts in computer science and to understand how computational
issues appear in their chosen disciplines. These admittedly ambitious goals are
being addressed by orienting the hypertext around a carefully chosen set of case
studies out of which there are links to material on the larger course
objectives. For example, there exist case studies involving curve fitting and
image processing, with direct tiebacks to science and engineering disciplines.
Further, because of the large numbers of available workstations, our objectives
is to develop a hypertext/hypermedia textbook that can be used by students to
learn in individual and group setting and by professors to instruct in lectures,
labs and interactive classrooms. Since the course is oriented around case
studies, material from the hypertext is gradually integrated into the existing
curriculum, i.e., as an addendum to currently used texts. As further case
studies develop into hypertext the course shifts away from the use of hardcopy
texts. Evaluation of our efforts is made by tracking the performance of students
on material learned in a traditional format versus hypertext; in addition,
mechanisms can be added to the hypertext which monitor (for non-grading uses)
the patterns of usage. Dissemination of case studies is via the XMosaic Internet
viewing program, which permits viewing of documents by anyone connected to the
Internet. The significance of this wo rk is that it goes beyond the focus of
current introductory computer science courses (which are oriented towards
majors) and moves towards the teaching of computer literacy as we believe it
eventually must be taught. Further, the exploitation of hypermedia seems to be
an ideal way to deal with variations both in the prior background of students
and in what they find interesting and relevant to their future computational
needs. ***