* 9354042
* Arizona Collaborative for Excellence in the Preparation of  Teachers (ACEPT)
* EDU,DUE
* 06/01/1994,11/30/1995
* Susan Wyckoff, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Terry S. Woodin
* 11/30/1995
* USD 100,000.00

9354042 Wyckoff A project-oriented, curriculum-integrated laboratory science
course, Patterns in Nature (3 credit hours), tailored for elementary education
majors and in-service teachers, is being developed at Arizona State University
in collaboration with Navajo Community College. The course integrates the
disciplines of mathematics, chemistry, astronomy, physics, and engineering. A
focus of the course is on inquiry based pedagogy utilizing research instruments
(e.g., electron microscopes, scanning tunneling microscopes, telescopes equipped
with charge-coupled devices), state-of-the-art computer simulations, and
interactive pedagogical software. Different versions of the course are being
developed in parallel and in collaboration at ASU and NCC. The objective is to
develop a course in physical science intended as a sequel to the normal basic
science courses required for elementary school teachers, so that the teachers
will have an in-depth knowledge of the physical laws they teach and the science
modules and kits used in the Arizona and Navajo school systems. The courses are
suitable as general studies undergraduate courses at both institutions. The aim
is to improve the science and mathematics curricula offered to elementary pre-
service teachers in the Phoenix area and the Navajo Nation. Course contents are
cross-disciplinary and cross-cultural, and taught in student-centered,
laboratory-integrated, Socratic dialogue, critical inquiry environments equipped
with state-of-the- art software and hardware. Nationally recognized science
educators in biology, chemistry, engineering, and physics will collaborate in
the curriculum development. ***y