* 9354799
* Collaborative Research: An Integrated, Computer-Assisted    Approach to Teaching Introductory Geology Laboratory
* EHR,DUE
* 05/01/1994,04/30/1997
* Paul Fullagar, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Susan H. Hixson
* 04/30/1997
* USD 63,760.00

9354799 Fullagar This project is a collaborative effort between Duke University
and the University of North Carolina. An introductory geology laboratory course
is being developed which emphasizes a multidisciplinary approach to solving
geological problems using state-of-the-art information technologies.
Laboratories are being designed as case studies utilizing an electronic data
bank integrated with more traditional maps and hand samples. Each case study
requires students to use tools such as satellite images, topographic and
geologic maps, cross-sections, three-dimensional animations, and simplified
geophysical and geochemical data to unravel the geologic history of an area.
Hypothesis formulation and testing are being emphasized. Not only are students
learning factual information in the context of real geologic problems, but they
also are seeing how geologists use physics, chemistry, mathematics, and biology
to study Earth. In addition, they are becoming familiar and comfortable with the
use of computers and sophisticated data handling techniques in a user friendly
environment. Laboratories and exercises are being designed by investigators from
both institutions. Software programming is being carried out at Duke. Evaluation
and assessment are primarily utilizing the larger introductory classes at UNC.
Duke faculty and students have created over twenty computerized prototype "field
trips" over the last two years, and a pilot study of how the technology employed
in the field trips can be applied to teaching introductory geology has been
conducted. Thus, the investigators are able to use the programming expertise and
classroom testing experience already gained in developing this comprehensive
introductory laboratory course. Dissemination is planned through several
channels including: 1) a full-day workshop at a GSA national meeting; 2) the
distribution of an announcement to all geology departments in the country; 3)
publication of the results in the Jou rnal of Geological Education; and 4)
commercial publication of the products.