* 9354482
* Exploring Technology": A Novel Introduction of Prospective  Engineers and Early Childhood Teachers to Science and       Technology
* EDU,DUE
* 01/15/1994,12/31/1995
* Donald Wertlieb, Tufts University
* Standard Grant
* Jack L Waintraub
* 12/31/1995
* USD 119,226.00

9354482 Miaoulis This project proposes to develop a novel curriculum that will
stem from a strong partnership between the College of Engineering and the
Department of Child Study and will provide a common solution to two separate
major problems: the inadequate preparation of early childhood teachers in
understanding and teaching science and technology, and the enthusiasm generation
and retention of engineering students. Teams of engineering faculty members, and
graduate and undergraduate students will develop a coordinated pool of mini-
courses that focus on exciting topics of applied science and technology. These
courses will be interdisciplinary in nature, will include open-ended laboratory
and/or field experiences, will involve semester-long team projects and will be
designed to allow students with no previous college-level background to
participate. Although the courses will be rigorous and emphasize depth versus
breadth, special attention will be given to creating an understanding and
appreciation for the scientific and engineering process. Engineering freshmen
and Child Study majors will each select and take two of these courses. In
addition to these courses, Child Study majors, the future K-3 teachers, will
take a Science and Technology Curriculum Development seminar-course that will
train them to transfer technical knowledge to the development of teaching units
appropriate for young children. The focused nature of the courses will allow the
proposed program to grow from the roots, since courses will be proposed and
developed following personal research and other interests of individual faculty
members, while being supported from the top, by a strong institutional
commitment. The project, which will be cost-shared by the university, can be
easily disseminated to numerous colleges and universities that combine science
and/or engineering departments with teacher preparation units. ***