* 9354323
* Interactive Learning:  A Hypertext Introductory Chemistry   Text
* EDU,DUE
* 04/15/1994,09/30/1995
* Claude Yoder, Franklin and Marshall College
* Standard Grant
* Susan H. Hixson
* 09/30/1995
* USD 28,566.00

9354323 Yoder This project is preparing a hypertext "electronic" textbook that
requires the active involvement of the student in the discussion of principles
as well as the application of these principles in the solution of problems.
Given that active, rather than passive, study is necessary for the mastery and
application of the concepts of chemistry, the computer provides an ideal vehicle
for this type of learning, especially in the form of hypertext. Our preliminary
version of a hypertext problem solving guide using the hypertext program Guide
(OWL International) has received very favorable student responses. We believe
that this hypertext program, using the Guide software, is helping to develop
rational approaches to learning and problem-solving, is building self
confidence, is making the concepts of chemistry accessible to students with a
greater range of abilities, and is serving as a model for the teaching of
chemistry by secondary school teachers. This hypertext book, ChemGuide, is
encouraging student participation by constructing most discussions around
questions that must be answered by the student. The responses to the questions
are hidden in hypertext until selected by the student. ChemGuide also provides
hints and definitions upon selection and when necessary takes the student to an
appropriate section of the text for review or help. Although the content of
ChemGuide is adapted from an introductory text co-authored by the principal
investigator, the conceptual content of the ChemGuide is similar to that of most
texts. ***y