* 9354055
* Program Development Project for the Enhancement of Teacher  Preparation
* EDU,DUE
* 04/01/1994,06/30/1998
* Charles Granger, University of Missouri-Saint Louis
* Standard Grant
* Terry S. Woodin
* 06/30/1998
* USD 100,000.00

9354055 Granger Program Development Project for the Enhancement of Teacher
Preparation The St. Louis Regional Enhancement Collaborative for Excellence in
Preparation of Teachers (RECEPT) is designing a comprehensive regional effort to
redesign, develop and partially test the mathematics and science component of
the K-8 teacher preparation program in the St Louis region. Institutions
participating include one state university, the University of Missouri-St Louis
(the fiscal agent), one state college, Harris-Stowe State College, two small
private colleges, Fontbonne College and St. Louis University, and three school
districts within the St Louis area, Rockwood, St. Louis and University City.
Together these institutions account for over 95% (480 of 500 total) of the
elementary certificates awarded in St Louis in 1991/92. The redesigned teacher
preparation program includes a three semester integrated science class with
tightly coupled methods courses, a two semester sequence of mathematics with
integrated methods courses and a one semester capstone course that integrates
mathematics and science concepts around a science, technology and society theme.
Field experience is integrated with the courses. The redesign team features
close cooperation between mathematics and science faculty, mathematics and
science educators, and cooperating master teachers. The redesigned courses
strongly reflect the guidelines established by the NCTM for mathematics and the
NSTA for the sciences. ***y