* 9354889
* Graduate Research Traineeship Program in Environmental      Physical and Mathematical Science & Engineering:            Environmental Hazard Mitigation
* EHR,DGE
* 08/01/1994,07/31/2000
* William Gray, University of Notre Dame
* Continuing grant
* Paul Jennings
* 07/31/2000
* USD 557,500.00

This proposal seeks $537,500 over five years to support Ph.D. graduate students
in the Department of Civil Engineering and Geological Sciences (CE/GEOS) at the
University of Notre Dame. Research performed by these students will concentrate
on the critical area of mitigation of natural and human-made environmental
hazards. The CE/GEOS unit is uniquely positioned to address environmental
hazards from a multidisciplinary viewpoint because its faculty is an integrated
mix of individuals with both science and engineering degrees. Among the critical
problems that can be creatively attacked within this multidisciplinary framework
are technology for the seismic design of landfills and the associated
uncertainty modeling and risk assessment, mathematical modeling of toxic
chemicals in surface water and groundwater systems, and biological degradation
of hazardous materials. The support obtained will expand opportunities for
highly qualified students to perform state-of- the-art research that complements
and expands activities in the Department aimed at assuring excellence in Ph.D.
education. Particular emphasis will be placed on identification, recruitment,
and retention of students from groups underrepresented in academia, with two of
the five requested scholarships being designated to support such students. To
increase this applicant pool, alliances have been made with three institutions
(Prairie View A&M University, Texas Southern University, and St. Mary's College)
which graduate a significant number of underrepresented students. The program
will be structured to achieve the goal of preparing students for leadership
positions as teachers and researchers in the diverse aspects of environmental
hazard mitigation.