* 9354085
* A National Teacher Enhancement/Implementation and           Evaluation Project for Grades 9-10 Scope, Sequence, and     Coordination in Science
* EDU,DRL
* 03/15/1994,08/31/1998
* Bill Aldridge, National Science Teaching Association
* Continuing Grant
* Wayne Sukow
* 08/31/1998
* USD 4,092,000.00

ABSTRACT ESI-9354085 A National Curriculum Development and Evaluation Project
for High School Scope, Sequence, and Coordination in Science The National
Science Teachers Association(NSTA) will lead a carefully focused project in
developing and evaluating an (SS&amp;C) program at the high school level.
Thirteen high schools having diverse populations and resources will participate
in this project, along with suitably identified control classes that utilize
traditional curricula. These schools are from California, Iowa, Montana, New
York, North Carolina, Texas and Washington, DC. The 140 participating teachers
will attend inservice workshops which provide the philosophical constructs of
the SS&amp;C science education reform and prepare them to use instructional
materials which are congruent with the SS&amp;C approach. The evaluation of the
project is comprehensive considering both the teacher enhancement component and
student outcomes. The project will focus on: (1) the natural science, i.e.
biology, chemistry, earth sciences, and physics; (2) the high school level from
grade 9 through grade 12; (3) the specification and incorporation of the basic
tenets of SS&amp;C at all sites; (4) coordination of teaching the science
subjects, designed so as to achieve integration of the sciences by students; (5)
answering important evaluation questions, regarding the efficacy of the SS&amp;C
approach, before embarking on widespread implementation. All sites will: follow
the SS&amp;C principles of providing every science subject every year,
explicitly taking into account student's prior knowledge; provide a sequence of
content from concrete experiences and descriptive expression to abstract
symbolism and quantitative expression; revisit concepts, principles, and
theories at successively higher levels of abstraction; coordinate learning in
the four science subjects so as to interrelate basic concepts and principles.
The project will work closely wit h the National Science Education Standards
Development process at the NRC. The SS&amp;C Framework for grades 9-12 will be
revised to meet the requirements of those standards, while conforming to the
tenets of SS&amp;C Materials will be prepared in the form of Anthologies of
appropriate readings and core laboratory experiments adapted from extant
sources. Project evaluation will establish, through evidence in the form of
student achievement, that a program based on SS&amp;C tenets will achieve the
fundamental goal of the SS&amp;C reform: to make the natural science
understandable by, accessible to, and useful in, the lives of all students.