* 9354898
* Graduate Research Traineeship Initiative in Robotics        and Intelligent Control
* EDU,DGE
* 10/01/1993,03/31/2000
* Jonathan Mills, Indiana University
* Continuing Grant
* Sonia Ortega
* 03/31/2000
* USD 557,500.00

9354898 Johnson This fellowship project will train students in robotics and
intelligent controls, focusing on the study of adaptive colonies of adaptive
robots. Oberlin College and Valparaiso University, both with active programs to
recruit women and ethnic minority undergraduates, will be feeder schools for the
Graduate Research Traineeship (GRT) program. Indiana University will provide
enhanced stipends to recruit and retain women and ethnic minority students who
might not otherwise choose a scientific career. The Computer Science Department
will ensure degree completion with additional advising and mentoring activities.
The GRT fellows' analytical skills, inter-disciplinary breadth, and rigorous
empiricism will be developed through coursework, collaborations with faculty and
senior graduate students at Indiana University, and an external research
semester in the Santa Fe Institute's program in adaptive computation. The
experimental component of the training program is solidly founded on the
department's innovative research, which has produced the inexpensive miniature
hexapod robot Stiquito, and analog VLSI Lukasiewicz logic arrays that are being
applied as sensors, inference engines, and controllers for the robot. GRT
fellows will study the principles of adaptive computation, systems
implementation, and mobile robotics by simulating, building, and experimenting
with Stiquito colonies. ***