* 9354791
* A Visual and Interactive Approach to the Foundations of     Computer Science
* EHR,DUE
* 07/01/1994,12/31/1996
* Susan Rodger, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Theodore J. Sjoerdsma
* 12/31/1996
* USD 66,426.00

9354791 Rodger Theoretical concepts provide the fundamental basis for computer
science, yet many undergraduates obtain a superficial understanding of these
concepts due to the pencil and paper environment in which these concepts are
currently taught. Our main objective is to provide an environment for presenting
and communicating abstract computer science concepts in a more efficient, visual
and interactive manner. We plan to redesign the sophomore formal languages and
automata theory course at Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute to use interactive
and visual software tools we have developed and will continue to develop. These
tools allow students to experiment with concepts in formal languages and
automata, receiving immediate feedback. We will evaluate the usage of these
tools in two ways: in a lecture format with computer demonstrations, and in a
lecture/lab format. The material to be developed includes manuscripts for the
lecture and lab presentation formats, problem sets, and software tools. This
material will be disseminated through computer science education conferences,
journals, and newsgroups on the Internet. In addition, a one day workshop will
be held during the second year for evaluation and dissemination of our methods
and tools. ***