* 9354742
* The Greenhouse Effect: An Interdisciplinary Case Study for  Liberal Arts Majors
* EDU,DUE
* 02/01/1994,01/31/1997
* Joe Pifer, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Ann P McNeal
* 01/31/1997
* USD 59,995.00

9354742 Pifer One of the most critical shortfalls nationwide in science
education today is our failure to impart scientific literacy to the non-science
student. Watered-down survey courses may teach some basic scientific facts and
jargon, but they rarely give students the critical skills necessary to function
effectively in a technological society. We propose to develop an
interdisciplinary course that studies a complex, multifaceted problem, the
Greenhouse Effect, from many points of view-- scientific, economic, political--
as a way of building scientific literacy in these students. The course will
treat the scientific background of the Greenhouse Effect, its impact on the
earth and human society, and ways to minimize the impact with an emphasis on
alternative energy sources including a detailed case study of nuclear energy.
Formal lectures will be avoided. Students will be given short lecture
presentations, but for the most part will be engaged in discourse among
themselves in which they will ask questions of the instructors and with faculty
experts on the meaning and implications of the presentations and of readings. A
series of laboratory exercises is designed to illustrate the physical principles
involved in the Greenhouse Effect. The course will culminate with written
reports and oral group presentations on case studies carried out by the groups
on non-nuclear alternative fuels from a scientifically informed point of view.