* 9354521
* Science, Community, and Diversity: Revitalizing             Undergraduate Curricula- Concluding Phase
* EHR,DUE
* 05/15/1994,02/28/1998
* Jacqueline Ross, University of Wisconsin General Administration Office
* Standard Grant
* Nancy L. Pruitt
* 02/28/1998
* USD 272,882.00

9354521 Ross This grant extends the activities of the Women and Science Program
currently funded by the Division of Undergraduate Education of the National
Science Foundation, and sponsored and administered by the Women's Studies
Consortium of the University of Wisconsin System. The goal of the program is to
attract and retain qualified female and minority students in science,
mathematics and engineering, by reforming aspects of introductory science
courses--content, climate and pedagogy--that discourage capable students from
further study of science. The program is founded on the assumption that
incorporating new scholarship about gender, science and pedagogy into the design
of introductory curriculum will increase the quality of introductory courses in
ways that will be attractive to female and minority students. The program
supports Distinguished Visiting Professorships of Women in Science on host
campuses selected from among the universities of the UW System. Visitors are
scientists (from inside and outside of Wisconsin) who have successfully
implemented race- and gender-friendly teaching innovations at their home
institutions. Visitors teach model introductory science courses and participate
in extensive faculty development activities with their hosts. The program also
offers Faculty Fellowships to release host faculty to develop new curricula. In
addition, faculty development workshops are sponsored at various UW System
institutions. The Visitors and Fellows develop new or revised courses that will
affect thousands of students in the near future. Faculty development activities
will enhance the content, climate, and pedagogy of introductory science courses
more broadly throughout the UW System. A comprehensive evaluation of the program
in underway. Findings and curricular materials will be disseminated nationally.
***