* 9354595
* Introductory Physics: A Pilot Project for an Elementary     Course based on Guided inquiry,with the Theme of "Energy"
* EDU,DUE
* 12/15/1993,05/31/1995
* David Meltzer, Southeastern Louisiana University
* Standard Grant
* Kenneth S. Krane
* 05/31/1995
* USD 37,233.00

9354595 Meltzer Undergraduate science courses taken by preservice teachers
typically have textbook-centered lecture formats. There is a need for new course
designs which implement ideas found beneficial in recent educational research.
It is essential that pilot forms of the courses be offered, tested and
evaluated, and that reports of the successes and problem areas of such courses
be widely disseminated.This proposal is for a pilot project to develop,
implement, and assess an elementary physics course, appropriate for preservice
teachers, which would embody a number of the recent innovations in educational
theory and practice. Among the problems which need to be investigated is the
question of just how severely the breadth of topical coverage will have to be
reduced from standard levels, in order to ensure that what is covered is
actually learned and retained by the students.The theme of "energy" is used as a
conceptual pivot to tie together the various topics. Students'
pre/misconceptions regarding physical phenomena will guide the presentation,
activities, and discussion. After pretesting to determine student
preconceptions, issues related to their preconceived ideas will be investigated
by the students through guided "mini-research-projects." These projects will be
carried out by the students working in small groups; discussions centered around
each group's results will lead to a systematic summing-up by the instructor to
provide perspective, and tie into the next topical area with the thread of the
theme "energy transformation and conservation." During course delivery, ongoing
testing and other assessment will guide the pacing and depth of the topical
coverage.The target audience is prospective elementary and middle-school
teachers, and other non-technical students. The project has the potential to
significantly improve the knowledge of and attitude towards physics on the part
of those whose typical experience with college physical science tends to be dist
asteful and nonproductive.