* 9354539
* A Collaborative Laboratory Course on "How Things Work"      Designed to Improve Retention of Women in Engineering
* EHR,DUE
* 04/01/1994,11/30/1996
* Jerald Henderson, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Daniel B. Hodge
* 11/30/1996
* USD 116,456.00

9354539 Henderson The recruitment and retention of under-represented students
continues to be one of the primary challenges for higher education. In the field
of engineering, women are one of the most under-represented groups, and women
continue to have higher attrition rates from engineering than their male peers.
We have identified a number of factors which contribute to the differential
attrition rates between men and women in engineering and have developed, with
preliminary funding from NSF, a novel, collaborative laboratory course to
explore "how things work". The course, known as Engineering 25, provides
freshman and sophomore women engineering students with the opportunity to
disassemble equipment and construct devices to discover the underlying
engineering principles involved. The course is unique in that it has, so far,
been limited to women engineering students, uses open-ended hands-on projects to
stimulate scientific curiosity and alleviate mechanical anxieties, it is based
on a collaborative, group exploration approach to learning, and it allows
students to explore issues of gender in science and engineering. In the proposed
project, we will further develop the course by offering two sections of E25
which will be team-taught by the P.l.s, assess the importance of the various
course components (gender make-up, tinkering, collaborative nature, and women's
issues), and determine the best way to institutionalize the course. ***y