* 9354823
* Reinventing College Algebra: A Revised Curriculum ExploitingTechnology, Unifying Themes and Laboratory Experiences
* EHR,DUE
* 03/01/1994,02/28/1997
* Ongard Sirisaengtaksin, University of Houston - Downtown
* Standard Grant
* Tina H. Straley
* 02/28/1997
* USD 93,787.00

9354823 Becerra The objectives of this project are: (1) development of a unified
course syllabus for College Algebra which has as its nucleus the process of
modeling in diverse settings via elementary functions and systems of equations;
(2) integration of technology as a fundamental medium for learning and doing
mathematics in College Algebra; and (3) incorporation of laboratory experiences
into College Algebra which promote problem solving skills and a collaborative
and highly interactive learning environment. The implementation of these ideas
is through the development of a series of laboratory modules which can be taught
in conjunction with any text. The versions produced can be used with current
standard technologies including graphing calculators, Mathematica and Maple. To
support these modules, packages of high-level functions are developed which
promote visualization and simplify numerical and symbolic computation.
Interested faculty at other institutions are able to easily incorporate these
modules into their college algebra courses. A revised College Algebra curriculum
which exploits technology and laboratory experiences addresses some critical
concerns of national interest: developing higher level thinking skills in
students, increasing the mathematical literacy of students and in particular
non-science majors, and incorporating teaching delivery styles which aid in the
recruitment and retention of minorities into the mathematical sciences. ***y