* 9354547
* TEME: A Plan for Interdisciplinary Curriculum Development in Hands-On Science Education for Middle School and Community College Students
* EHR,DUE
* 02/15/1994,10/31/1997
* Daniel LaRose, Greenfield Community College
* Standard Grant
* Herbert Levitan
* 10/31/1997
* USD 83,225.00

9354547 LaRose The purpose of this proposal is to further develop the TEME
(Totally Enclosed Modular Environments) model as the experiential laboratory of
the Human Ecology curriculum. Expanding the TEME model to include an
oceanographic research simulation will enable Greenfield Community College to
provide both college and middle school students with an opportunity to
participate in an exciting hands-on science education program that integrates
broad scientific content and effective group skills, providing a practical
framework for understanding ecological and social problems. The original TEME
curriculum model features a simulated shuttle orbiter experience as a metaphor
for "Spaceship Earth." The TEME model will be adapted to the study of the
oceans, using a deep sea submersible simulation as a vehicle for exploring this
vast and still mysterious environment. We will add new content to the module
program and upgrade the technology to run the simulation. In addition to
Greenfield Community College faculty, curriculum specialists, and middle school
teachers are involved in the curriculum development. We will develop written
curricular materials for middle schools as well as software that can be used on
ordinary PCs in the schools. The impact on students will include greater
motivation, improved math/science skills development, greater clarity of career
goals, and a broader ecological awareness. ***