* 9354875
* Environmental Physical and Mathematical Science and         Engineering: Joint Hampton University- Virginia Tech        Traineeship Program
* EHR,DGE
* 07/01/1994,06/30/2001
* John Dillard, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Continuing Grant
* Paul Jennings
* 06/30/2001
* USD 557,500.00

An interdisciplinary, inter-institution graduate study program involving
Hampton University and Virginia Tech (VPI) (see appendix I) is proposed to
enhance the possibility for minority students to obtain the Ph.D. degree. In the
program students will obtain the M.S. degree at Hampton University and will
complete advance study by obtaining the Ph.D. degree at Virginia Tech with
research on environmentally significant and relevant topics. A unique student
and faculty exchange program is incorporated into the overall traineeship
effort. The research areas and education in environmental science and chemistry
provide a balanced program for advanced study. Research topics available for
students in the program include 1) synthesis of organic compounds using
environmentally benign supercritical solvent media (carbon dioxide), 2)
conversion of aromatic and chlorinated aromatic compounds via microbial
oxygenation and transformation into medicinal and pharmaceutical materials, 3)
synthesis and characterization of porpyrins, the development of polymeric
materials for use in organic synthesis, 4) synthesis and characterization of
nitrated heterocycles, 5) transition metal catalysis in organic synthesis, 6)
studies of organic free radicals and radical ions, 7) trace element speciation
in aqueous media; analytical methods development with atomic absorption
spectroscopy, ion chromatography, and high performance liquid chromatography, 8)
studies of trace element transport in ground- water by suspended particles, 9)
development of slurry injection analytical methods for the direct elemental
analysis of geological samples, 10) design of extraction procedures and
analytical methodology using environmentally benign supercritical fluids for the
analysis of hazardous chemicals in marine and estuarine samples, 11)
chromatographic methods for the analysis of organic contaminants in water, 12)
assessment of placer heavy-mineral resources, nutrient influx in natural water,
13) studi es of crystal growth and surface adsorption reactions of interest in
chemical oceanography, 14) investigation of non- solvent and non-organic solvent
methods for treatment of and adhesive bonding to adherend surfaces, 15)
environmental awareness in materials selection and processing methods for the
preparation of high performance adhesive and composite materials, and 16) noise-
induced transitions in nonlinear, dissapative, and physico-chemical dynamical
systems.