* 9354726
* Undergraduate Curriculum Development in Micro-machine       Science and Fabrication Technology
* EHR,DUE
* 04/01/1994,03/31/1996
* Albert Henning, Dartmouth College
* Standard Grant
* Chalmers F. Sechrist
* 03/31/1996
* USD 130,000.00

9354726 Henning The specific objectives of this proposal are to develop and host
a summer Undergraduate Workshop in Micro-machining Science and Fabrication
Technology, and to develop an undergraduate course entitled Science and
Technology of Micro-machines covering the same material. These two activities
will be developed jointly. The Workshop is targeted for minority undergraduate
majors in science and engineering. Its purpose is to prepare students to enter
graduate degree programs, and to gain employment by companies engaged in the
rapidly evolving field of micro-machine engineering, science, and technology. It
is particularly intended to prepare students to make leading, lifelong
contributions to this field. Networking with guest lectures and visitor drawn
from industry and academe will be an important component of the Workshop and
course. The major benefit of the summer Workshop is to increase the number of
minority students entering science and engineering. The Workshop will further
serve as the foundation for a new undergraduate major course in Engineering
Science at Dartmouth College, entitled "Science and Technology of Micro-
Machines." Benefits will be to promote evolution and growth in the field of
micro-machines by: preparing skilled undergraduates to make contributions at the
graduate level, and with industrial firms engaged in this field; providing an
important bridge between undergraduates, and leaders in the field; and
disseminating results of this effort to the academic community, to lead in and
assist the replication of similar undergraduate programs at other institutions.
***y