* 9354642
* Chemistry Domesticated: An Alternative Curriculum for the   Two-Semester Introductory College Chemistry Course
* EHR,DUE
* 04/01/1994,09/30/1997
* Richard Cornelius, Lebanon Valley College
* Standard Grant
* Susan H. Hixson
* 09/30/1997
* USD 150,000.00

9354642 Cornelius Agencies and chemical educators are calling for major changes
in the curriculum for general chemistry at colleges and universities. A call is
frequently heard for chemistry to be relevant to the everyday lives of students.
This project, Chemistry Domesticated, is providing a radical change in how the
material in general chemistry is organized and how it is presented to students,
while leaving intact much of the material which must prepare students for
further courses in chemistry and other sciences. The chemical topics in a
particular chapter are being chosen on the basis not of the chemist's view of
the world, but of what chemistry is necessary for the understanding of materials
and activities familiar to students. Chapters have titles such as Soil and
Fertilizer, Blood, The Laundry Room, and Ice Cream. The subjects for the 22
chapters are being chosen to provide a foundation for a broad range of topics in
general chemistry. The chapters are linked by chemical topics discussed in
adjacent chapters, such as the chemistry of calcium carbonate being important in
both the chapter on Hard and Soft Water (as scale) and the chapter on Eggs (as
the major component in egg shell). Numerous appropriate experiments and
demonstrations have already been published in the science education literature,
and they are being put to work in Chemistry Domesticated. The proposed
curriculum is intended not to displace the current general chemistry curriculum,
but to provide an alternative to the curriculum that is under attack. The
project plans call for a year of development, a year of implementation and
modification, and a year of evaluation. ***y