* 9354772
* Mechanical Engineering Curriculum Development Initiative -  Integrating the Product Realization Process into the        Undergraduate Curriculum
* EHR,DUE
* 01/15/1994,03/31/1996
* Terry Shoup, American Society of Mechanical Engineers Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Janet C. Rutledge
* 03/31/1996
* USD 80,000.00

9354772 Prizirembel The American Society of Mechanical Engineers (ASME), with a
network of 120,000 members, including over 400 department heads of mechanical
engineering and mechanical engineering technology programs in the country, will
initiate a curriculum development project to integrate the product realization
process (PRP) and to take into consideration the issues associated with design
into the undergraduate mechanical engineering curriculum. Design, used in its
broadest sense, will be used as the central axis of integration both vertically
(integrating subjects in a time progressive manner over a number of semesters of
years) and horizontally (integrating different interdisciplinary subjects
offered at the same time period.) Specifically, the project will 1) identify the
essential elements of PRP activities with respect to design education, 2)
identify the paradigms and methodologies used in existing innovative programs
and curricula that have been successfully tested on campuses, 3) develop model
design courses, at various levels in the engineering curricum, and different
models of design curricula in mechanical engineering, 4) disseminate new courses
and curriculum models that are developed in this prject to all U.S. engineering
colleges, and 5) develop an implementation plan for engineering schools and
departments to adopt and utilize the project results. The course and curriculum
models thus developed will provide useful resource guides to the mechanical
engineering department heads and faculty members in their own effort of course
and curriculum development. The project results will also provide the paradigms,
methodologies, and processes for other engineering disciplines to integrate the
product realization process into their respective engineering curriculum. ***