* 9354158
* MIE:  JSU-Model Institution for Excellence Planning Proposal
* EDU,EES
* 10/01/1993,09/30/1994
* James Lyons, Jackson State University
* Standard Grant
* Albert L. Bridgewater
* 09/30/1994
* USD 74,849.00

9354158 Lyons, Sr. Several sources indicate that HBCUs have been the major
source of B.S. degrees awarded to African-Americans i Science, Engineering and
Mathematics (SEM) disciplines. But the situation is rapidly changing. Several
data also suggests that SEM bachelor degrees awarded to African-Americans by
HBCus has been declining since 1987. The Jackson State University School of
Science &amp; Technology (JSU-SS&amp;T) is submitting a proposal for a planning
grant to develop thorough, comprehensive Model Institution for Excellence (MIE)
implementation project that will enhance existing programs and create new areas
of strength in science and technology. The planning grant will provide resources
to review, assess, and evaluate in a systematic way, the process presently being
used in the recruitment retention, and graduation of students in SEM education.
Enhanced/corrective strategies will be planned for implementation using known
models which have proven successful. The overall project goal is to enhance and
strengthen JSU's SEM degree-producing capacity all levels and increase the
number of SEM graduates, especially minorities quality scientists/engineers who
can contribute to advancing the state of SEM knowledge and address the technical
problems of society. Specific focus will be directed toward identifying,
enhancing, or developing programs to increase SEM recruitment, enrollment,
retention, graduation rate, and students pursuing graduate degrees. It is
expected that all areas will be improved by at least 100% over the 1988-92
(five-year) average. Activities to be developed in support of JSU MIE goals
include: curricula analyses and restructuring, enhancement of specialized SEM
academic programs, development of new degree programs, development of a
comprehensive SEM student support center, integration of information technology
into the curricula, and enhancement of the educational/research support
infrastructure. Jackson State University's administrat ion is totally committed
to the success of the MIE initiative - planning phase and implementation. It's
commitment is demonstrated by the fact that the Project Director is the
President of the University and the Co- Project Director is the Dean of the
School of Science &amp; Technology, the unit responsible for the planning and
implementation of the project. Several faculty representing various disciplines
are responsible for key components of project planning and implementation. The
project leadership by the President of the University will stimulate involvement
of the whole University, with its various support mechanisms, to ensure
inclusion, diversity and success. To develop a complete, comprehensive proposal
to establish a Model Institution for Excellence at JSU, a total of $75,000 is
being requested. In an effort to sustain program operations beyond federal
funding, the JSU MIE key strategy is to establish and maintain a SEM Endowment
through contributions form industry partners committed to the MIE program goals
and continuity. Several representatives from industry partners in this planning
process and indicated continued support through the development and
implementation phases.