* 9354864
* Interdisciplinary Approaches to Identification & Mitigation of NPS Water Quality Impacts Geosciences (Hydrology),       Mathematical and Physical Sciences (Environmental) and E
* EHR,DGE
* 09/15/1994,08/31/2001
* James Smith, University of Wyoming
* Continuing Grant
* Paul Jennings
* 08/31/2001
* USD 562,500.00

Throughout the United States, non-point sources of water pollution are
responsible for contamination of more miles of stream than any other source, and
also contribute substantially to groundwater degradation. Non-point sources of
water pollution include municipalities, industries, agriculture, mine drainage,
energy production and recreation. This training program, which is supported by a
strong and successful interdisciplinary research team, combines water quantity
and water quality analysis with control and remediation of non- point source
water pollution. Emphasis will be on expanding basic scientific knowledge with
applications to identification and quantification of non-point sources of water
pollution and selection of the most suitable alternative for mitigation of a
particular problem. There is capacity for the program, which is expected to
expand. Innovative structural components in the training program include: 1. A
consortial arrangement between Colorado State University and the University of
Wyoming (EPSCoR University). 2. An interdisciplinary effort between Watershed
Sciences, Civil Engineering, Range Science, and Agronomy (water chemistry). 3.
An active recruiting program for women, minorities including Native Americans,
and those with disabilities. 4. Implementation of a "project management"
approach to improve communications among participants and improve trainee
retention.