* 9354937
* Integrating High Performance Computing into Research:       Computational Fluid Dynamics in Engineering and Astrophysics
* EDU,DGE
* 08/01/1994,07/31/2001
* Frediano Bracco, Princeton University
* Continuing Grant
* Paul Jennings
* 07/31/2001
* USD 557,500.00

Advancing our understanding in a wide range of scientific and engineering
fields require the solution of the fluid equations over a very large range of
densities and physical scales. These problems, which are not soluble on the
current generation of computers, can be solved with the new generation of
massively parallel high performance computers using object oriented languages
and are likely to form one of the most important scientific applications of
these machines. The MAE and Astrophysics departments at Princeton are at the
forefront of research into the development of numerical algorithms and computer
technology to utilize the next generation of machines in this effort. The
engineering and scientific goals are the applications to aerodynamics (the
design of airplanes, cars and ships); to turbulence research; and to structure
formation in the universe. Progress in these different application areas
requires a continuing research effort toward the development of algorithms
amenable to parallel processing, automatic grid adaption, coloring schemes for
domain decomposition of an arbitrary unstructured tetrahedral grid, and
implementation of efficient message passing algorithms to reduce the
communication costs on distributed memory architectures. These problems are
generic, and not specific to a particular field of application. It is felt that
a multi-disciplinary approach to the study of such problems would greatly
benefit the training of students and enhance the effective use of high
performance computing in research. The MAE and Astrophysics departments have
collaborated in this effort in the past, and will continue to do so in the
future. We request support for five graduate students to be trained in the
design of algorithms for the numerical solution of partial differential
equations using massively parallel computer platforms and the application of
complex hydrocodes to engineering and physics problems ranging from turbulence
research in aerodyna mics to the evolution of cosmological structure.