* 9354452
* The Language of Chemistry: Introductory Chemistry Based on  the Study of Problems at the Interface Between Chemistry andBiology
* EHR,DUE
* 04/15/1994,03/31/1997
* Jerrold Meinwald, Cornell University
* Continuing grant
* Herbert H. Richtol
* 03/31/1997
* USD 150,000.00

9354452 Meinwald There is a need to increase the scientific literacy of college
students in the USA. This proposal involves the development of a new
introductory course, The Language of Chemistry, intended primarily for students
who are not committed to a major in chemistry. The immediate challenge is to
provide an attractive course which students from areas such as the social
sciences and the humanities will elect to help fulfill a "distribution"
requirement. The proposed course will illustrate how chemists study problems
involving chemical interactions in nature. Among the cases likely to be included
for study are (1) the chemistry of gamete attractants; (2) the female pheromone
of the silkworm moth; (3) quinine, antimalarials, and synthetic dyes; (4)
penicillin; and (5) taxol. Basic concepts in general chemistry and organic
chemistry will be developed as they are required for the understanding of this
set of particularly interesting problems at the interface between chemistry and
biology or medicine. The methods of analyzing problems will be emphasized,
rather than the memorization of specific results or formulas. Students should
gain an understanding of subjects as diverse as: chromatography and other
purification techniques, spectroscopy, molecular formulas, molecular structures
(and how chemical and physical methods establish them), stereochemistry, atomic
structure, the periodic table, chemical bonding, functional groups, Avogadro's
number, and why synthesis is important. There will be an opportunity for
students, working in small groups, to prepare and present short reports on
chemical topics, based on library research. The project will work with
colleagues in the science education department on course development and
evaluation. Course related materials will also be generated. ***y