* 9354531
* Interactive Computer visualization in the Introductory      Science Curriculum
* EHR,DUE
* 01/15/1994,06/30/1997
* David Douglass, Pasadena City College
* Standard Grant
* Karolyn K. Eisenstein
* 06/30/1997
* USD 98,679.00

9354531 Bragin At Pasadena City College, where 25% of the students are born in
another country and 70% belong to ethnic minorities, minimal English language
proficiency is an obstacle to learning. This is compounded by poor college
preparation, bad study habits, inadequate writing skills, limited economic
resources, and great variability in concept comprehension. Teaching such
students requires that the material be presented in an engaging fashion that
allows immediate grasp of principles regardless of the students' background.
This project aims to achieve these objectives and to increase student retention
and interest in scientific careers by integrating computer visualization and
simulation into a core of introductory science courses: a new interdisciplinary
course in physical science and biology (Introduction to Environmental Science),
3 introductory chemistry courses, and 2 introductory geology courses. Customized
courseware developed in the NEXTSTEP-486 programming environment will utilize
equipment purchased with a recently awarded NSF-ILI (Instrumentation and
Laboratory Improvement) grant to one of the principal investigators. These
applications together with courseware that has already been developed by the PIs
will be used to illustrate abstract concepts and model complex natural
phenomena. Students will explore the effect of changing parameters on a variety
of such systems. Pre-lab computer simulations will familiarize students with
equipment and laboratory protocols before performing experiments thereby
instilling confidence and facilitating exploration and "discovery". Powerful
multimedia capabilities will be utilized to the fullest by incorporating sound,
full color high resolution images and video into the applications. Students will
use the Internet to access scientific data from public archives and bulletin
boards and communicate with peers at other campuses thus providing a sense of
connection to the broader scientific community. The proposed curricular
improvements will raise retention rates, attract more students to scientific
careers, and increase overall scientific literacy among students from
populations grossly underrepresented among professional scientists.