* 9354143
* MIE:  Model Institution for Excellence Planning Initiative  at Spelman College
* EDU,EES
* 04/15/1994,03/31/1995
* Etta Falconer, Spelman College
* Standard Grant
* Albert L. Bridgewater
* 03/31/1995
* USD 68,678.00

9354143 Falcorner Spelman College will undertake a six-month planning effort to
devise a long-range plan for the development of an excellent science,
engineering and mathematics (SEM) education and research program. The planning
effort will focus on four major areas. These areas include: 1) the Academic
Program; 2) Student Development; 3) Research &amp; Faculty Development; and 4)
the Infrastructure. The major objectives of the planning period will be to: 1.
Review and revise procedures for assessing the quality of SEM programs,
identifying specific strengths and weaknesses. 2. Determine activities and
resources needed to elevate SEM programs to a higher level of excellence. 3.
Analyze strengths and weaknesses related to recruitment and retention, and
determine activities to enhance these areas. 4. Analyze research capabilities
and determine research- related needs, particularly with respect to the training
of students. 5. Determine tracking procedures and infrastructure mechanisms
needed to ensure adequate feedback on SEM graduates, including enrollment in
graduate programs, progress in graduate school and employment data. 6. Assess
and develop appropriate mechanisms to enhance and facilitate cooperative
endeavors with industry, government and graduate institutions. 7. Determine
components of an effective infrastructure that will support current enhancements
and facilitate future growth.