* 9354033
* Rocky Mountain Teacher Education Collaborative (RMTEC)
* EDU,DUE
* 06/15/1994,05/31/2000
* Loretta Jones, University of Northern Colorado
* Cooperative Agreement
* Joan T Prival
* 05/31/2000
* USD 5,522,064.00

9354033 Stein Rocky Mountain Teacher Education Collaborative (RMTEC) The
University of Northern Colorado (UNC), Colorado State University (CSU) and
Metropolitan State College of Denver (MSCD), as partners in the Rocky Mountain
Teacher Education Collaborative (RMTEC), propose a five-year project which will
redesign targeted university science and mathematics courses, integrating
content and pedagogy; redesign the teacher certification programs for middle and
secondary science and mathematics teachers at RMTEC institutions; and serve as a
national model for recruiting and retaining certification candidates from
underrepresented groups, transfer and nontraditional-aged students. This
Collaborative is unique, providing leadership through CSU, a research-oriented,
land- grant university which has the largest secondary science teacher education
program in the state; UNC, a university that holds a state-recognized mission
for teacher education and one of the largest elementary and middle school
teacher- preparation programs nationally; and MSCD, a four-year college in
downtown Denver committed to training teachers for urban schools and the largest
middle and secondary math education program in the state. RMTEC partners will
design a national model to better prepare middle and secondary preservice
teachers in science and mathematics by emphasizing: the ongoing collaboration
between teacher education institutions, community colleges, and K-12 school
partners for the reform of science and mathematics by emphasizing: the ongoing
collaboration between teacher education institutions, community colleges, and
K-12 school partners for the reform of science and mathematics teacher
preparation: the redesign and delivery of targeted science and mathematics
courses for majors, with a central focus on research-based teaching and learning
strategies such as inquiry, problem-solving, and constructivist approaches and
utilizing appropriate interactive technologies; the enhancement of preservice
teachers' Pedagogical Content Knowledge (PCK) by integrating content, pedagogy,
and practice through the modeling of effective teaching, developing a new CORE
experience for student cohorts, and integrally involving experienced mentor
teachers; the development of faculty, mentor teacher, and student skills in
addressing classroom diversity issues and the recruitment and retention of women
and other underrepresented groups in mathematics and science teacher preparation
programs. The RMTEC institutions have also committed funds to accomplishment of
project goals, and project staff are working collaboratively with the
participants in the Colorado Statewide Strategic Initiative. Dissemination of
the national models will occur through presentations at regional and national
conferences; publications in science, mathematics, and education journals, and
conference sponsored by each of the partner institutions. ***y