* 9354403
* Design of Electro-Mechanical (Mechatronic) Systems          An Integrated Inter-Departmental Curriculum
* EHR,DUE
* 06/01/1994,05/31/1997
* Ali Keyhani, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Standard Grant
* Chalmers F. Sechrist
* 05/31/1997
* USD 110,000.00

9354403 Rizzoni The principal goal of this project is to develop an innovative
curriculum in Electro-Mechanical (Mechatronic) System Design. This innovative
curriculum integrates electrical, electronic, mechanical, and computational
engineering by introducing the innovative use of videos and computers into the
classroom and laboratory. Emphasized is the use of a variety of CAD tools in
engineering design and analysis. A realistic engineering problem setting is
provided in the laboratory to enable the students to address design and
experimental issues in engineering. The objectives are accomplished through an
integrated curriculum, cross-listing many relevant EE and ME courses, and a
Motion Control in Electro-Mechanical Systems Laboratory in which the students
are exposed to the electrical, electronic, mechanical, and computational aspects
of motion control and hybrid-electric vehicles. Students electing this
curriculum receive a certificate of study in Electro-Mechanical System Design
and complete their senior design projects using the facilities available in the
Motion Control in Electro-Mechanical Systems Laboratory. Through this curriculum
the undergraduate students identify creatively capstone design projects in
electro-mechanical systems. The design projects are realized through the open
use of the laboratory and with the participation of industrial sponsors who
assist in defining projects. ***y