* 9355599
* A Life of Science
* EHR,DRL
* 03/15/1994,08/31/1996
* Judy Crichton, WGBH Educational Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Hyman H. Field
* 08/31/1996
* USD 1,113,946.00

Proposal No. ESIE 93-55599 Proposal Name: A LIFE OF SCIENCE PI: Judith Vecchione
ABSTRACT WGBH Educational Foundation is producing a prime time television series
and informal education outreach component entitled "A Life of Science." Each of
the six one-hour programs in the series will profile a contemporary woman
scientist: Lydia Villa-Komaroff, biologist; Melissa Franklin, physicist; Misha
Mahowald, computational neuroscientist; Marcia NcNutt, geologist; Lynda Jordan,
biochemist; and Patty Jo Watson, archaeologist. The stories will present their
scientific quests and careers but also will be about scientific lives. An
outreach plan, which centers around a national campaign called "The Missing
Persons Investigation," will target two primary constituencies: girls and boys
11-14 years of age and their adult teachers and youth service community leaders.
The project will serve these audiences in formal school-based settings as well
as in the informal settings of community-based organizations and institutions.
Beyond these immediate target groups, the outreach project will reach a broad
and diverse national public through related activities including demonstrations
exhibits, community campaigns at local public television stations, and media
partnerships. A comprehensive promotion plan has been devised to inform the
public of both the series and the outreach component of the project. u ~ y; = $
n $ p @ P ! $`'0* .n1&gt;4 7 9 &lt;~?NB E G J M^P.S U &gt;a f~l r w = $ n $ p @
P ! $`'0* .n1&gt;4 7 9 &lt;~?NB E G J M^P.S U &gt;a f~l r w = $ n $ p @ P !
$`'0* .n1&gt;4 7 9 &lt;~?NB E G J M^P.S U &gt;a f~l r w $ $ = $ q % p @ P !
$`'0* .n1&gt;4 7 9 &lt;~?NB E G J M^P.S U &gt;a f~l r w F G CG Times (WN) Symbol
" Univers (WN) 1 Courier 1 MS LineDraw h r s , Hyman Field Melissa M. Lee