* 9355506
* Will Current Educational Reforms Narrow the Gender Gap In Science?
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/1994,02/29/1996
* Richard Shavelson, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Iris C. Rotberg
* 02/29/1996
* USD 122,603.00

9355506 Shavelson Over the years, gender differences in science have been
evident in two significant ways. First, as early as elementary school, males
outperform females on traditional measures of science achievement. Second, there
is persistent evidence that in comparison to males, females express more
negative affect in science (e.g., lower self- concepts, lower performance
expectancies) and report fewer positive experiences in the science classroom
(e.g., fewer student-teacher interactions). Currently, there is a general belief
that if science teaching and testing change to parallel methods of science
itself (e.g., hypothesis testing, hands-on experimentation), females will have
the opportunity to show more clearly what they know, leading to increased
achievement, positive classroom experiences, and positive student affect. In
turn, female students may come to view science as a field that is open to them
rather than a domain reserved for males. Although advocates of science
curricular and testing reform propose that such positive outcomes for females
will occur, there is little to no research which has explored this issue. The
purpose of this study is to examine whether new methods of teaching will,
indeed, result in narrowing or eliminating the existing gender gap in science.
Therefore, this study aims to assess the educational experiences of male and
female students in performance-based classrooms (i.e., those stressing inquiry,
scientific methodology, and "hands-on" experimentation) and to identify the
instructional methods within classrooms that may give rise to or eliminate
gender differences.