* 9355805
* Princeton Earth Physics Project
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/1994,08/31/1999
* Guust Nolet, Princeton University
* Continuing Grant
* Nora Sabelli
* 08/31/1999
* USD 1,864,985.00

9355805 Nolet PEPP aims to install an array of seismographs in high schools and
colleges nationwide, to create a computer network to share seismological data
and information, to develop a series of Earth science and physics curriculum
modules around analysis of seismological data, and to form a network of
supporting members of IRIS (Incorporated Research Institutions for Seismology,
an NSF-supported consortium of more than 80 universities - see Appendix A) to
train and support science teachers. The main goals of the project are: - The
develop "hands on" seismological data acquisition equipment for use at high
schools and colleges, to increase the curiosity of students to explain nature, -
To increase the understanding of Earth science and physics concepts through
connected lab experiments in seismology, while developing a sense of familiarity
with the seismometer as an instrument for using these concepts, - To support
teachers to do real "classroom science" with their students and provide
scientific back-up for teachers as they undertake these activities with their
students, - To stimulate interaction between teachers in Earth sciences and
physics with researchers in geophysics, - To give teachers organizational and
intellectual support by providing curriculum materials, computer networking as
well as research opportunities, - To disseminate PEPP nationally and build a
unique seismological array that allows students and teachers to share data over
Internet and to make real discoveries, - To stimulate developments in instrument
design that improves the sensor to be used in this project. PEPP is rooted in
the recent developments that have revolutionized observational seismology. New
networks of high quality, digital seismographs are being installed right now,
both on a national scale by the USGS, as well as on a worldwide scale. IRIS, a
consortium of (mostly academic) seismological institutions in the US is the
driving force behind the installation of a worldwide network. The school network
supplements this in the US. It not only provides real data for use in the
classroom - it has unique scientific potential because it provides a station
density that could never be obtained using purely professional resources. In the
final stage of the project, research workshops for teachers will be developed in
which the data are used. This project will enable secondary science teachers to
undertake long-term, networked seismic monitoring that will contribute
seismology research while supporting the reform of science education through the
infusion of teacher-led, student-based scientific research. By locating this
scientific research in schools, participants will help shift science instruction
in their schools toward a more project- oriented, inquiry-based paradigm.