* 9355832
* Teaching the Art of Modeling in Engineering Using a ComputerAided, Phenomena-Based Modeling Language
* NONE,NONE
* 01/01/1995,12/31/1998
* Alan Foss, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing grant
* Nora Sabelli
* 12/31/1998
* USD 1,506,908.00

9355832 Foss A computer-aided modeling environment is to be developed and
integrated into the educational scope of the core undergraduate chemical
engineering curriculum. Through this environment, a structured set of steps,
needed by students learning how to model physical and chemical process behavior,
is coordinated with an interactive modeling language that is designed to provide
instantaneous feedback to the students on the consistency, completeness, and
reasonableness of their model. The modeling language coordinates the terms
describing the physical and chemical phenomena, declared by the student as
important to the content of the model, and composes the mathematical
relationships that form the expression of the resulting model. Numerical
algorithms are then employed to produce through interactive simulation the
static or/and dynamic solution of the mathematical model, and thus allow
students to familiarize themselves with the behavior of the modeled process, as
well as compare it to the expected behavior of the real-world system. A
structured approach to guiding the student through the often torturous path of
modeling is to be developed in collaboration with the course instructors. The
approach is to bring to the students an awareness and practice in (i)
rationalizing the need for a model, (ii) setting objectives for the model within
a problem's context, (iii) perceiving the cause-effect relationships, (iv)
articulating the physics of the process, (v) stating representations of the
phenomena, (vi) observing the behavioral characteristics of the model built, and
(vii) using these characteristics for the resolution of the given problem. Such
structured guidance is to be coordinated with the use of the modeling language
and integrated within the scope of undergraduate core chemical engineering
courses in such a way that the modeling task for the student is embedded within
a problem needing solution, so that the problem's context and objectives are ma
de clear. Significant components of the proposed work involve developing the
individual modeling projects for use in the modeling language and redesign and
translation of a prototype version of the modeling language for use on personal
computers. It is expected that the completion of the proposed project will have
a significant impact on the undergraduates' education since, (a) the student
will be free to experiment and thus learn from immediate feedback of their
errors, and (b) the understanding of the "foundation phenomena" will be
reenforced through the contextual solution of non-trivial engineering problems.
***