* 9355530
* Workings of Science:  Interactive Natural History Museum    Keystone Exhibit to Enhance the Public's Understanding of   the Processes of Science through Application of These ...
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/1994,08/31/1996
* W. Carl Taylor, Milwaukee Public Museum
* Standard Grant
* Barbara H. Butler
* 08/31/1996
* USD 249,954.00

9355530 Hackbarth The Milwaukee Public Museum will develop two test stations: A
Wetland/Wood Station and a Mobile Testing Station that will be used to
evaluation how hands-on activities that incorporate scientific tools and methods
can be applied to supplement the educational experience of traditional natural
history museum dioramas. As a result of the MPM's work, visitors will become
engaged in a "field experience" by means of techniques to encourage observing,
recording of data, and hypothesizing using tools that a scientists might use to
study the natural environment such as a hand lens, radio telemetry receiver,
scales, rulers, and/or calipers. Visitors will also have the opportunity to
investigate further in the "lab". Here visitors will use such tools as a
computer, microscope, measuring grid, and they will be encouraged to experiment,
infer, predict, and classify. The intent is to have the visitor discover how
scientific information is used to support decisions in every day life. The
development of these stations will be accompanied by considerable formative and
summative evaluation studies. The results will be disseminated in order that
other natural history museums with dioramas may replicate these ideas in order
that visitors might move beyond the primary "animal identification" phase in
their examination and enjoyment of dioramas.