* 9355516
* NATO EAST EUROPE:  Activation of Ca 2+ Release Channels in  Sacroplasmic Reticulum from Skeletal and Heart Muscles by   Free Radicals
* EDU,DGE
* 10/01/1993,06/30/1994
* Valerian Kagan, University of Pittsburgh
* Fellowship Award
* Margrete S. Klein
* 06/30/1994
* USD 3,800.00

9355516 Kagan Dr. V. Kagan is a faculty member at the Department of
Environmental and Occupational Health at the University of Pittsburgh. He is a
world recognized leader in the field of free radical and antioxidant research.
His current research program includes extensive ESR studies of free radical
mechanisms involved in the activation of Ca2+ release channels in sarcoplasmic
reticulum membranes. Dr. V. Ritov is the Associate Research Professor of
Biochemistry at the Department of Biology, State University of Moscow. With his
systematic studies of Ca2+ transport and mechanisms of its regulation, he has
gained an outstanding reputation as a biochemist. The presence of Dr. Ritov in
Dr. Kagan's laboratory at the University of Pittsburgh on a daily basis will
greatly facilitate the joint studies on the involvement of free radicals and
antioxidants in fundamental physiologic mechanisms of functioning of
Ca2+-release channel in sarcoplasmic reticulum membranes. Dr. V. Ritov will have
access to unique ESR techniques for free radical studies developed in Dr.
Kagan's laboratory which he will be able to use in his research upon his return
to Russia. Dr. Ritov's visit to the US will enable him to interact with American
scientists directly and will enhance his international scientific reputation
that he deserves. The visit of Dr. V. Ritov to Dr. Kagan's laboratory will
significantly strengthen the collaborative research in their laboratories both
in the US and in Russia. ***