* 9355562
* Chemistry Fundamentals for Middle School Teachers;          Maintaining the ICE network
* EHR,DRL
* 06/15/1994,05/31/1997
* John Moore, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Debbie Jones
* 05/31/1997
* USD 723,481.00

PROPOSAL NUMBER: ESI-9355562 PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR: Dr. John Moore
INSTITUTION: The University of Wisconsin, Madison TITLE: Chemistry Fundamentals
for Middle School Teachers; Maintaining the ICE Network This two year project
would each year provide 40 teachers of grades 6-8 with training in a four week
workshop. The teachers includes content lectures and demonstrations, laboratory
work, chemical safety information, new ideas in pedagogy, practical teaching
sessions with students in an associated science camp, relationship of chemistry
to the other sciences, chemistry and technology, outreach techniques, and group
projects. It is anticipated that these 'enhanced teachers' will on average reach
out to an additional 35 teachers. This results in a total of 3500 teachers being
impacted. In addition to the basic training in the workshops, those teachers who
provide local training are eligible to apply for and Affiliate Incentive Award
program which is used as seed money for obtaining much higher support from local
sources to carry out the ICE-like workshops at the local level. In addition the
ICE Network of more than 2500 teachers will be maintained by a newsletter and a
new computer-network communications which will link ICE Field Centers,
Affiliates, and participants via the Internet. The cost share is $148,443 or
20.5% of the face value of Foundation support. The project begins in 1994 and
will run through 1995.