* 9355504
* Philadelphia Informal Science Education Collaborative       (PISEC):  Family Science Learning Project
* EHR,DRL
* 07/01/1994,12/31/1998
* Minda Borun, Franklin Institute Science Museum
* Continuing Grant
* Barry A. Van Deman
* 12/31/1998
* USD 616,248.00

9355504 Borun The Family Science Learning Project is comprised of a research
study and subsequent program development designed to fundamentally improve
family science learning in museums. The endeavor will be carried out in the
Philadelphia area by PISEC, a partnership of The Academy of Natural Sciences,
The Franklin Institute, the Thomas H. Kean New Jersey State Aquarium at Camden
and the Philadelphia Zoo, joined for this project by the University of the Arts.
To achieve the goal of fostering science literacy by encouraging families to
engage in successful learning strategies while visiting science museums, PISEC
has identified the following objectives for the project: - To increase
understanding of the processes and potential of science museum-based family
learning. - To apply this understanding to the development and implementation of
effective program and exhibit enhancements in four science museums. - To involve
existing staff so that evaluation and research become an ongoing component of
program and exhibit development in the participating museums. - To utilize a
multi-institution team approach designed to maximize impact, be cost-effective
and be replicable in other regions across the country. The project has three
phases. First, a research study using ethnographic data collection and focus
groups will be conducted at the participating museums. This study will lead to
the formulation of a set of criteria for successful family science learning and
hypotheses about what is needed to facilitate this behavior. Second, utilizing
these findings, the four institutions will develop four distinct programs and/or
exhibit enhancements designed to foster positive family learning experiences.
Formative evaluation and inter-museum collaborative will be integral parts of
this process. Finally, the summative findings of the individual efforts will be
compared to look for constants in successful programming across the sites.
Results will be assembled in a handbook which will be widely disseminated to the
field. In carrying out this study, the project will fill in the body of existing
museum-based family learning research. The knowledge gained will give science
museum professionals a new set of tools which can be used to increase the
frequency of positive learning experiences in their facilities, and to broaden
the diversity of visiting families as well. Because the subject matter under
investigation represents a wide range of scientific disciplines, the results of
the projects should prove applicable to many different types of informal science
learning environments, including science centers, natural history museums, zoos,
aquariums and botanic gardens. The collaborative nature of the project will
serve as a model for similar partnerships among cultural institutions and
universities in other large metropolitan areas.