* 9355658
* Frontiers in Physiology:  An Enhancement Program for        Teachers
* EDU,DRL
* 08/01/1994,07/31/1998
* Marsha Matyas, American Physiological Society
* Continuing Grant
* Lowell J. Bethel
* 07/31/1998
* USD 1,174,699.00

9355658 Matyas Theis project will improve science education by building the
scientific research community into the support infrastructure for teachers.
Specifically, it will: create ongoing relationships between researchers and
teachers through research and inservice experiences and computer networks; and
promote the adoption of K-12 national standards through activities developed
collaboratively by teachers and researchers. These goals will be met via 1) the
Summer Research in Physiology Program; and 2) the Joint Teacher-Researcher
Physiology Inservice Program. During the Summer Research Program, teachers
conduct research in physiology laboratories and participate in additional
professional activities. In the Inservice Program, teachers and researchers
develop lab/lessons for physiology inservice workshops, focusing on effective
pedagogical techniques. Teachers will be involved in project activities over a
full academic year. More than 500 teachers, nationwide, will participate in the
three-year project. Special features of the program include: connecting teachers
to global resources via computer networks; producing a videotape modeling
effective pedagogical techniques; developing an INTERNET- accessible databank of
physiology lessons; and focusing throughout the project on gender and
racial/ethnic equity. The project will serve as a model for professional
organizations and provide materials and methods for inservice providers (e.g.,
State Systemic and Urban Initiatives). Most significantly, it will provide a
model for building long-term relationships between teachers and researchers,
thus building the research community into the support infrastructure for K-12
science education.