* 9355557
* Project FIRST TWO Field Involvement:  Research by Science   Teachers Teams/Water/Ozone
* EHR,DRL
* 08/01/1994,07/31/2000
* Gary Lake, Wisconsin Academy of Sciences Arts & Letters
* Standard Grant
* Wayne Sukow
* 07/31/2000
* USD 743,745.00

9355557 Lake This is a five-year project to enable 100 teachers from Wisconsin
to learn and be involved in scientific research. The plan is to have teachers
involved in staff development activities of at least five days and then to
actively been involved in up to 30 days of hands-on scientific research. This
research will be (a) on an individual basis under the mentorship of specifically
selected scientists, or (b) within a team, or (c) both. The team projects will
be (a) an examination of water quality using biotic indexing, and (b) trails
aimed at the effective use of milkweed as an indicator of ozone pollution. Both
team projects will be in collaboration with the Wisconsin Department of Natural
Resources. The project's goals include (1) improvement of the teaching of
science by enabling selected teachers to become experienced in scientific
research, (2) formation of partnerships with scientists for on-going mentorship,
(3) performance of valuable studies and (4) providing selected with the local
opportunity to be research assistants in a research project. The project has its
foundations in Field Involvement: Research by Science Teachers (FIRST), an NSF-
funded program. This proposal benefits from the lessons learned from FIRST, the
expertise it created amongst teachers, and the weaknesses that became apparent.
The project also benefits from the experience gained, especially in terms of the
leadership, pedagogy, and networking components, from Earth Science Resource
Associates (ESRA), a currently NSF-funded project of the Wisconsin Academy. The
project requested $743,745 from NSF with institutions/Agencies and school
districts providing $172,841% of the National Science Foundation portion in cost
sharing (this does not include miscellaneous supplies, space, phone, contributed
by school districts).