* 9355537
* Iowa Scope, Sequence, and Coordination, Grades 6-10
* EDU,DRL
* 05/01/1994,10/31/1997
* Paul Rider, University of Iowa
* Continuing Grant
* Wayne Sukow
* 10/31/1997
* USD 2,009,442.00

9355537 Yager At each of four sites two satellite districts will be added to the
Iowa SS&amp;C project. The four original sites are Mason City, Davenport,
Chariton and Creston. The six new sites which will provide statewide coverage
areCharles City, Hampton, Denison, Johnston, Iowa City and Fairfield. These
latter sites will test the transportability of the Iowa SS&amp;C model.
Frameworks and approaches will be completed for grades 6-8 and continue the work
started in grades 9-10. At each of the four sites 30 teachers will participate.
Different leaders 6-8 will be involved as the middle school programs are
completed. Ninth grade teachers will be the major focus for 1994-95 and tenth
grade teachers for 1995-96. Over the three year period of the project 120
teachers in grades 6-10 will participate. The Teacher Enhancement activities
follow the Iowa Chautauqua inservice model: a two week leadership conference
including teachers from each site and all grade levels; a 3-week summer workshop
at each site for all teachers at a given grade level, with representative
teachers from preceding and following grades; two day courses each academic
semester for site leaders and other personnel; weekly meetings of teachers at
specific grade levels in each participating school; and, monthly 2-day inservice
meetings involving all teachers at each site. As part of the project evaluation
student learning is assessed in 6-domains via pre- and post-test methods. The
cost-sharing support comes from local schools, intermediate school districts,
the Iowa Utility Association, other industries and the University of Iowa.