* 9355741
* Journey to the Center of the Cell
* EDU,DRL
* 07/01/1994,06/30/1996
* D. Lansing Taylor, Carnegie Institute
* Standard Grant
* Roger D. Mitchell
* 06/30/1996
* USD 600,937.00

9355741 Olejniczak The Carnegie Science Center (of Carnegie Institute) and
Carnegie Mellon University (Center for Light Microscope Imaging and
Biotechnology, a National Science Foundation Science and Technology Center, and
The Studio for Creative Inquiry) have initiated a collaborative project that
portends to change in a dramatic fashion the planetarium theater as a tool for
informal science education. After several months of preliminary discussions and,
now, the beginning of work, the creative team has been assembled that is
defining the vision and executing the program of this exciting project. The
vision being formulated is the transformation of The Henry Buhl Jr. Planetarium
into a new visualization environment to achieve an interdisciplinary and
interactive group learning experience. We call this new concept the "Group
Immersive Visualization Environment (GIVE). GIVE will accomplish much of the
impact of virtual reality by combining "three-dimensional" images generated by
Evans &amp; Sutherland's Digistar Projection System with real and animated,
high-resolution video computer images and multimedia and by providing direct
audience-control of program direction via The Henry Buhl Jr. Planetarium's
elaborate 156-seat, electronic response system. While we anticipate the eventual
production of a series of programs in a variety of subject fields, the first to
utilize GIVE will be "Journey to the Center of the Cell," a 35-minute
presentation. The treatment will convey an experience of self-discovery and
natural wonder as audiences transport themselves through striking visualizations
of the living cell. Production and evaluation of "Journey to the Center of the
Cell" and the development of the Group Immersive Visualization Environment will
occur under the auspices of staff of The Henry Buhl Jr. Planetarium, key
personnel from Carnegie Mellon University, evaluator Harris H. Shettel, and an
Advisory Panel consisting of key planetarium and eductional profes sionals.
Program production packages, incorporating compatible components of "Journey to
the Center of the Cell," will be produced, marketed and distributed to public
and school planetariums; and a Teacher Resource Kit containing supplementary
educational materials in the form of video tapes, CD-ROMS and computer disks wil
extend the program's reach into the classroom. Special relationships and viewing
times will be offered at The Henry Buhl Jr. Planetarium targeting Pittsburgh
inner city schools and regional districts containing large percentages of
underserved and minority students.