* 9355802
* SET CAREERS: Science, Engineering and Technology Careers Museum Exhibit
* NONE,NONE
* 04/01/1994,09/30/1997
* Stephen Rabin, Educational Film Center
* Standard Grant
* Hyman H. Field
* 09/30/1997
* USD 982,929.00

Proposal No. ESIE 93-55802 Proposal Name: SET CAREERS: SCIENCE, ENGINEERING, AND
TECHNOLOGY CAREERS MUSEUM EXHIBIT PI: Stephen Rabin Amount: $982,929 ABSTRACT
The Educational Film Center (EFC) is developing a science, engineering, and
technology careers exhibit for distribution to science museums and technology
centers. The core of the exhibit kiosk, with related career graphics surrounds,
is SET/QUEST, an interactive multimedia program for both Macintosh and
PC/Windows using CD-Rom as the full motion video source. Teens and preteens will
enter an interactive exploration of thirty careers with first person video
profiles of people in science and engineering; animated/reality video
simulations of a work experience in these fields, decision screens, and a
database of over 200 more science and math-based professions. The documentary
profiles, database, and a personal interest career match component will also be
developed in alternative media formats (video, audio, print) for broad
distribution to community and youth education networks, schools, and libraries.
Specific emphasis in this project is being placed on reaching and attracting
female, minority, and disabled youth. A parent outreach component has been
developed and will be implemented by the Directorate of Education & Human
Resources Programs of AAAS. The concept of the parent effort is to work directly
with and through the national offices of four major national organizations with
different institutional community roots -- Science Museums, Public Libraries,
Schools, and Community Based Organizations -- to involve parents and families
with SET Project materials and to provide them with information with which they
can foster their children's pursuit of science and math education and careers in
these fields. Initial efforts will be conducted in 18 cities. The project is a
collaborative endeavor among three organizations: The Educationa l Film Center
which will be responsible for management and development/production of the
software and documentary video profiles; The New York Hall of Science which will
be responsible for the exhibit kiosk and graphics, will design and develop the
student workbook and user installation print, will serve as the principal test
site for the exhibit, and will advise on software, interactive multimedia
design, and installation options; and COMAP which will be responsible for direct
involvement of the Advisory Board, for selecting and hiring content consultants,
for assuring the accuracy of the science and math content, for formative and
summative evaluation, and for developing and preparing community leader and
school users guides for publication. Stephen Rabin, President of EFC, will serve
as PI for the project.