* 9355836
* SuperQuest Evaluation
* EHR,DRL
* 06/01/1994,05/31/1996
* Malvin Kalos, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Debbie Jones
* 05/31/1996
* USD 114,538.00

9355836 Kalos A key hurdle in the advancement of science at the secondary level
is the inability of public and private education to keep up with scientific
advances that involve computers. SuperQuest, an NSF funded program, was designed
to bring computational tools and techniques to high school students and their
teachers, with an ultimate goal of incorporating computational science into the
high school curriculum. To date, SuperQuest has involved a national competition,
wherein teams of students and their teacher-coaches propose computational
science or mathematics problems to investigate. The winning teams are selected
by a national review committee. Winners attend three-week summer institutes at
one of four SuperQuest Centers, where they learn how to use high- performance
computing and visualization to solve their scientific problems. The winners'
high schools receive workstations and communications links to the internet. The
early success and enthusiasm of these teams has sparked interest in moving
SuperQuest toward the next phase in its evolution - to provide broad-based
instruction and guidance to educators nationwide in how to integrate
computational tools and techniques into secondary science and mathematics
curricula. The Cornell Theory Center seeks support from the NSF to conduct a
detailed, systematic external evaluation of the SuperQuest program to assess and
understand the impact of the program on the high schools and to establish long-
term directions and goals as the program evolves to foster secondary school
computational science education. The Cornell Theory Center will contract with
the Center for Technology in Education to conduct this evaluation in cooperation
with the SuperQuest project director. Specifically, the evaluation will answer
the following questions: What is the range of models for implementing SuperQuest
activities in the schools that have participated in the program? What has been
the impact of S uperQuest participation within the different schools on the
students, the teachers, and the curriculum and learning environment? What can be
learned in general about how advanced computing resources are most effectively
and efficiently made available, supported, and used in schools? What kinds of
professional development experiences are required for teachers to use
computational resources well? What kinds of outreach took place to the broader
community? Among the non-winning schools, were there any lasting consequences of
the application process? What kinds of information sources do schools who apply
to the SuperQuest program use?