* 9355538
* Western Connecticut Middle Grades Math and Science Teacher  Leadership Project
* NONE,NONE
* 05/01/1994,10/31/1997
* Timothy Craine, Education Connection
* Standard Grant
* Joyce B. Evans
* 10/31/1997
* USD 677,396.00

Tedder 9355538 RESCUE will work with the Central Connecticut State University
and other university and business partners to conduct a three year Middle Grades
Math and Science teacher leader program. The program will enhance the skills of
90 teachers in 10 urban, rural and suburban areas. Another 900 K-12 teachers
will be served in leadership activities given by these teachers. Twelve teachers
who helped plan the project will serve as the core of the first cadre of
participants and will assume increasing responsibility for project leadership
over the three years. Project elements include 1) Introducing participants to
national math and science standards projects and exemplary curricula.2)
enhancing participants knowledge by doing math and science through
constructivist approaches, applying technology and working with authentic
assessment.3) year round site mentoring and professional development 4)
introducing strategies to increase the participation of females and minorities
in SEM 5) assisting grade 5-8 mathemtics and science teachers to introduce
enhancement into the classroom. Contributing organizations are the State
Department of Education, Project CONNSTRUCT (SSI) the CT Business and Industry
Association and Sacred Heart University SMART Center. Funds of $697,602 are
requested with cost share of $518,444 (74%)