* 9355087
* A Proposal for Graduate Research Traineeships in            Computational Environmental Science and Engineering
* EDU,DGE
* 07/15/1994,06/30/2000
* Mark Wiesner, William Marsh Rice University
* Continuing Grant
* Paul Jennings
* 06/30/2000
* USD 557,500.00

Advances in computational mathematics have revolutionized the variety and the
nature of problems that can be addressed by environmental scientists and
engineers. To fully exploit these advances, we must develop students who have
computational as well as environmental domain expertise. We propose a training
program emphasizing graduate study of advanced computational techniques applied
to complex problems in environmental science and engineering. The focal point of
this program is computational environmental science and engineering will be a
radically different approach to the solution of complex engineering problems:
multi-disciplinary optimization (MDO). MDO is founded on advances in numerical
optimization, parallel computation, and information technology for collaborate
work. MDO will allow environmental scientists and engineers to collaborate
within the context of one or more objectives that apply to the project as a
whole, but that may be unattainable or unclear within the context of each
subtask. This capability is critical to the resolution of environmental problems
which are typically multidisciplinary and multiobjective. The training program
will draw on faculty in the departments of Environmental Science and
Engineering. Computational and Applied Mathematics, Computer Science, and
Statistics. These departments have a substantial history of cooperation and the
faculty involved in the program are internationally recognized as leaders in
their respective areas.