* 9355028
* Cognitive Science: Language and Cognition
* EDU,DGE
* 10/01/1993,03/31/2000
* Merrill Garrett, University of Arizona
* Continuing Grant
* Paul Jennings
* 03/31/2000
* USD 557,500.00

9355028 Garrett We propose Traineeships in Cognitive Science, with emphasis on
human language systems. Cognitive Science is an inherently interdisciplinary
enterprise, and the program at Arizona provides coverage in all principal areas
of study. For the purposes of the GRT, however, we target natural language
processing as the specific interdisciplinary focus that will unite trainees'
experience. Every trainee will receive a grounding in formal, computational, and
experimental approaches to language study, and will bring that training to bear
on research problems that connect language to other major classes of cognitive
processing. Each trainee will be a Ph.D. student in one of three departments
participating in the Arizona Cognitive Science program: Linguistics, Psychology
and Philosophy. Major study areas in the Cognitive Science Program are: (1)
Formal and Computational Models of Language Structure, (2) Language Processing,
(3) Linguistic and Cognitive Development, (4) Visual Cognition, (5) Knowledge
Representation and Reasoning, (6) Cognitive Neuroscience. All students will
undergo interdisciplinary training in areas (1) and (2), and in addition will
undertake study in at least one of the other areas. Each Trainee's program will
include a GRT core curriculum that identifies specific course work in areas (1)
and (2); this will be supplemented by material selected from other areas suited
ot the particular major and research interest of each trainee. ***