* 9355724
* The Central and South Florida Middle School Partnership     Program
* EDU,DRL
* 05/15/1994,08/30/1998
* Thomas Marcinkowski, Florida Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Susan P. Snyder
* 08/30/1998
* USD 542,245.00

9355724 Marcinkowski This three-year project will involve middle school teachers
in the acquisition, implementation and evaluation of carefully selected science
content and STS issue instruction strategies in middle school classrooms. With
the support of education service centers, and participation from nine
participating school districts, in the Central and South Florida region, project
staff will train teams of key middle school teachers and supervisors in summer
institute settings. Instruction will include science content, a wide range of
regional STS issues, strategies for investigating and evaluating STS issues,
issue resolution skills, and two well-researched strategies for teaching this
content to middle school students. Subsequent to each institute, participants
will apply these skills, and report their results. Over each school year,
participants will implement and evaluate much of this content, including one
issue instruction strategy, in their classrooms. As a part of the projects
evaluation, the teachers will report the results of their efforts to project
staff and participants in a regular spring meeting. In Year 3 district teams
will participate in a summer seminar designed to prepare them to offer inservice
sessions to their colleagues. Once trained cadres of teachers and articulated
instructional programs are in place, extensive data will be collected to assess
impact and program effectiveness. The cost sharing will be 42 percent of the NSF
funds. ***