* 9355117
* Human-Accelerated Environmental Change: Request for Support of a Joint Graduate Program in Environmental Biology
* EDU,DGE
* 08/01/1994,07/31/2001
* Peter Marks, Cornell Univ - State: AWDS MADE PRIOR MAY 2010
* Continuing Grant
* Paul Jennings
* 07/31/2001
* USD 557,500.00

9355117 Marks We seek support for a consortial graduate program between Cornell
University and the Institute of Ecosystem Studies, a nondegree-granting
institution. The focus of the program is "human-accelerated environmental
change." Our program will expose doctoral students to problems of human-
accelerated environmental change and their potential solutions, and encourage
cross- disciplinary collaborative research while retaining strong, flexible
training in ecological research. We will accomplish these goals through a mix of
traditional and novel programs, including coursework and seminars,
apprenticeships with environmental management agencies, and an annual long-term
monitoring exercise. In addition, students in the program will be exposed to the
policy and management implications of ecological research. Students will be
encouraged to work on the "big problems" of environmental change, but at scales
suitable for doctoral research. The program will create a community of bright,
concerned students in a supportive atmosphere in which to pursue thesis research
on important environmental question. By both formalizing and expanding on the
goodwill and the many existing interactions between Cornell and the Institute of
Ecosystem Studies, the proposed consortial arrangement offers an exceptional
opportunity for a new group of graduate students to work in a nationally
important area of science. ***