* 9355642
* Rocky Mountain Secondary Teacher Enhancement Initiative in  Mathematics
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/1994,08/31/1997
* William Blubaugh, University of Northern Colorado
* Standard Grant
* Francis M. Fennell
* 08/31/1997
* USD 577,260.00

9355642 Abstract Rocky Mountain Secondary Teacher Enhancement Initiative in
Mathematics (RMSTEIM) The Rocky Mountain Secondary Teacher Enhancement
Initiative in Mathematics is a project to develop a Masters Degree program at
the University of Northern Colorado. This three- year project at $577,260 will
recruit and serve 50 secondary mathematics teachers, 40 high school and 10
middle school, in the three-state area of Colorado, Wyoming, and New Mexico. The
participants will receive enhancement in advanced mathematics that is consistent
with shifts in mathematics curriculum reform, use of appropriate instructional
and assessment strategies, and preparation in leadership and staff development.
Participants will take two mathematics and two mathematics education courses
along with laboratory/colloquiums including leadership, staff development, and
technology during an eight-week summer session in each of three summers. All
participants and staff will be connected through UNC s e-mail system. During the
school year, participants will design and conduct follow-up sessions of at least
one-half day in conjunction with meetings in their state or region with project
staff coordination. UNC plans to sustain an MA in Mathematics for Teachers
centered on the courses established in this project. Cost-sharing from UNC and
school districts will cover approximately 20% of the total project.