* 9355468
* Graphics Calculators And Internet Coalition Conference
* EDU,DRL
* 01/15/1994,12/31/1995
* Roseanne Hofmann, Montgomery County Community College
* Standard Grant
* Henry S. Kepner, Jr.
* 12/31/1995
* USD 82,999.00

9355468 Hofmann This project is a two-day conference, January 28-29, 1994, on
the use of graphing calculators for 200 middle and high school mathematics and
science teachers with additional post-secondary participation. The conference
will be held at Montgomery Community College, Blue Bell, PA and service
participants from that area. Participants will receive a conference proceedings
and must commit to part of an e-mail network with regular contributions coming
from conference leaders, participants and technical support staff. The
Conference will provide a graphing calculator to the 200 participants, and a
project kit for each school from which teachers attend. Texas Instruments, Inc.
has made the calculators and projector kits available to the conference project
at discount prices. Participation in the conference requires a signed agreement
of understanding from the teacher and building principal to provide local access
to the network and regular contributions by the teacher. The project evaluation
will be carried out through participant questionnaires at the completion of the
conference, after 0.5 years, and after 1 year. These will focus on the value of
the conference in involving the teacher's involvement of participants in using
technology in their instruction. A log of e-mail use will be studied in relation
to getting teachers into electronic dialog. ***