* 9355602
* "The Kinetic City Super Crew":  A Scientific Adventure Show for Children's Radio
* EHR,DRL
* 03/01/1994,12/31/1998
* Jerry Bell, American Association for the Advancement of Science
* Continuing Grant
* Hyman H. Field
* 12/31/1998
* USD 3,233,206.00

Proposal No. ESIE 93-55602 Proposal Name: KINETIC CITY SUPER CREW - A SCIENTIFIC
ADVENTURE SHOW FOR CHILDREN'S RADIO PI: Jerry Bell Amount: $3,050,225 payable in
the following fiscal years: FY 94 $1,150,250 FY 95 $1,090,338 FY 96 $ 809,637
ABSTRACT The American Association for the Advancement of Science (AAAS) will
produce and distribute a half-hour science adventure show for weekly broadcast,
primarily on commercial children's radio stations. The series, "The Kinetic City
Super Crew," is targeted at children 8-10 years old with an emphasis on urban
children, girls, minorities, and children with disabilities. The series of 92
programs also will be designed for family listening. The programs revolve around
a drama led by child actors and include discussions with scientists and
information for at-home experiments. The Co-Principal Investigators will be
Jerry Bell and Gerald Wheeler. Bell is Program Director for Science,
Mathematics, and Technology Education at AAAS and will be responsible for
overall management of the project. Wheeler is Program Director for the Public
Understanding of Science and Technology and will serve as the Science Content
Director for the programs. There also will be a Science Content Team (consisting
of Bell, Shirley Malcom and Andrew Ahlgren) that will work closely with Wheeler,
the production staff, and the advisors to review show themes, scientists to be
interviewed, overall content, and to serve as arbiters for questions related to
their respective fields. Bob Hirshon will serve as Executive Produce/Project
Director and John Keefe will be Senior Producer.