* 9355056
* Training in Environmental Science: Linking Basic Ecology with Social Solutions
* EDU,DGE
* 09/01/1996,08/31/2002
* Brenda Casper, University of Pennsylvania
* Continuing Grant
* Paul Jennings
* 08/31/2002
* USD 562,500.00

The next generation of ecologists and organismal biologists will be called upon
to link their basic-science focus with other skills necessary to solve major
environmental and social problems. These skills--in public policy, environmental
law, management, and scientific communication-- are severely lacking in our
current graduate training. We propose a cross-disciplinary training program that
will provide students with a rigorous introduction to the methods of
environmental science and exposure to the tools necessary to apply the fruits of
their research to attack major social and environmental issues. Before
initiating their diqsertation research, students will complete a two year
curriculum consisting of new lecture, seminar and field courses. Field and
management courses will draw on personnel and resources of the Conservation
Research Center of the Smithsonian Institution. Seminar courses on scientific
communication, current environmental issues, and environmental law and policy
will draw on faculty from other graduate schools at the University of
Pennsylvania and other professionals actively involved with these issues. These
courses, together with basic science research will provide trainees with
exposure to the methods needed to affect scientific and social solutions to
environmental problems.