* 9355608
* Using Polymers to Link the Sciences to Each Other and to Our World:  Innovation in the K-12 Curriculum
* EHR,DRL
* 11/01/1994,04/30/1999
* John Droske, University of Wisconsin-Stevens Point
* Standard Grant
* Debbie Jones
* 04/30/1999
* USD 545,805.00

Abstract PROPOSAL NUMBER: ESI-9355608 PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR: Dr. John Droske
INSTITUTION: University of Wisconsin - Stevens Point TITLE: Using Polymers to
Link the Sciences to Each Other and to Our World: Innovation in the K-12
Curriculum This project will take place during the summers and academic year to
follow of 1995 through 1997. Each of 24 teachers will be trained in a three week
workshop in applying polymer chemistry in their classes as appropriate to grade
level. The first year will be 24 secondary school teacher, the second summer 24
middle school teachers and the third summer 24 elementary school teachers.
During the second and third summers, 8 teachers from the previous summers 24
will be selected to participate in a one week leadership workshop. This workshop
will be held so that it coincides with the next group's workshop and so that
there can be cross grade level interaction. During the academic year following
each workshop the 24 participants will also come together for an additional two
day weekend workshop. A very substantial assessment and evaluation will be
carried out using both qualitative and quantitative data. The total length of
the project is for 42 months, spanning four summers beginning in 1994. The
workshops will be held at the University of Wisconsin at Stevens Point. The cost
share of the project amounts to 41% of the Foundation support.