* 9355042
* Graduate Research Traineeships Proposal in Plant Biology
* EDU,DGE
* 07/15/1994,06/30/2001
* Elizabeth Bray, University of California-Riverside
* Continuing Grant
* Paul Jennings
* 06/30/2001
* USD 557,500.00

This proposal has been developed in order to define and plan a training program
in a fundamental area of Plant Biology, regulation of plant growth and
development. Recent evidence that signaling mechanisms in plants are controlled
by the established plant hormones as well as other types of signaling molecules
has led us to increase our research efforts on regulatory events that occur
during plant development. The education of each trainee will include research
and instruction in lecture and discussion course. The trainees research will be
supervised by a faculty collaborator in the Graduate Research Traineeship (GRT)
Program of the Department of Botany and Plant Sciences at the University of
California at Riverside (UCR). An equally important goal of this NSF-GRT Program
is to promote student diversity in Plant Biology, leading to an increased number
of Ph.D. scientists from currently underrepresented ethnic groups. Innovative
Inter- Institutional Arrangements have been made with Tuskegee University and
the University of Puerto Rico an Rio Piedras for the purpose of recruitment of
underrepresented minorities to graduate studies in Plant Biology. Faculty
collaborators in the NSF-GRT will visit the two campuses to present a seminar
and talk to students that are interested in Plant Biology. Qualified students
from these institutions will visit UCR, and will be given priority during the
selection of NSF-GRT recipients.