* 9355806
* Maryland 'Virtual High School of Science and Mathematics'
* EDU,DRL
* 10/01/1994,03/31/1998
* MaryEllen Verona, Montgomery County Public Schools
* Continuing Grant
* Nora Sabelli
* 03/31/1998
* USD 1,580,040.00

9355806 Schlenker The goal of the proposed project is to establish a community
of scientists, teachers and learners who are investigating real world problems
in science using a variety of innovative tools. These tools will include
computational tools which will allow participants to model scientific processes
as well as communication tools which will allow participants at multiple
locations to work together, to share information, and to retrieve information
from remote sources. Implementation of the 'virtual high school' project will
help us determine how peer and mentor support, additional technical advice and
technical resources, and a source of problem-solving activities related to
science and mathematics can help teachers adapt to new technology and methods,
and help to equalize the learning opportunity for all levels of students at
diverse schools. preparing students to "do" science in the real world of the
future means guiding them in "doing" science now. This project entails bringing
to the classroom the same team problem solving, technology rich approaches
currently used in research and business. Computational science has become a
powerful paradigm to complement other approaches. Computational tools, ranging
from spreadsheets on microprocessors to advanced molecular modeling tools on
supercomputers, are allowing scientists to model processes too costly or
impossible to investigate in other ways. This project will support the creation
of the 'virtual high school' in two ways. Interdisciplinary problems requiring
many levels of expertise and solvable with computational techniques across a
communication network will be developed by a team of teachers who are interested
in using these problems in their classroom. Workshop training will enable these
teachers to lead their students and other teachers through the team building and
content learning necessary to create computational models. Secondly, the
computational, communication, and teaming tool s will be evaluated in a testbed
environment involving selected school sites and industry. Use of these tools and
the global Internet will enable schools to leverage the use of 'low end'
microcomputers currently available in schools to achieve access to databases and
more powerful high performance computers. As the project matures, the schools in
Maryland will be linked together solving 'realworld' problems. Students from
different age groups, with varying mathematical and scientific backgrounds, with
all levels to computer expertise, and from schools geographically distant from
one another will collaborate on problems of common interest. Students will no
longer wonder why they are learning disjointed facts nor will they wait
impatiently to see the uses of their high school education. Instead, they will
be motivated to learn because they are solving 'real' problems now. ***