* 9355032
* Environmental Regulation of Biodiversity: An Integrated     Multilevel Training Program
* EHR,DGE
* 07/15/1994,09/30/1999
* Mathew Leibold, University of Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Paul Jennings
* 09/30/1999
* USD 587,500.00

A pressing crisis in environmental biology today is that the accelerating loss
of biodiversity, globally and nationally, has outrun our fundamental knowledge
of its causes and consequences. We are little able to predict or manage the
future of most ecosystems and populations largely because our understanding of
the complex environmental processes that generate and govern biodiversity is
grossly incomplete and depends on a number of interacting taxonomic, temporal,
and spatial scales. We focus our proposal for graduate training in environmental
regulation of biodiversity on three major components of biodiversity: genetic
diversity, species diversity, and habitat diversity. The University of Chicago's
CEB provides and integrated, interdisciplinary PhD training program with
participation arising from every Division of the University and three major non-
academic Chicago research and educational institutions, the Field Museum,
Brookfield Zoo, and Argonne National Laboratories. The environmental
biodiversity training program will capitalize on our quantitative, empirical and
theoretical strengths in ecology, biogeography, systematics, genetics,
paleontology, behavior, and function. It will produce the next generation of
leaders who can address the complexity and intrinsically interdisciplinary
problems in this priority area. The CEB's deep-seated commitment to increasing
recruitment and maintaining participation of underrepresented populations into
environmental biology is represented by a range of innovative initiatives that
utilize our unique structure and are based on personal, individualized efforts.