* 9355559
* Chemistry and Physics Fundamentals for Middle School        Minority Teachers or Teachers of Minority Students
* EHR,DRL
* 01/01/1995,06/30/1997
* Susan Arena, Mount San Antonio College
* Standard Grant
* Debbie Jones
* 06/30/1997
* USD 446,015.00

Abstract 9355559 Arena Chemistry and Physics Fundamentals for Middle School
Minority Teachers or Teachers of Minority Students This two year project for 40
teachers of minorities in grades 6-9 will provide two three week workshops over
two years to cover the fundamentals of chemistry and physics. The project begins
in 1995. It would also provide for 5 Saturday topical conferences in each of the
two academic years. During the workshops the teachers will: improve their
conceptual knowledge of their chemistry and physics; learn how to integrate
appropriate topics in chemistry and physics with the other sciences and
mathematics and with science and technology issues; become more proficient in
the development and presentation of classroom activities for science
instruction; develop new teaching materials and strategies for teaching the
physical sciences in middle schools; become more familiar with the vast array of
source materials available for teachers of middle school physical science;
Additional goals of the workshops are to: develop networks of middle school and
high school teachers within the Southern California region to provide on-going
mutual support and assistance; encourage teachers to pursue outreach activities
to the community and to furnish them with the science demonstrations and
supplies necessary to perform these activities. The teachers will also have an
opportunity to practice newly acquired teaching strategies and demonstrations
with the middle school students in an associated Chemistry/Physics Camp. The
cost share of the project is 5% of the face value of Foundation support.