* 9355753
* Integrated Environmental Science and Technology Education   for Middle Grade Teachers
* EHR,DRL
* 06/01/1994,05/31/1998
* Jerry Bell, American Association for the Advancement of Science
* Continuing Grant
* Wayne Sukow
* 05/31/1998
* USD 1,145,143.00

9355753 Bell This teacher enhancement project is a collaborative effort between
the American Association for the Advancement of Science (AAS) and George Mason
University (GMU). It is a four year program to prepare 40-middle school teachers
in 3 and 4 member teams to implement "integrated environmental science and
technology education into their science curriculum. Each team participates in a
two-year program; teams include a science teacher, a computer science or
mathematics teacher and a technology education teacher from the same school;
teams come from DC, MD, PA, VA and WV. Two sets of teacher teams will
participate. During the program, each teacher team will: (1) increase their
knowledge of environmental science, mathematics, computer technologies and
technology education, as well as pedagogical content; (2) adapt and develop
units of study that link science content with appropriate teaching and
assessment strategies; and (34) disseminate to other teachers the process for
developing an integrated curriculum and team approach to teaching. At GMU
teachers will work in small groups to solve problems related to
scientist/engineer partners and school administrators. The comprehensive project
evaluation is designed to determine (1) how successful (in terms of student
outcomes) are the teachers and units they adapted/developed, (2) how well the
team concept transfers, and (3) how successful (in terms of student outcomes)
are the teachers trained through the dissemination workshops with units
developed by others.