* 9355522
* Century of Discovery
* EHR,DRL
* 06/01/1994,07/31/1998
* Tom Friedman, WGBH Educational Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Hyman H. Field
* 07/31/1998
* USD 3,705,700.00

Proposal No. ESIE 93-55522 Proposal Name: CENTURY OF DISCOVERY PI: Paula Apsell
Total NSF Award: $3,695,700 Anticipated Completion Date: Fall 1998 ABSTRACT:
WGBH will develop, produce, and distribute a comprehensive project that will
review science of the twentieth century. The major components of the project
will be a series of five, two-hour, prime time documentary programs for PBS, an
outreach campaign to involve the public through informal and formal science
education institutions and organizations, material for use in formal classrooms,
and a science museum component. The focus of the series will be to review the
science of the twentieth century by telling the dramatic story of the struggle
to understand ourselves and our world over the past 100 years -- a time when
science advanced further than in previous eras combined and when scientific
discipline underwent a revolution. However, because at the close of the century
there is an ever-widening gap between what scientists know and what most of the
public comprehends, the series will explore the century's most enduring
scientific endeavors with each two-hour program probing several related fields
of investigation and application: views of the universe and of matter; origins
of the Earth and of life; health, medicine, and the human body; human nature and
behavior; and technology and engineering. It will offer viewers an opportunity
to view 100 years of scientific pursuits as a whole, to recast their perceptions
of science and scientists, and to be intrigued and inspired by a view of science
as a never-ending and deeply human quest for answers and solutions. The outreach
component of the project include: o Video-based Components - videocassettes of
the series, video modules selected for classroom use, level one videodiscs, and
a prototype for a CD-ROM for home learning. A Discovery Challenge Activity - a
national campaign targeted primarily for girls and boys 11-14 years of age. The
two-phase activities will be offered through middle school science and social
studies classes; through youth groups such as Girls Inc., Family Science
Programs, 4-H, and Girls and Boys Clubs; at museums and science centers; and
through other informal education outlets. Activities will be designed so they
can be undertaken by youth with a wide range of interests, learning styles, and
skills. Print Components - teacher's guide, video module activity guide,
videodisc guide, poster, and a companion trade book. On-line Component - an
electronic bulletin board and e-mail center related to the project. Public
access sites will be established in libraries, community centers, and schools
throughout the country and members of the public with home computers will be
able to connect to WGBH at no cost. Service and activities offered on-line will
include the ability of viewers to critique programs, ask questions of the
production team, download educational materials, and ordering project material.
The bulletin board will provide an electronic forum for educators to exchange
strategies and ideas as they use the project's resources and enable participants
in the Discovery Challenge to tap into the on-line resources and share
information. The on-line component will be managed and controlled at WGBH.
Museum Component - consisting of a museum tool kit and activities to be
incorporated Science-by-Mail. Paula Apsell, executive producer for NOVA and
director of the WGBH Science Unit, will serve as executive-in-charge of
production. Jon Palfreman will be executive producer and will head up a project
team consisting of the executive editor, Thomas Friedman, a senior producer, and
two producers. Outreach activities will be the responsibility of Beth Kirsch,
Director of Educational Print and Outreach, and Simone Bloom, Outreach Manager.