* 9357757
* NYI:  Physical-Based Computer Vision:  Polarization Vision, Reflectance Modeling and 3-D Vision
* CSE,IIS
* 07/15/1993,06/30/2000
* Lawrence Wolff, Johns Hopkins University
* Continuing grant
* Jing Xiao
* 06/30/2000
* USD 312,500.00

Much of this research continues the development of the fundamentals of
Polarization Vision for image understanding which the principal investigator
initiated as a doctoral student. This research also continues the development of
Polarization Cameras which are a new class of sensors that automatically sense
polarization and compute either a visualization of polarization information, or,
properties of a scene that are physically related to polarization. The
additional physical dimensions of polarization of light beyond that of
intensity, carry extra information from a scene that can provide a richer set of
descriptive physical constraints for the understanding of images. Past work by
the principal investigator has revealed Polarization Vision techniques that can
be used to perform dielectric/metal material identification, specular and
diffuse reflection component separation and analysis, as well as complex image
segmentations that would be immensely more complicated or even infeasible using
intensity and color information alone. A new intensity diffuse reflectance model
has been formally developed for smooth dielectric surfaces that generalizes
Lambert's Law. Implications of this more accurate diffuse reflectance model are
being studied for 3-D shape recovery from reflectance in computer vision. New
techniques are being developed for 3-D shape recovery from binocular stereo
using correspondence of photometric values.