* 9357986
* NSF Young Investigator Award
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/1993,02/29/1996
* Marisa Carrasco, Wesleyan University
* Continuing grant
* Bonney Sheahan
* 02/29/1996
* USD 55,503.00

9357986 CARRASCO-QUEIJEIRO This award provides support to Dr. Marisa Carrasco-
Queijeiro under the National Science Foundation's Young Investigator Awards
program. The objective of this program is to recognize outstanding young faculty
in science and engineering, to enhance the academic career of recent PhD
recipients by providing flexible support for research and educational
activities, and to foster contact and cooperation between academia, industry,
and institutions that support research and education. Dr. Swain has already made
significant research contributions to the field of perceptual/cognitive
psychology, and she has the potential to become a leader in academic research
and education. This award will allow the investigator to pursue her research
interests in the area of visual perception. Visual perception is thought of as a
process involving analysis and synthesis. The brain analyzes visual stimuli into
discrete components, which are later synthesized into the perceptual wholes we
apprehend. Dr. Carrasco-Queijeiro's research is in the area of "Visual Search",
which seeks to characterize the basic features of analysis and to trace the
steps of the subsequent synthesis. She will conduct a series of psychophysical
experiments in which the physical properties of the stimuli and the experimental
tasks will be manipulated, so as to allow her to compare and contrast current
cognitive models of visual search, and to develop an alternative model which
would better take into account the biological constraints of the visual system.
Through this approach, she will be able to understand whether (or how) the early
stages of coding of visual processing interact with attentional processes. The
goal of the research is to contribute to our understanding of the relationship
between the psychological and physiological phenomena involved in some basic
processes of visual perception, and the impact of this understanding on models
of visual attention. This approach promises to integrate central facts about the
integration of the nervous system with behavioral and cognitive properties of
visual search. ***