* 9357740
* NYI:  New Approaches to Engineering Design:  Controlled     Chaos and Computer Automation
* CSE,CCF
* 08/01/1993,01/31/1999
* Elizabeth Bradley, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* S. Kamal Abdali
* 01/31/1999
* USD 290,931.00

This project explores two new approaches to engineering design. Each of these
threads is composed of synergistic subprojects; these subprojects combine
analytical mathematics, numerical simulation, symbolic reasoning, and physical
experiments. The first approach is to actively use chaos to improve the designs
of various engineering systems. One example of this is causing gases to burn
more effectively by induction of chaotic mixing in a combustion chamber. A
small, well-placed obstruction can interact with the inflow and with the
chamber's geometry to cause large effects: chaos's symptomatic ``sensitive
dependence on initial conditions.'' These effects are tested both experimentally
and with computational fluid dynamic simulations. Another example is the use of
chaos to broaden the capture range of a phase-locked loop circuit. The second
approach to improving engineering design is through computer automation. The
ultimate goal of this endeavor is a suite of programs that explores different
high-level analysis and design paradigms. Such tools would not only streamline
an engineer's problem-solving task, but actually amplify creativity. The first
step is a program that autonomously constructs mathematical models from
information about a system, presented in a variety of forms and formats:
measurements made directly on the physical device; a user's observations
described to the program in varying degrees of precision, symbolically or
graphically; partial models and hypotheses suggested by a user; and general
mathematical theory that is encoded in the program's knowledge base.