* 9357117
* NSF Young Investigator: Mechanism of RNA Folding by         Disulfide Bond Trapping of Folding Intermediates
* MPS,CHE
* 07/15/1993,06/30/1999
* Gary Glick, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Tyrone Mitchell
* 06/30/1999
* USD 312,500.00

The process by which RNA folds into a three-dimensional structure will be probed
by the use of oligoribonucleotides containing alkyl thiol tethers. These tethers
will be used to form disulfide cross-links, which allow mapping of the folding
pathways of these macromolecules. These studies will define the general
principles that govern ribonucleotide folding. In the course of this research,
the following topics will be addressed: (1) The design and synthesis of unique
RNA nucleosides that possess thiol tethers; (2) Incorporation of thiol-modified
nucleosides into oligoribonucleotides by synthesizing several key RNA structural
units; and (3) Mapping of the folding pathway of tRNA-Phe through disulfide bond
trapping of folding intermediates. %%% This grant from the Organic Dynamics
Program supports the work of Professor Gary D. Glick of the University of
Michigan. Functions of the important biomolecule RNA are mediated by the manner
in which it is folded. This research will seek to define the principles that
guide RNA folding and thereby will aid in predicting structure of this
macromolecule and its function from the sequence of bases in RNA. The pathways
of folding will be mapped by the use of derivatives of RNA whereby sulfur-sulfur
bonds can be formed as markers. The research will be involve the synthesis of
these RNA derivatives and the determination of the structures of intermediates
in the folding process.