* 9357099
* NSF Young Investigator: Coordination Chemistry of           Redox-Active Tetradentate Hemilabile Ligands
* MPS,CHE
* 07/15/1993,06/30/1998
* Chad Mirkin, Northwestern University
* Continuing Grant
* Re-Entered for CGI Processing
* 06/30/1998
* USD 362,500.00

Proposal: 9357099 PI: Mirkin Coordination chemistry will be the subject of
investigation for Professor Mirkin of Northwestern University; he will conduct
this research with support in the form of an NSF Young Investigator Award from
the Inorganic, Bioinorganic, and Organometallic Chemistry Program. One area of
his research will be in the synthesis and properties of "hemilabile" complexes.
These are complexes of ligands that bear a redox-active site, are tetradentate
in the reduced state and bidentate in the oxidized state. When the central metal
ion is Rh(I) it is thus expected to be inert when the ligand is in the reduced
state, but when in the oxidized state it should be an effective catalyst for
olefin hydrogenation. This scheme provides an entree into redox-switchable
catalysis. Another area of research deals with self- assembled monolayers
(SAMS). Specific plans include using derivatized metalloporphyrazines as the
surface layer, and, in particular, where the ligand design leads to the plane of
the ligand being perpendicular to the surface; this will lead to a parallel
orientation of the ligand planes, which is expected to confer unusual
electrocatalytic properties on these SAMS. %%% The nascent concept of "molcular
devices" poses many opportunities in chemistry. One approach is based on
traditional coordination chemistry, where a metal ion is bound to another
molecule (called a ligand) at several sites. An interesting development is to
build into the ligand the ability to donate an electron, for when this is done
the binding of the ligand to the metal ion can change radically. This change can
make the difference between a metal ion that is catalytic and one that is not,
and thus one has the elements of a method to switch catalytic activity one and
off. Another development is to design ligands that will cause themselves to
adsorb to a surface to form a highly oriented monolayer. If the surface is an
electrode, then such a monolayer could c onfer unique reactivity to the
electrode. Experiments to test and develop these ideas form the core of the
research to be conducted in this project.