* 9357637
* NSF Young Investigator
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/1993,01/31/2000
* Thomas Kepler, North Carolina State University
* Continuing Grant
* Barbara K. Zain
* 01/31/2000
* USD 200,000.00

9357637 Kepler This is a National Science Foundation Young Investigator Award.
The awardee is using a mathematical modeling approach to the problem of how
immunoglobulin-producing lymphocytes (B-cells) develop in lymphatic tissue.
Specifically, he will elucidate the process of somatic hypermutation within
germinal centers by mathematical modeling studies. He will address mathematical
problems arising in stochastic population dynamic models with many species
interacting through competition for resources and random mutation, in which very
small and very large populations coexist and which possess a non-trivial spatial
structure. %%% One of the primary ways the vertebrate immune system defends
against pathogens is by producing immunoglobulins (antibodies) (Ig) that bind
specifically to molecular epitopes on the pathogen, thus marking it for
destruction by the effector mechanisms of the immune system. The system has no
prior knowledge of the foreign epitopes it will encounter, so it must have an
efficient scheme for generating sufficient diversity to cover the space of all
potential invaders. That scheme is now in part understood. Each Ig- producing
B-cells assembles its Ig-encoding genes more or less randomly, with the
resulting gene product (Ig) borne as a receptor on its membrane. Upon meeting a
complementary antigen, the B-cell is stimulated to divide rapidly and
differentiate into Ig-secreting cells. In warm-blooded animals, the immune
system further sharpens its initial response through affinity maturation, during
which a mutagenic process within the responding B cell populations is activated
and targeted specifically at the Ig genes. Competition for antigenic stimulation
provides selective pressure, and the average affinity of the responding
population increases, often by two or more orders of magnitude. The immune
system retains a memory of its encounter through progeny "memory" B-cells, so
subsequent challenges by the same antigen are met with a faster and stronger
response than initially. This is the basis for immunization. These events
(somatic hypermutation and development of memory B cells) occur physically
within histologically defined structures called germinal centers (GC) which form
in the peripheral lymphoid tissue after antigenic challenge. The goal of this
research is to employ mathematical modeling and computer simulation to examine
the process. The GC reaction is not only critical to the functioning of the
immune system, but is itself a beautifully self-contained model of Darwinian
evolution in miniature (and in vivo). The relevant genomes are small and the
"fitness function" is measurable in a manifestly non-circular way. A thorough
quantitative understanding of the GC reaction will thus provide insight into
matters fundamental to general biology as well as to immunology per se. ***