* 9357373
* NSF Young Investigator
* BIO,MCB
* 08/15/1993,07/31/1999
* Patricia Kiley, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Hector E. Flores
* 07/31/1999
* USD 298,944.00

9357373 Kiley More than a century ago, Pasteur observed the profound effects of
oxygen on cell metabolism. It is now known that oxygen has two major effects.
First, excess oxygen can create reactive compounds that damage key molecules in
cells, and secondly, too little oxygen may deplete energy resources vital for
cell function. Although oxygen is known to play a pivotal role in cell
physiology, little is known about the molecular mechanism(s) used by cells to
sense and respond to changes in environmental oxygen concentrations. To begin to
understand how this occurs, I will attempt to determine how the Escherichia coli
transcription factor Fnr is activated by oxygen deprivation. The increase in Fnr
activity under anaerobic conditions is critical for E. coli survival, since Fnr
allows cells to adapt to anoxia by altering expression of genes involved in
energy metabolism. Since Fnr levels are not oxygen regulated, a key problem is
to identify the factor(s) which modulate its activity. Knowledge of such a
factor(s) should ultimately allow dissection of the pathway for cellular oxygen
sensing. In the present research program biochemical, genetic and physiological
approaches will be used to learn how Fnr activity is regulated. Specifically, we
wish to define the steps in Fnr activation, so that we may define how oxygen
deprivation effects Fnr's conformational and oligomeric state(s), and then
identify factors that regulate Fnr activity to gain insight into the pathway of
cellular oxygen sensing. %%% Many cells require oxygen to grow and to
metabolism. However, too much oxygen can kill cells, and too little oxygen can
stop their growth. As a result, for a cell to survive and grow efficiently,
there must be mechanisms which allow it to recognize oxygen and protect itself
against changing concentrations of the gas in its environment. Escherichia coli,
a bacterium, has a factor called Fnr, which may be involved in this detection
system. This factor is formed in cells when too little oxygen is available to
support cell growth. In the absence of oxygen, the factor appears to protect the
cell by stopping the formation of certain enzymes ordinarily needed to form
energy in air. The effect saves cell energy until oxygen again is available and
growth resumes. Experiments in biochemistry, genetics and physiology will be
performed to determine how oxygen influences the structure of Fnr and what other
factor(s) might be involved in regulating its formation. ***