* 9357302
* NSF Young Investigator
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/1993,06/30/1999
* Richard Hallberg, Syracuse University
* Continuing Grant
* Zoe Eppley
* 06/30/1999
* USD 259,155.00

9357302 Coleman Atmospheric concentrations of carbon dioxide and other
greenhouse gases continue to rise. This may lead to increases in the mean global
temperature as well as in yearly, and even daily, variations in temperature. One
consequence of increasing variation in temperatures is that plants may be
exposed to sudden and severe increases of temperature (i.e., heat shocks) at a
greater frequency than they are now. The ability of plants to withstand these
hyperthermic episodes is most likely related, at least in part, to their
capacity for elevating levels of certain heat shock proteins (hsps). A great
deal of information regarding the molecular biology of these proteins in plants
exists. Yet, little is known regarding how the physiological state of the cell
or whole-plant prior to the imposition of heat stress affects the synthesis and
accumulation of hsps or the ability of plants to survive heat stress. This NSF
Young Investigator Award supports research using several genotypes of eastern
cottonwood (Populus deltoides) in environments with different availabilities of
carbon, light and nitrogen resulting in plants with different physiological
states. These plants will then be exposed to acute increases in temperature, to
chronic sub-lethal temperature stress, or to control conditions to answer the
following questions. (1) How does the physiological state of the plant affects
the kinetics and extent of accumulation of specific stress proteins in response
to a single acute heat shock, as well as a prolonged high- temperature event and
the recovery rate of normal protein synthesis? (2) How are patterns of heat
shock protein synthesis and accumulation in leaves correlated to the functioning
of the photosynthetic apparatus during and after acute and chronic heat stress?
(3) Does the synthesis of stress proteins occur in lieu of the production or
activation of photosynthetic enzymes? (4) Are any tradeoffs exacerbated when
nitrogen is limiting? (5) Is there a correlation between the dynamics of stress
protein production at the cellular level and whole-plant performance? (6) How
are these relationships affected by plant development stage or plant genotype?
The results of this work are important for a number of reasons. First, global
climate models predict that the future atmosphere will have extremely high
concentrations of carbon dioxide, and that the accumulation of carbon dioxide,
as well as other factors, may result in temperature patterns that are subject to
extreme fluctuations. Furthermore, increasing levels of carbon dioxide, in and
of itself, will have substantial effects on the physiological status of plants.
Understanding how the stress response of plants might be altered in a high-
carbon dioxide world would therefore be an important step towards understanding
how plants in both agricultural and natural settings will respond to the
predicted changes in the global climate. Second, the role of stress proteins in
the acquisition of stress tolerance is in the midst of an intense debate.
Understanding the role that plant physiological status plays in governing the
heat shock response may provide essential links to understanding when and if
stress proteins function in promoting stress tolerance in plant tissues. ***