* 9357936
* NSF Young Investigator
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/1995,06/30/2000
* Jonathan Caulkins, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Continuing Grant
* Ann H. Bostrom
* 06/30/2000
* USD 112,447.00

This award provides support to Dr. Caulkins under the National Science
Foundation's Young Investigator Awards program. The objective of this program is
to recognize outstanding young faculty in science and engineering, to enhance
the academic career of recent PhD recipients by providing flexible support for
research and educational activities, and to foster contact and cooperation
between academia, industry, and institutions that support research and
education. Dr. Caulkins has already made significant research contributions to
the field of operations research, and he has the potential to become a leader in
academic research and education. This award will allow the investigator to build
on his existing research and to provide an intellectual basis for policies that
respond to the problems associated with the consumption, distribution, and
prohibition of illicit drugs. During the tenure of his award Dr. Caulkins will
(1) use price data as a window on market behavior and will compare arrest and
seizure records with local price series data to see if enforcement can create
`spot shortages` and, if so, how long they last; (2) study the relationship
between wholesale and retail prices to estimate the effect of regional
enforcement on prices; (3) study wholesale prices in different locations to
better understand transaction/transportation costs, arbitrage efficiency, and
the spatial character of drug markets; and (4) study how to divide resources
between various programs such as interdiction, domestic enforcement, treatment,
and prevention. Illicit drugs are consumer goods, and the more that is
understood about the markets for these goods, the easier it will be to design
policies that mitigate the costs associated with those markets and, thus, to
design interventions.