* 9357793
* NSF Young Investigator:  Understanding Basic Issues in      Machine Learning, On-line Planning, and Approximate         Algorithms
* CSE,CCF
* 08/15/1993,01/31/1999
* Avrim Blum, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Continuing Grant
* Yechezkel Zalcstein
* 01/31/1999
* USD 177,500.00

This research investigates application of theoretical tools to analyze
fundamental issues in machine learning, in planning from incomplete information,
and in approximation algorithms. In the area of machine learning, one direction
is to provide new algorithmic techniques for fast learning when there is much
information available about objects but only a small amount is truly relevant.
These techniques are potentially useful both for speeding up learning and for
automating the process of selecting what information is given to a learning
algorithm. Also new algorithms for learning using neural networks are
investigated, especially in the difficult case of high dimensional input spaces.
Other fundamental research issues examined include relationships between
learning and cryptography, and various ways a learner can usefully employ more
active approaches. In the domain of on-line planning past work has been on
strategies for traveling without a map in scenes with simple types of obstacles,
whose performance can be guaranteed to be not too much worse than the best
possible, if one had a map of the region. This is expanded to more varied
situations, including those where some kinds of partial maps are available. One
interesting case is where partial maps are created by previous explorations.
Here one can combine ideas of on-line planning and learning.