* 9357274
* NSF Young Investigator
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/1993,07/31/1998
* Todd Dawson, Cornell University
* Continuing Grant
* Zoe Eppley
* 07/31/1998
* USD 312,500.00

9357274 Dawson Forests cover 37% of all terrestrial surfaces. The trees that
compose these forests are a primary route by which water re-enters the
hydrologic cycle. The objectives of this NSF Young Investigator (NYI) Award are
to understand and evaluate the importance that trees and forests play in local
and regional hydroglogic processes. This will be accomplished through an
investigation that has four specific goals: (1) describe the water balance of
isolated trees and of forests stands using O and H stable isotope methods, eddy
correlation and aerodynamic-energy balance techniques, and the Bowen-ratio
method, (2) characterize the degree to which trees control movement and loss of
water from forest stands with leaf-, canopy- and stand-level transpiration
estimates and isotope techniques, (3) investigate how water uptake, movement and
loss respond (adjust) to experimental manipulation mimicking climate change
(e.g. irrigating trees, preventing transpiration), and (4) integrate the
information gathered from the observational/descriptive studies (objectives 1
and 2), the experimental studies (objective 3), and from both individuals and
entire stands into a comprehensive picture of the role that trees and forests
play in global water movement. Because the overall objective is to refine our
understanding of the importance and role that trees and forests play in the
hydrologic cycle, it is necessary to use a variety of research methods. The
combination of methods chosen will provide a means to validate information,
integrate different levels, and calibrate predictions. The stable isotope and
eddy correlation methods are the most powerful. An analysis of the stable
isotopic composition of water samples obtained from source water, plant xylem-
sap, and atmospheric water vapor has been successfully used to evaluate water
flux through the soil-plant-atmospheric continuum. The eddy correlation
technique is a powerful way to quantify water movement through pla nt canopies
and stands. Aerodynamic-energy balance methods of water flux based on the
Penman-Monteith equation, and the Bowen-ratio method (sensible/latent heat flux)
can provide ways to independently check the isotope and eddy correlation
results. The information obtained from these studies will help us understand the
impacts that climate and climate change may have on the functional and
structural characteristics of forested regions of the world, refine our
empirical understanding of the role that vegetated surfaces play in the
hydrologic cycle and local and regional water balance, and to forge a much-
needed link between atmospheric and plant biological research. ***