* 9357033
* NSF Young Investigator
* BIO,MCB
* 07/15/1993,12/31/1999
* Mark Winey, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* Eve Ida Barak
* 12/31/1999
* USD 312,500.00

This is a National Science Foundation Young Investigator Award. The awardee is
using a combined genetic, biochemical, and cell biological approach to
understand how centrosomes (spindle pole bodies) replicate in cells, using as a
model cell the yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae. %%% The centrosome is a
subcellular organelle made up of a highly organized set of microtubules. It
serves as a microtubule organizing center for the cell, and is critical to the
process of mitosis. During cell division, the genetic information of the cell,
contained in the chromosomes, is apportioned equally between the two daughter
cells by means of microtubules arrayed in a structure called the mitotic
spindle. During the mitotic process, chromosomes are dragged from the center of
the spindle to either of the two poles at opposite ends of the spindle, such
that by the end of the process each pole contains the appropriate chromosomes
for each daughter cell and the separation is complete. This process is
controlled by the centrosomes, one of which sits at each pole of the spindle. At
the end of cell division, each daughter cell receives the chromosomes and
centrosome from one of the spindle poles. Thus, the centrosome must replicate
before another round of cell division can be completed. This project will use
modern molecular and cellular biology approaches, including the use of yeast
mutants defective in centrosome replication, to understand how centrosomes
replicate and function.