* 9357781
* NSF Young Investigator:  A Tool for the Improvement of      Uniprocessor Performance
* CSE,CCF
* 08/01/1993,07/31/2000
* Valerie Taylor, Northwestern University
* Continuing Grant
* None
* 07/31/2000
* USD 322,500.00

The goal of this research is to investigate and develop techniques needed to
produce a tool that allows the applications programmer and computer designer to
work to increase uniprocessor performance. Computational units, such as the
floating-point units, are becoming faster and readily available because of the
rapid advances in technology and computer-aided design (CAD) tools. The
performance, however, is limited by the rate at which data is applied to the
units. To achieve good uniprocessor performance, the computational units,
memory, and memory ports must be efficiently utilized. This may require that the
applications programmer redesign the algorithms to better exploit the unique
features of the architecture or the computer designer utilize CAD tools to
design special-purpose processors that exploit the unique features of the
algorithms or for best results, both. This research investigates and develops:
(1) techniques for extracting statistics on the utilization of the
aforementioned processor resources, and (2) methods for displaying the
performance statistics to benefit both the applications programmer and the
computer designer. The results of this research permit the applications
programmer and computer designer to interact closely to address the problem of
efficiently solving challenging problems such as climate modeling, vehicle
dynamics, semiconductor modeling, and quantum chromodynamics, which are beyond
the scope of existing computers.