* 9357707
* NSF Young Investigator:  New Directions in Computational    Learning Theory
* CSE,CCF
* 07/15/1993,12/31/1999
* Sally Goldman, Washington University
* Continuing grant
* Yechezkel Zalcstein
* 12/31/1999
* USD 262,500.00

Building machines that learn from experience is an important research goal of
artificial intelligence. Recently, considerable research attention has been
devoted to the theoretical study of machine learning. This project focuses on
several new directions designed to enhance the current learning models to more
accurately model real-life learning situations. Most work in the area of concept
learning assumes there is a well-defined border that divides all objects into
those that are instances of the concept and those that are not. In reality,
though, categorization of objects is often not so clear cut: an algorithm
designed to read handwritten cheques will likely encounter many handwritten
characters that look somewhat like a `4,` and somewhat like a `9.` In these
situations, one possible goal for the learner is to determine which objects are
unclassifiable (i.e., the classification is not clear cut) as well as
determining the classifications of objects which are classifiable. Another
possibility is to require only that the learner determine a categorization so
that no object is incorrectly categorized. Thus, for this second goal, the
learner can arbitrarily categorize those objects that can go either way. This
project defines and studies learning models for both possibilities. Also this
project continues the PI's work initiated on developing and studying formal
models of teaching to understand how a teacher with knowledge of the target
concept and the learner can reduce the training time needed by the learner. As
well as being of theoretical interest, there are potential applications of the
research to improving automated manufacturing environments.