* 9357983
* NSF Young Investigator Award
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/1993,02/28/2001
* Reiko Mazuka, Duke University
* Continuing Grant
* Bonney Sheahan
* 02/28/2001
* USD 192,797.00

9357983 MAZUKA This award provides support to Dr. Reiko Mazuka under the
National Science Foundation's Young Investigator Awards program. The objective
of this program is to recognize outstanding young faculty in science and
engineering, to enhance the academic career of recent PhD recipients by
providing flexible support for research and educational activities, and to
foster contact and cooperation between academia, industry, and institutions that
support research and education. Dr. Mazuka has already made significant research
contributions to the field of psycholinguistics, and she has the potential to
become a leader in academic research and education. Over the last few years, Dr.
Mazuka's cross-linguistic investigation of natural language processing has led
to the conclusion that there are significant differences between the ways
Japanese- and English-speaking children process language. This conclusion has
critically challenged the hypothesis that mechanisms of natural language
processing are universal. This award will allow the investigator to pursue her
research interests in cross- linguistic comparisons of native Japanese and
native English speakers. Dr. Mazuka will examine how Japanese speakers manage a
high degree of indeterminacy early in a sentence, through a series of
psycholinguistic experiments using methods of eye movement monitoring, self-
paced reading, and on-line grammaticality judgments. Since the analysis of
temporal ambiguity has critically shaped research in language processing, she
will pay particular attention to the fact that English is a Right-Branching,
Head- Initial language and Japanese is a Left-Branching, Head-Final language.
The first year of the project will be conducted in Japan at the University of
Tokyo and NTT Basic Research Labs. This research holds promise of forming a new
interdisciplinary research paradigm in the theory of language-cognition
relations and first language acquisition. In addition, the results of t he
research will provide critical psycholinguistic data on Japanese sentence
processing. ***