* 9357328
* NSF Young Investigator
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/1993,01/31/1999
* Cory Abate, Rutgers, The State University of New Jersey-RBHS-Robert Wood
* Continuing Grant
* Paul B. Farel
* 01/31/1999
* USD 312,500.00

9357328 Abate This NSF Young Investigator (NYI) Award investigates the
molecular mechanisms that control gene expression in the developing murine
embryo using the hox gene family as a model system. The hox genes are expressed
in overlapping spatial and temporal patterns throughout murine embryogenesis and
play a fundamental role in controlling developmental processes. These encode
putative transcriptional regulators; however, their function as such has not
been well characterized. In particular, target genes that are regulated by Hox
proteins during embryogenesis have not been identified. Moreover, it is not well
understood how these related polypeptides, which share similar binding
specificities in vitro, interact selectively with DNA regulatory elements in the
control regions of target genes. The focus of my research is to identify such
target genes and, in the course of this analysis, to investigate the molecular
processes that promote target gene selection. The specific plan is to isolate
genomic DNA fragments that contain binding sites for the Hox proteins and are
potential regulatory sites in vivo. These studies will provide fundamental
information concerning the function of these transcriptional regulatory
proteins, as well as general insight into the mechanisms that control gene
expression during embryogenesis. The goal of this research is to understand the
processes that are required to direct the development of the mammalian nervous
system. The assemblage of a system as complex as the nervous system requires
many signals that are active in prcisely the right cell populations and at
precisely the right times during development. A family of proteins, termed the
Hox family, directs the appropriate expression of these signals (or genes)
during development. These proteins are essential for normal development and any
loss of function of these results in gross developmental abnormalities. Hox
proteins function by interacting with DNA regul atory elements within the genes
and thereby activating (or repressing) the expression of these genes. These
studies will provide a basis for understanding how appropriate gene expression
contributes to the development of the mammalian nervous system. ***