* 9357685
* NYI: Designing Multimedia Services in Future Integrated     Networking
* CSE,CNS
* 07/15/1993,06/30/2002
* Venkat Rangan, University of California-San Diego
* Continuing Grant
* Darleen Fisher
* 06/30/2002
* USD 312,500.00

9357685 Rangan Technological advances in hardware are revolutionizing computers
and networks so as to support digital multimedia. By effectively combining the
programmability of computers with the pervasiveness of mass-market information
networks, these advances promise to herald a new epoch in media communication.
In this research, we focus on the following areas arising out of the synergies
between computing and media communication: (1) Multimedia on-demand information
servers that can support a wide variety of services, ranging from video on-
demand for home entertainment to distance learning and digital libraries for
education; (2) Media synchronization techniques, communication architectures and
admission control strategies for supporting high-performance multimedia
applications efficiently over future integrated networks; and (3) Emerging
paradigms and software architectures for structured multimedia tele-
collaborations. For designing interactive multimedia on-demand information
services, we are developing a constrained block allocation model that guarantees
continuous media retrieval, and algorithms to service an optimal number of user
simultaneously without violating the real-time retrieval, rates of any of the
users. Multimedia services generally involve playback of multiple media strands
(continuously recorded video frames of audio samples) over high- speed networks
onto user display sites (e.g., HDTVs). We propose to develop adaptive, rate-
based techniques for synchronous playback of multimedia strands at display sites
over networks. In high-performance multimedia applications (e.g., Tele-
orchestra), media data form all the user must be continuously mixed together and
displayed synchronously. We are proposing optimal hierarchical mixing
architectures for supporting scalable tele-collaborations and conferences with
minimum real time end- to-end delays and are developing a Packet train protocol
in which routing nodes themselves of a network can b e used as mixers, thereby
integrating mixing with routing in networks such as the Internet. We expect to
experimentally demonstrate these ideas at the Multimedia Laboratory at UCSD. Our
experience will prove valuable in designing multimedia services for future
integrated networks in this rapidly approaching age of tele-personal
interaction.