* 9358123
* NSF Young Investigator:  Numerical Analysis of Metal        Forming Processes Based on Micromechanics
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/15/1993,12/31/1999
* Antoinette Maniatty, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Continuing grant
* Delcie R. Durham
* 12/31/1999
* USD 322,025.00

9358123 Maniatty The purpose of this research is to develop numerical tools to
analyze common forming process used in manufacturing in order to better predict
material behavior during and subsequent to these operations. Specific processes
of interest include rolling, drawing, and extrusion. In such processes, where
the material undergoes large deformations, the properties of the material change
as the deformation proceeds. For example, polycrystalline metals exhibit both
strain hardening and induced anisotropy as they are deformed. In addition, after
the deformation process is complete, the workpiece still retains residual
stresses. The behavior of metals is determined by microstructural phenomena,
therefore, using micromechanics as a basis can lead to a model which more
accurately characterizes the material behavior. It would be of value to many
industries to be able to predict, via inexpensive numerical simulations, both
the material properties and the residual stresses resulting from a given
deformation process under given conditions, as these characteristics are
directly related to the quality of the product. In the past, these processes
could not be accurately analyzed due to the inherent complexity. Now with the
increasing power and capabilities of computers, numerical analysis of these
process is becoming a reality. Such capabilities would enable a manufacturer to
investigate, at low cost, the effect on the quality of their product of certain
changes in their forming process before actually implementing the changes. In
addition, it could also be used as a tool to aid in the design of new processes.