* 9358516
* NSF Young Investigator
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/1993,02/23/1999
* Cynthia Atman, University of Pittsburgh
* Continuing Grant
* Anthony E. Kelly
* 02/23/1999
* USD 380,927.00

9358516 Atman Engineering education for the beginning student should 1)engage
the student's interest so he/she will stay in engineering and 2)provide the
student with a foundation for learning how to function successfully in a world
of rapid technological change. As a way to meet these challenges, many
engineering schools are changing their curricula to include realistic
engineering problems for students to solve in their freshman year. These can be
semester long engineering design projects or shorter problems that are open-
ended in nature. By giving freshman engineers open-ended problems to solve, we
will provide them with a simulated real world experience, but at this print we
have no research base from which to provide recommendations for the engineering
professors who must guide students through the ambiguity of the engineering
design process. What can we expect a freshman engineer to extract about the
engineering process while solving open-ended problems? Does the student apply
what is learned in one problem to the next problem encountered? The objective of
this work is to document the problem-solving approach novice engineers take when
presented with ambiguous, pen- ended design problems. This will be accomplished
b a series of think-aloud studies that examine various aspects of engineering
students' strategies for solving open-ended problems. These data will answer
questions such as 1)do "good" students and "poor" students differ in their
approach to studying case study material and solving open ended problems? 2)do
approaches to engineering design problems of these two student groups differ
from experienced engineers?, and 3)do engineering students generate self-
explanations as they study case-study material about design problems, and does
this help them improve their performance in design tasks? The answers to these
questions will contribute to a research base from which recommendations will be
developed for teaching strategies to facilitat e learning for engineering
students. ***