* 9358158
* NSF Young Investigator:  Intelligent Decision Aids          for Dynamic Manufacturing Environments
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/15/1993,01/31/2002
* Yuehwern Yih, Purdue Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Janet M. Twomey
* 01/31/2002
* USD 312,449.00

9358158 Yih The goal of this research project is to develop and apply
intelligent decision aids to improve system performance in high variety and low
volume manufacturing environments. Two critical areas to enhance the automation
capability and intelligent decision making in such environments are knowledge
based systems and machine learning. Specifically, this research project is
intended to establish an efficient channel between the knowledge base and the
knowledge source that may include human expert knowledge, simulation results,
solutions from mathematical models, and experimental data. To achieve this goal,
a learning based approach is gather data on the relationship between decisions
and systems behavior, and continuously modify the knowledge with available new
information. There are three phases involved in the planned research: (1)
information selection and representation; (2) rule generation; and (3) learning
algorithms. This research may results in intelligent decision aids that provide
high quality and precise decisions in a timely manner to achieve production
goals in manufacturing systems. This research may be applied to other decision
problems in manufacturing if the parameters defining state conditions can be
digitized, equipment replacement, troubleshooting, maintenance, material
handling equipment dispatching, job assignment, tool management, and facility
design. ***