* 9358163
* NSF Young Investigator:  Toward Neural Network Based        Modeling, Control and Diagnosis of Semiconductor            Manufacturing Processes
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/15/1993,01/31/2000
* Gary May, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Delcie R. Durham
* 01/31/2000
* USD 275,000.00

9358163 May The research involves applying implementation of computer-
integrated manufacturing (IC-CIM) techniques to two critical fabrication
processes used in the production of high performance multichip modules and other
integrated circuits: plasma-enhanced chemical vapor deposition (PECVD) and
reactive ion etching (RIE). These precesses are used in the process sequence to
deposit and etch silicon dioxide dielectric layers. Several aspects of computer-
integrated manufacturing successfully applied to other etching and deposition
processes. For these applications, traditional statistically-based approaches to
process modeling, control and diagnosis represent the predominant methods to
achieve IC-CIM objectives. However, more recent efforts have shown that neural
networks offer great promise in process modeling. In fact, neural process models
have been shown to be both more accurate and more robust than their statistical
counterparts. This is due to the high degree of parallelism and connectivity in
these networks, which crudely mimics the architecture of the human brian. It is
anticipated that the innovative use of neural networks will also have a
significant impact in process monitoring, control, and equipment diagnosis as
well. This program of research will investigate and implement several novel
neural network based approaches to the monitoring, modeling, control, and
diagnosis of RIE and PECVD. These techniques will be applied specifically to a
high performance multichip module program, but the methodology developed will be
generic and readily applicable to other electronics manufacturing processes and
equipment.