* 9360646
* Internally Oxidized Dispersion Strengthened Ag for          High-Temperature Superconductor Composite Wires
* TIP,TI
* 08/01/1994,04/30/1995
* Gilbert Riley, AMERICAN SUPERCONDUCTOR CORPORATION
* Standard Grant
* Darryl G. Gorman
* 04/30/1995
* USD 65,000.00

9360646 Riley The strengthening of High-Temperature Superconductor (HTS)
composite wires using internally oxidized, dispersion strengthened (ODS) silver
is proposed. Current methods manufacture of state-of-the-art HTS composite
wires, that consist of ceramic superconductor filaments encased in a silver (Ag)
sheath, weaken the Ag sheath, resulting in reduced HTS composite strengths. The
low strength of the composite wires are a major obstacle in the development of
HTS wires for applications requiring robust conductors such as power
transmission cables, magnets, and motors. The one method of increasing the
strength of the sheath, while maintaining the chemical compatibility and oxygen
permeability of Ag is ODS. Because the required strengths cannot be obtained
using commercially available ODS-Ag materials and processes, the proposed Phase
I research will be directed towards evaluating novel ODS-Ag materials using
novel processing techniques in the context of HTS composite processing. Process-
property-microstucture relationships for the ODS-Ag materials will thusly be
obtained. Moreover, by using statistically designed experimental techniques, a
quantitative expression of the mechanical properties of the novel ODS-Ag
materials as a function of the process parameters (temperature, oxygen activity,
time and strain) relevant to HTS composite wire fabrication will result. This
evaluation scheme will enable the identification of the optimum ODS-Ag material
(composition and process) for integration with HTS in composite form. ***