* 9360761
* Polishing of Sapphire for Optical Applications
* TIP,TI
* 02/15/1994,10/31/1994
* T. Sudarshan, Materials Modification Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Ritchie B. Coryell
* 10/31/1994
* USD 64,995.00

9360761 Sudarshan Current processes for manufacturing sapphire introduce a
number of defects such as die marks and growth artifacts in the as-grown
sapphire blank. Thus these materials will need to be polished prior to use in
optics. The objective of this Phase I effort is to develop a high quality, high
speed, cost effective technique for polishing sapphire based optics. The two
methods currently used for polishing sapphire are: mechanical and
mechanochemical, both of which involve scraping, grinding and using abrasives
such as diamond or colloidal silica. These methods are expensive because of the
long times required for polishing. Further, due to the application of mechanical
pressure, heat is generated at the polishing interface leaving behind defects
that affect optical performance. Phase I will establish the proof of concept by
using a dual stage non-contact method to remove planar layers of the sapphire
thus achieving surface roughness on the order of angstroms in both flat and
curved blanks. Optical characterization will be performed on the polished
samples and correlated to the processing parameters. In Phase II, we propose
expanding this technique for optical domes. This technique can also be used for
other applications involving optical components such as laser cavity mirrors,
laser beam mirrors, lenses, windows with high optical transmission, components
in floptical disk drives and magnetic disk drives. **