* 9360215
* X-Ray Instrument for Formation Bulk Density                 Determinations in Measurement-While-Drilling Applications
* TIP,TI
* 04/01/1994,03/31/1995
* John Bayless, First Point Scientific, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Michael F. Crowley
* 03/31/1995
* USD 75,000.00

9360215 Bayless The measurement of bulk density as a function of position in
boreholes is of major importance for determining the characteristics of
geological formations. The best approach for measuring bulk density involves the
scattering of high energy photons in the formation by Compton processes.
However, only radioactive gamma ray sources are currently available for use in
both measurement while drilling (MWD) and wireline density instruments. These
involve substantial concerns with safety and environmental contamination. We
propose to perform the research necessary to develop an x ray source, termed the
Double ended X ray Tube (DXT), for MWD applications. This novel, compact source
is expected to offer absolute safety and improved measurement accuracy in the
highly stressing MWD environment. The overall objective of Phase I is to
demonstrate the technical feasibility of the DXT concept. This will be
accomplished by performing three tasks: (1) design and assemble a DXT experiment
for operation at high voltage; (2) perform tests to evaluate and demonstrate the
DXT operating characteristics with the goal and (3) develop the conceptual
design for a low cost DXT system for MWD applications. A leading MWD logging
company will participate in Task 3 and provide an overall technical review of
the project. If successful, the Phase I results will form a firm foundation for
the development and demonstration of a laboratory prototype DXT system in Phase
II.