* 9360161
* Separation of Fine Particles from Gas Streams by            Condensational Growth
* TIP,TI
* 04/15/1994,12/31/1994
* Jinjun Sun, MSP Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Kesh S. Narayanan
* 12/31/1994
* USD 63,669.00

9360161 Sun A number of industrial processes, including incinerators and
metallurgical processes, typically emit large numbers of fine particles.
Measurements at an operating sewage sludge incinerator have shown that heavy
metals (including Cadmium, Chromium, Nickel, Lead, and Zinc) are concentrated in
the fine particle (approximately 0.25 mocrons) leaving the incinerators. Venturi
scrubbers have been typically installed to remove particulate from these flue
gas sources. The classical scrubbers are not capable of removing particles
smaller than about 0.5 microns. The process proposed in this project is the use
of the submicron particulate penetrating the Venturi scrubber as condensation
nuclei for steam injected into the flue gas to supersaturate it with water
vapor. Theoretical analyses show that water droplets as large as 1.0 micron can
be produced with reasonable steam rates and contact times. These water droplets
(a dilute suspension of the fine particulate) are removed from the flue gas
stream with a high efficiency mist eliminator and drained to the scrubber sump.
Preliminary analyses have shown that heavy metals in the fine particulate
leaving the Venturi scrubber can be reduced by 90% using this process. With a
relatively modest construction effort, the process proposed here can reduce fine
particle and heavy metal emissions from incinerators equipped with wet
scrubbers. The process is applicable to flue gas streams cleaned by wet
scrubbers including incinerators, metallurgical processes, and coal-fired power
plants with wet scrubbers for sulfur dioxide emission control. ***