* 9360935
* Manufacturing Methods for Mandrels to Make Nickel           Vapor Deposition Tooling
* TIP,TI
* 02/15/1994,10/31/1994
* Sean Wise, CEMCOM Research Associates, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Ritchie B. Coryell
* 10/31/1994
* USD 64,720.00

9360935 Wise Three methods are proposed for making net shape high temperature
mandrels to form chemically vapor deposited nickel shell tooling based on solid
freeform fabrication (SFF) models. The three methods are distinguished by the
number of generations or replications the nickel shell will be from the SFF
model: three, two or one. The three and two generation methods use chemically
bonded ceramic materials to form the mandrel because of their compatibility with
SFF models coupled with precision, quick and easy formability, thermal stability
and thermal conductivity. The single generation method will require the
development of a high temperature SFF model. The shells formed from these
mandrels will be incorporated into injection molds by backing them with CBC and
mounting them in a standard mold frame. The mold will be tested for part
precision and cycle time. The anticipated application of the technology, as
defined, is the tooling industry and specifically the matched die molding
industry. If successful, enhanced automation of complex mold production could
improve the worldwide competitiveness of the United States tool and die industry
and dramatically reduce costs for any industry that relies on molded parts,
particularly those with production runs of less than 25,000 parts.