* 9360030
* Microprocessor Simulation Toolkit (MST) for Computer        Education
* TIP,TI
* 01/15/1994,12/31/1994
* Kenneth Barnett, Technology International Incorporated of Virginia
* Standard Grant
* Sara B. Nerlove
* 12/31/1994
* USD 75,000.00

Proposal Number: 9360030 PI Last Name: Barnett Technology International
Incorporated (TII) shall perform research involving a rapid prototype of a
microprocessor simulation toolkit (MSTKit) and education software for learning
the intricacies of computer processing technology. The kit would be developed
for customization of education modules for high school senior level up to the
sophomore year at the college level, as well as vocational training. Powerful
graphics capabilities will allow the user access to information unattainable by
emulators presented by hardware boards or by costly software/hardware
combinations. The feasibility of the concept of developing nonexpensive,
flexible education software for learning about microprocessors will be evaluated
taking into account the availability of expensive hardware emulators and
platform-specific kits. The feasibility of the kit will be evaluated in terms of
the capability to learn about various microprocessors using appropriate
microcomputer instruction sets. By creation of an environment where the computer
of interest is simulated, users will be able to write and debug a program in the
related instruction set and interactively see the inner workings of that
particular microprocessor, including timing diagrams. Consideration will be
given to advanced optical computing and neural computing. Other microprocessors
(real or fictitious, that is, user-created) could be added to the kit. ***y