* 9360219
* Molecular Cytoskeletal Microscopy Probes and Biological     Wires
* TIP,TI
* 02/15/1994,10/31/1994
* Richard Powell, Nanoprobes Incorporated
* Standard Grant
* Kesh S. Narayanan
* 10/31/1994
* USD 64,993.00

9360219 Powell Novel probes are proposed for the study of cytoskeletal
structures and processes by electron microscopy. These will comprise large
cluster complexes of gold, platinum and palladium 0.8 nm - 2.4 nm in diameter
covalently lined to phalloidin, cytochalasin B, colchicin and taxol via a single
reactive functional group incorporated into their ligand spheres. The proposed
conjugates will penetrate 20-30 u or more into cell sections and achieve
significantly higher resolution than colloidal gold=antibody conjugates. They
will be microinjectable and compatible with living cells, and will be used to
extend the use of electron microscopy to the study of organisms such as
procaryotic bacteria, in which antibody probes are not feasible. Combined labels
including both a gold cluster and a fluorescent moiety will be used to prepare
additional probes with the same molecules, enabling correlation of fluorescence
confocal microscopy and electron microscopy data from a single labeling
experiment. The preparation of molecular wires will be attempted by the in vitro
assembly of gold-labeled cytoskeletal components, followed by silver
enhancement. %%% A new class of probes for cystoskeletal structures and
processes, compatible with living cells, will permit electron microscopy with
higher resolution than antibody probes. In vitro assembly of labeled
cytoskeletal components will be used to prepare novel conductive molecular
wires, and may be applied to the fabrication of other molecular devices,
catalysts, new materials and novel molecular detection systems. ***