* 9360793
* Saving up to 100 Million Dollars Per Year by Mitigating     Bridge Flood Damage
* TIP,TI
* 01/15/1994,09/30/1994
* Alan Bilanin, Continuum Dynamics, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Kesh S. Narayanan
* 09/30/1994
* USD 64,802.00

9360793 Bilanin The erosion of the river bed around bridge piers is commonly
known as local scour and is induced by the recalculating juncture flow at the
intersection of the pier and the river bed. Bridge failure caused by this
phenomenon has long been an important issue with respect to both public safety
and maintenance costs. Average total losses from the resulting damage can run up
to a hundred million dollars annually. Nearly half a million bridges nationwide
are potentially affected by local scour. A robust protective system is needed
that can be retrofitted to existing bridge piers to mitigate the sediment
transport. Recently, Continuum Dynamics, Inc. has made considerable progress in
designing large-scale flow modification devices based on the successful in-house
development of vortex control technology. The proposed effort will adapt these
techniques together with the appropriate application of scaling and boundary
layer analyses of the vortical flow near the river bed to the development of
vortex alleviation systems for local scour mitigation. Various designs will be
tested experimentally with sub-scale models to demonstrate the potential of the
proposed vortex alleviation techniques in mitigating local scour and to identify
a feasible design for Phase II. ***