* 9360173
* 2-D Micro-Matrix Code Reader for Computer-Integrated        Flexible Manufacturing
* TIP,TI
* 01/15/1994,12/31/1994
* George Seaver, Seaver (SeaLite) Engineering
* Standard Grant
* Ritchie B. Coryell
* 12/31/1994
* USD 74,851.00

9360173 Seaver This research is to demonstrate the accuracy and micro-radian
resolution of a two-dimensional stress-optic scanner. In the production of
Pharmaceuticals, both the workpiece and the packaging are too small for
conventional bar codes. Of particular importance is the use of Automatic
Identification to verify the correct labeling of Pharmaceuticals. Mislabeling
has been a persistent safety problem and labeling production lines are closely
regulated and inspected. Producers of semiconductor wafers, semiconductor chips,
and printed circuit boards are shifting to two-dimensional codes due to lack of
space for the amount of data that needs to be encoded. The most reliable,
accurate and fastest technique for reading two-dimensional codes would be a
solid-state scanning approach; of the various techniques available stress-
optics, using an imposed stress in photoelastic materials, is the best for small
beams and fast, precise scanning through relatively small sweep angles. Stress
can produce a such greater index change in some glasses than can an electric
field in electro-optical materials. And response rates up to megahertz are
possible. Also, the imposition of a stress to optical glass does not increase
its already low-loss, and the response is non-dispersive. Finally, optical
glasses are generally more rugged and environmentally stable and cost less than
do the materials used in other approaches. The manufacturability of the basic
stress-optics sandwich is straight forward and this would make it significantly
cheaper than electro- optical equivalent devices. These last two advantages are
considered to be very important in the matrix code reader market.