* 9360873
* High Growth Rate Atomic Layer Epitaxy of GaN and AlGaN for  Advanced Optoelectronic Devices
* TIP,TI
* 04/01/1994,12/31/1994
* Nasser Karam, Spire Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Darryl G. Gorman
* 12/31/1994
* USD 64,914.00

9360873 Karam We propose to demonstrate Atomic Layer Epitaxy (ALE) of GaN/A1N
structures at growth rates exceeding 1 micron/hr in an innovative reactor which
emoloys continuously flowing, yet spatially separate gas streams and a moving
substrate to expose the wafer surface to alternating fluxes of Group III and V
reactants. The reactor incorporates both structural and gas curtain barriers to
ensure fast and efficient removal o the excess reactants and reaction products
which limit ALE growth rates. Their removal is achieved by coupling mechanical
boundary layer shearing with hydrogen purging to prevent gas-phase mixing of the
two reactant species. In this way a process which combines the superior
thickness and compositional uniformity of ALE with the high growth rate of
metalorganic chemical vapor deposition (MOCVD) can be achieved. To show
feasibility, in Phase I we will use ALE-grown material to fabricate a functional
photoconductive UV detector; in Phase II, growth conditions and detector
fabrication processes will be optimized. One proper control of dopants is
demonstrated, high growth rate ALE will be explored as a means of producing P-N
junction devices such as lasers, light emitting diodes, and photodiodes. The
excellent uniformity of material grown by ALE will also make possible the
realization of two-dimensional staring UV detector arrays. ***