* 9360591
* Production and Applications of Higher Fullerenes
* TIP,TI
* 04/15/1994,03/31/1995
* Zhiping Jiang, TDA Research, Inc
* Standard Grant
* Darryl G. Gorman
* 03/31/1995
* USD 75,000.00

9360591 Jiang While the recent discovery of fullerene carbon has led to intense
research activity and many proposed applications, most of the work to date has
focused on C60, and to a lesser extent, CC0. The higher fullerenes (C76, C78,
C84, etc.) which may have significantly different and useful properties, have
not been evaluated because they are difficult to obtain in purified form. In
this project, TDA Research, Inc. (TDA) will develop improved routes to the
higher fullerenes and investigate their potential applications. In Phase I, we
will optimize our combustion synthesis process (developed with NSF support in
previous SBIR project) for the production of higher fullerenes. We will purify
the higher fullerenes by high-pressure liquid chromatography (HPLC). To minimize
the cost of higher fullerenes in future applications, TDA had identified several
different separation methods which do not involve chromatography. Using the pure
materials from chromatography, we will measure fundamental properties of the
higher fullerenes which are relevant to our proposed separation methods. We will
carry out an engineering and market analysis to determine the most desirable
future applications of the higher fullerenes. Because TDA is already a
manufacturer of combustion derived fullerenes we will be able to immediately
commercialize the technology for producing and separating the higher fullerenes.
***