* 9360860
* A Fullerene Based High Responsivity, Low Noise              Superconducting Bolometer
* TIP,TI
* 04/01/1994,12/31/1994
* Theodore Miller, SIGMA TECHNOLOGIES INTL., INC.
* Standard Grant
* Darryl G. Gorman
* 12/31/1994
* USD 65,000.00

9360860 Miller The recent availability of the carbon icosohedral molecules, the
fullerenes, and the discovery of superconductivity in alkali doped fullerene
derivatives opens anew avenues of investigation into superconducting devices. In
particular, the fullerides are predicted to achieve high performance as
superconducting bolometers. Most of the current superconducting infrared sensors
have utilized bolometric mechanisms, including most of those developed recently
from the high-T ceramics. The bolometric mechanisms are well understood, and a
simple thermal model adequately predicts there bolometric behavior. Using that
model the fullerence based superconductors are predicted to achieve a one to two
order of magnitude improvement in responsivity (change of signal for a given
change in power) in comparison to the superconducting ceramics. Additionally,
the same intrinsic physical properties of the fullerenes predict a reduction of
the Noise-Equivalent-Power (NEP) by an order of magnitude as well. the
combination of benefits can yield a three order of magnitude improvement in the
specific detectivity, D. In the Phase I project, Sigma proposes to test the IR
responsivity of fulleride films using environmentally protecting test cells in
preparation for commercial devices and arrays. ***