* 9360813
* Microstructure - Composition - Superconducting Properties   Relationships in Epitaxial TBCCO Film Growth
* TIP,TI
* 04/01/1994,12/31/1994
* Michael Eddy, SUPERCONDUCTOR TECHNOLOGIES INC
* Standard Grant
* Darryl G. Gorman
* 12/31/1994
* USD 64,995.00

9360813 Eddy The preparation of epitaxial TlBaCaCuO (TBCCO) films has been
demonstrated on only a small number of substrates (Lanthanum Aluminate and
Strontium Titanate). The films produced have been optimized primarily for
microwave performance, and a more systematic evaluation of film properties is
required. This proposal outlines a program to investigate the microstructure -
composition - superconducting properties relationships for the growth of high
quality, epitaxial TBCCO films. In addition to this analysis, the mechanism for
preparing low resistance metal contacts to TBCCCO will be explored. Transmission
electron microscopy (TEM) will be used to investigate the film microstructure
and metal-TBCCO interface. The goals of the program are to optimize the
composition of the TBCCO deposits to produce a more homogeneous film capable of
maintaining high quality superconducting properties even at the narrowest line
widths (<5um), and to understand and improve the metal-superconductor contacts.
It is essential for the preparation of the highest quality to control key
process variables and have the ability to vary parameters for process
optimization. We believe optimization. We believe optimization of composition is
the most important next step for improvement of TBCCO films to meet the
stringent requirements imposed by the next generation of superconducting film
applications. ***