* 9360796
* Monolithically Integrated Avalanche Photodiode Arrays
* TIP,TI
* 01/15/1994,09/30/1994
* Jih-Jong Wang, Advanced Research and Applications Corporation (ARACOR)
* Standard Grant
* Ritchie B. Coryell
* 09/30/1994
* USD 65,000.00

9360796 Wang Monolithic integration of silicon avalanche photodiode (APD) arrays
with their associated electronics is proposed. The photodiode elements are based
on the state-of-the-art process developed by Radiation Monitoring Devices, Inc.,
which achieves uniform bulk breakdown by using neutron transmutation doped
silicon and a "beveled junction" to suppress surface breakdown. ARACOR intends
to combine these photodiode arrays with their readout electronics by using a
special bonded wafer approach to achieve three-dimensional integration. In the
proposed approach, the already processed photodiode wafer will be bonded to a
prime wafer. The readout electronics will be processed in this prime wafer after
it has been thinned. The readabout electronics and photodiodes will be fully
dielectrica11y isolated with electrical connections made by means of vias opened
through the silicon film and buried dielectric. The Phase I feasibility study
will include fabrication of a two element APD array, integration of this array
into a bonded wafer substrate, and processing of the interconnects. ARACOR will
design readout electronics and fabricate a prototype of the inregrated detector
array in Phase II. In Phase II, ARACOR intends to incorporate these integrated
detector arrays into its own systems and provide OEM components to others in
cooperation with RMD.