* 9360798
* Improvement of Subsoils for Support of Pavements Using a    Grid of Stabilized Granular Columns
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/1994,04/30/1995
* Nathaniel Fox, Earthwater Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Kesh S. Narayanan
* 04/30/1995
* USD 65,000.00

9360798 Fox A method is proposed whereby subsoils for support of roadway,
airfield, and parking area pavements will be improved and reinforced by the
incorporation of a grid of small diameter, short, stabilized, vertical, granular
columns. The proposed method is a smaller-scale variation of a patented process
developed by the proposers to reinforce bearing soils beneath building
foundations, which recently won a national award for innovation in construction.
the columnar material can consist of soil, soil with chemical agents, soil with
special synthetic inclusions, artificial soil, or stone. The grid of columns
will be constructed simultaneously using a single apparatus. The improvement of
subsoils in this manner will be rapid and economical many applications. To
determine qualitatively and quantitatively there degree of improvement which can
be obtained, a finite element analytical study and laboratory and field
experimental research programs will be conducted on a variety of soils using the
proposed stabilization method. Laboratory tests to be conducted include one-
dimensional compression, triaxial, and large-scale plate bearing tests. A series
of plate bearing tests, as well as borehole shear, K0-blade, and dynamic
penetrometer tests, will be conducted in the field on in-situ will be produced
and used to construct the granular columns for the field experiments. The finite
element analyses will be conducted to model the results from the laboratory and
field tests, and to perform a parametric study of the important factors
influencing the degree of improvement which can be obtained from incorporation
of granular columns constructed of a variety of materials within a different
subgrade soils. In this manner, the results from the laboratory and field tests
can be extrapolated to subgrade soils and conditions not tested in the
experimental research program. Evaluation of the results from the analytical and
experimental studies will establish the feasibility of the proposed meth od for
stabilizing subsoils to support pavements. ***