* 9360118
* Synthesis and Characterization of Carbon Nitride Films for  Tribological Applications
* TIP,TI
* 03/15/1994,11/30/1994
* Philip Stark, Implant Sciences Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Kesh S. Narayanan
* 11/30/1994
* USD 65,000.00

9360118 Stark It has been suggested that a hypothetical crystalline material, B-
C3N4, may be harder than diamond, provide exceptional wear and corrosion
resistance, and exhibit an extremely low coefficient of friction. No one yet has
successfully synthesized continuous films of crystalline carbon nitride. Such an
achievement would represent a technical milestone. The availability of superhard
B- C3N4 in the form of an adherent, solid lubricant coating would permit
significant advances to be made in tribology. The innovation we propose is the
synthesis of metastable, crystalline carbon nitride films by dual ion beam
assisted deposition (DIBAD). The DIBAD process has been used successfully to
synthesize metastable materials such as cubic boron nitride. It also offers
considerable promise for successfully growing films of B-C3N4. The key to
successful synthesis is momentum transfer into the films per arriving atom.
DIBAD provides a wider window of operation than does a single ion beam
evaporation process. In phase 1, we will demonstrate the feasibility of growing
continuous films of stoichiometric and near-stoichiometric B-C3N4 by the DIBAD
process. Deposition conditions will be defined and the films characterized in
terms of their composition, morphology, density, structure, thermal stability,
adhesion and tribological properties. ***