* 9360378
* Phase-Locked Microlaser Array
* TIP,TI
* 04/01/1994,12/31/1994
* Steven Tidwell, ACULIGHT CORPORATION
* Standard Grant
* Ritchie B. Coryell
* 12/31/1994
* USD 64,913.00

9360378 Tidwell In an effort to reach higher powers, laser researchers have
developed larger and increasingly complex devices. An alternate scaling approach
is to combine the output power of many simple low-power lasers in an array.
Microlasers are the perfect array elements because they are mass-producible and
have polarized, singlefrequency, diffraction-limited outputs. Aculight has
developed a unique microlaser array based on the desire for coherent operation.
A coherent array with N elements produces an output beam that is N times more
powerful on a distant target or N times smaller at the focus of a lens than an
incoherent N-element array. Since microlaser arrays can easily contain several
hundred elements, the benefit of coherent operation is great. Coherent operation
opens applications in machining and processing of advanced materials such as
composites and ceramics. It also enables applications requiring the output
wavelength to be converted to other parts of the spectrum using nonlinear
optics. Coherent operation is also the next step toward electronic beam steering
for military and commercial applications. These opportunities are possible only
with the previous development of the Aculight mircolaser array hardware. The
objective of the proposed Phase I program will be to demonstrate coherent
operation of the Aculight microlaser array. We will fabricate servo control
electronics for the array and integrate the circuitry into the existing
computer. We will test the sensitivity of the laser to variations in power,
cooling, and other variables to determine the ultimate commercial feasibility.
The anticipated result is a compact, scalable laser with high beam quality and
single-frequency output.