* 9360519
* Modified In-Situ Rutherford Design for Early SIMOX          Contamination Detection
* TIP,TI
* 01/15/1994,12/31/1994
* Geoff Ryding, Ibis Technology Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Darryl G. Gorman
* 12/31/1994
* USD 74,925.00

9360519 Ryding Insitu wafer analysis is proposed in order to examine metallic
contamination in SIMOX silicon-on-insulator substrates during the early
implantation stage of their fabrication. Early detection of any metallics in the
active silicon layer would greatly improve chances for impurity source tracking
and ultimate cost reduction. In Phase I, we propose to design and fabricate an
in-situ, non-destructive impurity detection capability at the ion implantation
station of SIMOX fabrication. Several design advantages are incorporated which
enhance detection sensitivity and ease of implementation. Phase II is proposed
to transfer the in-situ apparatus onto the production implant machine,
incorporating design modifications or required refinements. In-situ, non-
destructive testing of manufactured material and ion beam control optimization
based on the detection and feedback will ensue. Phase III is the
commercialization of the probe station as a product for high energy higher
current implantation stations, consistent with IBIS products. The nation may
expect to benefit from the development of an in-situ, non-destructive wafer
contamination detection system. Such early stage detection may be used as an
advanced quality control tool which will enhance product development and
material for the silicon industry. *** v s t $ $ ( F / A A / 1 Courier Symbol &
Arial 5 Courier New A < < < " h * * = C R:\WW20USER\ABSTRACT.DOT Denise Henry
Denise Henry