* 9360457
* Water Purification Process Utilizing Electrochemically      Generated Hydroxyl Free Radicals
* TIP,TI
* 03/01/1994,11/30/1994
* Oleh Weres, Sonoma Research Company
* Standard Grant
* Kesh S. Narayanan
* 11/30/1994
* USD 64,984.00

9360457 Weres The objective of this project is to evaluate an electrochemical
process for destroying organic compounds dissolved in water utilizing electrodes
which generate hydroxyl free radicals. The fundamental chemistry resembles
processes powered by ionizing radiation. Hydroxyl attacks most organic compounds
in a nonspecific manner. Olefinic and aromatic compounds, including highly
chlorinated compounds and phenols, react particularly well. Most contaminated
groundwaters have sufficient electrical conductivity to carry the small currents
needed to remove the low TOC levels typical of these waters. The process appears
particularly attractive in application to brackish groundwaters typical of
coastal areas, and to industrial process waters. This is a Phase I award based
on a proposal submitted in response to NSF 93-18, Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Program Solicitation. During Phase I, destruction of several
organic solvents dissolved in water will be demonstrated, and two cell
configurations will be tested and compared. The results of Phase I will be
extrapolated and used to design a large water treatment system. The proposes
process is expected to find many commercial applications where organic compounds
need to be removed from water, including contaminated groundwater, and process
water in oil refineries. Projected operating costs are expected to compare
favorably with the nearest competing process.