* 9360681
* Problem-Based Concepts Utilizing Plant Resources
* TIP,TI
* 03/15/1994,11/30/1994
* Karen Graf, EDVOTEK Inc
* Standard Grant
* Sara B. Nerlove
* 11/30/1994
* USD 64,124.00

9360681 Graf This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project
seeks to explore the feasibility of using biological materials which have not
been traditionally utilized in educational settings for developing new problem-
based laboratory experiments in the life science curricula. The research will
explore the use of plant biological materials, such as plant mutants, which are
available through genetic stock centers and germplasm collections, to construct
classroom experiments for biology courses. These experiments are intended to
encourage problem-based experimental activities for communicating biological
concepts for helping students develop critical thinking and investigation
skills. In Phase I, the experiments will focus on biological concepts which will
provide a foundation upon which students can build to achieve a full
appreciation and understanding of the agricultural applications of modern
biotechnology. The use of these materials will present students with an
introduction to genetics and biotechnology, showing the connection between these
disciplines and other areas of modern biology. A preliminary evaluation
component focusing on obtaining feedback from several practicing science
educations of the project will be initiated. It is anticipated that the results
of this Phase I will lead to the identification and utilization of new resources
in science education and will contribute novel aspects to future improvements in
the development of new biology curricula. Recognizing that very few laboratory-
based curricula materials have been developed in the area of biotechnology
education as it relates to agriculture, specifically plants, and that this area
will have increasing importance and relevance for students, Edvotek seeks to
make an important contribution to the appreciation of current biotechnology
research being conducted for agricultural applications by providing such
curricula materials on the grounds that this area will have in creasing
importance and relevant for students. ***