* 9361716
* Fabrication of Silicon Sheet for Electronic Circuit         Application
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/1994,09/30/1994
* Thomas Jasinski, CREARE INCORPORATED
* Standard Grant
* Ritchie B. Coryell
* 09/30/1994
* USD 64,920.00

9361716 Jasinski Single crystal silicon wafers are essential for integrated
circuit (IC) manufacturing. Our research proposes to fabricate these wafers
directly in sheet form in contrast to cylindrical boules currently utilized. The
proposed technique will reduce complexity and cost of the crystal growth
hardware. Wafer slicing from the boule is eliminated along with the associated
kerf loss. And, fabrication in sheet form alters the basic thermal transport of
the crystal growth so that scale-up to larger sizes can be more
straightforwardly accomplished. Our research objective is to obtain a final
wafer product which is equal or superior to current wafers. The Phase I research
will demonstrate that single crystal silicon can be fabricated in sheet form.
Phase 11 will demonstrate scale-up to larger sheet widths through the
construction of laboratory prototype hardware and production of high quality
single crystal product. There currently is no domestic vendor of silicon wafers
to supply the domestic IC fabrication industries. This puts the US IC industry
at severe jeopardy vis-a- vis export control from foreign suppliers. SEMATECH
has recognized this risk and has recently included bulk silicon growth within
their scope of activities. This research would promote the return of silicon
wafer manufacturing to the domestic United States marketplace. ***