* 9361977
* Innovative Electrostatic Printing Process for Low-Cost      Printers
* TIP,TI
* 01/15/1994,09/30/1994
* Fred Schmidlin, XI-Tech
* Standard Grant
* Ritchie B. Coryell
* 09/30/1994
* USD 64,030.00

9361977 Schmidlin A simple powder marking process known as Direct Electrostatic
Printing (DEP) was invented by the Principal Investigator to enable the
development of affordable desktop color printers. The process proved to be
capable of printing images with 12 dots per mm. resolution at speeds up to 15
cm/sec; but fell short of becoming practical due to its sensitivity to wrong
sign toner. A new electrostatic process has now been conceived by the Principal
Investigator that should overcome the limitations of DEP while preserving all of
its desirable attributes. The feasibility of this new proprietary process will
be demonstrated by DPI Technologies in the proposed research via the design of a
new structure and process (based on analysis) and experimental fests using an
existing laboratory fixture. Successful results from the proposed research will
justify the follow-on development of a revolutionary innovative technology. This
technology will enable the subsequent development of a wide variety of new and
improved non-impact printers. There is an enormous market need for the kind of
simple, reliable, robust, low-cost monochrome or color printers that this
technology is capable of enabling. Products with the unique ability to form
durable, tamper-proof pictures and labels for security applications are also
possible. ***