* 9361973
* An Environmentally Friendly Electropolishing Machine for    Titanium
* TIP,TI
* 02/15/1994,01/31/1995
* Willard Kemp, Kemp Development Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Ritchie B. Coryell
* 01/31/1995
* USD 74,520.00

9361973 Kemp Most electropolishing treatments for stainless steels employ
multiple open mildly acidic vessels. Concerns regarding fumes and carryover of
more aggressive acids make commercial treatments for titanium unavailable. An
automated enclosed single tank electropolishing machine provides and
environmentally friendly method for titanium. Workpieces are placed in a dry
vacuum tight chamber and necessary fluids are sucked in. Electrolytes and rinse
fluid storage canisters are sealed and rinse fluids are continuously
deactivated. All servicing is through removal and replacement of sealed tanks.
The work includes construction of a working model and the verification of
procedures which include pulse current and ultrasonic capabilities. Phase I will
also include metallurgical characterization of electropolished titanium and
zirconium samples. Phase II includes prototype construction with complete
automation and the characterizing of metallurgical effects on representative
ferrous, nickel, and reactive alloys. Immediate beneficiary will be the medical
industry where titanium is now finished by manual polishing. Longer term the new
system can move many electroplate/polish operations into the clean computer
controlled environment of the modern production facility.