* 9361907
* Preattentive Vision Based Automatic Recognition of Smoke and Obscurant Clouds
* TIP,TI
* 01/15/1994,09/30/1994
* Chong Ng, American Research Corporation of Virginia
* Standard Grant
* Kesh S. Narayanan
* 09/30/1994
* USD 65,000.00

9361907 Ng Field tracking of smoke and obscurant clouds from forest fires or
volcanoes requires determination of the two- dimensional cloud extent shown in
visible images scanned from various angles about the clouds. At the present
time, two-dimensional cloud extent is determined by an operator who manually
locates points on the cloud perimeter -- a procedure which has been found to be
expensive, time consuming and vulnerable to human misjudgment. To address this
problem, this project undertakes a study for the development of computer vision
algorithms based on human preattentive visual processes for the automatic
recognition of smoke clouds. The objectives of this research include a study of
human preattentive vision to determine important visual cues, incorporation of
these visual cues into computer vision algorithms for detecting cloud regions,
development of a neural network pattern recognition system utilizing these
algorithms, and integration of the system with a user-friendly graphical
interface. The innovative use of image analysis features based on human
preattentive visual processes for automated cloud detection is significant.
Since features modeled on human visual preattention are capable of functioning
in a scene- independent manner, a system for automatically recognizing obscurant
clouds that is superior to present methods will be demonstrated. This is an SBIR
Phase I project. ***