* 9361281
* Enhanced Communication of the Risks from Hazardous ChemicalsConsidering MSDS Users' Practices and Proficiencies
* TIP,TI
* 01/15/1994,04/30/1995
* Richard Bergman, Savant Associates, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Sara B. Nerlove
* 04/30/1995
* USD 74,220.00

Federal and state regulations require that employers train millions of US
workers about the risks of hazardous chemicals to which they are exposed on the
job, including how to access information on multi-page Material Safety Data
Sheets (MSDSs). Many employers are also required to communicate information
about hazardous chemicals to the public for environmental release monitoring and
to prepare for emergency response to community endangering accidental releases
of hazardous chemicals and at hazardous waste sites. Previous research has
identified limitations in communicating the information in MSDS. As they
increasingly contain information useful to multiple users, MSDSs have become
longer, and more difficult to use. Little effort has been made to tailor the
structure and format of MSDSs to the multiple needs of different users. We
propose to investigate a method of structuring and communicating the information
contained on MSDSs according to various users' needs, capabilities, and skills.
We will build on adult literacy research previously carried out by proposed
subcontractor, Educational Testing Service, Inc. From the varying practices and
proficiencies of MSDS users we will also identify criteria for prototyping a
computer-adaptive multimedia system for presenting chemical risk and risk
related information to multiple users of varying needs and abilities.