* 9361179
* Cold Cathodes for Electron Spectroscopy
* TIP,TI
* 02/01/1994,10/31/1994
* Charles Beetz, Advanced Technology Materials, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Darryl G. Gorman
* 10/31/1994
* USD 65,000.00

9361179 Beetz The development of cold electron emitter technology has the
potential for broadly impacting the rapidly growing area of electron
spectroscopy. Commercially available instrumentation such as Auger spectrometers
typically employ thermionic electron sources which restrict their scope of use
through filament heating effects and thermal cracking of gases on filaments.
These instruments are also not capable of performing time resolved phenomena on
the sub second level. The development of a robust cold emitter capable of high
frequency pulsed operation would not only solve these problems but more
importantly, it would enable revolutionary new development in the construction
of extremely high speed, high sensitivity electron spectroscopic instrumentation
employing Fas Fourier Transform (FFT) time of flight measurement techniques. In
Phase I, Advanced Technology Materials, Inc (ATM) will determine the feasibility
of fabricating a cold cathode electron source using a novel diamond junction
base emitter. The cold cathode source will be evaluated and in Phase II be
employed in the construction of a prototype FFT Auger spectrometer. In Phase III
commercial production of cold cathode electron beam guns is anticipated for use
in a variety of electron spectroscopy and UHV instrumentation applications. ***