* 9361633
* Specific Phage Particles for Bio-Sorbtion of Heavy          Metals in Waste Waters
* TIP,TI
* 05/15/1994,01/31/1995
* Robert Steffan, Envirogen, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Kesh S. Narayanan
* 01/31/1995
* USD 65,000.00

9361633 Steffan Bacteriophage particles will be developed using phage display
technology that specifically bind heavy metals (mercury and chromium). Random
phage libraries will be generated by cloning degenerate nucleotides into genes
encoding coat proteins of the bacteriophage M13. The resulting phage will have
one of as many as 1013 random peptides exposed on their surface in up to 2700
copies. The resulting phage particles will be screened to select those that
specifically bind heavy metals. Selected phage particles will be used to remove
metals from a variety of wastewaters including those generated by industrial
processes, nuclear facilities, soil washing, and improper storage or disposal of
wastes. %%% It is expected that using phage binding to pre-treat mixed organic
(organics + metals) wastes to remove metals will allow for the successful
biotreatment of many of the nation's heretofore untreatable waste sites. The
successful demonstration of this technology will provide a precedent for the
future developments to remediate even more difficult wastes such as mixed low-
level radioactive wastes (organics + radionuclides). Completion of this research
will allow the development of a commercially-viable biological treatment system
for hazardous wastes containing mixtures of organic contaminants and heavy
metals. ***