* 9361481
* Robust Algorithm for Aquiring and Interpreting Contact      Data via Active Robot Expansion
* TIP,TI
* 04/01/1994,12/31/1994
* William Townsend, Barrett Technology Inc
* Standard Grant
* Kesh S. Narayanan
* 12/31/1994
* USD 64,892.00

9361481 Townsend A new generation of robots with high-bandwidth, backdrivable
transmissions driven by high-performance brushless DC motors presents the
opportunity for improving the flow of force data back to the controller without
additional force sensors. This research will develop an algorithm for
determining contact geometry, to be used as feedback to the controller or
teleoperator. The algorithm will complement existing force-sensor and tactile-
sensor techniques which offer improved accuracy, but otherwise limit the
responsiveness and stability of the system. The proposed research will compile a
set of prototype force-control tasks, determine the special kinematic equations
necessary to calculate contact force vectors, develop a mathematical and
graphical representation of the contact geometries, determine the best
implementation algorithm for the required speed, and outline specifications for
experimental development in Phase II. The result of this research will be
faster, more dexterous robots which relay greater information about the process
than existing robot systems. US companies, such as Adept and Barrett Technology,
have helped lead the international community in backdrivable robotic hardware
development. By improving the control algorithms to capitalize on these hardware
improvements, the US should retain its competitive lead in this area of
robotics.