* 9361115
* A High Intensity Excimer UV Source for Semiconductor        Manufacturing
* TIP,TI
* 09/01/1994,05/31/1995
* David Boyers, Adelphi Technology, Inc
* Standard Grant
* Ritchie B. Coryell
* 05/31/1995
* USD 64,996.00

9361115 Boyers The objective of this research is to explore the feasibility of
developing a high intensity UV excimer source for the demanding requirements of
the semiconductor manufacturing and materials processing industry. Emerging
processing technologies not requiring a coherent source including UV wafer
cleaning and photo CVD will require very high UV intensities over large areas
(100mW/cm@) currently only available from excimer lasers. Conventional UV lamps
are inadequate for the task. Excimer lasers cannot conveniently illuminate a
large field size, are often difficult to integrate into a production tool, and
have a very high cost of ownership. The phase I research will be directed toward
establishing the feasibility of developing a UV excimer lamp and excitation
source with the required performance : 1) A lamp and excitation source will be
designed and fabricated. 2) The spectrum and UV efficiency will be measured with
pure Xe (172 nm). 3) A preliminary full scale design and cost estimate will be
prepared. The Phase II research will be directed toward the construction of a
full scale prototype for operation with other excimer gas mixtures such as
ArFl*(193 nm), KrCL* (222 nm), KrF* (249 nm), and XeCl* (351 nm). If successful,
this program will lead to the development of a critical manufacturing resource
for use in the fabrication of the next generation of semiconductor devices. ***