* 9361114
* A Multi-Point Array Laser Doppler Velocimeter
* TIP,TI
* 02/01/1994,01/31/1995
* Yogesh Agrawal, NorthWest Research Associates, Incorporated
* Standard Grant
* Michael F. Crowley
* 01/31/1995
* USD 74,951.00

9361114 AGRAWAL We are proposing to develop a multi-point laser velocimeter to
obtain velocities at a number of points, simultaneously and non- intrusively.
Our specific interest is to apply this instrumentation to transport and exchange
in surface and bottom boundary layers However, the technique will be applicable
to a wide range of flows where simultaneous velocity measurements are desirable.
At the heart of the innovation is a completely non- intrusive optical geometry
which forms several sample volumes in the flow, and corresponding receiving
optics to distinguish their images. Such a device is needed to observe
structures in natural flows and to deal with issues such as flow stationarity.
This simultaneous view of the velocity field will remove uncertainty in the
interpretation of velocity profile information; e.g. the velocity shear and
shear stress, turbulent characteristic scales and roughness lengths. The concept
also concept also removes the need for mechanical scanning devices or profilers,
both of which yield non-simultaneous measurements. The use of this instrument
for characterizing the concentration and transport rate of sediments in the
bottom boundary layer is described. The concept is also beneficial to laboratory
scientists using flumes, towing tanks, and wind tunnels, in that multi-point
measurements provide additional information on flow structure and improve
productivity.