* 9361511
* Brains for Intelligent Buildings Under Seismic Loads
* TIP,TI
* 03/15/1994,11/30/1994
* Jin Zheng, Intelligent Machines, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Kesh S. Narayanan
* 11/30/1994
* USD 64,028.00

9361511 Zheng This proposal conducts feasibility study for the development of a
microprocessor which will become the brain for intelligent buildings (BIB). The
brain discerns the state of the building by evaluating signals from the sensor
network and issues appropriate commands to active and passive controllers to
moderate the effects of seismic disturbance. The BIB will merge two
technologies, (i) active pattern recognition and analysis and (ii) adaptive
fuzzy logic control using a dynamic knowledge base. These methods can respond to
the dual needs of such a processor: inference under uncertainty and adaptability
to change. Uncertainty is the result of stochastic disturbance, noise,
incomplete sensor data, or fuzziness of information. Change occurs during
extreme hazards but also from deterioration of the building, its sensor network,
and actuation systems over time. The proposed design has innovative features.
Via active pattern recognition process, BIB interacts with the building to probe
and monitor its operating state. Dynamic, adaptive control module has two sets
of meta rules that adjust control rules according to environmental conditions.
By incorporating fuzzy logic, BIB leverages any tolerance for imprecision into
simplicity in design and hence gains in efficiency and lower costs. The study
through software simulation will focus on its performance in extreme events and
address BIB's reliability to degrading sensors and actuators. This is an SBIR
Phase I project. ***