* 9361888
* A Virtual Physics Laboratory for Disabled Students:         Development of Interaction Metaphors and Methods
* TIP,TI
* 04/01/1994,03/31/1995
* Kenneth Nemire, Interface Technologies
* Standard Grant
* Sara B. Nerlove
* 03/31/1995
* USD 74,389.00

9361888 Nemire Medical advances, new legislation and changing social attitudes
have encouraged more disabled individuals to continue their education. However,
disabled students have limited access to typical science laboratories. One
promising and innovative way to provide access is through virtual environment
technology which can provide a unique tool for the disabled by offering
opportunities for manipulative exploration and mobility without requiring
physical access, dexterity and strength. This project is developing a virtual
learning environment (VLE) to provide greater educational opportunities to
disabled persons. In Phase I. the staff will perform human factors analyses to
facilitate VLE design, construct a prototype of their VLE, including a module
for physics instruction, and evaluate its utility. VLEs will benefit disabled
students by providing them grater control over their environment and more
educational opportunities. The potential applications of VLEs for education are
vast and will provide the next generation of interactive learning systems.
Development of VLEs fits America's agenda of developing technology for economic
growth and facilitating education and training of disabled and non disabled
individuals. The Interface Technologies research and development team has
extensive experience in conducting experimental and human factors research,
designing and developing virtual environments, and developing adaptive
technology for persons with disabilities.