* 9361640
* Submicron Fiber Optic Chemical Sensors with Millisecond     Response Times
* TIP,TI
* 04/01/1994,12/31/1994
* Robert Lieberman, Physical Optics Corporation (Corporate Headquarters)
* Standard Grant
* Darryl G. Gorman
* 12/31/1994
* USD 64,982.00

9361640 Lieberman This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) project is in
the general area of analytical chemistry and specifically in the subfield of
submicron optical sensors. The Phase I studies will utilize a microfabrication
technique capable of making optical fiber based light sources and sensors as
small as 40 nm which will be applied to the demonstration of near-field optics
(NFO) in microscopy and chemical imaging. These sensors will be small enough to
measure chemical concentrations within a single cell in biological applications.
Phase I objectives are to fabricate and test a working pH sensor with
millisecond response time and 0.01 pH unit sensitivity, requiring only atto-
liters of sample. A similar sensor will be developed for monitoring oxygen
concentration. These sensors will be much less invasive, and much more
chemically selective than existing sensors and will increase both the speed and
reliability of microchemical measurements. %%% Submicron fiber optic chemical
sensors should find their way into scientific, environmental, and medical
testing laboratories and in the process and quality control aspects of the
chemical, pharmaceutical and biotechnology industries. The small size of the
sensors will result in cost savings and increased safety and their fast response
time will increase the speed and efficiency with which chemical measurements can
be made. ***