* 9361940
* Advanced Materials for Catalytic Combustion
* TIP,TI
* 03/01/1994,11/30/1994
* William Pfefferle, Precision Combustion, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Darryl G. Gorman
* 11/30/1994
* USD 64,997.00

9361940 Pfefferle Catalytically stabilized thermal combustion (CST combustion)
offers significant advantages for high efficiency , ultra-low emissions
combustion applications in gas turbine engines, burners, incinerators, and even
internal combustion reciprocating engines. With CST combustion, nitrogen oxides
emissions can be effectively eliminated without aftertreatment by enabling
combustion at a temperature below the nitrogen oxides formation level.
Combustion efficiency is maintained at a high level and carbon monoxide/unburned
hydrocarbon emissions are kept low. Yet limits on the ability of the catalyst
and its substrate to survive high temperatures (e.g. 1200C - 1600C) in reactive
atmospheres have severely restricted practical applications. Doped aluminum base
oxides such as hexaaluminates and perovskites offer the promise of a thermally
stable, Catalytically active monolithic catalyst material through the proper
choice of dopant atoms. However the nature of the dopant residence and the
effect of the dopants on the morphology of the hexaaluminate macrostructure is
uncertain. We shall investigate the affects of doping and anchoring
catalytically active atoms into aluminum based oxides for use in CST combustion.
In particular, we shall investigate the morphology, sintering resistance, dopant
site residence, and catalytic activity as a function of dopant concentration and
processing. ***