* 9361815
* Czochralski Crystal Growth Process for Organic Nonlinear    Crystals
* TIP,TI
* 04/01/1994,12/31/1994
* Warren Ruderman, INRAD, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Darryl G. Gorman
* 12/31/1994
* USD 64,885.00

9361815 Ruderman Although several organic nonlinear single crystals have been
reported to have exceptionally high figures of merit compared with the best
inorganic crystals available, organic nonlinear crystals are not now being used
in industrial, scientific or defense and aerospace laser systems. We attribute
this principally to the lack of a supply of high quality single crystals of a
large enough size to be useful. The technology for the growth, fabrication and
polishing of organic nonlinear crystals is no now available. The crystal growth
techniques reported in the literature for organic nonlinear crystals have been
solution and Bridgman and crystal sizes for complex compounds have been of the
order of a few mm or less. We propose to develop a Czochralski crystal growth
process capable of producing large (2 to 3 cm) crystals of high perfection, to
develop methods for fabricating and polishing such crystals and to characterize
them with respect to crystal perfection, optical absorption coefficients, laser
damage, frequency conversion efficiency and electro-optic properties. MMONS
(3-Methyl-4-Methoxy-4'-nitrostilbene) which has been reported to have one of the
largest nonlinear figures of merit, will be used as a model crystal and all work
will be carried out with this crystal. However, the growth process as well as
fabrication techniques that are developed will be applicable to a wide range of
organic nonlinear crystals. ***