* 9361914
* A New Approach to Estimate Design Wind Characteristics for  Extensive Pressure System Storms
* TIP,TI
* 01/15/1994,09/30/1994
* Peter Vickery, Applied Research Associates, Inc. (Raleigh)
* Standard Grant
* Kesh S. Narayanan
* 09/30/1994
* USD 64,980.00

9361914 Vickery Estimates of design windspeeds in the nonhurricane-prone region
of the United States are derived from historical records of windspeeds obtained
from surface level anemometers. These surface-level windspeed measurements are
subject to errors produced by terrain effects, nearby structures and vegetation,
changes in the height of the anemometer over time, and observation errors. These
measurements are made only at fixed anemometer stations and there is no first
principle method to estimate winds at other locations. This research project
investigates an innovative method for determining windspeeds and their spatial
variations for extensive pressure systems (EPS) using a first principle direct
analysis approach. The proposed methodology makes use of the recently available,
and inexpensive, data set of historical records of surface pressures for the
contiguous United States. Using this data, the pressure field can be
reconstructed on an hour-by-hour basis. From the reconstructed pressure field a
continuous record of windspeed and direction at gradient height can be generated
at any one location or multiple locations in the United States. The approach
eliminates the problems which plague surface- level measurements and provides a
means to estimate area- wide risk associated with the passing of intense, large-
scale, low pressure systems. This is an SBIR Phase I project. ***