* 9361034
* Increased Endurance Lifetime of MoS2 Coating on Ti-6A1-4V   by Substrate-Surface-Pretreatment
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/1994,09/30/1994
* Brett Buchholtz, Colorado Engineering Research Laboratory (CERL) Inc
* Standard Grant
* Kesh S. Narayanan
* 09/30/1994
* USD 64,943.00

9361034 Buchholtz Improving the wear-endurance-lifetimes of sputtered MoS2 on
Titanium (Ti) alloys represents an enabling technology for these alloys.
Colorado Engineering Research Laboratory (CERL) proposes to pretreat Ti-6A1-4V
surfaces by elevated-temperature-ion- implantation and reactive-ion-beam-
sputter-deposition to produce ceramic surface layers, which will significantly
(i.e., 2 orders of magnitude) improve the wear-endurance-lifetimes of sputtered
MoS2. Ceramic layers that exhibit a range of electronic (band gap) properties
will be formed on Ti-6A1-4V substrate surfaces. Pretreated substrate surfaces
will be characterized by X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy to establish the
binding energies/chemical states of elements important in the bonding process.
Scratch adhesion tests on the MoS2/pretreated substrates will be performed to
establish the three best pretreatments. Wear-endurance-lifetimes tests will then
be performed, in an argon atmosphere, on specimens exhibiting the greatest
adhesion. Correlations of ceramic electronic properties with MoS2 tribological
performance will be made. Preparation of pretreated substrates and mechanism
gears for commercial coating vendors to apply their specific tribo-coatings is a
viable product. Increased use of Ti gearing in mechanisms and transmissions will
result in reduced weight of space and terrestrial vehicles and increased fuel
efficiency. ***