* 9361525
* High Sensitivity Nanoprobe for Molecular Imaging
* TIP,TI
* 04/15/1994,12/31/1994
* Philippe Bado, CLARK-MXR INC
* Standard Grant
* Darryl G. Gorman
* 12/31/1994
* USD 65,000.00

9361525 Bado This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) project is in the
general area of surface chemistry and in the subfields of Secondary Ion Mass
Spectrometry (SIMS) and Multiphoton Resonance Ionization (MPRI). The objective
of the research is to fabricate and test a high- sensitivity nanoprobe with the
capability of directly determining the lateral location of atoms and molecules
on nonconducting surfaces with high spatial resolution (100nm) and very high
sensitivity in the atomole range. The nanoprobe will combine sub-picosecond
laser techniques in MPRI with focused ion beams from TOF-SIMS in surface imaging
applications. During Phase I, the development of a post-ionization ultrashort
pulse laser source will be emphasized. Laser source parameters will be optimized
to boost nanoprobe sensitivity. A two to three order of magnitude improvement in
sensitivity over systems with identical spatial resolution is anticipated. %%%
There is a clear market in surface science and biology for imaging tools with
sub-micron resolution and high chemical sensitivity. The proposed nanoprobe
complements existing capabilities in optical and electron microscopy, provides
the ability to identify chemical species with high spatial resolution, and
promises to enhance our ability to image biological surfaces. ***