* 9361116
* A Diffusion Gradient System for Isolating Microorganisms and Studying Microbial Processes Related to Detoxification of  Hazardous Chemicals
* TIP,TI
* 02/15/1994,01/31/1995
* John Koh, Koh Development Inc
* Standard Grant
* Kesh S. Narayanan
* 01/31/1995
* USD 74,662.00

9361116 Koh Microorganisms are primarily responsible for the degradation of
toxic chemicals that enter the environment. Successful isolation and
exploitation of these microbes for bioremediation requires identifying the
physico-chemical conditions under which detoxification activity is maximized.
This work proposes to develop an analytical diffusion gradient chamber that
mimics the diffusive processes that prevail in the microbial world. This system
can be used to separate, enrich for, and isolate detoxifying microorganisms, as
well as study the behavior of , and detoxification processes mediated by, these
organisms. The proposed system will consist of a gradient chamber for culturing
microorganisms in multiple, continuous diffusion gradients of small soluble
molecules. In addition there will be an effluent chamber for consolidating
effluent flow from the system, an environmental control unit of maintaining
constant temperature, and an imaging unit to monitor and quantify microbial
growth and movement. These components will be developed by Koh Development, Inc.
The system will be tested and evaluated by Koh Development with help from
researchers at Michigan State University (MSU). The scientists at MSU will also
use the system to evaluate the chemotactic response of an individual bacterial
species to multiple chemical cues. In addition, gradients of salt and toluene
will be used to evaluate the response of a natural community from a soil site
contaminated with oil brine. Mathematical models will also be developed that aid
in optimizing the performance of the system.