* 9361730
* Spatial Coherence Effect Tomography for Biological          Structural Analysis
* TIP,TI
* 06/01/1994,02/28/1995
* Tin Aye, Physical Optics Corporation (Corporate Headquarters)
* Standard Grant
* Kesh S. Narayanan
* 02/28/1995
* USD 64,982.00

9361730 Aye POC proposes an entirely new approach to tomography in which
recording and reconstruction of the 3-D object is done in 2-D slices
automatically, without significant computer assistance and with very high
spatial resolution. This new process is based on reduced coherence
interferometry and will be called Spatial Coherence Effect Tomography (SCET).
SCET overcomes the limitations of both classical holographic and tomographic
approaches. Previous attempts at 3-D tomographic imaging usually involved 2-D
projection images and the heavy use of computers for data processing and
display, thus reducing spatial resolution. Although holographic imaging can
provide high resolution, it lacks an intrinsic tomographic interpretation. The
proposed method is based on holographic recording using radiation with very
short temporal coherence length which can overcome major drawbacks in techniques
using such sources, e.g., x-ray lasers, while still preserving the advantages of
both tomography and holography. Moreover, the method is simple and efficient
because it can provide a continuum of high (spatial) resolution images of object
slices in a single recording. This new system will produce low-cost, high-
resolution tomographic imaging for biological structural analysis as well as
other non-destructive-evaluation (NDE) applications. ***