* 9361715
* Simultaneous Measurement of Two Arbitrary Ultrashort Laser  Pulses Using Double-Blind Frequency Resolved Optical Gating
* TIP,TI
* 01/15/1994,03/31/1995
* Daniel Kane, Southwest Sciences Inc
* Standard Grant
* Darryl G. Gorman
* 03/31/1995
* USD 73,074.00

9361715 Kane We propose to develop an instrument that would completely
characterize (measure the intensity and phase) two ultrashort laser pulses
simultaneously, ultimately in a single shot, which would facilitate measurement
of low energy ultrashort pulses, help to characterize ultrashort laser systems,
and would also allow sub-pulse dynamics to be resolved. The proposed device is
based on a newly invented technique to measure the intensity and phase of
ultrashort light pulses called frequently-resolved optical gating (FROG).
However, rather than use the pulse to gate itself via the optical Kerr effect,
the proposed technique uses an unknown pulse to gate a different unknown pulse.
Like FROG, the gated pulse is spectrally resolved for a series of time delays.
The intensity and phase of both pulses is found by using two-dimensional phase
retrieval methods that are commonly used in astronomy and image processing to
deblur images. This device would not only measure pulses, but would provide
insight into ultrafast laser operation as well and hence allow them to be used
more easily and more effectively. Immediate commercial applications are directed
toward use as a diagnostic for existing ultrafast laser systems for which few
are currently available. Future commercial applications include use as research
tool for industry, academia, and government. *** v s t $ $ $ ( F / h h / 1
Courier Symbol &amp; Arial 5 Courier New h c c c " h YB %YB % c C
R:\WW20USER\ABSTRACT.DOT Denise Henry Denise Henry