* 9362155
* Improving Neural Network Reliability for Dynamic System     Modeling and Control Optimization Through the Use of        Confidence Measures
* TIP,TI
* 03/15/1994,11/30/1994
* Yuchun Lee, Unica Technologies, Incorporated
* Standard Grant
* Ritchie B. Coryell
* 11/30/1994
* USD 57,562.00

9362155 Lee No algorithms exist that generate comprehensive, statistically sound
reliability information for neural networks. Reliability of neural nets is
affected by (1) the amount of training data, (2) input novelty, (3) data
consistency and (4) time-varying system dynamics. Confidence measures con gauge
network reliability by indication when sufficient training data has been
presented for good generalization, when a neural network's output should be
trusted, and when periodic retraining should occur in slow time-varying dynamic
systems. They can also help automate neural network controllers in a closed-loop
environment. Confidence generation algorithms complement virtually all neural
nets and can help their integration with existing controllers into production
environments. Unica will develop and test confidence algorithms for each of the
four independent factors affecting reliability. This research will be based on
established theories and innovative ideas, using artificial and real-world data
from "Alcoa's aluminum reduction process. The principal investigator, Yuchun
Lee, along with neural network expert, Dr. Richard Lippmann of MIT Lincoln
Laboratory, provide the perfect combination of real-world application exposure
and theoretical background to conduct this research. Successful results are
expected to have great commercial potential for incorporation into neural
network-based process control applications. ***