* 9362170
* Adaptation of GIS for Location of Surface Transportation    Objects
* TIP,TI
* 03/01/1994,02/28/1995
* Yakov Smotritsky, Advanced Routing Technologies Inc
* Standard Grant
* Sara B. Nerlove
* 02/28/1995
* USD 75,000.00

9362170 SMOTRITSKY The location of surface-transportation routes and utility
corridors requires consideration of economic, political, engineering, and
environmental issues. The potential for simultaneously considering these diverse
factors has been increased dramatically in recent years through the development
of sophisticated geographic information systems (GISs), but procedures for
analyzing data in ways that identify optimal routes have not yet been developed.
This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project will begin work
on the development and application of an algorithm to identify least- cost and
environmentally acceptable route locations between points. Special attention
will be given to three major facets of the optimal route location problem. With
respect to identification of the shortest path, this project will focus on
adaptation of an algorithm that minimizes metrication errors that result from
characteristics of the spatial units for which data are associated. The project
will address directional factors, especially the role of slopes in terrain that
can have a major impact on the operation of transport and utility systems, by
introducing elements of a third dimension into calculations. The project also
will consider the practical need to consider how routes cross boundaries between
parcels, because past experience has shown that route location problems are
reduced when fewer parcels are affected. This phase of the project will consist
of four parts: (1) the testing and improvement of an existing algorithm to
determine the computational complexity of adaptations, (2) evaluation of
commercially available geographic databases to provide terrain and boundary
information for test calculations, (3) creation of a graphical interface for
users to simplify information entry for additional data, and (4) application of
a revised algorithm in a small-scale demonstration project focusing on highway
location in western New York state. The test demonstration will be undertaken in
cooperation with officials of the New York State Department of Transportation.
Through development and testing of this algorithm, the investigators will
advance the capabilities for GISs to address a critical set of problems in a
more powerful and efficient way. The use of this type of algorithm is expected
to reduce construction costs of transportation routes and utility corridors by
four to seven percent, thereby saving both public- and private-sector
organizations millions of dollars annually. This type of algorithm also will
help the U.S. maintain its competitive advantage in geographic information
systems, a rapidly growing segment of the information technology industry. ***