* 9362057
* Instrumented Test Kit System for Metabolic Characterization and Identification of Marine Bacteria
* TIP,TI
* 02/15/1994,10/31/1994
* Barry Bochner, BIOLOG INC
* Standard Grant
* Kesh S. Narayanan
* 10/31/1994
* USD 65,000.00

9362057 Bochner There is a growing recognition of the need to care for our ocean
environments and to prevent or at least minimize chemical pollution introduced
by man. Marine bacteria play a key role by initiating the recycling metabolic
good chain of the oceans. However, our knowledge of these organisms, their
diversity, taxonomy, and metabolic capabilities, is still at a rudimentary
level. In this project, Biolog, Inc. proposes to develop a simple and rapid
instrumented system for characterizing and identifying a broad range of
heterotrophic, mesophilic marine bacteria or mixed populations of marine
microorganisms. The system will be composed of microplate test kits which can be
read and analyzed by an existing computer-controlled reading instrument. A
second goal of this proposed research program is to collect and analyze data on
the metabolic capabilities of microbial populations indigenous to ocean
environments. The fundamental scientific insights gained in the proposed study
should aid in the development of strategies for preserving, enhancing, and/or
directing the metabolism of marine bacteria for preservation or reclamaton of
marine habitat. The instrumented test kit system will be marketed to marine and
fishery organizations and research institutes and to commercial fish and
shellfish farming operations.