* 9362135
* Optimal Ship Design and Simulator Development Using         Systems Identification Techniques
* TIP,TI
* 04/01/1994,03/31/1995
* Ramani Duraiswami, Dynaflow Inc
* Standard Grant
* Darryl G. Gorman
* 03/31/1995
* USD 75,000.00

9362135 Duraiswami Optimization in ship system design is a problem which, if
properly formulated and solved, would have great economic impact. However, the
problem cannot be easily cast mathematically as a classical single objective
optimization problem. In ship system design a considerable number of criteria
must be satisfied of which some can only be formulated in fuzzy terms. This is
particularly true in modeling/simulating ship maneuverability, where the
adequateness of a simulator can only be judged by consulting a ship
master/pilot. To build a successful ship simulator, the equations of ship motion
must be identified. This systems identification problem is ill-posed. In the
proposed research we tackle the problem of developing a framework for optimizing
design, by incorporating in the procedure the mathematical simulation and
identification of ship dynamics in real time. The ill-posed problem will be
formulated using multiple physical constraints/objectives, and solved via
pareto- optimization. Efficient computer programs implementing our theory and
algorithms will be developed. Phase I research will develop an inexpensive
prototype ship maneuvering simulator, based on simple PC architectures. In
future phases the developed tools will be used to develop procedures for optimal
ship system design, and in assisting shipboard decision making.