* 9362028
* Constructive Abstraction of Logic and Mathematical Concepts through Interactive Games
* TIP,TI
* 03/01/1994,11/30/1994
* Michael Micotto, Labrador Educational Products
* Standard Grant
* Sara B. Nerlove
* 11/30/1994
* USD 65,000.00

9362028 Miccotto There is a definite trend in early childhood education away
from rote learning methods toward more child directed, activity based learning.
As children act upon and change the external environment, they internally
construct knowledge. Constructivism stresses hands-on interactive learning
through problem solving activities that provoke thought and reflection. Many
early childhood educators have endorsed and integrated games as a primary means
of Mathematics and Logic education. Some games can provide an excellent
opportunity for children to compare, seriate, equate, count, and establish a
concept of number and logic. Unfortunately, they games weren't designed for this
specific purpose, and often don't provide the level of interaction desired.
Furthermore, todays sophisticated children often tire of simple games. We
propose to empirically test the hypothesis that interactive games can more
efficiently promote constructive abstraction of the concept of number, concept
of inclusion, concept of conservation, and other basic mathematical and logical
thought functions. Cognition of these concepts at an early age would lay the
foundation for development of higher rational powers and independent thought.
Furthermore, it would directly improve mathematics performance, confidence, and
enthusiasm in later education. ***