* 9362197
* Polar Telescience Via Satellite Communication Relay
* TIP,TI
* 05/01/1994,07/31/1995
* Robert Douglas, Sierracom Inc
* Standard Grant
* Michael F. Crowley
* 07/31/1995
* USD 63,000.00

9362197 DOUGLASS This project will to use a low altitude, polar-orbiting, data
collection satellite platform, in conjunction with commercial communication
satellites, to provide direct worldwide recovery and distribution of data from
in-situ instrumentation platforms. It also provides a command link for remote
control of the untended platforms. This project offers an affordable approach to
greatly improved polar telescience. It will significantly increase communication
capacity and reduce delays in data recovery for deployed systems. The overall
objective of the program is to increase the daily data throughput capability by
a factor of 100 or more, compared to existing systems. The anticipated total
system cost makes it feasible to develop the system with private sector
financing and operate it on a a fee-for- service basis. The Phase I study will
(1) examine user requirements, (2) develop a system specification, (3) prepare a
preliminary design of the sensor platform and satellite equipment, (4) perform a
cost effectiveness analysis, including budgetary life cycle costs, and (5)
develop a Phase II plan for system development, simulation, and demonstration.
The study will emphasize minimization of total system complexity and costs by
using simple sensor platform communication packages, low cost development
options, proven satellite components, and existing, proven comsat systems for
data distribution. ***