* 9362165
* Solution Methods for Differential Algebraic Equations in    Mechanical Simulation Systems
* TIP,TI
* 05/01/1994,04/30/1995
* Rajiv Rampalli, Mechanical Dynamics Inc
* Standard Grant
* Darryl G. Gorman
* 04/30/1995
* USD 75,000.00

9362165 Rampalli Mechanical System Simulation (MSS) is the technology used to
analyze systems undergoing large overall motion, such as an automobile going
over a pothole or a space shuttle performing satellite retrieval. MSS
formulations lead to a coupled set of Differential and Algebraic Equations
called Index-3 DAE. Index reduction methods (IRM) are employed to simplify and
solve these equations. Three factors determine the accuracy and stability of
solutions for mechanical systems: (a) the System States selected, (b) the IRM
used, and (c) the numerical integrator used. Ideally, these selections should be
problem driven. Yet, most commercial MSS software apply very limited
combinations of the above to all problems. We will address this limitation be
developing a library of IRM and integrators, and allow for their independent
selection. In Phase-I, we will enhance an Augmented Lagrangian Formulation, an
IRM, to control constraint violation (ALF- CC), implement it and demonstrate its
effectiveness with two integrators. ALF-CC is very accurate and fast. Unlike
other IRM, it promises to solve through singular configurations, accommodate
inequality constraints and system topology changes. ALF-CC will be compared to
other methods. In Phase-II, we will expand this library and facilitate creation
of problem specific simulators.