* 9600229
* NSF-CGP Fellowship:  Relationship between Structural        Disorder Parameters and Conductivity in Semiconductor       Fullerene Films
* O/D,OISE
* 10/01/1996,09/30/1997
* Daxing Han, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Larry H. Weber
* 09/30/1997
* USD 15,100.00

9600229 Han This proposal supports the collaboration of Dr. Daxing Han of
Department of Physics and Astronomy at the University of North Carolina at
Chapel Hill and Dr. Shoji Nitta at Faculty of Engineering of Gifu University.
Project funding will enable Dr. Han to spend three months in Japan, resident at
Gifu University, in order to study the structure disorder parameter in
semiconductor fullerene films. Dr. Han has previously studied the structure
disorder in non-crystalline semiconductors. Dr. Nitta has been investigating the
optical absorption of semiconductor fullerene film. Dr. Han will combine her
expertise with that of Dr. Nitta to study the correlation between structure
disorder and conducting properties in semiconducting fullerence. This proposal
brings together research scientists from two countries working in the area of
fullerence. Fullerence and related materials have attracted great interest in
recent years because of their unusual properties and potential applications. The
U.S. scientist will have the opportunity to become familiar with fullerene film
preparation, research techniques, and facilities at Gifu University while
contributing to the overall research effort. Therefore, this proposal fulfills
the objectives of the Program in its exchange and transfer of scientific
knowledge through an international collaboration. ***