* 9600985
* CAREER: Research and Educational Innovation on Making Sense of Biodiversity Loss
* NONE,NONE
* 08/01/1996,07/31/2001
* James Proctor, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Continuing grant
* Rachelle D. Hollander
* 07/31/2001
* USD 203,631.00

This CAREER project investigates how people make descriptive, explanatory, and
moral sense of biodiversity loss at local to global scales. The objective of the
research component is to begin to clarify and compare conceptions of
environmental change held by two major actors in contemporary biodiversity
protection efforts: the scientists who play a key role in establishing
conservation strategies and the people who live in communities where the
strategies are being implemented. The research will examine the descriptions of
environmental change, explanations of major human driving forces, and
evaluations of moral significance. It will consider global, regional, and local
scales: the empirical focus for the latter will be a UN. Biosphere Reserve
located in the US. Pacific Northwest. The conceptual basis stems from
contemporary cultural geography and human dimensions of global environmental
change theory. Major methodological components, which will be evaluated as a
part of the program, include visualization-based group interviews, narrative
analysis of biodiversity literature and map representations, and a survey. The
educational objective is to develop World Wide Web (WWW) based learning
resources and opportunities for interaction beween students in college-level
geography programs as well as for people living in sites where biodiversity
conservation efforts are taking place. Components include development of
collaborative WWW networks, information resources for the study site, an
interactive module on cultural dimensions of biodiversity loss and conservation,
and the conversion of existing human dimensions modules from the American
Association of Geographers to WWW format.