* 9600568
* Ca2+ Gradients, cGMP and the Cytoskeleton in Symmetry       Breaking in Pelvetia Zygotes
* BIO,IOS
* 07/15/1996,06/30/2000
* Kenneth Robinson, Purdue Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Judith Plesset
* 06/30/2000
* USD 303,790.00

IBN 9600568 Kenneth R. Robinson, P.I. A central problem of developmental biology
is how pattern emerges from the relatively unpatterned state of the egg. The
eggs of the brown algae are especially useful for the approaching this problem
because they are completely unpatterned at the time of fertilization. These
cells respond to unilateral blue light by forming their primary developmental
axis and germinating away from the light source. Our research aims to understand
the mechanisms whereby the cells convert the light signal to a localized growth
response. Preliminary results indicate that a small, soluble molecule, cyclic
GMP, is produced in response to light and somehow directs the later events. We
will carry out experiments to test this hypothesis and will use antibodies to
map the distribution of cyclic GMP in cells that have been exposed to light. It
is remarkable that these lower plants seem to use a sensory mechanism that is
closely related to that used by the vertebrate eye for detecting light. The next
step will be to understand how the cyclic GMP changes are coupled to the later
events. There is evidence that calcium ions are involved, so we will attempt to
map the distribution of calcium in responding cells. Finally, we will explore
the possible downstream targets of calcium. A calcium-binding protein called
calmodulin appears to be involved and we will test this idea. Also, the plant
version of the muscle protein, actin, has been shown to necessary for
germination, so we will study the regulation of that protein by calcium.