* 9600047
* Young Investigator Symposium at the 1996 Workshop on Steriod Hormones and Brain Function at Breckenridge, CO:           March 30 - April 3, 1996
* BIO,IOS
* 03/01/1996,08/31/1996
* Charles Roselli, Oregon Health & Science University
* Standard Grant
* Kathie L. Olsen
* 08/31/1996
* USD 6,350.00

9600047 Roselli Steroid hormones are integral modulators of neural communication
and development. These simple molecules, acting as hormones, have the potential
to influence all neural functions from initiation of neural development to the
activity of individual synapses in adults. Recent advances in knowledge about
non-genomic actions of steroid hormones, the involvement of non-neuronal
elements in reproductive function and the role of steroid hormones on neural
organization, have had striking effects on neuroendocrine physiology, neuronal
cell biology, reproductive physiology and non-reproductive behaviors such as
learning and memory, aging, aggression, feeding and emotion. This action will
provide support for a Young Investigator Symposium to be held at the 1996
Workshop on Steroid Hormones and Brain Function in Breckenridge, CO on March
30-April 3, 1996. This workshop brings together scientists using different
approaches to address important and timely issues concerning steroid hormone and
growth factor involvement in brain function. Molecular biologists,
neuroanatomists, neurophysiologists and behavioral scientists will discuss
issues such as neurotrophic and neuroprotective effects of estrogen, the
neurobiology of androgenic anabolic steroids, functions of G-protein linked
steroid hormone receptors, and steroids and reproductive behaviors. These are
fundamentally important questions in a field that is rapidly changing and
advancing. The inclusion of the Young Investigator Symposium will provide a
mechanism to foster young scientists and facilitate collaborative efforts that
may significant enhance our understanding of basic neurobiological mechanisms.