* 9600165
* Cooperative Research: Novel Polymeric Materials Based on    Natural Resources in Vietnam
* O/D,OISE
* 05/15/1996,04/30/2001
* James Mark, University of Cincinnati Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Alice C. Hogan
* 04/30/2001
* USD 75,417.00

9600165 Mark This three year award supports collaboration on novel polymeric
materials between James Mark, University of Cincinnati, and Pham Huu Ly,
Institute of Chemistry, National Center for Natural Science and Technology,
Hanoi, Vietnam. The proposed research will investigate the reinforcement of
natural rubber, a common substance in Vietnam and therefore of great interest to
researchers there. The proposed research is of fundamental and practical
interest to the US as well. The primary general goal is to apply some of the
latest processing technologies to natural rubber, and to other natural
resources, to produce modern, high-performance materials. The potential for
producing more environmentally benign materials is an important implication of
this research. This mutually beneficial choice of research topics seems well-
suited for the early stages of cooperation with Vietnam. The National Center for
Natural Science and Technology in Vietnam is the premiere research arm of the
government.. Because natural rubber is so important to Vietnam, there has been a
relatively well-funded research effort in polymer science at the Institute of
Chemistry. This proposal draws on experience gained by the PI in earlier
interaction with Dr. Ly, on common research interests, and on complementary
expertise. Plans call for training of a Vietnamese researcher at the University
of Cincinnati, and for exchanges of research visits.