* 9600930
* CAREER: Prosodic Phrasing and Feature Specification as      Determinants of Phonetic Form
* SBE,BCS
* 02/15/1997,01/31/2002
* Marie Huffman, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Continuing Grant
* Cecile Mckee
* 01/31/2002
* USD 203,612.00

The proposed project will integrate innovation in teaching with important basic
research on vocal cord function in human speech. The research component of the
project will examine the ways in which linguistic phrasing--position in a
sentence, differences in sentence structure, etc.--affects the quality of
sounds, particularly the way the vocal cords move, during speech. Many previous
studies have not given adequate attention to the possible effects that
differences in sentence structure could have on the timing of articulator
movements for speech. As a result, important generalizations may have been
missed about the way that variations in vocal cord function are used in the
world s languages. This project will be one of the first large scale research
studies which combines careful control of linguistic phrasing with carefully
planned cross-language comparisons of vocal cord position and movement during
speech production. The result of the research will be a clearer understanding of
the similarities and differences between languages in speech production. The
similarities between languages will further our understanding of the innate
common linguistic abilities of all humans. The differences will make clearer
some of the speech production skills which must be acquired by individuals
learning a new language. The teaching portion of the project involves developing
a new curriculum for basic education in phonetics, using the research results as
the core of a laboratory-centered course. Students will develop basic skills in
speech acoustics and physiology by collecting their own data on vocal cord
function, its coordination with other speech articulators, its acoustic
manifestations, etc., and comparing their data with that of the larger corpus
generated in the research portion of the project. By participating in analysis
of data pertinent to current research questions in the field, students will gain
first hand knowledge of how scientific methods are applied t o the study of
human language, and they will have a more active and collaborative educational
experience.