* 9600548
* U.S.-Poland Cooperative Research on Problems in Set         Theoretic Analysis
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/1996,05/31/2000
* Krzysztof Ciesielski, West Virginia University Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Cassandra Dudka
* 05/31/2000
* USD 15,395.00

INT-9600548 Ciesielski This U.S.-Polish Cooperative Researah award is to
research "Problems in Set Theoretic Analysis." The principal researchers are Dr.
Krzysztof Ciesielski and Dr. Jerzy Wojciechowski of West Virginia University and
Dr. Tomasz Natkaniec and two other colleagues of the Pedagogical University in
Bydgoszcz, Poland. The researchers work in the newly created area of Set
Theoretic Analysis. This is a branch of Real Analysis, the theoretic foundation
of Calculus, that is characterized by extensive use of modern set-theoretic
techniques. The objectives of the project are to further understanding of the
basic properties of such a fundamental concept in the whole of mathematics as
the notion of a real function. New developments in Set Theory will provide the
necessary tools to make the realization of this objective possible. In addition
to the senior personnel, the project involves five graduate students (two of
whom are women). Their involvement in an international activity, at this early
stage of their careers, will be of great importance for them and will likely
lead to broader international cooperation in the future. This research in
mathematics fulfills the program objectives of bringing together leading experts
in the U.S. and Poland to combine complementary efforts and capabilities in
areas of strong mutual interest and competence on the basis of equality,
reciprocity, and mutuality of benefit. *** ??