* 9600914
* CAREER: Identification of the Site-of-Action in Wheat of    Pyrenophora tritici-repentis Toxin
* BIO,IOS
* 07/01/1996,06/30/2002
* Lynda Ciuffetti, Oregon State University
* Continuing grant
* Sharman D. O'Neill
* 06/30/2002
* USD 495,901.00

9600914 Ciuffetti Research: This is a CAREER Award. A major goal of modern plant
biology is a molecular definition of factors that regulate plant-microbe
interactions. The PI is investigating a disease called tan spot of wheat which
is caused by the fungus, Pyrenophora tritici-repentis. This fungus is pathogenic
because it produces the host-selective toxin (HST) called Ptr toxin. Unlike all
other HSTs, Ptr toxin is a protein and the direct product of a single gene.
Thus, pathogenicity in this fungus is regulated by a single gene for toxin
production. Also, genetic evaluation of sensitivity to Ptr toxin has
demonstrated that the wheat response to the toxin and consequently,
susceptibility to the pathogen, is controlled by a single dominant gene. The
research component of this award is composed of four specific objectives which
encompass a diversity of approaches including an immunological, biochemical, and
genetical approach to the identificaiton of the site-of-action of Ptr toxin:
Objective 1. IDENTIFICATION AND GENETIC CHARACTERIZATION OF DIPLOID WHEATS
SENSITIVE TO PTR TOXIN. Objective 2. PRODUCTION OF LABELED DERIVATIVES AND
BIOCHEMICAL IDENTIFICATION OF THE SITE-OF- ACTION/RECEPTOR OF PTR TOXIN.
Objective 3. GENETICAL ANALYSIS OF INTERACTIONS BETWEEN THE TOXIN AND ITS SITE-
OF-ACTION/RECEPTOR USING THE YEAST TWO-HYBRID SYSTEM. Objective 4.
IMMUNOCYTOCHEMICAL LOCALIZATION OF THE SITE-OF- ACTION/RECEPTOR OF PTR TOXIN.
Education: Development of an effective academic career in the plant sciences
requires integration of both research and education. Oregon State University and
the Department of Botany and Plant Pathology are committed to this integration.
In keeping with the mission of the University and the Department toward graduate
and undergraduate training, the recruitment of underrepresented individuals into
science, and outreach to the community, the education career plan is composed of
four main objectives: Objective 1. INCORPORATION OF VIDEOM ICROSCOPY, COMPUTER
ENHANCED IMAGING AND INFORMATION TECHNOLOGIES IN TEACHING UNDERGRADUATE PLANT
SCIENCES. Objective 2. TRAINING GRADUATE STUDENTS TO BE MORE EFFECTIVE EDUCATORS
IN THE PLANT SCIENCES. Objective 3. COMMITMENT TO WOMEN AND TRAINING OF
UNDERGRADUATES FOR A CAREER IN THE SCIENCES. Objective 4. SERVICE TO THE
COMMUNITY. This PI's research projects provide the underlying scientific subject
for the education activities.