* 9600875
* CAREER: Immunological Development In A Marsupial
* BIO,MCB
* 10/01/1996,03/31/2001
* Robert Miller, University of New Mexico
* Standard Grant
* Randolph Addison
* 03/31/2001
* USD 343,232.00

96-00875 Miller The development of specific immune responses, such as generating
antibodies, is an unique and fascinating aspect in the evolution of vertebrates.
Immunology is an exciting area in biology for students and for the public, in
general. This is caused in part by the daily reminders of new emerging diseases,
such as the Ebola virus and Hantaviruses as well as the continuing AIDS
epidemic. Most of what is known about the development and function of the immune
system has been obtained from muridaes and from humans, little is known about
the development of immunocompetence in other vertebrates. The objectives of the
grant are to analyze immunological development at a molecular level in a model
marsupial species, the short tailed opossum Monodelphis domestica.
Immunocompetence in marsupials develops postnatally whereas in placental mammals
this occurs early in the prenatal period. Little is known about the development
of the immune response in marsupials. Toward understanding this process in
marsupials, opossum genes that are apparently involved in lymphocyte development
have been cloned and characterized and expression analysis of these genes during
development has been initiated. This grant also outlines plans to integrate an
active research program in comparative immunology that involves undergraduates
and graduates as well as a research and educational program involving a local
instructor and students at a nearby community college. This program is set in
the unique environment created by the Albuquerque community and the University
of New Mexico, which is one of the largest minority research institutions in the
country. An important aspect of this educational plan is the use of this
research project to foster an active collaboration with the biology faculty of
the local community college. %%% The generation of antibodies in the immune
response is an unique and fascinating aspect in the evolution of vertebrates.
While much is known about the development and function of the immune systems of
murid rodents and of humans, little is known about the development of
immunocompetence in other vertebrates. For example, how does immunocompetence
develops in marsupials, which occurs postnatally, in contrast to development in
placental mammals, which occurs early in the prenatal period? The educational
component of this grant will foster an active collaboration with the biology
faculty at the local community college. This collaboration will involve working
with students, primarily minority, who enter four year University from the two
year college without having been exposed to active research programs. Cross-
institution course development is also providing exposure to research active
faculty for these students. ***