* 9600183
* U.S.-Korea Cooperative Research on Lipid Second Messengers  in Plant Signal Transduction
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/1996,05/31/1999
* Philip Low, Purdue Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Gerald Edwards
* 05/31/1999
* USD 31,956.00

9600183 Low This award provides funds to permit Dr. Philip S. Low, Department
of Chemistry, Purdue University, to pursue with Dr. Youngsook Lee, Department of
Life Sciences, Pohang University of Science and Technology, Korea, for 24
months, a program of cooperative research on lipid second messengers in plant
signal transduction. The collaborators propose to further their understanding of
the roles of lipid-derived second messengers in plant defense by (1) testing
whether addition of phospholipase A or C reaction products can independently
stimulate the oxidative burst in both cultured cells and in intact plants, (2)
determining whether elicitors of the oxidative burst also activate
phospholipases A and C in intact soybean and tomato plants, and (3) evaluating
whether mutant tomato plants that are defective in the oligogalacturonide-
induced oxidative burst are also defective in activating these phospholipases.
Plant defense systems are activated upon exposure to pathogens or to specific
molecules derived from pathogens, termed elicitors. One of the most rapid plant
defense responses identified to date is the oxidative burst, a process whereby
hydrogen peroxide or peroxide ions are released within minutes of elicitor
binding to plant cell surface receptors. The experiments to be undertaken in
this project are expected to establish whether phospholipases A and C
participate in signaling the oxidative burst in both suspension cultured cells
and in intact soybean and tomato plants. The collaborators are experienced in
research in the field of this project. Dr. Low's experience, however, is
primarily with cultured cell assays, while Dr. Lee has concentrated on intact
plant systems. Their complementary expertise will be a valuable asset in this
study of plant defense systems. This project is relevant to the objectives of
the U.S.-Korea Cooperative Science Program which seeks to increase the level of
cooperation between U.S. and Korean scientists and engineer s through the
exchange of scientific information, ideas, skills, and techniques and through
collaboration on problems of mutual benefit. Korean participation in the project
is supported by the Korea Science and Engineering Foundation (KOSEF). This
project adds an international cooperative dimension to the PI's research under
NSF Grant No. MCB-9303929. ***