* 9600142
* The Fallen Leaf Lake Conference on Horizontal Gene Transfer Sept. 12-15, 1996, South Lake Tahoe, CA
* BIO,MCB
* 08/15/1996,01/31/1997
* Michael Syvanen, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Patrick P. Dennis
* 01/31/1997
* USD 5,000.00

Syvanen 9600142 The Fallen Leaf Lake Conference, initiated in 1985, is a
bienneally held international meeting devoted to the molecular biology and
genetics of microorganisms found in the environment. Past meetings have
emphasized bacteria that grow on plants and in the soil. The 1996 conference
will expand upon topics that have been previously covered to multidisciplinary
area of horizontal gene transfer. The conference will therefore include and area
of high priority in the assessment of risk in the release of genetically
engineered microoganisms as well as explore a subject with profound theoretical
implications. The Fallen Leaf Lake Conferences offer the special opportunity is
provided during the course of the conference for informal exchanges between
participants. These conferences have an international complexion (for example,
the typical conference has participants from Europe, Asis, Australia, South
America, and the Middle East) and therefore the conference provides excellent
opportunities for graduate students and post docs to interact with
internationally recognized experts. The conference will bring together a variety
of people who have thought about horizontal gene transfer problems but from
different perspectives. A multidisciplinary meeting will be needed to cover
these different perspectives -- agricultural, medical and environmental
microbiology, comparative systematics, virology, molecular evolution and even
some paleontology. This will cover, for example, work in controlled field
experiments that have measured movement of altered genes in genetically
engineered organisms to native species, epidemiological surveys of during
resistant genes in human pathogens and phylogenetic analyses of extant organisms
that show the role of horizontal gene transfer in their history. In addition, a
number of evolutionist will be invited to discuss evolutionary patterns and
trends, with special emphasis on some problems in systematics and phylogenetics
of plants.