* 9600645
* U.S.-Brazil Planning Visit on Strongly Correlated Electronic Systems at Extreme Conditions
* O/D,OISE
* 05/01/1996,06/30/1996
* Milton Torikachvili, Florida State University
* Standard Grant
* Susan Parris
* 06/30/1996
* USD 2,500.00

9600645 Lacerda This U.S.-Brazil planning grant will support a trip by Alex
Lacerda of Florida State University and the Los Alamos National Laboratory to
the Universidade de Sao Paulo, Brazil to establish a collaboration with Nei
Fernandes de Oliveira Junior of the Instituto de Fisica of that institution. The
eventual objective will be to study the thermodynamic and transport properties
of Heavy Fermion (HF) and Kondo Insulator (KI) compounds and to construct a
miniaturized plastic dilution refrigerator to operate in pulsed magnetic fields
to 60T. The collaborators will also work with Milton Torikachvili of San Diego
State University in California, where low-field thermodynamic and transport
properties will be studied. Although these systems have been intensively
studied, the new project will provide needed data on behavior at extreme
conditions of magnetic fields and ultra low temperatures. The establishment of
cooperation between the excellent magnet facilities of Los Alamos Laboratory,
the low temperature expertise at Sao Paulo, and the experience in sample
preparation, magnetization and magnetotransport measurements at San Diego State
will produce a very high capability for carrying out the proposed
investigations. One result should be a new and useful experimental apparatus to
serve the scientific community. ***