* 9600581
* Social Change, Subsistence and Sedentism in the Pithouse-to-Pueblo Transition in the Southwest
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/1996,09/30/2003
* Thomas Rocek, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 09/30/2003
* USD 100,405.00

With National Science Foundation support Dr. Thomas Rocek will conduct three
seasons of archaeological excavation at the site of Dunlap-Salazar located in
central New Mexico. Preliminary work by Dr. Rocek indicates that the site dates
to approximately 500 to 700 A.D.and is marked by a ca. 300 by 400 meter square
scatter of lithic and ceramics. Small scale excavation has demonstrated the
presence of both semi-subterranean pit houses and storage pits. Through a
multiyear program of excavation and analysis Dr. Rocek will collect additional
information to test preliminary indications that inhabitants were dependent on
agricultural rather than hunted and gathered food and to reconstruct social
organization. To accomplish these goals he will locate and expose large enough
areas of architectural features and their surroundings to examine the
organization of domestic activities and to obtain increased chronological
control over the deposits to allow identification of associations between
dwellings and storage features and among the multiple dwellings on the site.
Multiple radiocarbon samples will be dated and phytolith and macrobotanical
analysis will provide detailed information on plants consumed. When Spanish
explorers first entered the Southwestern United States in the early 1500s they
found Native Americans living in large population aggregations in hierarchically
organized societies and dependent on agriculture. Archaeologists wish to
understand how this complex level of society developed and much of their
research in the Southwest has focused on this issue. A crucial changed occurred
in the mid first millennium AD when the typical semi-subterranean pithouse
dwellings were abandoned in favor of multistory pueblo houses. Based on data
from many excavations it appears that changes in dwelling type, settlement
pattern, reliance on agriculture and the development of social complexity appear
closely related and a number of models examine the interaction among these
variables. In this context the Dunlap-Salazar site is particularly interesting
because it challenges this assumption. The inhabitants of this pithouse village
appear to have been highly dependent on agriculture but to evince none of the
other supposedly related changes. Further work at the site will evaluate this
hypothesis. This research is important for several reasons. It will shed new
light on the variables which led to the rise of complex societies. It will
provide data of interest to many archaeologists and because many undergraduates
will participate in the field research the project will contribute to the
education of potential young scientists.