* 9600991
* Molecular Basis of Stability and Folding of Proteins
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/1996,07/31/2002
* Bertrand Garcia-Moreno, Johns Hopkins University
* Continuing grant
* Kamal Shukla
* 07/31/2002
* USD 522,000.00

9600991 Garcia-Morena The main goal of this research program is to determine the
detailed sequence of molecular events that leads to transitions between native
and denatured states of proteins. Dr. Garcia-Moreno is studying the energetics
of acid denaturation of staphylococcal nuclease with equilibrium thermodynamic
methods. An extensive collection of mutants where ionizable residues have been
substituted by uncharged amino acids will be used to determine the role of
individual ionizable residues. The emphasis is on resolving the contributions by
individual residues because that is the level needed to advance our current
understanding of the mechanisms of stability and folding of proteins. Another
goal is to characterize the physical and structural properties of compact
denatured states of nuclease, and to establish the molecular determinants of the
electrostatic effects that poise for denaturation by acid. Dr. Garcia- Moreno's
research is intimately interwoven with his teaching and training of students at
the graduate and undergraduate levels. %%% The stability of a folded protein is
always defined relative to a protein in a denatured state. While much is already
known about the structure and physico-chemical character of folded proteins,
those of denatured proteins remain largely unexplored. In order to understand
fully the relationship between the structure of a protein and its stability it
is necessary to understand better the denatured state. Denatured proteins do not
necessarily exist as truly random, unfolded polypeptides. Many denatured
proteins are compact and retain many of the structural and physical attributes
of the fully folded protein. Dr. Garcia-Moreno hopes to gain insights about the
manner in which proteins achieve their folded state by determining the sequence
of events that leads to transitions between folded and denatured proteins. He
will also study some of the noncovalent forces that stabilize proteins in
compact denatured st ates. Nuclease is a protein well suited for these studies
because it is not very stable and can be coaxed into compact denatured states
easily with acid, temperature or chemical denaturants. Dr. Garcia-Moreno is
developing courses in molecular physiology and in protein thermodynamics where
graduate and undergraduate students will learn the fundamental of macromolecular
structure, energetics and function by using computers to analyze high resolution
structures graphically, to predict energetics from structure, and to simulate
complex phenomena such as the conformational transitions that he will study in
the proposed research. ***