* 9600598
* U.S.-Portugal Cooperative Research:  Computational          Foundations of Non-Monotonic Reasoning
* O/D,OISE
* 09/15/1996,11/30/2000
* David Warren, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Jeanne E. Hudson
* 11/30/2000
* USD 25,600.00

This award will support collaboration in logic programming between US groups,
including students, at SUNY Stony Brook and Southern Methodist University, led
by Terrance Swift of SUNY Stony Brook, and the Universidade Nova de Lisboa in
Portugal, led by Professor Luis Moniz Pereira. They will create a sequential
engine capable of performing central aspects of non-monotonic reasoning to
develop a robust, scalable, freely-available system that will make possible the
use of logic programming for such applications such as diagnosis, planning, and
hypothetical reasoning over databases. They also propose to develop a
distributed version of XSB combined with PVM-Prolog to form a system capable of
performing non-monotonic reasoning in a distributed, agent-like environment. The
USB-SMU group has strengths in the fundamental theory of computational logic and
in implementing these theories in usable logic-based systems. The UniNova group
has strengths in the theoretical development of expressive logic systems with
negation and in the application of these systems to real-world problems. They
share an interest in implementation and evaluation strategies. Both groups have
begun to explore, in different ways, distributed non- monotonic reasoning, which
will address situations in which the knowledge itself is distributed, and will
model agent- like argumentation systems that can share knowledge non-
monotonically. The US group will provide efficient implementation of expressive
systems, the Portuguese, an expansion of the utility of the US systems, through
increased expressiveness and new applications.