* 9600115
* Supplement to LSAMP Award
* EDU,EES
* 11/01/1996,06/30/2003
* None None, University of Alabama at Birmingham
* Cooperative Agreement
* A.  Hicks
* 06/30/2003
* USD 5,061,881.00

9600115 Dale The Alabama Alliance for Minority Participation Program Phase I
began in 1991, as a response to a national need to increase the number of
underrepresented minorities receiving undergraduate degrees in science,
engineering and mathematics (SEM). Initial Alliance Members included eight
Historically Black Colleges and Universities: Alabama A&amp;M University,
Alabama State University, Miles College, Oakwood College, Stillman College,
Talladega College, Tougaloo College, Tuskegee University, one majority
institution, University of Alabama at Birmingham; and two businesses. The Coca-
Cola Foundation and International Business Machines (IBM). Conceived and
initiated by ten black faculty at these institutions with Ph.D. degrees in
science and mathematics, Alliance programs were designed to attract minorities
to careers in SEM disciplines, increase retention rates, and increase the
quality and quantity of underrepresented minorities receiving degrees in SEM
disciplines. These programs included: (1) AMP Scholars Program, (2) Summer
Research Internships, (3) AMP Drop-In Centers, (4) AMP Mentoring Programs, (5)
Faculty and Student Conferences, (6) Alabama AMP Retention Study, and (7)
Alabama AMP Science Day. The Alliance was successful in increasing the number of
graduates in SEM disciplines, improving the quality of science education at
participation institutions, and increasing the student retention rates of
program participants at participating institutions. AAMP Phase I built a solid
foundation for AAMP Phase II. This foundation will allow the Alliance to affect
minority student advancement through the critical decision points at the
transition between high school and college, 2-year and 4-year colleges and
undergraduate and graduate school. In addition, collaborations between the
Alliance and National Laboratories and the Alabama DOE/EPSCoR Program are
planned. Moreover, this foundation will allow AAMP Phase II to address the
problem of underrepres entation of minorities in the mathematics and science
teaching profession. AAMP Phase II will include the following additional
programs: (1) A Graduate School Bridge Program - designed to ease the transition
of minority students from college to graduate programs; (2) Summer Bridge
Program - designed to ease the transition of minority students from high school
and junior colleges to college; (3) AAMP Research Outreach Program - designed to
provide research experience for minority students at National Laboratories and
Research Clusters of the Alabama DOE/EPSCoR Program, and (4) AAMP Teacher
Preparation Program - designed to attract minorities to the mathematics and
science teaching profession, to prepare them for certification requirements, and
to provide research experience in teacher education. During the last three
years, all of the major state universities joined AAMP. This action will enhance
the success of AAMP Phase II and its impact on the higher education system in
Alabama. AAMP Phase II will expand and goal of AAMP Phase I to include graduate
SEM degrees and undergraduate degrees in mathematics and science education. The
project will provide significant cost-sharing, appropriate dissemination of
activities, and employ evaluation and assessment activities.