* 9600328
* NSF-CGP Fellowship:  Issues in Heterogeneous High           Performance Computing
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/1996,05/31/1999
* Richard Schlichting, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Gerald Edwards
* 05/31/1999
* USD 100,517.00

9600328, PI-Schlichting: This award supports the collaboration of Dr. Richard D.
Schlichtilg of the Department of Computer Science at the University or Arizona,
and Dr. Sigeo Ihara of the Intelligent Systems Department at Hitachi Ltd.'s
Central Research Laboratory (CRL). Funding from the project will allow Dr.
Schlichting to spend one year in Japan in residence at CRL collaborating with
Dr. Ihara on issues in heterogeneous high performance computing. Dr. Schlichting
will contribute a computer science perspective to the project based on his long-
standing research effort to develop software support for heterogeneous high
performance applications. Dr. Ihara will contribute an application perspective,
a demonstrated need for interconnecting heterogeneous scientific simulations,
and a prototype middleware system for interconnecting such simulations. The
combined expertise will facilitate improvement in the techniques and the
underlying software support needed to allow computational scientists to deal
with heterogeneity in high-performance computations. This proposal brings
together research scientists working in the area of high-performance computing.
The U.S. scientist will have the opportunity to become familiar with application
requirements, research techniques, and high-performance computing equipment at
CRL, while contributing to their efforts in heterogeneous computing. Therefore,
this proposal fulfills the objectives of the Program in using international
collaboration to facilitate the exchange of scientific knowledge.