* 9600496
* FASEB Conference: "Transport ATPases" will be held at       Copper Mountain, Colorado from 8-19-96 to 8-22-96
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/1996,07/31/1997
* Antonio Scarpa, Federation of Amer Societies For Exper Biology
* Standard Grant
* Marcia Steinberg
* 07/31/1997
* USD 2,000.00

9600496 Scarpa/Carafoli This is an application for partial funding of the first
summer conference on "Transport ATPases" to be held under the auspices of the
Federation of American Societies for Experimental Biology (FASEB) from August
19-22, 1996 at Copper Mountain, Colorado. The conference has the major aim of
bringing together one hundred and fifty investigators from a large number of
disciplines working on different aspects of various ATPases to exchange ideas
and the latest information on structure, function and regulation of these
important enzymes. These scientists represent a cadre of disciplines which
include biochemistry, biology, biophysics, chemistry, genetics, molecular
biology, pharmacology, physics and physiology. Transport ATPases are widely
distributed in cells and subcellular organelles. In the forward transport mode,
they utilize chemical energy il the form of ATP to build ionic gradients. This
energy transduction is key to excitability, contractility, secretion, and
overall cell function. The amount of ATP (and therefore nutrients and oxygen)
consumed by these ATPases is extremely large. Immense progress that has taken
place in this field is evident: several ATPases have been cloned; isozymes have
been found; hormonal regulation of expression has been documented; several
structural insights have been provided by x-ray diffraction, low angle
diffraction and site-directed mutagenesis; new transport ATPases such as the one
for Mg2+ transport have been described and characterized. This conference will
focus on the variations in structure, regulation and physiological significance
among different ATPases which have been described during the last few years. The
interactive environment should greatly stimulate collaborative efforts and help
identify new directions for future research in addition to new tools and
approaches, already successful for established ATPases, which may be applied to
newly discovered transporting enzymes. %%% Transport ATPases are proteins that
are capabl e of utilizing the energy stored in ATP to transport various ions or
molecules across cellular membranes. This form of energy transduction is
involved in many biological processes, such as nerve conduction, muscle
contraction, secretion, and overall cellular homeostasis. This meeting will try
to integrate knowledge on the various transport ATPases in the hopes of finding
unifying features as well as novel approaches to the study of newly discovered
transporting enzymes. ***