* 9600847
* The Use of Non-Aqueous Media to Probe Oxyferryl             Metalloenzyme Intermediates
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/1996,07/31/2001
* Patricia Mabrouk, Northeastern University
* Continuing Grant
* Parag R. Chitnis
* 07/31/2001
* USD 325,452.00

9600847 Mabrouk In the research component of the program, spectroscopic studies,
using uv-visible, circular dichroism, electron spin resonance and Raman
spectroscopies, will be performed the characterize the geometric and electronic
structure and redox properties of oxyferryl enzyme intermediates in organic
solvents. Study of direct interfacial electron transfer between these
intermediates and solid electrode substrates will be investigated, using cyclic
voltammetry and chronoamperometry, as a means of probing the relationship
between metalloenzyme intermediate structure and redox function in enzyme
catalysis. Oxyfedrryl intermediates in the peroxidase and cytochrome P 450
enzymic pathways will be the focus of these studies. The implications of this
research include the ability to characterize the structure an redox properties
of normally inaccessible enzyme intermedicates and the development of viable
commercial catalytic electrocatalytic devices based on enzyme chemistry. In the
educational component of this program, efforts will iclude modernization of the
course curriculum and teaching methodology used in undergraduate Quantitative
Analysis involving a "discovery"-based approach, expansion of current efforts to
introduce undergraduate and graduate students to the scientific literature, and
development of an integrated teaching/research program, which involves high
school, undergraduate, and graduate students, that can serve as a holistic model
of the scientific enterprise. %%% My research is focussed on studies that probe
on a molecular level how enzyme active site structure is related to function
for, in particular, horseradish peroxidase and cytochrome P450, enzymes that
play important roles in biosynthesis, metabolism, and detoxfication. We have
found that by dissolving enzymes in organic solvents it is possible to generate
highly reactive oxyferryl enzyme intermediates inaccessible to study in aqueous
solution. We have also shown that in organic solvents we can use electochemi
call methods to learn about the redox character of enzymes. We now intend to use
a wide range of spectroscopic and electrochemical methods to probe the oxyferryl
intermediates in horseradish peroxidase and cytochrome P 450. The implications
include the ability to map out individual steps in an enzyme's catalytic cycle
and to develop viable (electro) catalytic methods based on enzyme chemistry. My
educational efforts have been focused on involving students as early as possible
in the research experience. This has involved redesigning the undergraduate
Quantitative analysis course, designing projects and assignments that introduce
students at all levels to the scientific literature, and opening my research
laboratory to high school and undergraduate as well as graduate students. During
the next four years, I intend to author a major textbook/lab manual for
Quantitative Analysis, expand my efforts to make students comfortable with the
primary scientific literature, and develop an integrated teaching/research
program, that can serve as a holistic model of the scientific enterprise. ***