* 9600040
* Bayesian Communication in the Social Sciences
* SBE,SES
* 07/15/1996,06/30/1999
* John Geweke, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Cheryl Eavey
* 06/30/1999
* USD 154,170.00

This project will develop and implement procedures that will enhance
communication between investigators who report results and their audience (i.e.,
other investigators, decision makers, and students). These user-friendly
procedures will enable clients to alter investigators' priors, examine
alternative posterior moments, and combine models. Software will be developed
with standard file structures to facilitate control between it and user
software. This software will enable clients to evaluate the accuracy of
reweighted output, plot corresponding posterior densities, and average across
models to obtain posterior moments unconditional on models. It is expected that
this project will have two significant impacts in the social sciences. First, it
will place within the reach of all quantitative social scientists many of the
inherent advantages of Bayesian analysis by removing the unreasonable
computational demands that have previously been required. Second, it will enable
clients to rework investigators' analyses by modifying their priors, examining
alternative posterior moments, and updating samples, in less time than is
required to read a typical research report. Together these impacts should
greatly encourage analysis of the robustness of policy recommendations with
respect to assumptions and accelerate the application of new research to policy
problems.