* 9600393
* Japan JSPS Program:  Endocrine Correlates of Protogynous    Atrmaphroditism:  Importance of Key Steroidogenic Enzymes
* O/D,OISE
* 08/01/1996,10/31/1997
* Craig Morrey, Individual Award
* Fellowship Award
* Larry H. Weber
* 10/31/1997
* USD 3,000.00

9600393 Morrey This award supports a 12 month Japan Society for the Promotion of
Science (JSPS) Postdoctoral Fellowship for Dr. Craig Morrey at the National
Institute for Basic Biology, Okazaki, Japan. Dr. Morrey will work with Dr.
Yoshitaka Nagahama, professor in the Department of Developmental Biology,
Laboratory for Reproductive Biology, on a project is entitled "Endocrine
Correlates of Sex Change: Importance of Key Steroido-genic Enzymes". The
proposed research will analyze sequential, protogynous hermaphroditism in
teleost fishes in an effort to understand the simultaneous process of sex
determination and sexual differentiation. As an individual undergoes the
transition from female to male, physiolo-gical pathways must be redetermined.
Similarly, corresponding mechanisms of male differentiation must be activated.
Although steroid hormones are generally considered downstream mediators of
sexual differentiation, the fate of teleost germ cells may be significantly
influenced by hormonal profiles. Consequently, teleost sex-determining cascades
may be post- maturationally labile and triggered by steroid hormones. To begin
investigating potential roles for steroid hormones, previous research has
focused on expression studies involving key steroidogenic enzymes, particularly
cytochrome P450 aromatase and cytochrome P450 11b-hydroxylase. The proposed
research extends this line of investigation in two ways. First, translation of
messenger RNA of the respective enzymes will be verified using
immunocytochemical techniques. Combined with messenger RNA content, these
results will determine the potential for the transitional gonad to produce
steroid hormones by confirming the presence or absence of protein. Second,
collaborative efforts involving several different model species will lend
insight into potential similarities among systems. Results of these comparative
studies will determine the applicability of a general model for the role of
steroid hormone s in the regulation of sex change. Overall, the proposed
research will provide a solid foundation from which to base future
investigations of the physiological mechanisms regulating sex change in teleosts
by providing critical information concerning potent mediators of sexual
differentiation. ***