* 9600956
* Dissertation Research:  The Site of Naranjal and the        Interaction Spheres of the Late Preclassic to Early Maya    Lowlands
* SBE,BCS
* 06/01/1996,11/30/1997
* Scott Fedick, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 11/30/1997
* USD 9,476.00

Under the direction of Dr. Scott Fedick, MS Jennifer Mathews will collect data
for her doctoral dissertation. She will conduct archaeological research at the
Mayan site of Naranjal which is located in Mexico's Yucatan peninsula. Based on
past research it appears that Naranjal predates the Classic Maya period. A total
of 21 major structures have been identified, most characterized by a `megalithic
style` which employed large well-dressed stones in construction. Many of the
blocks are wedge or pie-shaped and over a meter in length. Remains of plaster on
facing stones indicate that they were thickly coated to from a smooth exterior
surface and this style is distinctly different in appearance from others in
different parts of the Mayan area. MS. Mathews' work will focus on this
phenomenon. She will excavate several structures in order to describe in detail
both construction techniques and finished product. Plaster samples will be
collected and the charcoal inclusions they contain will be extracted for
radiocarbon dating. Finally comparisons will be made with similar structures in
other sites in the region. The Mayan region has long constituted a focus for
archaeological study because it witnessed the rise of large complex societies in
a hostile lowland tropical environment. While many sites have been carefully
excavated, researchers still do not understand in detail how these related to
each other, the extent of regional interaction and political integration at the
inter site scale. To what extent were individual units grouped together into
regional alliances and larger functional groupings? If they exist, at what stage
in Mayan prehistory did they develop? MS Mathews conducts her research in the
Northern Mayan region where relatively little is known and she wishes to address
this basic question. She has noted what appears to be a distinct regional
architectural style which appears to reflect such a regional interaction sphere
and she will determine whether or not her guess is correct. Through the
radiocarbon samples she collects, absolute dates will be provided for these
structures. This research is important for several reasons. It will shed new
light on the process of the development of complex societies. It will help to
pioneer a new use for radiocarbon dating which may be applied to archaeological
sites in many parts of the world and finally it will assist in training a
promising young scientist.