* 9600897
* Research Planning Grant: Retinoid Modulation of jun and myb in Rat Sertoli Cells
* NONE,NONE
* 08/15/1996,01/31/1998
* Kathleen Creed Page, Bucknell University
* Standard Grant
* Elvira Doman
* 01/31/1998
* USD 18,000.00

Regulation of spermatogenesis is a remarkable process about which little is
known. While circulating hormones clearly play a role in initiating and
controlling this system of rapid cell differentiation, the Sertoli cell is an
important mediator of molecular information traveling from the blood to the
developing sperm. To date only five factors have been shown to play a definite
and essential role in modulating spermatogenesis: FSH, testosterone, stem-cell
factor, c-fos, and Vitamin A. Dr. Page is focusing on Vitamin A as a molecular
switch for particular proto-oncogene transcription factors including fos and
jun, the genes that code for components of the API complex, as well as myb, all
of which are expressed in the Sertoli cell. A current model for steroid action
proposes that these compounds act as master switches for gene transcription and
supports the notion that retinoids, as members of the steroid/thyroid-receptor
supergenefamily, can also be considered as molecular switches for regulatory
cascades. Dr. Page's hypothesis is that retinoid-inducible gene transcription in
the seminiferous tubules is modulated not by an alteration in a single
transcription factor, such as the RAR-alpha receptor, but through regulation of
a complex of multiple interacting factors including the proteins encoded by fos,
jun, and myb. Under this Research Planning Grant, Dr. Page will extend her
recent studies, which demonstrate the up-regulation of both jun and myb gene
expression following Vitamin-A stimulation of rat Sertoli cells, by evaluating
the effects of Vitamin A on c-fos mRNA using Northern-blot analysis. The levels
of the protein products translated from these proto-oncogenes will be determined
using Western-blot techniques as well as immunostaining of testicular tissue.