* 9600587
* CAREER: Analysis of a Novel Nuclear Double Kinase, and      Development of Teaching and Mentoring Initiatives
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/1996,07/31/2001
* Kristen Johansen, Iowa State University
* Continuing Grant
* Michael Mishkind
* 07/31/2001
* USD 542,014.00

96-00587 Johansen The organization of the nucleus is exceedingly complex and is
intricately interrelated with gene expression, cell differentiation, and cell
division. During each cell cycle, the chromosomes must be faithfully replicated,
the complex nuclear matrix must be duplicated and reorganized, and microtubule
assembly must be coordinated. Studying nuclear reorganization events that occur
during mitosis should provide significance insights into cell cycle control and
into the role of nuclear organization in nuclear functions. Therefore, it is
important that as yet unknown components of the nuclear structure be identified
as well as the regulatory molecules involved in the process of reorganization. A
monoclonal antibody, mAb2A, has been isolated and has been shown to label
Drosophila nuclei in a cell cycle-specific pattern: The antibody recognizes a
nuclear meshwork at interphase, a spindle-like structure during prophase, and
the mitotic spindle at metaphase. This antibody recognizes a novel nuclear
protein, JIL-1, that contains two ser-thr-like catalytic domains bounded by a
moderate (15 KD) C-terminus and a large (90KD) N-terminal domain. This tandem
kinase domain coupled with its cell-cycle specific localization pattern in the
nucleus suggests that JIL-1 may be involved in signal transduction events
regulating and/or responding to mitotic events. The identifications of mutants
in JIL-1 in combination with perturbation studies with molecular and biochemical
analysis will hopefully provide insights into the function of JIL-1 and possibly
identify the signal transduction pathway(s) in which it operates. The
educational component of the CAREER proposal employs two broad approaches:
First, a more formalized development of courses that target larger groups of
students and are designed to improve accessibility and understanding of genetics
to major in the life sciences; Second, a very individualized approach counseling
students in planning their careers and personally working with them on
independent research projects. %%% The organization of the nucleus is
exceedingly complex and is intricately interrelated with gene expression, cell
differentiation, and cell division. During each cell cycle, the chromosomes must
be faithfully replicated, the complex nuclear matrix must be duplicated and
reorganized, and microtubule assembly must be coordinated. Studying nuclear
reorganization events that occur during mitosis should provide significance
insights into cell cycle control and into the role of nuclear organization in
nuclear functions. Therefore, it is important that as yet unknown components of
the nuclear structure be identified as well as the regulatory molecules involved
in the process of reorganization. The educational component of this CAREER
proposal employs two broad approaches: First, a more formalized development of
courses that target larger groups of students and are designed to improve
accessibility and understanding of genetics to major in the life sciences;
Second, a very individualized approach counseling students in planning their
careers and personally working with them on independent research projects. ***