* 9600187
* Dissertation Research:  Organizational Structure and        Training Strategies:  The Effect of Organizational          Characteristics on Employee Training
* NONE,NONE
* 08/15/1996,07/31/1997
* Barbara Reskin, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Standard Grant
* Patricia White
* 07/31/1997
* USD 7,500.00

9600187 Reskin This doctoral dissertation improvement proposal examines the
effects of organizational and environmental factors on employers' investments in
employee training. It is hypothesized that the amount of training hours and the
number of training courses offered/ taken are positively related to affiliate
size, environmental complexity, labor market competition, and profits. The
investigator will study a large for-profit corporation, its affiliates, and 500
employees within these affiliates. The diverse and geographically dispersed
affiliates of this organization will permit the investigator to explore how
affiliate-specific organizational characteristics affect the process and
outcomes of training. The three basic questions that will be investigated are:
(1) What effect does an organization's environment and structure have on the
amount of employee training the organization provides?, (2) How do these
features influence the structure of the training department? and (3) What is the
relationship between the organizational structure, environment, characteristics
of individual employees and the amounts and type of training that employees with
different characteristics receive? This research will inform theoretical and
empirical debate in the sociology of organizations as well as orgnizational and
governmental training policies. %%% Data will be collected through surveys of
individual employees, in-depth interviews, archival sources, and participant
observation. Organizational- and individual- level data will be analyzed using
multi-level statistical techniques.