* 9600021
* Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU)               Site in Cognitive Psychology
* SBE,BCS
* 05/01/1996,04/30/1999
* Charles Fletcher, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Bonney Sheahan
* 04/30/1999
* USD 170,429.00

This award provides funds to continue an REU Site at the University of Minnesota
Center for Research in Learning, Perception, and Cognition. Ten students each
year, over a three year period, will be selected for eight week sessions in the
summer to work with cognitive science faculty affiliated with the Center. The
majority of the students will be selected from small liberal arts colleges in
the upper midwest with limited research opportunities. Students will: (1) work
as full members of their faculty mentor's research team; (2) complete a research
project including a written report and oral presentation to peers and faculty;
(3) participate in a multidisciplinary research training seminar for credit; and
(4) participate in a special non-credit 'Master Student' course. Seminar
activities will include presentations by program faculty and faculty in related
areas campus-wide, laboratory tours, and lectures on research tools, design, and
ethics. The fully integrated program will include opportunities for the students
to learn specific research methods, to apply these methods in the context of
their own research, and to examine broad conceptual and methodological issues
relating to the cognitive sciences. This award contributes to the Foundation's
continuing efforts to attract talented students into careers in science through
active undergraduate research experiences.