* 9600574
* dsDNA Packaging by Viruses
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/1996,02/29/2000
* Sherwood Casjens, University of Utah
* Continuing Grant
* Thomas E. Smith
* 02/29/2000
* USD 305,000.00

9600574 Casjens The long term objective of this project is the furtherance of
our knowledge of the life cycle of dsDNA viruses by gaining an understanding of
the molecular mechanisms by which these viruses package DNA and assemble progeny
virions within infected cells. The particular virus chosen for this study,
bacteriophage P22, serves as a model for similar processes in less
experimentally accessible eukaryotic viruses such as the dsDNA Herpesviruses and
Adenoviruses. The P22 system is one of the most highly studied virus systems,
both genetically and biochemically. This type of virus assembles protein shells,
called procapsids, first and then inserts the dsDNA chromosomes into these
shells. The icosahedral P22 procapsid contains three critical polypeptides, an
external coat protein, an internal scaffolding protein and the portal protein.
In addition, two non-structural P22 encoded proteins are critical in the DNA
recognition/entry process. The coat protein forms the exterior shell of the
virus particle, the scaffolding protein is required to build the procapsid but
leaves the structure before DNA enters, and the portal protein forms a ring-
shaped structure at one vertex of the icosahedral protein shell. DNA is thought
to enter into this preformed capsid through the portal structure. The procapsid
is a central feature of this viral assembly strategy and few details are known
about its assembly and function. We propose to examine the mechanism of assembly
of the P22 procapsid. In particular, the function of the scaffolding protein,
which guides the coat protein assembly by co-assembling with it, will be studied
in detail. After co-assembly with coat, scaffolding protein is released, and so
functions catalytically in virion assembly. Questions will be addressed from
genetic, biochemical, biophysical and structural directions. Knowledge gained
will contribute to the understanding of the life cycle of the dsDNA viruses, and
will also be relevant to all studies of the catalysis of macromolecular
assembly. %%% The objective of this project is to understand the molecular
mechanisms by which dsDNA viruses package DNA and assemble progeny virions
within infected cells. Knowledge gained will contribute to the understanding of
the life cycle of dsDNA viruses and to the catalysis of macromolecular assembly.
Bacteriophage P22 is chosen as a model for this investigation. P22 assembles
protein shells first and then inserts the dsDNA chromosomes into these shells.
The icosahedral P22 procapsid shell contains three critical structural
polypeptides namely an external coat protein, an internal scaffolding protein
which is required to build the procapsid but leaves the structure before DNA
enters, and a ring-shaped portal protein through which DNA is thought to enter
into this preformed capsid. Two additional non-structural proteins that are
critical for the DNA recognition/entry process are also present in the
procapsid. The procapsid is a central feature of this viral assembly strategy,
yet few details are known about its assembly and function. We propose to examine
the detailed catalytic function of the scaffolding protein which guides the coat
protein assembly and co-assembles with it and is followed by its own release
using genetic, biochemical, biophysical and structural approaches. ***