* 9600261
* U.S.-Mexico Cooperative Research:  Comparative Aspects of   Brain and Behavioral Development in Mammals
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/1996,02/28/2001
* Michael Baum, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* Harold Stolberg
* 02/28/2001
* USD 43,085.00

9600261 Baum This Americas Program award will fund a collaborative research
project between Drs. Michael Baum, Boston University, and Raul Paredes, Anahuac
University, Mexico City. The researchers will study comparative aspects of brain
and behavioral sexual differentiation in two mammalian species, the rat and the
ferret. The structure and function of the brain circuit normally undergoes a
degree of masculinization in female rats as a consequence of prenatal exposure
of the female's brain to testosterone of placental origin. Normally, no such
masculinization occurs in the female ferret. Experiments are proposed to treat
animals prenatally in order to determine whether circulating androgens and/or
estrogens during fetal development are the cause of the more masculine behavior
of female rats, and to relate differences in sexual behavior to the functional
activation of neurons within regions of the brain that have been sexually
differentiated. All the proposed studies involving ferrets will be done in the
Boston laboratory, while the comparative work with rats will be done in the
Mexican laboratory. The results obtained should improve our understanding of how
sex differences in pheromonal communication develop in species representing two
different mammalian orders, and will provide basic information concerning the
activational and organizational effects of steroid hormones on chemosensory
systems important for reproduction. ***