* 9600138
* Design of Multifunctional Nanoscale Information Bearing     Units and Processes Related to their Use on a Surface
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/1996,12/31/2000
* Christopher Gorman, North Carolina State University
* Continuing Grant
* David Nelson
* 12/31/2000
* USD 285,400.00

9600138 Gorman It has now become an important but unanswered question as to
whether molecules (or macromolecule at the 1-10 nm size scale) can be addressed
and reliably store information. New techniques, particularly scanning tunnelling
microscopy (STM), will certainly have use in these schemes. Nanolithography of
metallic or semiconducting phases to create depressions or mounds on a surface
can represent binary information, but atoms can diffuse, destroying this
information. Ideally, information-bearing molecules could be moved into place
and anchored to a surface. Subsequently, they could be switched and read without
being influenced by their surroundings. In this project, both the molecular
requirements and the process requirements for such a scheme will be addressed.
In the former area, a new nanoscale unit will be synthesized. It is designed to
be switchable, isolated from nearby units (so that the information it contains
will not become scrambled), readable by an STM tip, and easily positioned on a
surface (and thus addressable). It is argued that all of these criteria must be
fulfilled before a molecule-based system can function as an information storage
device. The molecule designed for this purpose will contain an electroactive
core inside a dendrimeric polymer. This hybrid molecule will have an isolated,
switchable information unit and simultaneously an easily tailored size, shape,
and surface. Simultaneously, in the process area, methods for using the STM tip
to perform chemical transformations on an organic surface (fashioned using self-
assembled monolayers of organothiols on gold) will be explored. Rather than
etching the surface, it is argued that site-specific reductive desorption of the
organothiols into a solution over the surface will permit more predictable,
reliable control over positioning of molecules on a surface. Both of these
project segments will be directed towards demonstrations of those requirements
for molecule-based information storage on a surface. %%% As computing elements
become smaller and smaller, one must devise ways to encode information in
smaller spaces. At least as far as strictly spatial encoding is concerned, the
two most obvious schemes for nanoscale information storage are (a) continued
miniaturization of known microscale elements to approach the nanoscale or (b)
tailoring existing nanoscale objects e.g. molecules so that they can function as
information bearing units (IBUs). In this proposal, macromolecular objects will
be described that are tailored to serve as switchable, addressable, and
organizable IBUs. It will be argued that only such a system will be suitable for
use in nanoscale information encoding schemes. ***