* 9600889
* An Integrative Study of the Functional Interactions         Between Primate Hip Joint Morphology and Loading Environment
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/1996,07/31/2001
* Laura MacLatchy, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Mark L. Weiss
* 07/31/2001
* USD 53,227.00

This study proposes to apply advanced engineering methods to study primate hip
function. The primate hip joint is a complex structure that serves a wide range
of purposes. A better understanding of this structure will not only facilitate
our knowledge of hip joint function but also provide important evidence about
the evolutionary process of early human locomotion. This is because the hip
joint underwent substantial reorganization in the transition to a bipedal form
of locomotion. Despite extensive research efforts devoted to this structure in
the last two centuries, hip functions remain poorly understood. Up until now,
most work has been confined to the documentation of the shape of the hip
skeleton and little effort has been invested to analyze the functional
implications of observed morphological traits. This project will take a
comprehensive approach that has only recently become possible. It will for the
first time systematically incorporate external hip morphology, internal
trabecular bone density patterns, and functional loads into global femoral and
acetabular models. It will examine the relationship between form and function in
the hip of humans as well as various other large bodied primates. The objectives
of this study are: (1) To quantify bone density patterns in behaviorally diverse
monkeys, apes, and humans. (2) To test predictions concerning the biomechanical
significance of isolated joint features. (3) To integrate external morphological
features, internal architecture and joint loads into a single global model so
that the relative sensitivity of single variables and sets of variables to joint
forces and muscle forces can be investigated. (4) To use those variables which
are found to be sound indicators of loading to reconstruct positional behavior
in fossil species. This project will make substantial contributions in the
following fields: (1) Comparative Functional Morphology: This study will
contribute new information to the field of comparative anatomy by integrating
data on joint surface geometry, trabecular bone density and mechanical loading.
(2) Paleoanthropology: This study will extend our current understanding of
form/function relationships in the hip of living primates and provide
paleontologists with new tools to reconstruct positional behavior in extinct
species. (3) Methodological Contribution: The integration of modern bone
remodeling theories with computer and bioengineering technologies is a new
approach in biological anthropology and will help to establish new research
frontiers.