* 9600310
* Japan JSPS Program:  Imaging and Analysis of CorticocorticalProjection Development in Organotypic Slice Cultures
* O/D,OISE
* 07/01/1996,09/30/1997
* Edward Ruthazer, Fellowships
* Fellowship Award
* Larry H. Weber
* 09/30/1997
* USD 7,300.00

9600310 Ruthazer This award supports a 12 month Japan Society for the Promotion
of Science (JSPS) Postdoctoral Fellowship for Dr. Edward S. Ruthazer at the
University of Osaka, Osaka, Japan. Dr. Ruthazer will work with Dr. Nobuhiko
Yamamoto, Associate Professor in the Department of Engineering, on research
project entitled, "Imaging and Analysis of Cortico-cortical Projection
Development in Organotypic Slice Cultures" The proposed research will develop
and apply an in vitro model of early corticocortical connection formation using
a novel callosum-intact cortical slice culture. The research will examine the
axon pathfinding and branching process in living cultures made from thick (but
optically penetrable) brain slices that will include both cortical hemispheres
and the interconnecting callosal tract. Single axons will be labeled using
vital, non-toxic fluorescent dyes and then observed using scanning laser
confocal microscopy over a period of hours to days as they grow through their
normal environment and extend branches to contact the target neurons in the
other hemisphere. In this way, it will be possible to determine at exactly which
locations axon turning and branching occurs, and whether the development
involves direct and selective growth toward target sites or a combined process
of exuberant branching followed by selective retraction of incorrect branches.
Once the precise series of developmental events has been determined, direct
physical, pharmacological, and eventually genetic manipulations will be used to
analyze the specific biochemical interactions that contribute to each step of
the developmental process. ***