* 9600433
* Conference on Magnetic Resonance in Biological Systems to beheld August 18-23, 1996 in Keystone, Colorado
* NONE,NONE
* 08/01/1996,07/31/1997
* Gerhard Wagner, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Kamal Shukla
* 07/31/1997
* USD 6,000.00

9600433 Gaffney This grant will provide partial support for the XVIIth
International Conference on Magnetic Resonance in Biological Systems (ICMRBS),
to be held in Keystone Colorado, August 18-23, 1996. The meeting will focus on a
broad range of magnetic resonance methods as applied to studies of biological
processes. This biennial meeting has become the major venue for discussion of
advances in NMR studies of the high resolution structure and dynamics of
proteins and nucleic acids and of the role of magnetic resonance (both NMR and
EPR) in structural biology. NMR studies of protein structure often rival those
by x-ray crystallography, but NMR also provides unique information on the
dynamics of macromolecules - an area that will be emphasized in the scientific
program. In vivo NMR spectroscopic and imaging results to be presented will shed
light on metabolic processes and on their cellular ramifications. Other sessions
will cover new magnetic resonance methods, advances in magnet design, and
improvements in instrumentation for spectroscopy and imaging. Considerable
effort has been made to plan symposia in such a way as to stimulate cross-
fertilization of ideas among the communities expert in high resolution NMR,
solid state NMR, EPR, in vivo spectroscopy and magnetic resonance imaging. The
conference is built around 12 plenary lectures and 27 parallel sessions with a
total of 81 invited talks and 27 short contributions selected from poster
abstracts. Three poster sessions of up to 200 posters each round out the
program. The funds provided by NSF will provide partial support for travel of 75
younger scientists (graduate students, postdoctorals, beginning faculty). Funds
are also being sought from industry and other government agencies. By permitting
more younger scientists to attend, the grant will be particularly beneficial in
promoting the active participation of female and, to some extent, minority
investigators, who tend to be disproportionately represented in the younger gro
up. %%%