* 9600860
* CAREER: Methy1-Accepting Taxis Proteins in Archaea
* BIO,MCB
* 07/15/1996,06/30/2001
* Maqsudul Alam, University of Hawaii
* Continuing Grant
* Randolph Addison
* 06/30/2001
* USD 411,536.00

96-00860 Alam A basic property of living cells is their ability to respond to
specific, external chemical signals and to respond appropriately. Eubacteria,
like Escherichia coli and Salmonella typhimurium, respond to chemical gradients
by modulating their swimming patterns towards a more favorable chemical
environment. In eubacteria a family of transmembrane receptors called
transducers mediate chemotaxis and some aspects of their mechanism of action is
known. It is presumed that the Archaea are more closely related to eukaryotes
than to eubacteria. Halobacterium salinarium, an Archaeon, responds to chemical,
oxygen, and light gradients. A family of putative transducer proteins has been
identified in H. salinarium using a site-specific multiple antigenic peptide
antibody raised against a 23 amino acids peptide. This peptide represents a
highly conserved region in eubacterial transducers. A complementary
oligonucleotide probe was designed based on this conserved region and was used
to select thirteen putative methyl- accepting taxis genes. Based the structural
and putative functional homology with eubacterial transducers, the putative
transducers fall into three structurally distinct subfamilies: a) a type with
two transmembrane segments connecting large extra- and intracellular domains; b)
a type with two or more transmembrane segments with an intracellular domain
only; and c) a type that exists only in the cytosol as a soluble transducer. A
combination of physiological, genetic, and biochemical approaches will be used
to study the signal transduction mechanism of the unique transducer proteins in
the Archaea H. salinarium. %%% A basic property of living cells is their ability
to respond to specific, external chemical signals and respond appropriately.
Eubacteria, like Escherichia coli and Salmonella typhimurium, re spond to
chemical gradients by modulating their swimming patterns towards a more
favorable chemical environment. In eubacteria a family of transmembrane
receptors called transducers mediate chemotaxis and some aspects of their
mechanism of action is known. It is presumed that the Archaea are more closely
related to eukaryotes than to eubacteria. Halobacterium salinarium, an Archaeon,
responds to chemical, oxygen, and light gradients. A family of putative
transducer proteins has been identified in H. salinarium using a site-specific
multiple antigenic peptide antibody. A combination of physiological, genetic,
and biochemical approaches will be used to study the signal transduction
mechanism of the unique transducer proteins in the Archaea H. salinarium. ***