* 9600422
* U.S.-France (INRIA) Cooperative Research:  Numerial Solution of High Speed Network Models
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/1996,08/31/1999
* Ahmed Sameh, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Rose Gombay
* 08/31/1999
* USD 36,000.00

This three-year award supports U.S.-France cooperative research in numeric
computation with the French National Institute for Research in Computer Science
and Applied Mathematics (INRIA). The U.S. investigators are Ahmed Sameh and
Yousef Saad from the University of Minnesota, Harry Perros and William J.
Stewart from North Carolina State University; and the French investigators are
Brigitte Plateau, INRIA (Rhone/Alpes), Bernard Philippe, INRIA (Rennes), and
Denis Trystram, University of Grenoble. The objective of their research is to
evaluate the performance of crucial aspects of high-speed communication
networks. They propose to evaluate the effectiveness of Stochastic Automata
Networks (SANs) as a modeling technology for the analysis of telecommunications
systems and development and deployment of high-speed networks. They will apply
the approach to one aspect of modeling high-speed networks, namely performance
analysis of packet delay and loss in a high-speed multiplexer. This multiplexer
has been developed to provide flexibility in integrating multi-media traffic.
The U.S. investigators bring to this collaboration expertise in numerical
modeling, networking, and parallel processing. This is completed by the French
investigators' expertise in Stochastic Automata Networks. Over the last decade,
they developed the theory underlying SANs. The project will advance our
understanding of SANs and their effectiveness in modeling performance of high-
speed communication networks.