* 9600415
* Topics in Theoretical Physics
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/1996,07/31/1999
* Marc Sher, College of William and Mary
* Continuing Grant
* Virginia R. Brown
* 07/31/1999
* USD 300,000.00

We propose to investigate a number of topics in theoretical physics. One
concerns the origin of the violation of time- reversal symmetry, one of the
greatest mysteries in physics, and observed in decays of the K-meson. The nature
of this violation isn't well understood. A particular rare decay of the K-meson
is extremely sensitive to time-reversal violation, but is very difficult to
detect. Recently, it has been realized that it may be measurable at TUNAF or
BNL. We plan to calculate the decay rate in a wide variety of models of particle
interactions. Another topic concerns neutrinos scattering off the deuteron,
where more protons are produced in the forward direction than one expects. This
is often attributed to rescattering in the deuterium nucleus. Relativistic
effects also affect the expectations, and we wish to determine the size of these
effects. This is the largest uncertainty in determining the reaction rate of
neutrinos off neutrons and protons. Still another topic concerns a popular
theory in particle physics, based on supersymmetry. Although most new particles
predicted by supersymmetry are very heavy, there remains the possibility that
one, the gluino, is light, and detectable at TUNAF and/or BNL. We've examined
this previously and will work closely with experimenters in planned searchers.