* 9600805
* CAREER:  Neuroendocrine Regulation of a Zinc Finger Protein
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/1996,08/31/2002
* David Hurley, Tulane University
* Continuing Grant
* Christopher Platt
* 08/31/2002
* USD 401,805.00

Hurley 9600805 The cells of the hypothalamic region of the brain produce small
protein hormones called peptide releasing- and release-inhibiting factors which
act on the pituitary gland to regulate the synthesis and secretion of the
peripherally active hormones derived from this tissue. While it is clear that
the hypothalamic releasing- and release-inhibiting peptides bind to receptors on
pituitary cells, and alter intracellular levels of second messengers such as
cyclic AMP or calcium, the downstream events that link the intracellular
messengers to alterations in gene expression are presently unclear. Dr. Hurley
is characterizing a newly discovered intranuclear factor, Zn-15, that may prove
to be one of the important links between the second messenger systems and
regulation of gene transcription. He is determining the mechanisms involved in
the physiological regulation of the expression of Zn-15 and the ability of Zn-15
to control expression of pituitary hormone genes. These investigations will
result in novel information concerning the regulation of the function of the
neuroendocrine axis, and organismal growth and development. In this CAREER
proposal, the educational component includes the development of novel computer-
assisted learning program for basic biochemistry and expansion of the use of
this powerful tool into all levels of higher education. In addition, significant
integration of research skills with computer tutelage is to be used to foster
undergraduate interest in biochemical neuroendocrinology. These endeavors will
provide the students with unique educational and research opportunities intended
to develop new generations of researchers and educators.