* 9600518
* U.S.-Czech Mathematics Research on Robust Statistical       Inference Based on Second Order Asymptotic Relations
* O/D,OISE
* 09/15/1996,08/31/2000
* Pranab Sen, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Bonnie Thompson
* 08/31/2000
* USD 23,152.00

INT 9600518 Sen This U.S-Czech mathematics project between Dr. Pranab Sen of the
University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, and Dr. Jana Jurechova of Charles
University, Prague, will examine higher-order asymptotic properties of robust
statistical procedures in the linear model and in more sophisticated contexts,
such as models for longitudinal data. The researchers intend to build upon their
experience in nonparametric methods and asymptotic theory to refine procedures
for several related areas: 1) k-step M-estimation in linear models; 2) second
order robust estimation of regression parameters; 3) relations between
r-estimators and regression rank scores estimators; and 4)second order
representations for statistical functionals. Results are expected to lead to
choices of estimators based on computational complexities that will be useful in
situations when samples are of moderate size. The researchers expect to apply
their findings in the development of new statistical procedures with special
emphasis on tests of hypotheses and on non-standard models that arise in
biomedical and environmental applications. This project is statistics and
probability fulfills the program objective of advancing scientific knowledge by
enabling experts in the Unites States and Eastern Europe to combine
complementary talents and share research resources in areas of strong mutual
interest and competence. ??