* 9600288
* International Research Fellow Awards Program:  The          Electrolytic and Catalytic Behavior of the Mixed Conducting Oxide Y203-Ti02-Zr02
* O/D,OISE
* 08/01/1996,02/28/1998
* Pamela Beatrice, Fellowships
* Fellowship Award
* Susan Parris
* 02/28/1998
* USD 29,150.00

9600288 Beatrice The International Research Fellow Awards Program enables U.S.
scientists and engineers to conduct three to twenty- four months of research
abroad. The program's awards provide opportunities for joint research, and the
use of unique or complementary facilities, expertise and experimental conditions
abroad. This award will support a twelve-month postdoctoral research visit which
will support Dr. Pamela Beatrice to work with Professor Costas G. Vayenas at the
University of Patras in Greece for six months and then return to the United
States to work with Professor Wayne L. Worrell at the University of Pennsylvania
for six months. Solid oxide fuel cells (SOFCs) have potential for simultaneous
operation as both a generator od electrical power and a chemical reactor for
several industrially important catalytic oxidation processes. This project will
evaluate the electrocatalyic and catalytic properties of the mixed
electronically and ionically conducting yttria-titania- zirconia materials which
show great promise as an anode material in SOFCs. The materials have been
developed and evaluated for their ionic and electrical conducting properties at
the University of Pennsylvania under Professor Worrell. The study consists of
two parts: the first is the electrocatalytic and catalytic evaluation to be made
at the University of Patras, with the help of Professor Vayenas, and the second
is a microstructural characterization to be done at Penn with Professor Worrell.
***