* 9600274
* Japan JSPS Program:  Problems in Algebraic                  Combinatorics
* O/D,OISE
* 08/01/1996,07/31/1997
* Brian Curtin, Fellowships
* Fellowship Award
* Larry H. Weber
* 07/31/1997
* USD 3,000.00

9600274 Curtin This award supports a 12 month Japan Society for the Promotion of
Science (JSPS) Postdoctoral Fellowship for Dr. Brian Curtin at the University of
Kyushu, Fukuoka, Japan. Dr. Curtin will work with Dr. Eiichi Bannai, professor
in the Department of Mathematics, on a research project entitled "Some Problems
of Algebraic Combinatorics." The proposed research will examine association
schemes using subsonstituent algebra and focusing on connections among the thin
condition, the Q-polynomial property, the 2-homogeneous condition, and spin
models. The focus of the research will be on spin models, association schemes,
and their connections. Spin models arose in the study of knots and links. It has
recently been shown that any spin model is contained in an association scheme.
In almost every case, the scheme involved satisfies two conditions -- the thin
condition and the Q-polynomial condition. Drs. Bannai and Curtin propose to
study schemes with both properties from the perspective of the subconstituent
algebra, their goal being to determine which of these schemes contain spin
models. Spin models have recently received a great deal of attention among
researchers at Kyushu University, but until now have not been studied from the
perspective of the subconstituent algebra. As association schemes provide the
basic framework in the development of codes and designs, research into these
basic models will likely result in practical benefits beyond initial theoretical
explorations. ***