* 9600088
* Mathematical Sciences:  Numerical Methods for Molecular     Dynamics
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/1996,08/31/2000
* Robert Skeel, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Deborah Lockhart
* 08/31/2000
* USD 148,000.00

9600088 Skeel The work involves the analysis, synthesis, and testing of
efficient numerical time stepping schemes for the long-time simulation of
Hamiltonian systems of differential equations. This is motivated by the desire
to improve the performance of computer programs that simulate the dynamics of
biomolecules, with particular attention to the MDScope simulation program
NAMD/SIgMA. Much of the proposed work is general and applies directly to a
variety of applications modeled by Hamiltonian systems, such as astrophysics,
some structural dynamics problems, and wave propagation. Some of the work is
less general but can be adapted to other applications. Typically, the
complicated dynamics of Hamiltonian systems is a combined effect of many simple
interactions, often having a range of time scales. A key emphasis of the
research is the development of sound "long-timestep" methods, which exploit the
slowness present in many components of the motion and the possible regularity
present in other components. More specifically, such methods evaluate some
interactions at time increments that well exceed half the period of the fast
modes of the system. Another emphasis is the design of time stepping schemes
that can compute long trajectories having the right qualities. A specific goal
is the construction of a multiple time stepping scheme that can be used both
with long timesteps and for long-time simulations--existing schemes fail in one
respect or the other. Another specific goal is to reduce the cost of certain
calculations, such as inverse-square-law forces, by reducing their accuracy
without sacrificing qualitative properties. Mathematical formulas are being
devised that can predict typical motions of large molecules such as proteins and
DNA. The aim is find shortcuts that enable very fast calculations on large
computers. These ideas are tested for accuracy and speed, and the more useful
ones are put into the software that biologis ts and other scientists use to
study the action of molecules. Computer simulations can help the scientist to
understand how molecules perform biological functions, which can be very
difficult to observe experimentally. Such studies are also useful in the design
of molecules for agricultural and medical purposes. Much of the proposed work is
general and extends to other applications in which dissipation is negligible,
such as astrophysics, some structural dynamics problems, and wave propagation.