* 9600637
* CAREER:  Representing Biological Structure Information      for Multiple Uses
* BIO,DBI
* 08/15/1996,07/31/2002
* Russ Altman, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 07/31/2002
* USD 523,979.00

The development of technologies to support interpretation of scientific data is
a major challenge for bioinformatics. The information explosion within molecular
biology has highlighted the difficulties in maintaining scientific models that
are consistent--both internally and with the mass of experimental and
theoretical data. Even the most experienced biologists struggle with the task of
integrating their own observations with the published literature in order to
build coherent models. For any complex biological phenomenon, the large number
of relevant experimental systems and techniques creates a web of biological
knowledge with exponential proportions. It is therefore critical that
computational technologies exist for the representation and interpretation of
multiple, diverse data sources, and for collaborative scientific interpretation
of these data sources. It is further necessary that the next generation of
bioinformaticians be trained in the creation and extension of these
technologies. The research and education activities proposed here address both
these problems. First, we elaborate a research plan to build a prototype for the
next generation of structural information resources. The hypothesis of this work
is that computer representations of both scientific hypotheses and the primary
data upon which they are based, can be used to support multiple activities,
including hypothesis formation, hypothesis exploration and hypothesis testing.
Second, we elaborate a plan for creating a track within the Stanford medical
informatics training program that is specifically geared towards training
students in the methods of bioinformatics. Dr. Russ Altman is an Assistant
Professor in the Section on Medical Informatics (SMI), within the Department of
Medicine at Stanford. He also holds a courtesy appointment in the Department of
Computer Science. Dr. Altman was recruited to establish a strong presence of
bioinformatics within the SMI, and to focus the traditional stre ngths of the
SMI on important problems in basic molecular biology. As such, Dr. Altman has
focused on the application of information technology on problems in basic
molecular biology. Dr. Altman's goals for this career development award are
twofold: 1. The first, research goal, is to create a testbed application for
experimenting with the ways in which biologists interact with structural
information. This testbed, called RiboWeb, will be an integrated knowledge base
about the 16S subunit of the procaryotic ribosome. The knowledge base will
contain principled representations of the published structural data and
published structural models, and will allow the data and the models to be
browsed, evaluated and used for computation. The resource will be made available
over the internet, and will provide immediately useful functionality for
investigators working on this important structure, as well as allowing students
to experiment with new information organization, storage and retrieval
technologies, and demonstrate their efficacy empirically. 2. The second,
educational goal, is to develop a pathway in bioinformatics at Stanford that
provides a general introduction to the field of bioinformatics, and gives
students the skills necessary to participate in research in projects such as the
test bed application described in the research component. This pathway will
leverage the formal coursework in computer science, probability and statistics,
biology, and social /ethical issues already provided within the Medical
Information Sciences (MIS) PhD/MS program. In addition, this pathway will
provide a new course within the MIS training program at Stanford, in which
students learn the fundamentals bioinformatics. The unique affiliation with
medical informatics will create a population of bioinformaticians who are aware
of relevant technologies within other branches of informatics.