* 9600851
* CAREER: Protein Export in Escherichia coli
* BIO,MCB
* 07/01/1996,12/31/2001
* Ann Flower, University of North Dakota Main Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Ronald M. Weiner
* 12/31/2001
* USD 414,610.00

96-00851 Flower Proteins destined for secretion are synthesized in precursor
form with an amino terminal extension, the signal sequence. The latter is
decoded by the protein export machinery which consists of sec proteins that are
localized in the cytoplasm and in the membrane. Successful export of a protein
requires sequential interactions among the various sec proteins. The long term
goals of this research are to understand the functions of the sec proteins and
to elucidate the requirements for productive interactions among the sec
components. Escherichia coli is the model organism chosen for these studies. The
translocation process in E. coli shares many similarities with the protein
translocation event that is observed in the endoplasmic reticulum of higher
organisms. The investigator will use a combination of genetic and biochemical
methods to gain insights into protein export. The project has the following
objectives: a) To use an in vitro system to study altered translocation
processes in suppressor forms of SecE and SecY; b) To study SecA interactions
with precursor proteins that have mutated signal sequences; and c) To generate
synthetic lethal mutants of sec components to identify interacting domains. The
educational component of this CAREER grant involves modernization of courses
that are taught to students. To enhance comprehension of scientific concepts,
teaching will also be performed within a laboratory. Also, mentoring of American
Indian and Alaskan Natives will be made possible through Outreach programs. %%%
Proteins destined for secretion are synthesized in precursor form with an amino
terminal extension, the signal sequence. The latter is decoded by the protein
export machinery which consists of sec proteins that are localized in the
cytoplasm and in the membrane. Successful export of a protein requires
sequential interactions among the various sec proteins. The long term goals of
this research are to understand the functions of the sec proteins and to
elucidate the requ irements for productive interactions among the sec
components. Escherichia coli is the model organism chosen for these studies. The
translocation process in E. coli shares many similarities with the protein
translocation event that is observed in the endoplasmic reticulum of higher
organisms. The investigator will use a combination of genetic and biochemical
methods to gain insights into protein export. The educational component of this
CAREER award involves modernization of courses that are taught to students. To
enhance comprehension of scientific concepts, teaching will also be performed
within a laboratory. Also, mentoring of American Indian and Alaskan Natives will
be made possible through Outreach programs. ***