* 9601419
* Archaeology &amp; Paleoenvironments of the Kapthurin Formation, Baringo District, Kenya
* SBE,BCS
* 09/15/1996,08/31/2000
* Sally McBrearty, University of Connecticut
* Continuing Grant
* John Yellen
* 08/31/2000
* USD 222,801.00

With support from the National Science Foundation Dr. Sally McBrearty will
continue archaeological research in the Baringo Basin region of Kenya. In
particular she will focus on the Kapthurin Formation in the Tugen Hills.
Previous archaeological research in the area has yielded a stratified sequence
of archaeological sites as well as a small amount of hominid (human) skeletal
material. Research will include analysis of existing museum collections, new
archaeological site excavations and investigation of ancient landsurfaces.
Geochemical analysis and argon dating of tuff units will refine the Kapthurin
chronology. Dr. McBrearty will use stone artifacts and archaeological fauna in
an attempt to reconstruct human behavior. A number of techniques will be
employed to understand the fluxuating environment to which these hominids
adapted. While a number of lines of evidence archaeological, paleontological and
genetic suggest that anatomically modern humans first appeared in sub Saharan
Africa just when and where this occurred is unknown. What interests
paleoanthropologists most however is the process which lead to this emergence
and here also little evidence is available. Dr. McBrearty's research will
address this issue. Information to date suggests that the transition took place
during the Middle Pleistocene and the Kapthurin Formation encompasses this time
period. Prior work indicates that it contains archaeological materials and fauna
as well as human remains. Dr. McBrearty's work will increase this data base and
bring a wide range of modern scientific techniques to bear in order to make
interpretations. This research is important for several reasons. It will
increase our understanding of Africa's past. It will provide data of interest to
a large number of paleoanthropologists and shed new light on the emergence of
modern humans.