* 9601149
* Economic Survey Response Behavior:  Experiments Using A     Virtual Laboratory
* SBE,SES
* 09/15/1996,02/28/2003
* Daniel McFadden, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 02/28/2003
* USD 45,183.00

Daniel L. McFadden University of California - Berkeley SBR-9601149 Economic and
other surveys are plagued by the continuing problem of trying to elicit
information about respondents' true behavior. Survey questions must be carefully
framed to accomplish the aim of eliciting accurate information. Among the
specific problems arising in survey design to be investigated are anchoring and
focal points. Anchoring refers to a widely observed and well- documented family
effects in which presumably irrelevant cues or settings provided by questions
influence responses. For example, subjects asked to judge whether an uncertain
quantity, such as the length of the Amazon, exceeds a certain value (the anchor)
and then asked for an estimate, will typically give a response that is pulled
toward the anchor. Focal point refers to a rounded off, conventional response.
For example, subjects asked for the time it takes them to get to work will
frequently give answers such as 5, 10, 15, 30, 60 minutes, rather than
intermediate values, so that one observes spikes of responses at these focal
values even though the true values have a continuous distribution. The research
will use econometric methods to infer the extent of these biases and how they
might be adjusted for based on experiments with questionnaire design using the
internet (world-wide web) as a virtual laboratory.