* 9601835
* Acquisition of Advanced Equipment for Rapid Thermal and     High Density Plasma Processing for Integrated Circuits and  Flat Panel Displays
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/1996,08/31/1999
* Dennis Hess, Lehigh University
* Standard Grant
* Stefan T. Thynell
* 08/31/1999
* USD 130,001.00

9601835 Hatalis The rapid thermal annealing (RTA) system will enable the
formation of ultrathin gate insulators for CMOS transistors, multi-dielectric
nonvolatile semiconductor memory devices and promote the development of a new
technology for novel silicon carbide MOS devices especially the so-called MCT or
MOS Controlled Thyristors. New silicide contact metallurgy, and rapid
crystallization of amorphous silicon films will be explored for both silicon ICs
and TFT based flat panel displays. Furthermore the new RTA system will provide
us with critical control of the device dimensions during the implant activation
anneals which is essential for the realization of our new nanoelectronic
devices. The ICP high density plasma reactor will be used in the development of
new materials and new deposition processes for both IC and flat panel display
applications. Such materials and processes will include: low dielectric constant
fluorocarbon films as intermetal dielectric material, high quality amorphous
silicon and silicon dioxide films deposited at high rates for IC and flat panel
display applications, and novel plasma hydrogenation, oxidation and nitridation
processes for single crystal silicon, polysilicon and compound semiconductor
devices. A rapid thermal processing system and an inductively-coupled high
density plasma (ICP) deposition system will be purchased in order to enable
advanced research and training at Lehigh University on the following
microelectronics areas: a)silicon integrated circuits ,b) compound semiconductor
microwave devices, and c) thin film transistor flat panel displays. The
equipment will enhance the education of students by exposing them to the
fundamental s and applications of new singly wafer processing approaches.