* 9601087
* Calcium, pH and the Cytoskeleton in Pollen Tube Growth
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/1996,08/31/2001
* Peter Hepler, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Continuing grant
* Michael L. Mishkind
* 08/31/2001
* USD 632,943.00

9601087 Hepler Pollen tube growth is the process that delivers the male gametes
to the egg apparatus and thus is essential for sexual reproduction in higher
plants. Understanding the mechanisms addresses issues of both economic and
fundamental importance. Recent work reveals that growing pollen tubes posses a
steep, tip-focused gradient of intracellular free calcium (Ca), and a pronounced
tip-directed influx of extracellular Ca, of which both are essential for growth.
In addition the gradient fluctuates in magnitude, being correlated with changes
in the growth rate. Ca thus appears to occupy a pivotal position in the control
of pollen tube growth. Specifically, Ca may stimulate the occurrence and define
the location of vesicle exocytosis required for cell wall formation and cell
elongation. Ca might also control the formation of the cytoskeleton, which is
responsible for transporting the vesicles to the apical region of the tube. We
know much less about the role of hydrogen ions (H), but it is plausible that
local gradients in pH exist and that they are essential for growth and
development. It is a goal of the proposed work to elucidate the organization,
activity and interaction of the Ca gradient, the putative H gradient, and
cytoskeletal elements, and to understand how these factors contribute to the
polarity and growth of the pollen tube. Particular emphasis will be given to
events as they occur in living pollen tubes using intracellular microinjection
as a means for introducing specific fluorescent analogs, probes and indicator
dyes. Intracellular Ca, for example, will be analyzed by fluorescence
ratiometric ion imaging on pollen tubes loaded with the indicator dye, fura-2
dextran, while H can be detected with BCECF-dextran or SNAFL-dextran. Through
rapid, sequential image acquisition, Ca or H levels will be directly correlated
with growth. Similarly, in cells injected with low amounts of fluorescent
phalloidin, specific for F-actin, it will be possible to observe the relati
onship between growth, cytoplasmic streaming and the organization of the
microfilaments. The live cell studies will be augmented by those using
immunofluorescence and immunogold to spatially localize key proteins, e.g.,
myosin, in an attempt to further elucidate function. The proposed studies
address basic aspects of pollen tube growth, particularly within the context of
the live cell. Whereas we know the existence of certain fundamental processes,
e.g., tip-focused Ca entry, and structural complexes, e.g., the actin
microfilaments, we understand much less about how these are integrated within
the cell, and how they interact to produce the highly polarized and rapidly
elongating pollen tube. The proposed work attempts to bridge this gap and thus
to provide a new level of understanding that can apply not only to tip growing
cells, but also to plant cells in general. ***