* 9601430
* Law and Responsibility: International Airlines, the U.S.    Immigration Service, and Detection of Illegal Travelers
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/1996,08/31/1999
* Janet Gilboy, American Bar Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Patricia White
* 08/31/1999
* USD 28,963.00

9601430 Gilboy This study explores a recent dramatic change in U.S. efforts to
combat clandestine immigration through the regulation of international airlines.
In the past, airlines operated under a stringent liability system in which
regardless of the thoroughness of their screening they were subject to stiff
sanctions if they transported an inadequately documented traveler. In October
1994, however, these screening laws were significantly relaxed. In exploring
this recent policy change the study has two objectives. First, it examines the
debate between international airlines and the U.S. Immigration Service over
airline responsibility for illegal travelers. The research describes and
analyzes the differing perspectives about airline responsibility for illegal
travelers such as asylum seekers who board planes with forged documents, destroy
them on route, and then claim asylum once they have arrived. Second, it explores
the sources of the recent legislative change, focusing on the context in which
the legislative policy shift occurred. The study examines several explanations
(economic concerns, political interests, transnational forces, ideas about
deregulation and private enforcement) for the congressional decision to change
the century old approach to carrier regulation. Canada, where relaxation of
stringent laws also occurred recently, will provide a useful additional case to
begin to refine and elaborate the model. This analysis of clandestine
immigration and its control through the use of international airlines will
contribute to our understanding of the fundamental issue of public and private
domains and the role of law in their articulation. %%%%