* 9601508
* Academic Research InfraStructure:  Using ASCEND and GAMS    for Undergraduate Teaching and Research
* ENG,CBET
* 08/15/1996,07/31/1997
* Lakshmi Sridhar, University of Puerto Rico Mayaguez
* Standard Grant
* Robert M. Wellek
* 07/31/1997
* USD 12,000.00

CTS - 9601508 Lakshmi N. Sridhar U of Puerto Rico Mayaguez ABSTRACT This project
is concerned with the use of software like ASPEN PLUS, GAMS and ASCEND for the
development of undergraduate design projects for students. The department of
Chemical Engineering at the University of Puerto Rico has over 500 undergraduate
students. It is imperative that the students receive a modern computer-aided
education that will enable them to use and interpret the results from the
software available and prepare them for the design of processes and process
equipment. As a large majority of our students go to work in the chemical
industry, such exposure to using software like ASPEN PLUS will be a tremendous
asset for them. At this time, the department suffers from lack of modern
computational equipment like work-stations. This project will provide the
students with exposure to chemical engineering software like ASPEN PLUS, ASCEND
and GAMS. Two work stations will be hooked up to the personal computers. The
primary objective is to enable students to use the software and participate in
the various computer aided design projects. This project will provide a new,
modern and a computer aided process design instruction and enable students to be
better prepared for the rapidly developing automation in the chemical process
industry.