* 9601661
* Acquisition of NMR and X-ray Instrumentation for Structural Biology
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/1996,08/31/1998
* Arthur Palmer, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Gregory K. Farber
* 08/31/1998
* USD 640,000.00

Structural biology and biophysics using NMR spectroscopy and x-ray
crystallography are historic strengths of Columbia University. Research
interests range from the development of new techniques, to the determination of
the structural and dynamical properties of proteins and nucleic acids, to the
structure-based investigation of fundamental biophysical and chemical properties
of biological macromolecules. Future continuation and expansion of Columbia
University's seminal contributions to structural biology and biophysics is
threatened by the increasing age and inadequacy of the existing NMR and x-ray
instrumentation. The NMR Center presently houses three Bruker NMR spectrometers
with proton resonance frequencies of 300 MHz, 400 MHz and 500 MHz. The
spectrometers were installed in 1985; only the 500 MHz instrument has been
upgraded to any significant extent since the original installation. The age of
the NMR spectrometers precludes performance of critically important modern
experiments. The Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biophysics x-ray
facility houses two Rigaku RU-200 rotating anode x-ray generators, two Huber
precession cameras, one Rigaku RAXIS-II imaging area detector, one Xuong-Hamlin
multiwire area detector served by a Rigaku AFC-6 goniormeter, and three
cryogenic systems. The Xuong-Hamlin multiwire detector is no longer suitable for
current research projects. For both the NMR and x-ray facilities, backlogs for
scheduling critical experiments ranges from one to two months with current
users. To address evident needs, a new 600 MHz NMR spectrometer will be
purchased and consoles upgrades will be purchased for the 500 MHz and 400 M-Hz
instruments .These decisions are based on the following considerations: (1) an
additional high field spectrometer is necessary to provide timely access for the
(burgeoning) research groups of the present faculty and to make possible
recruitment of one or two additional junior faculty members. (2) An upgr ade of
the 500 MHz console is required for performance of state-of-the-art experiments.
(3) An upgrade of the 400 MHz spectrometer will allow methods development,
preliminary data collection to evaluate sample integrity, and training to be
performed at lower field. This will have the effect of significantly leveraging
production on the 500 MHz and 600 MHz spectrometers. To alleviate the
limitations of the present x-ray crystallographic instrumentation, two imaging
plate area detectors systems (including detector, focusing mirrors and cryo
delivery system) and one Rigaku RU-200 rotating anode x-ray generator will be
purchased. Following the requested acquisitions, the x-ray facility will house
three x-ray generators, three area detector systems, and two Huber precession
cameras. Each x-ray generator can support two precession cameras or area
detectors; therefore, two of the x-ray generators will be equipped with a
precession camera and an area detector. The third generator will be equipped
with an area detector, leaving one slot for future expansion. The Xuong-Hamlin
detector will be decommissioned. The following advantages will accrue from the
requested instrumentation: (I) the approximate doubling of the capacity of the
x-ray facility will permit existing research groups to perform experiments in a
timely fashion; (2) recruitment of an additional faculty member in biomolecular
x-ray crystallography will be facilitated by the availability of sufficient
x-ray instrumentation to support another beginning faculty research group; and
(3) the increased sensitivity of the new detectors (and optics) will permit
performance "in-house" of experiments that previously have been performed at
synchrotron sources.