* 9601872
* Acquisition of a New TIMS for Ocean and Earth Sciences at   the University of Florida
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/1996,08/31/2002
* Paul Mueller, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Rom
* 08/31/2002
* USD 360,730.00

9601872 Mueller This proposal seeks funding to support 50% of the cost of
acquiring and operating a state-of-the-art thermal ionization mass spectrometer
(TIMS) for the Geology Department of the University of Florida. The proposed
instrument will provide enhanced performance in three areas: 1) The instrument
will be capable of providing extended dynamic range (&gt;10 ) through the
ability to measure sample ion beans with both Faraday and electron multiplier-
or scintillation - type detectors simultaneously. This capability is essential
for utilizing systems in which the abundance of individual isotopes, including
tracers, exceeds the dynamic range of Faraday detectors alone. 2) The instrument
will be capable of providing high abundance sensitivity at high mass. This
extended capability, relative to traditional TIMS configurations, is also
necessary for accurate measurements in the U-Th series and provides benefits in
lower mass systems such as Ca. Recent developments in the use of retarding
potential lens can provide this capability without the need (and cost) of large,
double focusing configurations; 3) The instrument will be capable of high
precision isotopic ratio measurements in static mode. Measurement in this mode
is necessary in order to combine the advantages of increased dynamic range and
extended abundance sensitivity to provide maximum accuracy for small samples,
e.g., those containing only picogram (10 g) quantities of Pb, and those with low
ionization efficiencies, e.g., Th. Specific applications that will benefit
include the analysis of U-series isotopes for recent geochronology; the analysis
of individual zircon crystals or parts of crystals for geochronologic and
petrogenetic studies; Pb, Sr, and Nd isotopic studies of very small samples for
tracer, chronostratigraphic, and paleo-environmental applications; and Sr/Ca
isotopes via isotope dilution for paleoenvironme ntal studies. Their current
mass spectrometer is heavily utilized by graduate students. Approximately half
of these students are women, a minority in the geosciences. The University of
Florida is supporting this project with $360,730, which represents a 50% cost
share. ***