* 9601886
* Instrumentation to Enable and Enhance Three-Dimensional     Nanofabrication Capabilities in the National NanofabricationUsers Network
* ENG,ECCS
* 10/01/1996,09/30/1999
* Noel MacDonald, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Filbert J. Bartoli
* 09/30/1999
* USD 480,860.00

9601886 Davis Nanofabrication, or the fabrication of solid structures on the
nanometer size scale, has evolved into a field which is the foundation of a
significant fraction of the world economy, namely, the semiconductor integrated
circuit industry. The ability and potential of this field to fabricate small
structures for use in other fields such as optics, physics, materials science,
chemistry, biology, medicine, and mechanics is also being quickly realized by
both researchers and industry. Yet, with the exception of some materials growth
techniques, the field of nanofabrication has been somewhat confined to the two
lateral dimensions which are defined by the plane of a smooth solid surface.
This is partly due to depth-of-field issues which are important and common to
optical and electron beam lithography, the difficulty of plasma etching a wide
variety of materials to form high aspect ratio structures, and the difficulty of
characterizing fine structures in three dimensions, to name a few. The National
Nanofabrication Users Network (NNUN), an NSF-sponsored network of five
university nanofabrication laboratories, has been tasked with providing user-
facility service to the US nanofabrication community (including industry,
academia, and government laboratories), and to provide technical leadership to
that same community toward the solutions of problems. The NNUN consists of sites
at five universities, with two sites (Cornell and Stanford) serving as primaries
with the remaining three (Howard, Penn State, and University of California at
Santa Barbara) serving as subcontractors. Together, these five University
laboratories unite expertise in silicon processing (Stanford), nanometer
lithography (Cornell), wide-bandgap materials (Howard), novel materials (Penn
State), and III-V processing (UCSB), all within the common theme of
nanofabrication. To date, the Network is serving a user base which is rapidly
approaching 1000 users, service which is implemented and enhanced by project
referral s, sharing of laboratory and teaching techniques and information, and
complementary capabilities. This award will find acquisition of a: A Chemical
Mechanical Polishing (CMP) System: This system, to be located at the Cornell
site, will permit the chemical mechanical etchback of structures for
planarization and bring CMP capabilities to the NNUN; Reactive Ion Etching
Additions: Due to the importance of anisotropic etching to the nanofabrication
of 3D structures, Penn State will add an RIE for materials such as transparent
oxides, piezoelectrics, and plastics.