* 9601491
* Consortium:  Research Computing Facility for the CMU/Pitt Center for the Neural Basis of Cognition
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/1996,08/31/1999
* James McClelland, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 08/31/1999
* USD 214,035.00

With National Science Foundation support, the Carnegie Mellon University and the
University of Pittsburgh joint Center for the Neural Basis of Cognition will
acquire instrumentation to improve the computational facilities used by a group
of 15 laboratories. The Center is creating a computing facility based on a
scaleable parallel processing system for very large-scale computational projects
and has recently acquired the core of the system through a grant from IBM. With
NSF funds the Center will purchase a fast, symmetric multi-processing compute
server to provide impulse computing power for exploratory modeling and
interactive data analysis; and desktop display stations to facilitate accessing
resources. The server will consist of four state-of-the-art HP PA-8000
processors, 512 Mb of memory and nearly 100 Gb of disk and would provide a wide
range of pre-compiled software tools for simulation modeling at the cognitive
and biological levels as well as for analysis of data from functional imaging
and multi-electrode recording studies. The Carnegie-Pittsburgh center is
dedicated to understanding how cognitive processes arise from underlying neural
mechanisms, how anomalous forms of cognition arise from biological disturbances
and how experience and brain development interact to give rise to the emergence
of cognitive functions. The Center brings together the methods of behavioral
analysis, neurophysiology, functional imaging and computational modeling, in an
effort to understand how functions such as perception, attention, memory and
language emerge from the interactions among neurons in the brain. Fifteen
laboratories have a range of foci which include memory and learning, language,
attention and control of processing, and perception and spatial cognition. In
addition, several labs address general principles of neural function relevant to
many aspects of cognition and several have contributed to the development of
tools for computational modeling and functional imaging research. The
instrumentation will also be made available to graduate students and to
researchers in related areas who lack adequate computing facilities. Thus is
will serve an educational function and assist a broad research community.