* 9601774
* Acquisition of a Pulsed FT-EPR Spectrometer
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/1996,08/31/1999
* Willem Vermaas, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Gregory K. Farber
* 08/31/1999
* USD 324,850.00

The purchase of commercially-built electron paramagnetic resonance (EPR)
instrumentation is proposed which will advance the ASU Photosynthesis Center's
EPR laboratory to the state of the art in several areas. The majority of the
budget is allocated to the purchase of a pulsed Fourier Transform (FT)-EPR
accessory, the Bruker ESP 380E, for the Center's existing continuous-wave (CW)
EPR spectrometer, a Bruker ESP 300E. The 380E offers improved sensitivity, time
resolution, reliability, ease of use, and (most importantly) versatility over
the home-built pulsed spectrometer currently used by the Center's investigators.
For example, 380E can perform two-dimensional electron spin echo envelope
modulation (ESEEM) experiments, execute complex phase-cycling routines
automatically, and implement long or novel pulse sequences without modification
of microwave or pulse timing hardware. The Center's present pulsed instrument
has none of these capabilities. In addition, attachments for the 300E and 380E
will be purchased that will provide the Center's investigators, for the first
time, with the following spectroscopic tools: pulsed electron-nuclear double
resonance (pulsed ENDOR); 35 GHz EPR measurements from 3.8 K to room
temperature; and 35 GHz ENDOR. The proposed upgrade of the Center's Bruker 300E
CW spectrometer will also include construction (by the PI) of a high-Q quartz 9
GHz ENDOR cavity of the type described by Lubitz. The uses of this
instrumentation will lie mainly in the area of photosynthesis and plant science,
but will also include basic studies of protein structure and enzyme mechanisms
which have applications across the life sciences. For example, pulsed and CW
ENDOR and fast time-resolved EPR measurements will aid in characterization of
Photosystem II mutants in which the properties of the tyrosine D or Z radicals
have been affected. In studies of chloroplast Fl-ATPase using oxovanadium (VO2+)
and Mn2+ as paramagnetic probes, the availability of the new in struments will
permit precise determination of local ligand structure. In addition, extensive
spectroscopic characterization of metal-ligand model systems whose crystal
structures have been determined will help to establish the 'signature' hyperfine
couplings from commonly-occurring protein-based metal ligands. Determination of
structural changes during the ATPase's catalytic cycle will lead to full mapping
of its highly complex catalytic mechanism. Other systems to be examined using
the new instrumentation are: Photosystem I; the Fenna-Matthews-Olson protein in
photosynthetic green sulfur bacteria; lysine 2,3-aminomutase and ethanolamine-
ammonia lyase (both of whose reactions proceed through free radical
intermediates); and the enzyme S-adenosylmethionine synthetase, which produces
the primary intracellular methylating agent in a wide variety of organisms.
Finally, FT-EPR measurements on short-lived charge-separated states in
artificial photosynthetic systems will be undertaken, as a probe of the complex
problem of the influence of structure upon electron transfer processes. In all
cases, the proposed instrumentation will yield, to a degree not heretofore
possible, atomic-scale structural information from disordered samples. Funding
of the proposed equipment purchases/construction will enhance significantly the
research training for graduate students as well as summer research experiences
for undergraduates. The improvement in ease of use of the pulsed instrument will
make it far more practical to introduce students to the intricacies of pulsed
techniques, within the context of a formal course or as a part of individual
laboratory training. This-project will also allow the Center's EPR facility to
maintain its high-profile external collaborations with investigators from
leading institutions nationwide, and to attract other such collaborations. ) A -
I