* 9601828
* Acquisition of an Integrated Computational and              Psychophysical Laboratory
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/1996,08/31/1999
* Tomaso Poggio, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 08/31/1999
* USD 335,456.00

The recently established MIT Center for Biological and Computational Learning
(CBCL) unites seven faculty in the study of computational neuroscience with
specialization in the areas of visual perception, motor control, language and
the theory of learning. Recently space has been made available and renovated to
bring the group together in a single physical location and this NSF award
provides an infrastructure for research and training activities with the
purchase of a modern networked computer laboratory, including workstations,
servers and a network hub. Items to be purchased include 3 Bay Networks Network
Huns, three Sun UltraServers, an SGI Indigo High-Impact Workstation and an
Electrohome Marquee 8500 projector. Central to the facility is a 'virtual
reality` system in which complex multi-modal stimuli (visual, auditory and
haptic), can be synthesized and presented to subjects. A system for recording
the positions of subjects' limbs and eyes will be developed, with tight coupling
to the stimulus display system. The Electrohome Marquee projector is a high-
brightness projector which displays stimuli in a large field of view. The visual
stimuli will be generated on the high-performance Silicon Graphics Indigo which,
when equipped with a High Impact video board, can generate real time texture-
mapped images. The problem of understanding intelligence in terms of its
algorithmic realization in the mind and brain is one of the greatest challenges
of modern science. It has many facets; one which has become a unifying goal
throughout the computational and brain sciences is the problem of understanding
how an animal or a machine can learn. CBCL has provided leadership in research
on learning mechanisms by developing a theoretical understanding of learning and
by applying this understanding to a wide variety of problems in the domains of
visual perception, motor control and language. The instrumentation provided
through this grant will significantly further that goal.