* 9601657
* Development of Crystallographic Data Acquisition Systems for Biological and Chemical Research at the Advanced Photo     Source
* BIO,DBI
* 09/15/1996,02/29/2000
* P. Viccaro, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Gregory K. Farber
* 02/29/2000
* USD 1,026,068.00

Third generation synchrotron radiation facilities, such as the Advanced Photon
Source (APS) presently under commissioning at Argmnne National Laboratory, will
be the world's leading sources of x-rays for scientific research. The greatly
increased spectral brilliance and unique spectral properties of the APS
insertion device x-ray sources in the intermediate and hard x-ray regions offer
the possibility to significantly advance existing scientific frontiers and, more
important, to open new research areas. The concurrent development of x-ray
optics technology ensures that x-ray beams which parallel those properties of
the source can be delivered to the sample. However, in order to take full
advantage of these opportunities, similar development of data acquisition
instrumentation must take place. Source and optics developments allow
researchers to take their data faster, to examine much smaller (and hence more
readily available) crystals, and to study time-resolved scattering phenomena. As
a consequence the data acquisition rate has increased dramatically thus
requiring novel diffractometer and detector systems. New detectors such as the
emerging CCD-based systems have the potential to meet the new demands. However,
all of these systems can only be used optimally if they are carefully integrated
into dedicated x-ray experimental stations. We propose to develop integrated
data acquisition systems, comprised of fast and reliable diffractometers, and
optimized detectors and read-out systems with understandable instrument control
software, that allow researchers at all level of expertise to focus on their
experiments rather than operation of the system. Particular emphasis will be
placed on system integration, equipment protection and reliability, since
expensive area detectors can be ruined in seconds when inadvertently exposed to
high-powered f x-ray beams. These instruments share a common research focus in
structural biology ~\/ and related a reas of chemistry. The data acquisition
systems are composed of: - development of novel fast diffractometers which
address the particular need for research on small samples and which can
accommodate large and heavy detector systems, and essential peripheral equipment
such as cryostats and single crystal micro-photospectrometers; - acquisition of
four state-of-the-art detectors, their optimization for particular experiments,
and characterization of these detectors to eliminate artifacts; - development of
display software and a graphical user interface, which aids researchers to
assess initial cr~stal and data quality in real time and hence to make sensible
on-line decisions in the conduct of their experiments. The APS and associated
x-ray beamlines represent a large national investment from many funding
agencies, namely the US Department of Energy, the National Science Foundation,
the National Institutes of Health, the State of Illinois, private foundations
and institutions. The research effort at The University of Chicago is organized
in the Consortium of Advanced Radiation Sources (CARS), comprising the Geo-,
Soil-, and Environmental Sciences (GSECARS), the Biological Sciences (BioCARS),
and Chemistry and Material Sciences (ChemMatCARS). The proposed total project
cost is estimated to be $ 2.05M. One half of the funding is requested in this
proposal and the other half will be provided as a nonFederal match from funds
granted by the Australian Nuclear Science and Technology Organization (ANSTO) to
The University of Chicago acting for and on behalf of CARS.