* 9601630
* Acquisition of an HPLC and GC-IRMS for Oceanographic,       Biological and Environmental Engineering Research on Stable Isotope Composition of Individual Compounds
* BIO,DBI
* 07/15/1996,06/30/1998
* Susan Henrichs, University of Alaska Fairbanks Campus
* Standard Grant
* Lee C. Makowski
* 06/30/1998
* USD 160,000.00

Funding is requested to purchase a gas chromatograph-isotope ratio mass
spectrometer (GC-CIRMS). This instrument permits the measurement of carbon and
nitrogen stable isotope ratios of a wide variety of organic molecules,
essentially all of those which can be resolved by gas chromatography or which
can be converted to a suitable volatile derivative. Also, funds are requested
for an off-line, automated high-performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) system
for isolation of specific compounds for subsequent, off-line, IRMS. This
approach is needed for certain compounds which are too involatile or lack
sufficient heat stability for GC; it also can be more convenient for compounds,
such as amino acids, which require extensive derivatization for GC. Together,
these instruments would constitute a facility that could measure the C and N
isotopic composition of virtually any organic substance. Specifically, the HPLC
and GC-IRMS would be used to measure the stable isotope composition of amino
acids and fatty acids in the course of studies of the growth rate and trophic
dynamics of marine mammals. The stable isotope composition of specific organic
compounds, such as amino acids, carbohydrates, hydrocarbons, and lipids, from
marine and lake sediments would be used in investigations of the sources and
diagenetic alteration of these substances, assisting studies of environmental
change at high northern latitudes. Also, the instruments would be used in tracer
investigations of the metabolism of large mammals by measuring changes over time
in the isotopic composition of metabolites such as volatile fatty acids.
Finally, the GC-C-IRMS would be used to distinguish naturally-occurring
hydrocarbons from petroleum-derived contaminants.