* 9601062
* Upgrade of the Facilities in the Archaeozoology Laboratory  at the University of Michigan
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/1996,07/31/1997
* John O'Shea, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 07/31/1997
* USD 24,147.00

The Museum of Anthropology at the University of Michigan maintains a comparative
collection of faunal material. The 340 skeletons were collected under controlled
conditions and represent a wide range of species from North America and the
Middle East. They are widely used by archaeologists who wish to study and
identify excavated remains. The archaeozoology laboratory in which these
materials are housed is extensively used by faculty, graduate students and
visiting scientists. The laboratory and its comparative collection have been
used as a resource for the identification and analysis of faunas from a large
number of sites. However the laboratory's present arrangement and limited
crowded storage facilities have inhibited efficient work and the growth of the
comparative collection. The crowded and make-shift storage has resulted in
damage to and increased wear and tear on the comparative collection and other
archaeological specimens. The Museum has developed a renovation plan and will
contribute significantly to upgrade the facility and establish adequate working
spaces. This NSF award will permit the purchase of high grade storage cases to
house the comparative collection. This will permit easy researcher access, help
to minimize damage to the materials themselves and provide space to permit the
collection to grow. Bone preserves well in many environmental contexts and is
often recovered in large amounts in the course of archaeological excavation.
Identification and analysis of such remains can further a number of scientific
goals. Such research sheds light on the subsistence and social practices of
prehistoric peoples. It also permits reconstruction of past environments and
allows scientists to study human-environmental interactions. This award will
permit such research to proceed more effectively.