* 9601010
* FASEB Summer Research Conference on "Plant Developmental    Genetics", August 10-15, 1996, Saxtons River, Vermont
* BIO,IOS
* 07/01/1996,06/30/1997
* R. Poethig, Federation of Amer Societies For Exper Biology
* Standard Grant
* Judith Plesset
* 06/30/1997
* USD 5,000.00

9601010 Poethig This conference is the fifth in a series of very successful
FASEB conferences on Plant Molecular Biology. The focus of these conferences has
changed from year to year as this rapidly moving field has progressed. The fifth
conference is entitled "Plant Developmental Genetics" and will be held from
August 10-15, 1996 at Vermont Academy in Saxton's River, VT. Much of the recent
progress in plant development has occurred as a result of the use of classical
genetic approaches to identify genes involved in various developmental
processes, followed by a molecular analysis of these genes. This meeting will
summarize recent advances in this exciting area of plant biology. The sessions
will carry us through the plant life cycle starting with gametogenesis and
ending with reproduction. Woven through the sessions will be a consideration of
the cellular, molecular and environmental factors that regulate plant
morphogenesis. Although much of the recent work in this area has been carried
out on Arabidopsis and maize, other systems -- including ferns, petunia,
snapdragon, tomato, pea and the algae, Fucus and Acetabularia -- have also made
significant contributions. Each of these systems has unique advantages for
studying particular aspects of the plant life cycle. The invited speakers
include both young and established investigators. Additional speakers will be
drawn from attendees on the basis of submitted abstracts. Ample use will also be
made of poster presentations. By bringing together investigators studying these
different systems, the organizers hope to facilitate the exchange of ideas and
information between scientists who otherwise might not interact. ***