* 9601099
* Polypeptide Signaling in Plants: Structure, Function, Evolution and Mechanism of Action of Systemin and Its Precursor, Prosystemin
* NONE,NONE
* 07/01/1996,06/30/2001
* Clarence Ryan, Washington State University
* Continuing grant
* Sharman D. O'Neill
* 06/30/2001
* USD 994,005.00

9601099 Ryan The objective of this research is to understand the fundamental
processes involved in the synthesis and storage of the 200 amino acid prohormone
protein, prosystemin, and the mechanisms of processing, release and mode of
reception of the 18 amino acid polypeptide hormone, systemin, that is derived
from prosystemin in response to wounding by herbivore attacks. The specific cell
types in which prosystemin is synthesized will be identified and the sites of
its inter- or intracellular storage will be established. The mechanism by which
wounding causes processing and release of systemin from prosystemin will be
studied, and research to identify the specific novel processing enzymes will be
carried out. The processing enzymes will be purified and characterized. The mode
of transport of systemin in tomato plants will be investigated and the
mechanism(s) of its reception in target cells will be studied at the biochemical
and subcellular levels. The full spectrum of proteins that are activated by
systemin will be identified, purified and cloned. Prosystemin protein, produced
in an E. coli expression system, will be produced in mg quantities to determine
its three dimensional structure, and to relate the stuctural features to its
storage and processing. The occurrence of prosystemin homologs throughout the
plant kingdom will be systematically sought using prosystemin antibodies, cDNA
hybridization analyses, and PCR analyses. The role of prosystemin and systemin
in systemically activating defense genes in plant species other than tomato will
be studied. The possiblity that polypeptide hormones other than systemin may be
derived from the prosystemin protein will be examined. Systemin is the only
peptide hormone identified in plants to date. It has a role in plant defense
against insects and other insults. This research will contribute to our
fundamental understanding of how plants cope with stresses that they encounter
during their life cycle.