* 9601924
* Acquisition of High Field Nuclear Magnetic Resonance        Spectrometer for Transport Studies
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/1996,08/31/1998
* Bruce Locke, Florida Agricultural and Mechanical University
* Standard Grant
* Robert M. Wellek
* 08/31/1998
* USD 550,002.00

9601924 Gibbs The major objective of the proposed research project is to acquire
a 500 Mz wide bore Nuclear Magnetic Resonance (NMR) spectrometer equipped with
probes for flowing imaging, diffusion analysis, and electrophoresis. The
instrument requested is an AVANCE DMX 500 WB high performance digital nuclear
magnetic resonance spectrometer, manufactured by Bruker Instruments, Inc.
Manning Park 19 Fortune Drive, Billerica, MA 01821-3991. The main purpose of
this instrument will be for the performance of experiments in multiphase
transport phenomena by faculty in the Department of Chemical Engineering at the
FAMU-FSU College of Engineering. Three key faculty members, Dr. Stephen J.
Gibbs, Dr. Bruce R. Locke, and Dr. Rufina Alamo, will conduct experiments in
transport in materials science, biochemical and biomedical materials, and
polymers. Dr. Gibbs is recently joining the faculty and comes with extensive
experience in the applications and methodology of pulsed field NMR for transport
studies. Dr. Locke has funded research and extensive experience in a number of
related projects that will utilize the instrument purchased on this grant; the
major focus of this work is on electrical field driven transport in
biomaterials. Dr. Alamo has funded research and extensive experience in the
characterization of polymers. Her focus will be on crystallization under flow
conditions. Additional faculty members from the Department of Chemical
Engineering, including Dr. Pedro Arce and Dr. Michael Peters have expertise in
the mathematical modeling and theoretical approaches for the analysis of
macromolecular transport will collaborate with investigators on this grant. The
proposed instrument will be the focus of an interdisciplinary program that will
included chemical engineers and other scientists from FAMU with common interests
in the measurement of molecular transport. Dr. Hsieh, from the Wetlands Ecology
Department at FAMU is developing research in multiphase transport in soils and
will utili ze this instrument in the future. ***