* 9601528
* Acquisition of Electrophysiological Equipment to Study the  Modulatory Influence of Circulating Hormones on Well-DefinedNeural Networks
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/1996,08/31/1997
* Brian Norris, California State University San Marcos Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Lee C. Makowski
* 08/31/1997
* USD 45,990.00

This grant will be used to acquire equipment with which to conduct
neurophysiological experiments. The equipment will consist of a vibration
isolation table, micromanipulators, oscilloscope, appropriate amplifiers, tape
and chart recorders, and stimulator. The research conducted with this equipment
will determine the precise influences circulating hormones have on a well-
defined neural network. The preparation used will be the Stomatogastric Nervous
System (STNS) of the spiny lobster Panulirus interruptus. The STNS controls all
movements associated with the stomach. In lobsters, chewing occurs internally,
in the gastric mill region of the stomach. The stomatogastric ganglion (STG) in
particular produces two distinct motor patterns associated with the stomach
movements. Molting in lobsters is controlled by two types of circulating
hormones - a collection of steroid hormones collectively called ecdysteroids,
and a peptide hormone called Molt Inhibiting Hormone (MIH). During the molt
cycle, the circulating levels of MIH decrease, and this triggers a rise in
ecdysteroids (Figure 1). Molting occurs once ecdysteroid levels have reached a
peak and begin to decline. The lobster stops eating prior to molting and sheds
the lining of the stomach during the molt. My working hypothesis thus is that
MIH plays an essential role in maintaining the day-to-day functioning of the
STNS. I further expect that declining levels of MIH, or increasing levels of
ecdysteroid, will initially inhibit the motor patterns of the STG. The
subsequent drop in ecdysteroid levels that triggers the molt will in turn elicit
a novel motor pattern associated with shedding the lining of the stomach.
Molting in crustaceans can be induced by removing the eyestalks of juvenile
animals. The eyestalks contain the neurosecretory cells that release MIH.
Eyestalk ablation leads to an increase in ecdysteroids. Because the animal
itself is making the hormones, the appropriate ecdysteroids are pro duced in the
proper ratios. I will use anatomical and physiological techniques to examine the
effects of circulating hormones on the STNS. My specific aims will be: Aim 1:
Determine the precise concentrations of circulating ecdysteroids during the molt
cycle in the spiny lobster. I have already initiated a collaboration with Dr. D.
Watson at the University of Alabama, Birmingham in which he will run
radioimmunoassays to determine the circulating levels of ecdysteroids during
induced molts. Serum samples will be withdrawn from animals during various
stages of the molt cycle to determine the time-course for hormonal changes
during molting. Aim 2: Examine the change in expression of modulatory
neurotransmitters. A single result from an early experiment in Cancer borealis
suggests that the expression of certain modulatory transmitters is downregulated
during natural molts. I will use anatomical and immunocytochemical techniques to
measure the expression of identified transmitter substances within the STNS in
eyestalk ablated and control animals. Aim 3: Examine changes in STNS motor
patterns and individual network neurons prior to and during molts. To do this, I
will use a combination of intracellular and extracellular recordings to monitor
rhythmic motor patterns. Preliminary work will consist of extracellular and
intracellular monitoring of the STG motor patterns in molt-induced and control
animals. In later experiments, I will use voltage clamp techniques to monitor
changes in ionic conductances in individual neurons. Aim 4: Characterize changes
in the effects of modulatory inputs to the motor pattern generating network.
Previous research I conducted suggests that the effects of modulatory inputs to
the STG is altered prior to a spontaneous molt. I will use bath application of
identified and characterized neuromodulators as well as stimulation of
individual inputs to compare effects during and between molts. The work will
initially be conducted by myself and 2 or 3 undergraduates. When CSU San Marcos
begins its Master's degree program in 1997, I hope to have at least 2 graduate
students (Masters) working in the lab. I also teach courses in Comparative
Physiology, Human Physiology, Neurobiology, and Endocrinology. The equipment
purchased with this grant will be used for demonstrations in conjunction with
these courses. California State University at San Marcos has committed itself to
offering a program in the Biological Sciences that stresses the use of modern
equipment and the latest techniques. This commitment is shown in part by the
generous set-up funds for a University of this size. However, the costs of
acquiring the equipment necessary of neurophysiological research are beyond the
capability of this institution. I therefore hope the NSF will support the
university in its endeavor.