* 9601028
* Selected Problem Periods in the Prehistory of the Eastern   Mediterranean:  A Dendrochronological Solution
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/1996,07/31/1999
* Peter Kuniholm, Cornell University
* Continuing Grant
* John Yellen
* 07/31/1999
* USD 349,000.00

With National Science Foundation support, Dr. Peter Kuniholm and his
collaborators will continue to construct a master dendrochronology for the
Eastern Mediterranean and to provide precise dates for sites of archaeological
interest. `Dendrochronology`, or tree ring dating, is the most accurate dating
technique available to scientists. Because the thickness of wood rings which
trees add annually is affected by temperature and rainfall, these vary from year
to year and it is possible to start with living trees, plot a thickness curve
back from a known starting date and then extend the series further backwards in
time with the addition of samples from geological and archaeological contexts.
One can take wood of unknown age from archaeological sites and match it against
the master curve to determine the absolute age of the rings. Dr. Kuniholm and
his colleagues have single-handedly worked for many years to construct such a
master chronology for Greece, Turkey and other countries in the Eastern
Mediterranean. This has resulted in a chronology which covers some 6,500 of the
last 9,200 years. The longest part of the chronology is 1,633 years long and
absolutely dated from A.D. 3652-1994. The remaining portions have had their age
anchored by radiocarbon dating, but they still `float` because gaps remain
between them and the major part of the chronology which is anchored in the
present. Dr. Kuniholm and colleagues will now work at carefully determined
archaeological sites to collect wood samples which will attach the floaters to
the master sequence. Over the course of three field seasons he will focus on 53
prehistoric sites where evidence suggests an unusually large number of well-
preserved samples exist. These include the Neolithic, Chalcolithic and Bronze
age periods. The team will visit sites to collect suitable samples, meet with
archaeologists who curate such materials and analyze wood thus collected at
Cornell University's tree ring laboratory. The project is extremely important
because the resulting sequence will permit the absolute dating of large numbers
of archaeological occurrences. Because the laboratory involves many
undergraduate students it will continue to play an important role is science
education.