* 9601427
* Molecular Signaling by Insulin Receptor Substrates
* NONE,NONE
* 08/15/1996,07/31/2000
* Sonia Najjar, University of Toledo Health Science Campus
* Continuing grant
* Eve Ida Barak
* 07/31/2000
* USD 285,000.00

96-01427 Najjar Insulin regulates glucose and lipids homeostasis, gene
expression, and protein synthesis through concerted actions on numerous
enzymatic activities. Insulin binding to its cognate receptor activates
receptor-associated tyrosine kinase which in turn, phosphorylates the receptor
itself and a number of intracellular protein substrates. In recent years,
considerable progress has been made in elucidating the molecular mechanism of
insulin action. Pp120, an integral membrane glycoprotein, is a substrate of the
insulin receptor tyrosine kinase in the liver. Among the substrates of the
insulin receptor kinase, pp120 is unique because it is not phosphorylated by the
highly homologous insulin like growth factor-1 receptor kinase. This is a novel
finding. For years, scientists have searched for differences between the insulin
and IGF-1 receptors that would explain their different actions. Insulin receptor
primarily regulates metabolic pathways; The IGF-1 receptor induces
proliferation. This project aims to identify specific amino acid residues in the
carboxyl domain of the insulin receptor that regulate pp120 phosphorylation.
Single amino acid substitution will be introduced to specific residues of the
carboxyl terminus of the insulin receptor and the effects of the mutant forms on
pp120 phosphorylation in transfected hepatocytes will be analyzed. Mutants of
the insulin receptor will be transfected into a newly developed hepatocyte cell
line genetically deficient of insulin receptor. Using this assay system, the
role of pp120 phosphorylation by the insulin receptor in insulin endocytosis
will be determined. These studies will expand our understanding of the molecular
mechanism of the complex signal transduction pathways that are mediated by the
insulin receptor. %%% Insulin regulates glucose and lipids homeostasis, gene
expression, and protein synthesis through concerted actions on numerous
enzymatic activities. Insulin binding to its cognate receptor activates
receptor-associat ed tyrosine kinase which in turn, phosphorylates the receptor
itself and a number of intracellular protein substrates. In recent years,
considerable progress has been made in elucidating the molecular mechanism of
insulin action. Scientists have searched, however, for differences between the
insulin and IGF-1 receptors that would explain their different actions. Insulin
receptor primarily regulates metabolic pathways; The IGF-1 receptor induces
proliferation. Pp120 is a substrate of the insulin receptor tyrosine kinase in
the liver and is not phosphorylated by the IGF-1 receptor kinase. This project
aims to identify specific amino acid residues in the carboxyl domain of the
insulin receptor that regulate pp120 phosphorylation. These studies will expand
our understanding of the molecular mechanism of the complex signal transduction
pathways that are mediated by the insulin receptor. ***