* 9601567
* Acquisition of a CT Scanner for Research in Engineering and Sciences at Montana State
* ENG,CBET
* 08/15/1996,07/31/1997
* Robert Brown, Montana State University
* Standard Grant
* Robert M. Wellek
* 07/31/1997
* USD 141,002.00

601567 Brown A compute tomography (CT) X-ray scanner will be purchased for the
purpose of expanding the capabilities of several research projects either
currently in progress at Montana State University or being considered for new
research directions. Areas of research include studies on (1) metamorphism of
alpine snow and changes in microstructure of snow, (2) long term metamorphism of
Antarctic firn, (3) micromechanics of sea ice and non-saline ice, relationship
between microstructure and mechanical properties of granular materials, (4)
damage effects in composite materials, and (5) studies of lake ice in
Antarctica. In addition, the acquisition of the scanner will open up the strong
possibility of establishing long-term cooperative studies with Japanese
scientist, particularly with the National Center for Earth Science and Disaster
Prevention (NEID) for snow, ice and polar firn research. The scanner is a
transportable system which would enable it to be moved to remote sites for field
investigations. With a total weight of approximately 1000kg, the scanner
incorporates an industrial quality Seifert constant potential x-ray source and a
detector utilizing a CDD with 1024 X 1024 pixels and a 12 bit resolution (4096
grey scales). Also included are a Pentium computer to control the scanner, a
color printer, a backup digital tape lead shielding to qualify the system as a
radiation-free environment. It has the capability of scanning slices as thin as
0.1 mm and has a spatial resolution as small as 10 um for those instances where
very small details need to be studied. Courses taught in the Engineering college
intend to use this instrument to evaluate internal structure of materials. These
courses included both undergraduate and graduate courses in materials science
and soils mechanics. ***