* 9601723
* Acquisition of NMR Instrumentation to Upgrade the NMR       Services Facility at the University of South Carolina
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/1996,08/31/1999
* Daniel Reger, University of South Carolina at Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Joan M. Frye
* 08/31/1999
* USD 120,000.00

9601723 Reger University of South Carolina Columbia This award from the Academic
Research Infrastructure (ARI) Program will assist the Department of Chemistry &
Biochemistry at the University of South Carolina at Columbia upgrade the
existing 500 MHz NMR spectrometer and aquire a graphics workstation. This
equipment will enhance research in a number of areas including the following:
(1) catalytic properties of high nuclearity mixed metal cluster complexes (2)
studies of the catalytic ring opening cyclooligomerization of sulfur-containing
heterocycles by transition metal cluster compounds (3) investigations of natural
products, specifically the isolation of medicinally active compound(s) from four
different trees from the Ivory Coast (4) structural studies of covalently cross-
linked DNA hairpins (5) small-molecule DNA-binding agents, and (6) syntheses and
metal NMR studies of model complexes. Nuclear Magnetic Resonance (NMR)
spectroscopy is the most powerful tool available to chemists for the elucidation
of the structure of molecules. It is used to identify unknown substances,
characterize specific arrangements of atoms within molecules, and to study the
dynamics of interactions between molecules in solution. Access to a state-of-
the-art NMR is essential to chemists who are carrying out frontier research. The
results from these NMR studies are useful in the areas such as polymers,
catalysis, and in biology.