* 9601298
* Cognitive Consequences of Emotion
* SBE,BCS
* 06/01/1997,05/31/2001
* Michael Robinson, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Steven Breckler
* 05/31/2001
* USD 252,058.00

Technical Summary. This research examines the consequences of positive and
negative affective states on judgment and information processing. Positive and
negative moods frequently influence the process of evaluative judgment. In
addition, experiencing positive affect also appears to lead individuals to
assimilate incoming information to their existing conception of a situation (top
down processing), whereas negative affect leads them to accommodate their
conception to the incoming information (bottom-up processing). These effects
will be examined by manipulating positive and negative moods (e.g., by
describing emotional events or watching emotional films) and then observing
judgment (e.g., risk estimates, liking judgments) and performance in diverse
cognitive tasks (e.g., gambling, impression formation, recognition memory).
Experiments will be guided by a framework integrating the explanatory hypotheses
of multiple theorists. The research has four specific goals: (1) to resolve
issues about how objective and subjective information combine in judgment, (2)
to determine under what conditions different theories make accurate predictions
about the cognitive consequences of mood, (3) to examine individual differences
in attention to emotion to test predictions about the mediating role of
subjective experience in these phenomena, and (4) to determine the extent to
which positive affect results in active rather than passive assimilation of
information. %%% Project Justification. This research examines the influence of
emotional feelings on both the content and process of thought. Prior research
shows that a person's mood can readily affect one's evaluations and judgments.
More recent research also suggests that mood affects how people think. Positive
feelings stimulate people to rely on their own knowledge, beliefs, and
intuitions, whereas mildly negative feelings lead people to attend outwardly to
the situation, to be analytical, and to engage in new learning. These phenomena
will be examined by inducing positive and negative moods (by asking participants
to describe emotional events they have experienced or to watch emotional films).
Of interest is the influence of the emotions on judgment (e.g., risk estimates,
liking judgments) and on performance on various tasks (e.g., gambling, forming
impressions of others, memory for previously seen material). Different
explanations for the findings will be tested, focusing on four specific goals:
(1) to learn how people combine information from emotions with information from
the real world, (2) to determine when the different theories make accurate
predictions about emotional influences, (3) to examine differences among people
in how much they pay attention to their emotions and how that plays a role in
these phenomena, and (4) to determine the extent to which people are active
rather than passive thinkers when experiencing positive emotion.