* 9601524
* Acquisition of Transmission Electron Microscope for         Biological Sciences
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/1996,02/28/1999
* Robert Hikida, Ohio University
* Standard Grant
* Lee C. Makowski
* 02/28/1999
* USD 161,767.00

This proposal requests funds to provide a modern transmission electron
microscope facility for the Biological Sciences Department of Ohio University.
This facility also serves as the Transmission Electron Microscopy Resource for
the University. The requested microscope will supplement the current 1 6-year-
old, student-grade electron microscope currently being used for both teaching
and research in this department of 65 faculty and 80 graduate students. The
upgraded facility will continue to provide training for graduate students and
undergraduates with special aptitude for biology and research. It will also be
used for ultrastructural research. All of these activities have been carried out
for the past 25 years; they have been supported by two transmission electron
microscopes in the past, but the older one was decommissioned last year, and the
remaining microscope is old and was never meant for analytical research use.
Research that will be done with this facility include several studies on muscle,
such as _ examining the changes in the nucleocytoplasmic relationship of
skeletal muscle with aging or ' with changes in activity, detecting how skeletal
muscle damage occurs in the muscle fiber, or exploring the effects of dietary
trace elements on cardiac ultrastructure. Besides these muscle studies,
neurobiological research will include structural and computational studies of
mechanoreceptors in the inner ear, and the structural mechanisms underlying the
vestibular control of head movements. Another project will use a combination of
time lapse and electron microscopy to study how the retina trophically affects
development of the optic tectum of the brain. The mechanism by which mosquitoes
become infected and transmit arboviruses will also be investigated.
Ultrastructural studies will also be done on morphological adaptations evolved
in Antarctic fishes to reduce their buoyant density, and how feeding upon toxic
microorganisms has affected the digestive s tructure and function of marine
copepods. Most of the projects listed above are currently supported by NSF
funding and use a combination of methods; all of them include electron
microscopy. The presence of a modern transmission electron microscope is vital
to these projects. Acquisition of a new electron microscope will further enhance
research in the department because of the opportunity to attract more graduate
students and technicians to learn electron microscopy. It will also allow
graduate students to use a greater diversity of research tools. The general
effect of having a modern electron microscope will be to enhance the training
capabilities, the research productivity and the level of grant support to this
department.