* 9601958
* ARI: Acquisition of a High Performance Computing            Infrastructure for Interactive Synthetic Environments
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/1996,09/30/1999
* James Bernard, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* george hazelrigg
* 09/30/1999
* USD 223,252.00

9601958 Bernard This Academic Research Infrastructure Award provides funds for a
Silicon Graphics Inc. Power Challenge with 16 MIPS R10000 processors with 2
Gigabytes of 8-way interleaved RAM, a 4-node HiPPI network switch, and a 21.3
Gigabyte RAID disk. This high performance computing engine will be integrated
with existing immersive environments and dedicated to the support of numerically
demanding real-time simulations controlled from synthetic environments for
engineering problem solving. The equipment provided by this grant will make
possible the development of an integrated environment with computational and
immersive visualization capabilities to support research in intelligence
amplification for engineering. Intelligence amplification enables engineers to
immerse themselves in the problem or phenomena under study using haptic, visual
and audio cues to support real-time communications between the user of the
environment and the numerical simulations. This will be a paradigm shift for
engineering design and manufacturing. Engineers will be able to cost-effectively
perform "what if" studies while obtaining immediate feedback. This environment
also will have a significant impact on the engineers of the next century by
providing graduate and undergraduate students of today with a unique research
environment that will prepare them for leadership positions in a variety of
careers involving the application of these new technologies. ***