* 9601770
*                                                             US-Turkey Cooperative Research:  High Performance Resonant  Cavity Enhanced Photodetectors and Applications
* O/D,OISE
* 08/01/1996,08/31/2001
* M. Selim Unlu, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* Osman Shinaishin
* 08/31/2001
* USD 41,076.00

Description: This award supports a cooperative project between a US scientist,
Dr. Selim Unlu, from the Department of Electrical, Computer, and Systems
Engineering at Boston University, and Dr. Ekmel Ozbay, Department of Physics,
and Dr. Orhan Aytur, Department of Electrical Engineering at Bilkent University,
Ankara, Turkey. The research aims at improving the design, fabrication and
characterization of compound semiconductor photodetectors in various material
systems operating at near-IR spectral region. The research will emphasize the
fabrication of high-performance photodetectors with bandwidth-efficiency
products approaching 100GHz. These are suitable for use in high performance
optical communication and signal processing systems that require high
sensitivities, short response times, and low power consumption. Over the past
few years a new family of optoelectronic devices has emerged whose performance
is enhanced by placing the active device structure inside a Fabry-Perot resonant
microcavity. The resonant cavity enhanced (RCE) detection scheme has been
studied using computer simulation techniques, which showed they can impart
drastic improvement to high-speed performance of conventional photodetectors.
This project will build on the mature theory and existing experience in RCE
detectors and to prototype high-performance ultrafast and nearly unity quantum
efficiency photodetectors. Scope: This award allows cooperation of two teams of
scientists whose capabilities complement each other to do important scientific
work. The U.S. P.I. is an accomplished young scientist who is at an early stage
in his academic and research career, but who has already received a grant from
the NSF's CAREER program. The research under that grant is complementary to that
planned in the present award. The two scientists at Bilkent have received their
doctorates recently at universities in the United States. They have excellent
facilities at their university for fabrication of the ultrafast photodetectors.
One U.S. graduate student at Boston University will participate in the work done
at Bilkent, and will have an opportunity for conducting research in an
international setting. This award is jointly funded by the Division of
International Programs and the Division of Electrical and Communication Systems.