* 9601065
* Landscape Ecology and Hominid Land Use in the Lowermost     Bed II Olduvai Basin
* SBE,BCS
* 07/15/1996,08/31/1999
* Robert Blumenschine, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Continuing Grant
* John Yellen
* 08/31/1999
* USD 211,467.00

With National science Foundation support, Dr. Robert Blumenschine and his
colleagues will continue their archaeological research at Olduvai Gorge in
northern Tanzania. Over the course of two seasons' of fieldwork, they will focus
on a stratigraphic horizon which dates to just under 2 million years ago and
which preserve traces of human activity. Dr. Blumenschine and colleagues will
continue to sample this horizon through carefully controlled excavation and will
collect both stone artifacts and faunal remains. Because it extends over a
considerable horizontal distance, through comparison of samples, the team will
be able to reconstruct a broad range of hominid (and likely non-hominid)
activities, gain insight into geographically varied behavior, and place this in
an environmental framework. To further the environmental aspect of the research,
the team will collect sediment, paleosol and carbonate samples from the
excavations for analyses of grain size, mineralogy, stable carbon and oxygen
isotopes. Laboratory analyses of these geological samples will provide
contextual information for interpreting archaeological patterning. Single
crystal laser fusion argon-argon dating and trace element analyses will serve to
establish finer temporal control within the target unit. This research is
significant for two primary reasons. First it will shed new light on the
emergence of human cultural capabilities. Olduvai Gorge has yielded not only
important hominid fossil remains, but also numerous assemblages of stone tools
and apparently associated fauna. These materials have provided a focus for
examination of the cultural capacities of early hominids. Using data from the
Olduvai sites paleoanthropologists have speculated on issues such as the role of
meat in early hominid diet and questioned whether such peoples had the ability
to hunt. Most of the available data comes from `sites` or dense, spacially
clustered groups of stone and bone remains. Archaeologists however have come to
realize that such clusters represent only one aspect of hominid behavior and
that smaller less dense scatters and areas which have no material at all can
also provide important relevant information. Dr. Blumenschine and colleagues
will focus their attention in a systematic fashion on both the `clusters` and
the scatter between the sites. Secondly, this work will help to pioneer the
field of `landscape archaeology.` The team will develop techniques for the
collection and analysis of non-site data and these methods will be applicable in
a wide variety of archaeological situations. This work will provide insight into
early hominid behavior. It will yield data of interest to many archaeologists
and assist in the training of Tanzanian researchers. It will serve to strengthen
the scientific ties between African and United States scientists.