* 9601691
* Acquisition of Wide Bore Nuclear Magnetic Resonance Imager
* ENG,CBET
* 11/01/1996,12/31/2000
* James Glazier, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* Mihail Roco
* 12/31/2000
* USD 435,002.00

9601691 Glazier The University of Notre Dame will purchase a Magnetic Resonance
Imaging (MRI) to pursue research in the department of Biological Sciences,
Chemistry and Biochemistry, Chemical Engineering, Electrical Engineering and
Physics. Research problems include the study of the evolution of foams, their
structures and the time dependence of their rheology; the flow of liquids
including foams in porous media; the imaging of flow in concentrated suspensions
and their properties; the architecture of neural network as a source of
information for the mathematical modeling of these networks; hibernating
myocardium and fumarate reductase as a study of anaerobiosis and metabolic
alteration; the design of selective MRI contrast agents and studies of tissue
freezing and cryoprotectant distribution as a metabolic response. The results
obtained from these studies will support the research of the OLISAO program in
the Department of Electrical Engineering which develops theory and numerical
simulations to fit and process image signals. These studies vary from
theoretical to applied and form engineering design to neurobiology. The support
from LISA will aid in developing improved imaging technology and increase speed
and accuracy in processing of data into images. The proposed studies either
require static imaging of prepared samples or study of the changes of images in
time. These projects can all be adequately performed with a vertical, high
resolution NMR imagine spectrometer operating at 300 MHz (7 Tesla magnetic
field) with the necessary accessories to acquire and process data. The in-vivo
probe (64mm working diameter) will monitor 1H at gradient strengths of 20 G/cm
(at 40 A), suitable for high resolution 3-d imaging experiments on frog and for
large scale hydrodynamics experiments. The microimaging probe will be available
with 0.4 cm to 2.5 cm coils for various nuclei, with microprobes for
microimaging at a resolution below 100 um for use in high resolution materials
science and bioc hemistry experiments. Some of the hardware and software will
require custom design for individual experiments. Three NMR specialists will be
present in the NMR facility, one devoted solely to MRI and one with extensive
MRI experience, to provide support for experiment development and execution. The
current proposal includes 10 faculty, 5 postdoctoral, 12 graduate students and 5
undergraduate researchers. MRI will also be used in undergraduate courses with
an enrollment of about 65 and graduate courses with an annual enrollment of
about 25. ***