* 9601943
* Acquisition of Electron Microscope for High Resolution      Structural Studies of Membrane Protein Assemblies
* BIO,DBI
* 08/01/1996,07/31/1997
* Thomas Pollard, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Lee C. Makowski
* 07/31/1997
* USD 145,000.00

This proposal seeks to initiate efforts at The Johns Hopkins University to
carry out high resolution structural investigations of membrane proteins with
the acquisition of a CM 120 Philips electron microscope system. The CM 120 is a
high quality transmission electron microscope which is suitable for studies of
biological specimens at atomic and near-atomic resolution. Our goal is to use
both the electron diffraction and imaging capabilities of the CM 120 microscope
to understand the structural basis for the function of a variety of membrane
proteins. Membrane proteins play a central role in executing key cellular
functions such as energy conversion, signal transduction and ion transport. Yet,
the structures of only seven membrane proteins are known at atomic resolution,
in contrast to the nearly one thousand structures known for water-soluble
proteins. Recent developments in high resolution electron microscopy have the
potential to alter this situation dramatically. Of the seven membrane protein
structures known at atomic resolution, two have been solved recently by applying
new techniques in high resolution microscopy to two-dimensional, rather than
three-dimensional protein crystals. We anticipate that our use of the CM 120
microscope for structural studies will occur in two phases. In the first phase,
we will initiate work on the following five projects, four of which represent
direct extensions of experiments already being carried out in collaborative
efforts with external electron microscopy centers: Structural "snapshots" of
steps in energy conversion by bacteriorhodopsin, a light-driven proton pump (S.
Subramaniam, with Dr. R. Henderson at MRC, Cambridge, England) Structural basis
of water transport by aquaporin, the water channel in red blood cells (P. Agre,
with Dr. A. Engel at the Biozentrum, Basel, Switzerland) Structural basis of the
association of myosin-I with the cell membrane (T. Pollard, with Dr. R. Milliga
n at the Scripps Research Institute, La Jolla, CA) Structure of the voltage-
gated potassium channel from Drosophila (M. Li, with Dr. N. Unwin at MRC,
Cambridge, England) Structure determination of the IP3 receptor, a ligand-gated
calcium channel (W. Agnew and S. Subramaniam) From these initial efforts, our
goal is to lay the foundation for an institutional resource to carry out high
resolution electron microscopy. A number of biologically important membrane
receptors including a variety of sensory transducers and ion channels are
currently being studied in laboratories at Johns Hopkins University. We fully
expect that in the second phase of research facilitated by the the microscope,
the structures of these receptors, as well as those of a variety of other
cellular components can be successfully analyzed.