* 9601084
* U.S.-China Cooperative Research:  Finite Volume and Runge-  Kutta Discontinuous Galerkin Methods for Conservation       Laws
* O/D,OISE
* 11/01/1996,10/31/2000
* Chi-Wang Shu, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* Alice C. Hogan
* 10/31/2000
* USD 59,000.00

9601084 Shu This award supports collaboration in applied mathematics,
specifically on finite volume method and Runge-Kutta discontinuous Galerkin
method for hyperbolic conservation laws. Chi-Wang Shu, Brown University,
Division of Applied Mathematics, and Li Yinfan, Department of Computational
Mathematics, Chinese Academy of Sciences together with Lu Ruxun, Mathematics
Department, University of Science and Technology, Hefei, propose to conduct
research on various projects related to development of numerical algorithms with
high order of accuracy. The cooperation will be carried on through exchange of
visits and of students. Finite volume method and finite element method are two
of the main classes of numerical methods frequently used to solve differential
equations arising from fluid dynamics and other areas of computational physics
and computational engineering, such as semiconductor device simulations. The US
and Chinese researchers in this project will jointly study these two types of
methods, compare their relative merit in different situations, and apply the
method to computational fluid dynamics problems and other problems in
computational physics. The US investigator's expertise in finite difference
method, and in applications in various fields of computational physics is
complemented by the Chinese expertise in algorithm development and analysis. The
Chinese side also brings established research groups to the project, providing
an additional pool of research support.