* 9601861
* Academic Research Infrastructure:  Development of a Wide    Area Scalable Infrastructure for Data Intensive Computing:  Consortium Proposal
* CSE,EIA
* 09/01/1996,08/31/1999
* Jonathan Smith, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Stephen Mahaney
* 08/31/1999
* USD 2,000,000.00

9601861 Hollebeek, Robert Smith, Jonathon University of Pennsylvania Academic
Research Infrastructure: Development of a Wide Area Scaleable Infrastructure for
Data Intensive Computing: Consortium Proposal This Academic Research
Infrastructure award supports the acquisition of equipment to enhance the
National Scaleable Cluster Project. The equipment will be sited at 3
universities to further the development of a national meta computing center. The
equipment consists of large fast disk arrays, high performance computer cluster
enhancements, ATM network switches to OC-12 capabilities, network connections,
and associated software. The research projects supported by the equipment
include: 1. Applications computing that is data intensive including data mining
of particle physics data, digital library development of the linguistics data
consortium, digital library development of astrophysics, gravitational lenses
data maps, galactic large structure simulations, and the development of
numerical and statistical digital libraries. 2. Real time computing applications
including collecting reduced astronomical data, medical imaging, and
telepresence. 3. Parallel compute intensive applications including liquid
crystal imaging, phase transition simulations, crystal surface computational
studies, and vortex flow studies. 4. High speed network research including
network striping and the inclusion of tertiary store in high performance memory
hierarchies. 5. Computer science research on scaleable object stores, research
on caching, transforming, and replicating data, and software tools for cluster
management.