* 9601598
* Acquisition of a Variable-Temperature Scanning Tunneling    Microscope and X-Ray Photoelectron Spectroscopy Facility for a Molecular Beam Epitaxy System
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/1996,05/31/1999
* Robert Sacks, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Standard Grant
* Carmen I. Huber
* 05/31/1999
* USD 281,850.00

9601598 Pelz An ultrahigh-vacuum, variable-temperature scanning tunneling
microscope and an x-ray spectroscopy facility will be established at Ohio State
University. The facility will be attached to a modular molecular beam epitaxy
system and will thus allow for in situ characterization of the chemistry and
electronic structure of heterostructure interfaces. Research activities
supported by the facility include studies of the interface chemistry and atomic
structure of GaAs grown on lattice-matched Ge/GeSi/Si substrates, charge
trapping in metal/semiconductor structures, the growth of epitaxial
metal/semiconductor structures with III-V materials, and metal contact formation
on polymer films. The scanning tunneling microscope will be configured so that
it can perform variable-temperature ballistic electron emission microscopy of
buried interfaces, in addition to conventional structural studies of surfaces.
This will permit detailed studies of metal/semiconductor interface formation
over a wide range of metal coverage. %%% The incorporation of the requested
instrumentation to the film growth facility results in a powerful tool for the
characterization of interfaces between dissimilar materials. In addition to the
direct research benefits, acquisition of the instrumentation will enhance the
training of graduate students from several departments through interdisciplinary
research using state-of-the-art facilities. ***