* 9601458
* Dynamic Simulation Software for Biologists
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/1996,07/31/2000
* Robert Macey, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Paul Gilna
* 07/31/2000
* USD 303,751.00

In recent years, complex biological problems are increasingly analyzed using
computer simulation models. Unfortunately, the development and application of
these simulations are too often beyond the reach of experimental biologists,
most of whom have neither the background nor the time to devote to mastering
conventional simulation tools. This proposal addresses the problem of making
simulation accessible to biological scientists. Software development is proposed
that is intuitive, easily accessible to the novice within a few hours, and
sufficiently powerful to develop innovative, state of the art simulations. The
objective is to provide the tools for both researchers and students of biology
that will be: 1. Designed specifically to handle biological problems. 2.
Intuitive and easy to learn and use by scientists with limited mathematical or
computer experience. 3. Sufficiently flexible to handle a wide variety of
problems. 4. Sufficiently powerful to tackle current problems in the research
literature. 5. Sufficiently flexible to allow teachers to design their own
simulation exercises and interfaces according to their own experience and
tastes. These objectives will be accomplished with software that contains an
intuitive graphical interface designed specifically for constructing biological
models and solving them very quickly. It will also contain a convenient output
display that is conducive to exploring model parameters, curve fitting model
results to empirical data, and plotting results in different modes (e.g. run
time, batch, overlay, strip chart, triggered oscilloscope, 2 or 3 dimensions,
phase p lane, iso- and nullclines). The software will contain modern algorithms
for solving stiff systems of ordinary differential and difference equations,
initial and boundary value problems, partial differential equations, root
finders, location of bifurcations, optimization, and stochastic problems. In
many cases these mathematical techniques will be invisible to the inexperienced
user, but will be available to the more advanced worker.