* 9601393
* Dissertation: The Effects of War and Violence on Moral      Development in El Salvador
* NONE,NONE
* 08/01/1996,01/31/1999
* Robert Edgerton, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Stuart Plattner
* 01/31/1999
* USD 10,883.00

This project supports the dissertation research of a cultural anthropologist
from UCLA, studying the effects of political violence on the moral development
of children. The project will ask how and when moral proscriptions against
violence are universally binding or context-specific, and whether children's
moral rules are more similar to those of children from other cultures or those
within their own culture, holding socio-economic class constant. Thirty male and
female children from 3 age ranges (5-7, 8-10, 11-13) in 3 subsamples (urban
upper class, urban middle class, rural poor) will be interviewed as well as 30
male and female adults in El Salvador, as well as a US sample of children and
adults in . In each case a questionnaire consisting of 36 behavioral cases of
`wrong` behavior will presented and the persons asked to comment on its morality
in diverse contexts. This project is important because it will advance our
understanding of how children learn moral rules. Testing the proposition that
the development of such rule is culture-specific as opposed to cross-culturally
stable will contribute valuable information to bear on this question. At a time
when many in US society bemoan the lack of values among the youth, a project
such as this will provide valuable information on the source of and variation in
moral values in children.