* 9601443
* Dissertation Research: The Role of Southern Vowels in Ethnic Diversity
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/1996,12/31/1997
* Walter Wolfram, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Paul G. Chapin
* 12/31/1997
* USD 5,968.00

The goal of the project is provide an account of the sociolinguistic and
ethnolinguistic boundaries for the three ethnic communities in Warren County,
NC: the African-American community, the Native-American community, and the
European-American community. The complex nature of the relationships between the
communities offers an ideal sociolinguistic laboratory for examining the effects
of ethnic boundaries on language change and variation. Acoustic analysis of
vowels will be conducted to pinpoint inter- and intradialectal variation, and
quantitatively based covariance studies of a set of social and linguistic
varieties will provide a profile of the overlapping but distinctive dialect
systems. Interviews with members of all three communities will be conducted
using sociolinguist/native fieldworker teams to augment the present corpus of
speakers, which presently includes 36 Warren County speakers. The project will
provide data and analysis relating to three major issues in sociolinguistics
today. First, research will provide current and refined information on the state
of Southern linguistic identity. Second, quantitative and qualitative analysis
will provide a closer look at the possible convergence or divergence between
African-American Vernacular English (AAVE) and European-American Vernacular
English (EAVE). Studies done in large, urban cities reveal social influences on
the variation and change of vernacular English; the triracial community of
Warren county offers a vastly different social situation, that of an
agriculturally based rural community. The possible convergence and divergence of
the Native American community with either the local AAVE or EAVE speech
communities, vis-a-vis a separate dialectal identity, will also provide crucial
evidence pertaining to the attempts of the Warren County Native American
community to meet regulations for federal recognition. A distinctive dialect may
lend credence to claims of cultural diversity for the Native American community.
Third, data and analysis of Warren County speech will provide the linguistic
community at large with a clearer view of the nature of ethnic boundaries and
language variation. The social setting of Warren County's ethnic boundaries
offers a different, diverse, and culturally rich perspective on language
variation.