* 9601968
* ARI: Acquisition of Multidisciplinary Instrumentation for   Intelligent Control
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/1996,08/31/1999
* Vittal Rao, Missouri University of Science and Technology
* Standard Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 08/31/1999
* USD 200,899.00

9601968 Rao Funds for acquisition of research instrumentation are provided for
the development of multidisciplinary research facilities in intelligent control
systems. The University of Missouri-Rolla (UMR) has identified intelligent
control as part of its emphasis areas in manufacturing and civil infrastructure
for research and training. A multidisciplinary research team at UMR is actively
pursuing research in this area and has been quite successful in obtaining the
support of federal agencies. This instrumentation will significantly expand the
research and training capabilities in the area of intelligent control systems.
The instrumentation package consists of (i) real-time control systems and
hardware-in-the-loop simulation systems, (ii) connected network of adaptive
processor systems (CNAPS) for hardware implementation of neural networks, (iii)
real-time neural network and fuzzy logic control development system, (iv) multi-
channel dynamic signal analyzer, (v) vision and image processing system for
vision-based intelligent control, and (vi) a cluster of advanced workstations.
This instrumentation package supports the multidisciplinary research and
training efforts in real-time implementation of intelligent control area. The
senior undergraduate and graduate students and faculty members from the
departments of electrical engineering, civil engineering, chemical engineering,
and mechanical and aerospace engineering will benefit from the proposed
equipment. This equipment will interface with existing laboratories and enhances
the research infrastructure of UMR. The primary research areas/research training
to be supported by the proposed instrumentation are: (i) basic research in
intelligent control; (ii) intelligent control of smart structures; (iii)
structural control; (iv) intelligent control in manufacturing; (v) intelligent
control applications in aerospace vehicles; (vi) intelligent control of power
systems and drives; (vii) intelligent pro cess control; (viii) combined
research- curriculum development projects; (ix) laboratory support for senior
undergraduate/graduate level courses in neural networks for control, fuzzy logic
control, control of smart structures, and flexible power system control. *** ??