* 9601821
* Acquisition of a Multidisciplinary Transmission Electron    Microscope Laboratory
* BIO,DBI
* 08/01/1996,07/31/1999
* Darwin Wittrock, University of Wisconsin-Eau Claire
* Standard Grant
* Gregory K. Farber
* 07/31/1999
* USD 247,494.00

The University of Wisconsin - Eau Claire (UWEC) proposes a major equipment
upgrade in its electron microscope center with the purchase of a new
Transmission Electron Microscope (TEM) and associated TEM preparation equipment.
The proposed equipment will augment equipment purchased almost 20 years ago and
will function in support of both the university's teaching and undergraduate
collaborative research mission. The new TEM will have both analytical and video
capabilities that do not exist with the current instrumentation. Development of
this lab will ensure that UWEC remains a well respected regional laboratory for
the analysis of materials using electron microscopy. Four departments currently
use the electron microscopes for instruction of undergraduate students (Biology,
Chemistry, Physics and Geology) and well over 100 students have been trained to
do EM in the existing facility. Faculty members currently use the facility for
research with graduate and undergraduate students in Biology and with
undergraduate students in materials science and mineralogy. The enhanced
resolution and analytical capabilities of the new instrument will draw
additional researchers including one new UWEC faculty member (Dr. Anne Geraghty
- plant physiology/plant molecular biology) who is experienced in
immunocytochemical localization techniques for TEM. This powerful research tool
forms an important link with the highly successful interdisciplinary program in
biochemistry/ molecular biology which is one of the most popular majors on
campus and draws some of UWEC's best students. This will ensure more use of
electron microscopy in the future. Since UWEC has been designated the University
of Wisconsin System Center of Excellence in Student/Faculty Collaborative
Research, it is imperative that state-of-the-art research facilities be funded
and maintained. Towards these ends, the State of Wisconsin has recently
committed $343,000 to renovate exist ing space to house a new EM center and the
new facility, completed in February, 1996 has a room devoted exclusively to
development of a modern analytical TEM laboratory. In addition, UWEC is pledging
an additional $256,311 for purchase of the proposed equipment indicating again
the level of commitment on this campus to the proposed program. The combined
university contribution to this laboratory including the remodeling will be ~
$600,000. We are seeking $269,953 from NSF to complete equipping the laboratory
facility. The new TEM and associated equipment will add the following
capabilities to the current laboratory: (1) TEM microanalysis, including
accurate immunocytochemical localization, (2) ability to perform higher
resolution studies (ten-fold increase in resolution over current TEM) and image
crystalline structures with atomic resolution, (3) video display for instruction
and demonstration, (4) video capture of digitized images for display and image
analysis, and (5) improved access to electron microscopy for school and
community groups. A surprising number of current science majors indicate that
summer programs and school year visits to the university influenced their career
decisions. Acquisition of this equipment will allow safe, effective training and
research in EM to continue at UWEC for the next 20 years. Students from UWEC
will have experience using state-of-the-art equipment, whether they are bound
for graduate school, professional school, or simply a science literate life in
the private sector.