* 9601021
* Excavation of Duinefontein 2, A Middle Stone Age Open-Air   Site on the Western Cape Coast of South Africa
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/1996,02/28/2002
* Kathryn Cruz-Uribe, Northern Arizona University
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 02/28/2002
* USD 155,113.00

Drs. Kathryn Cruz-Uribe and Richard Klein will conduct archaeological research
at the site of Duinefontein which is located on the South African Atlantic coast
approximately 35 km. North of Cape Town. For over 40 years scientists have known
of the presence of thousands of well preserved fossilized bones in the
Duinefontein sands but until Richard Klein's work they had not been found in
secure stratified context. In recent work, the investigator has found two levels
of in situ material in association with artifacts attributable to Middle Stone
Age peoples. With National Science Foundation support Drs. Cruz-Uribe, Klein and
their collaborators will return to the site to conduct two field seasons of
extensive carefully controlled excavations. The goals of this work are to
recover large enough samples of both lithics and faunal remains to conduct
statistically meaningful analyses, to clear large enough surfaces to recover
potential behavioral information, and to collect samples which can provide
absolute dates for the two levels. The Middle Stone Age is of great
archaeological interest because it is during this period, between a. 250,000 and
50,000 years ago that humans assumed their modern physical form and many
hallmarks of modern behavior appeared. Before the Middle Stone Age there is no
evidence for art, religion or burial of the dead. Trade and interaction spheres
were geographically limited yet at the same time there is no indication of
tribal or other ethnic groupings. By the end of the Middle Stone Age period the
presence of all these traits - all hallmarks of modern day peoples - are
abundantly clear in the archaeological record. Drs. Cruz-Uribe, Klein and their
colleagues wish to determine the temporal origin of these attributes and
determine how they developed over time. A site such as Duinfontien with its
excellently preserved bone and rich lithic assemblage is will suited for such a
purpose. This research is important for several reasons. it will provide
information of interest to many archaeologists and increase understanding of how
we became human.