* 9601505
* Glycoallcaloids of Temperate and Tropical Solanum Species:  Patterns of Occurrence and Ecologocial Relevance
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/1996,08/31/1998
* Martin Cipollini, Berry College
* Standard Grant
* Lee C. Makowski
* 08/31/1998
* USD 33,788.00

In this proposal, funds are being requested for the acquisition, setup, and
maintenance of a number of pieces of equipment used for the analysis of primary
and secondary chemicals found in plants. Specific items include a high-pressure
liquid chromatography HPLC) unit, accessories to a low-pressure liquid column
(LC) chromatography apparatus, a centrifuge, a refrigerating/heating water bath,
a ductless fume hood, a an ultrafreezer, an analytical balance, a pH meter, a
hot plate, a vortex mixer, a Wiley mill, and a set of micropipetters. These
instruments will be used principally in a research program designed to quantify
a number of related secondary compounds (glycoalkaloids) in fruits of Solanum
species and to isolate these compounds for use in bioassays with birds, mammals,
microbes, and insects. Such studies are critical for understanding the role of
secondary compounds of ripe fleshy fruits in mediating interactions among plants
and the organisms that consume their fruits. Of particular interest is the
apparent evolutionary paradox of "toxic" fruits and the relative effects of
fruit toxins on organisms with contrasting effects upon seed viability and seed
dispersal. This research was initiated at the University of Florida under NSF
grant DEB-9207920 (Douglas J. Levey, PI) and is being continued by the co-PI of
this grant and the project director of the current proposal, Dr. Martin L.
Cipollini, with financial support for materials and supplies from Berry College.
Dr. Cipollini began a tenure-track faculty position at Berry College in August
1995. Because of a historical lack of academic research instrumentation at this
college and because of the necessity of leaving research equipment at the
University of Florida upon his leaving, it has been very difficult for Dr.
Cipollini to resume the laboratory-based components of his research. Acquisition
of the above items will allow the resumption of this research and will allow
this research to expand i n other directions in the future. Of particular
concern is the desire to involve undergraduates in Dr. Cipollini's research
program. Berry College has a guaranteed student work program, which gives
faculty researchers virtually unlimited access to qualified undergraduate
research assistants, generally two or three students per semester. With the
instrumentation to conduct the research, undergraduates will be able to be fully
involved in all aspects of this research program. Students will have the
opportunity of acting as research assistants, of being involved in directed
studies (independent research for credit), and of conducting honors-level
research. Moreover, use of a number of these pieces of equipment will be shared
with at least three other faculty researchers at Berry College, Drs. Chris
Mowry, Bill Davin, and Laura Fielden, who share an unimproved lab (Cook 302)
with Dr. Cipollini. Availability of these instruments to these researchers will
likewise enhance their research programs and their ability to support
undergraduate research and education at Berry College.