* 9601253
* Monetary Policy and the Monetary Transmission Mechanism
* SBE,SES
* 10/15/1996,09/30/1999
* Lawrence Christiano, National Bureau of Economic Research Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Lynn A. Pollnow
* 09/30/1999
* USD 221,616.00

The purpose of this research is to continue developing an empirically based,
dynamic general equilibrium framework for analyzing monetary policy. This effort
will have two basic components: to better understand the monetary policy making
process itself, and to develop improved models of the links between monetary
policy and the performance of the overall economy. The first component seeks to
endogenize monetary policy by thinking of it as being determined by a purposeful
policy maker who does not have the ability to commit to future actions. This
project will investigate the possibility that the take-off of inflation in the
1970s reflects in part the kind of instability that can arise when monetary
policy is conducted in the absence of commitment. An important objective of this
proposal is to analyze alternative feasible institutional arrangements that
could give rise to a more stable monetary policy. The second component of this
project focuses on developing improved models of the economy. For an analysis of
alternative monetary policy regimes to be persuasive, it must be built upon a
sound model. One strand of the proposed research builds on the author's previous
work developing a framework for integrating monetary and business cycle
phenomena. Specifically, the project will explore various factors that can help
account quantitatively for the observation that the price effects of monetary
policy disturbances appear to be small, while the output effects are relatively
larger. In a third strand of research the investigator will continue his work
reconciling the salient characteristics of asset returns with macroeconomic
models. This is important because virtually any view about the way money affects
the economy assigns a central role to asset markets. The investigator will also
explore the possibility that expectational shocks play an important role in the
business cycle. Understanding what are the ultimate impulses to the business
cycle is likely to be important in any assessment of alternative monetary
policies. Finally, the investigator will use financial market data to obtain
improved estimates of the exogenous component of monetary policy. Such measures
play an important role in efforts to identify the channels by which money
affects the economy.