* 9601157
* HCI: Community, Neighborhood, and Family Influences on the  Development of Inner-City Minority Youth
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/1996,08/31/1998
* Patrick Tolan, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Steven Breckler
* 08/31/1998
* USD 60,332.00

The purpose of the proposed study is to test a theory of the influence of
community, neighborhood, and family functioning on the social development of
African-American and Latino male adolescents living in inner-city and other
urban poor communities. Research in child and adolescent development has long
recognized the family as the most proximal and perhaps primary influence on
child behavioral and emotional development. However, there is increasing
recognition that families' ability to provide necessary functions for social
development such as modeling of behavior, consistent care, and emotional support
is constrained or enabled by characteristics of the neighborhood and community
in which they live. Parental styles and beliefs do not merely reflect individual
proclivities, but also are shaped by considerations outside the family,
especially the social organization of the community. This study uses existing
data from a four-year longitudinal study that has tracked multi-level indicators
of adjustment and promising predictors for 300 inner-city male youth and their
families to test the impact of community structure (e.g., mobility, poverty,
heterogeneity) on neighborhood social organization (e.g., support, involvement,
resource use) and family functioning and relate these influences to adequacy of
social development as indicated by involvement in criminal behavior, educational
attainment and employment of inner-city youth. The nature of the transaction
between communities and families over time and variations in relations across
ethnic groups are also examined. The hypotheses and related models to be tested
can direct risk identification efforts (e.g., focus on community vs.
neighborhood vs. specific families), prevention programs (identify which aspects
of social context are necessary and sufficient program targets), and policy (the
likely benefit and limitation investments in community economic and social
resources to decrease youth risk). %%% The purpose of the proposed study is to
test a theory of the influence of community, neighborhood, and family
functioning on the social development of African-American and Latino male
adolescents living in inner-city and other urban poor communities. Research in
child and adolescent development has long recognized the family as perhaps the
most important influence on child development. However, there is increasing
recognition that families' ability to provide necessary functions for social
development is strongly influenced by the neighborhood and community in which
they live. Parental styles and beliefs do not merely reflect individual
proclivities, but also are shaped by considerations outside the family,
especially the social organization of the community. This study uses existing
data from a four-year longitudinal study that has tracked 300 inner-city male
youth and their families to test the impact of community structure (e.g.,
mobility and poverty) on neighborhood social organization (e.g., support,
involvement, resource use) and family functioning. The study examines such
outcomes as criminal behavior, educational attainment and employment. The model
developed in this research holds promise in helping to identify problems for
which inner-city youth are at particular risk, to develop prevention programs,
and to inform policy on community economic and social resources.