* 9601682
* Acquisition of a Confocal Laser Scanning System for Imaging  Living, Voltage Clamped Cells
* BIO,DBI
* 07/15/1996,06/30/1999
* Rodney Parsons, University of Vermont & State Agricultural College
* Standard Grant
* Gregory K. Farber
* 06/30/1999
* USD 265,265.00

Stimulus-induced alteration in the concentration of intracellular second
messengers is a key mechanism by which cell function can be regulated. With the
development of fluorescent probes, it became possible to directly measure
changes in the concentration of a number of second messengers such as calcium
and hydrogen ions in both resting and stimulated cells. Until recently,
fluorometric measurements of intracellular ions monitored generalized changes,
but were not sufficiently sensitive nor had adequate temporal resolution to
measure very brief, localized ion release from internal stores. However, with
laser scanning confocal microscopy, it now is possible to measure elevations in
intracellular ions or pH changes within micron-thin optical sections through
living cells. For example, the brief, localized elevation of intracellular
calcium, that results from the opening of calcium channels in the sarcoplasmic
reticulum/endoplasmic reticulum can be measured as "calcium sparks" (3,8). These
local calcium sparks have a profound influence on muscle function by summing to
cause a global elevation of intracellular calcium leading to contraction in
heart muscle (3) or by activating surface membrane K+ channels leading to
vasodilitation in smooth muscles (8). Calcium spark activity, in turn, is
intimately controlled by local calcium entry through surface membrane channels.
These extraordinary insights into fundamental mechanisms of cardiac muscle and
smooth muscle control were permitted by the unparalleled resolution of the
laser-scanning confocal microscope (3,8). This approach permits one to follow
the fate of key ions, such as calcium, which after crossing the cell membrane
are then sequestered into internal stores. Although calcium sparks occur as
random events, their frequency and kinetic properties commonly are affected by
cell voltage. Cons equently, the local changes in intracellular calcium,
monitored as calcium sparks, must be measured in cells with membrane voltage
controlled. It is proposed that these fluorescence measurements will be made on
cells voltage clamped with whole cell patch clamp techniques. Also, these
measurements will be made under conditions which allow for rapid exchange of
bathing solutions. A Major objective of five of the six projects is to establish
the relationships between calcium entry through surface membrane calcium
channels and activation of calcium sparks and then subsequent effects on
membrane ionic conductances in neurons and in different smooth muscle cells. The
last project investigates the role that intracellular pH plays, in the
regulation of chemotaxis in Paramecium, by measuring local intracellular changes
in proton concentration. Each project asks a very specific question concerning
the role of brief, highly localized changes in calcium or pH which may be
critical to a specific cell function. Further, the requested equipment will
permit the investigation of other key issues such as local homeostatic
regulation of intracellular ionic concentrations by extrusion mechanisms. The
critical requirement of all of the proposed studies is the ability to measure
very rapid, highly localized changes in the concentration of calcium or pH in
voltage-clamped cells. Funds are requested to create a multiuser facility
comprised of three closely integrated components: a Noran Odyssey XL digital
confocal laser scanning imaging system, a Nikon Diaphot 200 inverted microscope
and an Axon Instrument based voltage clamp system. The presence of this highly
sophisticated instrumentation will greatly enhance the research capabilities of
the project directors and also will provide significant new training
opportunities for our current and future gradua te students and postdoctoral
fellows.