* 9601942
* Acquisition of Essential Monitoring and Control Equipment   for a Long-term, Multi-institutional Free-Air Carbon        Dioxide and Ozone Enrichment Facility
* BIO,DBI
* 08/01/1996,07/31/1999
* Kurt Pregitzer, Michigan Technological University
* Standard Grant
* Gregory K. Farber
* 07/31/1999
* USD 250,973.00

We are in the process of developing a state-of-the art free-air carbon dioxide
enrichment(FACE) facility in northern Wisconsin to examine the interacting
effects of elevated CO2 and O3 on a Populus tremuloides forest ecosystem. The
FACE system will allow study of community level forest responses to elevated CO2
and O3 under natural, nonchambered conditions. We have assembled a
multidisciplinary team of scientists to examine responses from the molecular to
the ecosystem levels. Our long-term goal is to examine the interacting effects
of elevated CO2 and O3, alone and in combination, on the productivity,
competitive interactions, and carbon and nitrogen fluxes in a regenerating aspen
ecosystem. Three replicate FACE rings will be established in each of four
treatments (CO2, O3, CO2 + O3 control) in a randomized complete block design.
Rooted cuttings from nine P. tremuloides clones previously characterized for
their O3 and/or CO2 sensitivities will be planted at 0.5 m x 0.5 m spacing
across each FACE ring. The close spacing will simulate a naturally regenerating
aspen forest. Fumigation with elevated CO2 (550 ppm) and O3 (50 ppb above
background during photosynthetically active daylight hours to a target of 80
ppm-hr seasonal exposure) will be conducted over the approximately 100-day
growing season. Growth measurements (height, diameter, biomass, leaf area, root
production and root mortality), physiological measurements (photosynthesis,
respiration, stomatal conductance, chlorophyll content), plant nutrient status
(nitrogen), foliar biochemistry (carbohydrates, phenolic glycosides, and
antioxidants), litter decomposition rates, and soil respiration will be made
throughout each growing season. The establishment and operation of this FACE
system is an expensive, capital-intensive research project. Therefore, we will
encourage multiple use of the research site by researchers and their students.
We currently have some 14 in vestigators and their graduate students involved.
Thus far, we have three years' support from the U.S. Department of Energy, the
U.S. Forest Service Northern Station's Global Change Program, the National
Council for Air and Stream Improvement of the Pulp and Paper Industry, and
Michigan Technological University. In addition, we have significant in-kind
contributions by the U.S. Forest Service and Brookhaven National Laboratory.
However, we are still short of capital for critical air and meteorological
monitoring equipment, the related data acquisition systems, and ozone
generation. This proposal seeks support for high resolution, rapid-response
instrumentation for the ozone, CO2, and meteorological monitoring, and for the
ozone generation needed for the facility. We seek $251,671 from the National
Science Foundation Academic Research Infrastructure (ARI) Program; we have
matching contributions of $59,955 from the National Council for Air and Stream
Improvement of the Pulp and Paper Industry (NCASI) and $44,896 from the host
institution, Michigan Technological University.