* 9601975
* Acquisition of a Thermal Ionization Mass Spectrometer at the Berkeley Geochronology Center
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/1996,08/31/1998
* Kenneth Ludwig, Berkeley Geochronology Center
* Standard Grant
* Russell Kelz
* 08/31/1998
* USD 200,000.00

9601975 Ludwig This grant, made through the Academic Research Infrastructure
(ARI) Program, provides $200,000 as partial support of the costs of acquiring a
state- of-the-art, high abundance sensitivity, thermal ionization mass
spectrometer (TIMS) with multiple collectors, to be used for Uranium series and
U-Th- Pb geochronology. Specific projects will include the dating of siliceous
microfossils, pedogenic silica and carbonate, speleothems, corals and materials
from archaeological sites such as tooth enamel using U-series methods for
samples in the 20-500 Ka age range and U/Pb techniques for dating of pre-
Mesozoic igneous accessory phases. These data should provide new age controls on
the late Pleistocene marine stratigraphic record, the timing of pedogenesis and
thus climate history of opal-bearing soils, high-resolution records of
paleoclimate recorded in spleothem calcites and records of paleosea level based
on accurate geochronologies determined from U-series dating of near-surface
dwelling corals such as Acropora palmata. The new TIMS will also serve to
calibrate Stanford-USGS SHRIMP ion microprobe analyses of individual zircons and
will provide independent checks of 40Ar/39Ar dates of volcanic zircons and
sanidines obtained using the existing noble gas mass spectrometer at the BGC.
Funding of this TIMS will also shared with NSF's Archaeometry Program
(SBR-9601068). ***