* 9601711
* Acquisition of an Inductively Coupled Plasma Mass           Spectrometer
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/1996,08/31/1997
* Emily Klein, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Rom
* 08/31/1997
* USD 168,528.00

9601711 Klein Funds are requested to establish an inductively coupled plasma-
mass spectrometer (ICP-MS) facility at Duke University. The ICP-MS is an ideal
instrument for the analysis of trace elements, particularly low-abundance trace
elements, in diverse geological samples. The ICP-MS will be operated as a multi-
user facility and matching funds have been committed from Duke University and
the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill (UNC-CH). The Duke Department of
Geology has also committed funds toward the long-term support of a technician to
maintain the instrument assist users in obtaining analyses. The ICP-MS is
capable of measuring a wide range of elements with high precision at high sample
throughput and, as a result, is being recognized as a major advance in
analytical instrumentation. Elements now routinely measured in rock samples
include the rare earth elements, high field strength elements, heavy alkali
elements, U, Th, and Pb. The facility will expand analytical capabilities in
virtually every areas of geochemical and environmental research in the Research
Triangle are, and will complement existing analytical facilities at Duke and the
University of North Carolina-Chapel Hill (UNC-CH). The facility will serve a
large and diverse group of faculty and students in the Research Triangle area,
including igneous and metamorphic petrologists, marine sediment and microfossil
geochemists, and environmental (soil and water) geochemists. The faculty have a
well- established record of funding and research productivity, and there is a
clear need for an ICP-MS in our area. Indeed, the research of many of our
potential users already depends upon the acquisition of ICP-MS data at distant
facilities across the country, and the acquisition of an ICP-MS facility at Duke
will allow others to explore new avenues of research beyond the reach of our
present analytical capabilities. Furthermore, it is highly desirable that our
numerous graduate students have easy access to the analytical equipment required
for their research so that they can become well-versed in its use. Lastly,
because we at Duke and UNC-CH are committed to educating undergraduates and
encouraging them to choose careers in the geosciences, it is critical that these
bright young students have the opportunity to become involved in research using
state-of - art analytical equipment. ***