* 9601148
* Protein-RNA Interactions in Splicing of a Physarum Group    I Intron
* BIO,MCB
* 07/15/1996,07/26/1999
* Sarah Woodson, University of Maryland, College Park
* Continuing Grant
* Marcia Steinberg
* 07/26/1999
* USD 300,000.00

9601148 Woodson Post-transcriptional processing of RNA is a fundamental step in
eukaryotic gene expression and consequently of basic importance to biological
processes such as embryonic development and disease. A central problem in RNA
processing is understanding how proteins contribute to the formation of
catalytic RNA structures. We will use protein-dependent splicing of a group I
intron as a model for the folding and assembly of protein-RNA complexes in vivo.
A protein that accelerates splicing of a group I intron from Physarum nuclear
pre-ribosomal RNA has been biochemically identified in nuclear extracts of
Physarum polycephalum. This protein is the first example of a nuclear group I
splicing factor. An advantage of this simple system for biochemical studies is
that the intron RNA is able to self-splice in the absence of protein, enabling a
direct comparison of protein-dependent and protein-independent splicing in
vitro. In addition, we have previously established a bacterial system for
expression and splicing of group I introns in pre-ribosomal RNA. Consequently
this system is well suited for future investigations of protein-RNA interactions
in vivo and will be directly relevant to processing of pre-ribosomal RNA.
Preliminary work has shown that this Physarum splicing factor primarily
recognizes a tRNA-like structure that is not part of the catalytic core of the
intron. As maturase proteins that facilitate group I splicing are so far known
to predominantly bind their cognate intron core, our observation suggests a
novel mode of group I protein-dependent splicing. The minimal binding site and
essential recognition elements within this tRNA-like structure will be
determined using chemical modification and ribonuclease protection, and site-
directed mutagenesis. Models of protein-facilitated splicing will be evaluated
by determining the dependence of in vitro splicing kinetics on variables such as
protein concentration, temperature and time of preincubation. Protein-induced
changes in the structure of the catalytic core will be determined by comparing
the pattern of Fe-EDTA-dependent hydroxyl radical cleavage of intron RNA in the
presence and absence of protein. Intermediates in the complex assembly pathway
will be separated by native gel electrophoresis. The Physarum splicing factor
will be cloned and expressed as a fusion protein in E. coli. cDNA libraries will
be screened by hybridization to probes derived from peptide sequences or by
complementation of splicing in bacteria. Biochemical characterization of the
cloned protein will permit more detailed analysis of protein function and
investigation of whether this protein binds other cellular RNAs. Development of
bacterial (or yeast) expression systems will lead to further work on in vivo
splicing of group I introns and enable us to dissect the roles of non-specific
and specific RNA-binding proteins in the processing of pre-ribosomal RNA. %%%
Most genes in higher organisms contain non-coding sequences, or introns, that
are removed after the gene is transcribed into RNA. This process, which is
called "splicing", is an essential step in the normal expression of genes in
human and other organisms. Defective splicing can lead to disease or to
developmental disorders. Correct splicing is determined by the sequence and
structure of the RNA itself, and also by interactions between RNA and proteins.
We have isolated a protein that promotes correct splicing of a group I intron in
pre-ribosomal RNA of the slime mold Physarum polycephalum. This system will be
used as a model for investigating how proteins enhance splicing reactions. The
points of interaction between the RNA and the protein will be determined, and
the way in which the protein alters the three-dimensional structure of the RNA
investigated. In the future we will determine whether this protein also
regulates expression of other genes. These experiments will lead to a better
understanding of how more complex splicing systems in human genes are
controlled. ***