* 9601582
* ARI: Acquisition of Scanning Acoustic Microscope
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/15/1996,08/31/1997
* Rodney Dillon, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Standard Grant
* george hazelrigg
* 08/31/1997
* USD 235,000.00

9601582 Dzenis This is an Academic Research Infrastructure Award that provides
funds to purchase a Universal Scanning Acoustic Microscope (SAM). The SAM
combines microimaging, microtesting, and microscopic non-destructive evaluation
devices in a single instrument. It will be dedicated to support research and
education in science and engineering at the University of Nebraska-Lincoln.
Acquisition of SAM will be beneficial for a large number of current and planned
research projects spanning a wide range of topics including, for example,
fundamental studies and development of new polymers, metals, composites, and
coatings; studies of peculiarities of chemical reactions, glass transitions, and
crystallization in polymers; studies on emerging manufacturing technologies of
electrical discharge machining and electrospinning; studies of evolution of
microdamage in advanced heterogeneous materials and composites; studies of
microdebonding at interfaces; studies on surface morphology and subsurface
residual stresses; studies leading to development of smart nondestructive
evaluation system, and others. The multidisciplinary nature of the instrument is
evidenced by the involvement of eleven faculty members from seven Departments in
the Colleges of Engineering and Technology, Arts and Sciences, and Dentistry. In
addition to the broad research applications, the acquired system also will be
used as a laboratory device in several senior undergraduate and graduate
courses. These include courses on experimental mechanics of solids, crystallog
raphy, experimental composites, damage mechanics, thin films, surface finishing,
machining, and others. The user friendly computerized control and data
acquisition software of the new system will allow students to concentrate on the
peculiarities of mechanical behavior and microstructure of materials.
Acquisition of this sophisticated equipment will improve national research and
education infrastructure. At the present time, only a few of the top
universities thro ughout the world have this new technology available in their
labs. Thus the acquisition of SAM will place the University of Nebraska-Lincoln
in a leading position with regard to the research areas where the unique
features of this technique can be utilized. These features include a wide range
of resolutions and depths of penetration, three-dimensional microimaging,
microscale non-destructive evaluation, and a combined information on geometric
morphology and distribution of mechanical properties of materials. New
experimental capabilities will assist in attracting quality researchers and
students to UNL and will improve the quality of their experimental research
training. The acquisition of SAM is also in the interests of local industries
involved with advanced and novel materials, such as Brunswick Composites, Telex,
Addax, Spirotech, Cushman, and others. SAM service is currently unavailable in
Nebraska. ***