* 9601143
* Human Capital Investment and Intergenerational Income       Inequality
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/1996,08/31/2001
* Suzanne Cooper, Harvard University
* Continuing Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 08/31/2001
* USD 132,161.00

Cooper 9601143 This project explores the role of redistributive school financing
in mitigating the persistence of income inequality across generations. Previous
empirical and theoretical work has found that both family and neighborhood
characteristics are important determinants of a child's future income. This work
has not addressed the interactions between communities in human capital
accumulation, however. The existence of state funding of public schools suggests
that even in the absence of court mandates for redistribution, some transfers of
human capital expenditure do take place. This project takes both a theoretical
and an empirical approach to the question of the extent to which redistribution
is used and the effect it has on the persistence of income inequality across
generations. The proposed research begins with a theoretical model which
suggests circumstances under which redistribution of human capital investment
from wealthy neighborhoods to poor neighborhoods can take place voluntarily.
This model not only describes how we can observe redistributive human capital
investment, but also suggests how we could bring about more voluntary
redistribution by strengthening the spillovers in productivity across workers of
different skill levels. In addition, this proposal describes empirical work
which assesses the role of human capital redistribution in reducing the
transmission of poverty across generations. The theoretical model suggests that
children who grow up in poor communities and do not receive redistributive human
capital investment are more likely to be poor as adults than are children in
comparably poor communities that do receive redistribution of human capital
expenditure. Preliminary empirical results suggest that there is substantial
variation across communities in the intergenerational persistence of income
inequality. In particular, the persistence of inequality across generations is
greater for the poor and the wealthy than for those of middle incomes. This
project extends this analysis to study explicitly the role for redistributive
human capital expenditures in the dynamics of income inequality across
generations. Preliminary results in this area suggest a qualitatively important
role for redistribution in reducing the intergenerational persistence of income
inequality.