* 9601671
* Acquisition of Instrumentation to Examine Anthropogenic     Effects on Biodiversity and Ecosystem Function in           Southcentral Pennsylvania
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/1996,08/31/1999
* James Parks, Millersville University
* Standard Grant
* Gregory K. Farber
* 08/31/1999
* USD 127,050.00

Due to the pattern of human occupation and land use in Lancaster County and
Southcentral Pennsylvania, where nearly two thirds of the land is in
agricultural use, significant populations of native species are restricted
largely to forested areas on the low mountains in the northern portion of the
region and riparian forests in the southern portion. The first goal of this
research project is to examine selected elements of the biodiversity of riparian
forests of southcentral Pennsylvania in an attempt to understand the nature and
distribution of organisms and the impact of continued human expansion and growth
on population densities and reproductive successes of these nonhuman species.
Instrumentation acquired through this research proposal will greatly expand the
research capacity of the Department of Biology at Millersville University in
order to pursue the following specific topics dealing with biodiversity: 1. the
genetic diversity of populations of rare-endangered ferns, Vittaria and
Trichomanes 2. the distribution of rare-endangered plants in Southcentral
Pennsylvania 3. the impact of habitat fragmentation on mammal and bird
populations 4. the composition and distribution of riparian plant communities in
the southern Susquehanna River drainage. Many of the problems of poor water
quality, environmental degradation, decline in beds of submerged aquatic
vegetation, and reductions in population densities of valuable fishery species,
including shellfish, in the Chesapeake Bay have been attributed to high inputs
of plant nutrients, such as phosphorus and nitrogen from non-point sources in
the Susquehanna River drainage. Agricultural fertilizers and manures from
livestock account for 75% of the phosphorus and 50% of the nitrogen entering the
Chesapeake Bay. With nearly 400,000 acres of agricultural land, over 600,000
cows, steers and pigs, and over 55,000,000 chickens, Lancaster County's
contribution to the non-p oint source pollution of the Chesapeake is huge. The
vegetation of riparian forests has been identified as one type of buffer
reducing this pollution by trapping eroding soil and absorbing soluble
nutrients. Once in the aquatic environment the nutrients stimulate alga blooms,
which reduce water quality; a major factor in the degradation of the Bay. The
second goal of this proposal is to examine biological activities in the riparian
forest and aquatic ecosystems which might reduce the quantity of nutrients
flowing into the water or control alga populations that reduce water quality.
Acquisition of equipment will facilitate research in: I. restoration of aquatic
ecosystems through viral control of alga blooms 2. effects of plant root systems
and the associated mycorrhizal fungi on nutrient flow through raparian
vegetation. Acquisition of the requested equipment will greatly expand
opportunities for undergraduate students to become involved in research projects
at Millersville University. After graduation, many undergraduates from
Millersville University pursue scientific careers through graduate studies at
large research universities. Acquisition of research equipment will facilitate
undergraduate research and nurture aspirations of careers in science.