* 9601523
* Identification of Environmental Pollutants
* BIO,DBI
* 08/01/1996,07/31/1997
* R. Given Harper, Illinois Wesleyan University
* Standard Grant
* Lee C. Makowski
* 07/31/1997
* USD 90,000.00

PROJECT SUMMARY The requested research instrumentation includes a gas
chromatograph (GC) equipped with electron capture and flame thermionic
detectors, and a GC-mass spectrometer (GC-MS). These instruments will be used by
chemists and biologists for identification and quantification of organochlorine
and organo phosphorus pesticides in Neotropical migrant passerines (i.e.
songbirds that breed in North America and winter in Mexico, Central and South
America) with reported declining populations. Few data are available on the
extent to which Neotropical migrants are contaminated, and this baseline data is
critical to understanding the impact of organochlorine and organophosphorus
chemicals on these birds. The objective of this project is to involve
undergraduate students in determining more fully the pattern of pesticide levels
in Neotropical migrant species with reported declining populations, and to
correlate these levels with age class, gender, food habits, wintering range, and
winter habitat preference. Funding of this proposal will allow students to take
part in collecting and preparing birds for analysis, and identifying and
quantifying pesticide levels in them. They will receive course credit in
Chemistry 499 (Chemistry Research) or Biology 499 (Biology Research), be co-
authors on papers submitted for publication, and present the results of their
research at professional meetings. Thus, this project will provide chemistry-
related information of vital importance to conservation biology, while preparing
undergraduate students for careers in research. The GC-MS will also be used in
another project involving undergraduate students to study the production and
fate of hydroxyl radicals formed photochemically from common pollutants in the
environment. Students will take part in all aspects of the project (e.g.
photolyzing solutions of nitrous acid/nitrite ion, extracting aqueous
photolyzate, s eparating components on the GC-MS), earn course credit, and
present and write papers as described above. Illinois Wesleyan University opened
the doors of its new 130,000 square-foot Center for Natural Science Learning and
Research in August l995, which doubled the number of teaching labs and research
labs opened new opportunities for new pedagogies. The Center is organized around
two concepts: 1) a "community of science" and 2) the undergraduate research
experience. In 1992, eight of 10 or 80% of the graduating chemistry majors were
among the 31 Illinois Wesleyan seniors going on to Ph.D. studies. All students
had assistantship offers, several from such places as MIT, Yale, Princeton and
UC-Berkeley. Several also received prestigious fellowships. One such award went
to Jane Johnson, one of 30 chemistry graduate students nationwide awarded the
highly competitive NSF graduate fellowship. This is outstanding evidence of the
benefit that participation in undergraduate research has in terms of fostering
professional career aspirations. The 30 entering freshmen chemistry majors in
Fall 1994 had an average ACT Composite of 29.4. Eight of those students are
women with an average ACT of 30 or above. The Biology Department at Illinois
Wesleyan University has attracted a large number of high quality students over
the past two decades. Indeed, more students continue to apply to the biology
program than to any other on campus--approximately 500-600 per year. The average
ACT score for these students is 30 and the SAT composite 1212. Currently there
are 210 biology majors or 13 to 15% of the student body and 17% of the liberal
arts college. In 1995, 73% of the graduating class of biology majors went on to
graduate degree programs. Because of this, a substantial number participate in
various areas of biological research in their graduate education. The
opportunity to initiate or participate in research at the undergraduate level
provides a particula rly valuable learning experience. Investigative lab
experiences in courses provide important background, but are not a substitute
for the creative processes, conceptual innovation, literature searches,
experimental design, successes and failures, formal analyses, and written
communication required by an independent research project. The requested
instrumentation will enhance the research training of these students while
increasing the productivity of the faculty.