* 9601552
* Global Partners?: Transnational Environmentalism and        In Country Environmental Organizations
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/1996,02/28/1999
* Priscilla Weeks, University of Houston - Clear Lake
* Standard Grant
* Linda Layne
* 02/28/1999
* USD 73,201.00

Using ethnographic methods and document analysis, this project will analyze how
cultural differences affect the construction of environmentalism and how these
differences affect collaboration between transnational and in-country non-
governmental environmental organizations. The movements and organizations
comprising environmentalism are exceptionally diverse and dynamic. They describe
environmentalism in different ways and attach different meanings to the term.
There is little research on the ways in which this conceptual diversity
facilitates or constrains environmental advocacy. Specifically, this project
will compare five Indian and two transnational environmental non-governmental
organizations (NGOs) which are located in the North. It will focus on the
differential use of scientific and social justice concepts to frame
environmental action and examine how conceptual and organizational diversity
affects the global environmental movement. The social movements and science
studies literatures frame the research questions, and methods from interpretive
communication studies will be used to gather and analyze data. Publications,
mission statements, project and annual reports, organizational charts will be
collected when available from all organizations. The two transnational NGOs have
published numerous reports, books, and treatises with their views on the nature
of environmentalism. Textual analyses will be done on these materials, and the
analyses will be used as a `yardstick` by which to gauge differences between
national and transnational environmentalism. Field visits and long interviews
will be conducted and tape recorded with staff of Indian NGOs. A network chart
will be made for all organizations, chronicling their collaborations with
government and private organizations and donors. In conjunction with information
on collaborations, funding sources, and organizational history and structure,
field notes, project visits, and informal interaction with staff will provide
background information for thematic analyses and analyses of metaphor clusters,
that can then be compared to the chart of collaborations. Results will be
prepared for journal publication and presentations at professional meetings.
They will be useful to local and transnational environmental organizations and
to policy makers seeking to understand their priorities and concerns.