* 9601064
* Protein Isoprenylation in Plants
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/1996,08/31/2000
* Dring Crowell, Indiana University
* Continuing Grant
* Susan Porter Ridley
* 08/31/2000
* USD 274,000.00

9601064 Crowell In plants, the mevalonate pathway leads to the synthesis of
cytokinins, abscisic acid, gibberellins, ubiquinones, plastoquinones, dolichols,
sterols, carotenoids, chlorophylls, and numerous other isoprenoids. Derivatives
of mevalonate have also been found to be incorporated into a variety of plant
cell proteins, but little is currently known about the function of these
isoprenylated plant proteins. Since isoprenylated proteins are involved in a
number of fundamental process in mammalian and yeast cells, including signal
transduction, cell cycle regulation, cytoskeletal organization, and vesicular
transport, it is likely that they serve important roles in plants. Preliminary
data indicate that plants contain both known and novel isoprenylated proteins
with probable functions ranging from regulation of actin polymerization to
mediation of vesicle fusion. The objective of this project is to demonstrate the
isoprenylation of these proteins in plant cells, to elucidate the role of
isoprenylation in protein targeting and function, and to characterize the
developmental regulation of the corresponding plant genes. This research will
further our understanding of this important class of proteins and provide
critical insights into their roles in plant growth and development. %%% Plants
are the 'producers' of the biological world. Because of their ability to utilize
sunlight and inorganic carbon in the production of energy-rich organic
compounds, they constitute the biological foundation upon which all animal life
depends. Accordingly, it is essential that we understand plant growth and
development (cell cycle regulation, cytoskeletal organization, and vesicular
transport) and the mechanisms by which plants interact with their environment
(signal transduction). Plant responses to environmental or developmental stimuli
result in remarkable changes in plant growth, habit, and ultimate biomass
production. In this project, the role of several isoprenylated proteins, likely
to be i nvolved in these processes will be characterized. By characterizing in
detail the molecular events that influence these processes, we will be able to
maximize the efficiency and utility of this natural process. ***