* 9601728
* Acquisition of Instrumentation for a Networked Analytical   Laboratory
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/1996,08/31/1999
* Turner Collins, Evangel University
* Standard Grant
* Robyn E. Hannigan
* 08/31/1999
* USD 79,801.00

Description of Instrumentation: Evangel College requests $210,884 from the
National Science Foundation for the acquisition of a system of analytical
instruments to be used in environmental research. This proposal addresses
equipment requirements in the environmental research program, which is a
collaboration between biology, chemistry, and environmental science faculty in
the Science and Technology Department. The project will be directed by Dr.
Turner Collins, Professor of Biology. He will be assisted by Mr. Michael
Tenneson and Dr. Michael McCorcle. The environmental teaching and research
experience of this will bring a multidisciplinary approach to this project. This
acquisition will make possible a wide array of research training opportunities
for the Evangel College science student. The request is for a system of
analytical instruments which will be networked into a Laboratory Information
Management System (LIMS). The system consists of three analytical instruments
along with computer hardware and software. Each of these precision instruments
integrates with a networked version of a LIMS software package. Evangel College
already has installed a campus network; the equipment represented by this
proposal will be attached to the existing network. When the complete system is
operational, students will analyze samples in the instrument room, store the
results on the LIMS database, and retrieve data for lab reports from any
computer on the network. Research and Research Training: Successful research
training requires a capable faculty, energetic and gifted science students, and
technological tools in step with today's research profession. Evangel College
possesses a capable faculty with both research and research training experience.
Many of Evangel's graduates have gone on to receive higher degrees. Of the 22
private colleges and universities in Missouri, Evangel ranks 6th in the
production of st udents who eventually receive Ph.D's. In addition, Evangel has
produced more teachers than any of these other Missouri institutions. While
Evangel's Science and Technology department has had some initial success in
forming research training, the technological components required for state-of-
the-art research training experiences do not yet exist. To date, scientific
research and research training at Evangel have capitalized on regional
environmental issues and local cooperative alliances. The school is located in
the Ozark Mountains, a recreational region with great environmental concerns.
Evangel College faculty and student researchers are conducting environmental
studies of the region's water supplies. In this process, cooperative
arrangements exist with the Missouri Department of Conservation, the Missouri
Department of Natural Resources, and the City Utilities of Springfield,
Missouri. Activities Resulting from Funding: The current research projects have
been short term projects which have been severely hindered by the lack of modern
and sophisticated instrumentation. The instrumentation from this proposal will
permit the modernization of the Evangel College research labs, will permit the
students to participate in a meaningful long-term research project, and will
contribute valuable information to the city and state agencies.