* 9602641
* Replacement of Induced Mutant Resource Facilities
* O/D,OIA
* 12/15/1996,05/31/2000
* Kenneth Paigen, Jackson Laboratory
* Standard Grant
* Sherrie Green
* 05/31/2000
* USD 850,000.00

The Jackson Laboratory (TJL), located in Bar Harbor, Maine, is the recipient of
ARI funds for the replacement of existing research space for the Induced Mutant
Resource (IMR). Established in 1992, the IMR is a national center for the
cryopreservation and distribution of transgenic, targeted mutant, and chemically
induced mutant mice. Current services of the IMR that occur in separate
facilities include: importation of mice of unknown health status,
cryopreservation of embryos, and the maintenence and inbreeding of mice which
require unusual health safeguards or breeding paradigms. However with rapid
growth, the integration of these processes are imperative to the success of the
IMR which is increasingly important to the conduct of biological research in all
areas, and cannot be achieved under existing conditions. The configuration of
the facilities presents serious limitations to quality control functions that
now require separate, duplicative embryo transfer facilities and animal
colonies. The lack of adequate space hinders the IRM from accepting strains for
preservation as cryopreserved embryos or gametes, and from developing and
implementing new methods for rederiving animals. This project is part of a
larger effort of TJL to construct a permanent facility for the IMR.
Specifically, NSF funds will be used to replace research space for the SPF and
Cryopreservation facilities. Consolidating these functions will allow the TJL to
accept strains for cryopreservation only, increasing the number of strains the
IMR can preserve, while keeping costs of the repository manageable. As an
important component of the Laboratory's strategic plans for research and
educational growth, the replacement structure will facilitate recruitment
efforts in building programs in developmental biology, molecular genetics and
neurogenetics and behavior. Research will be enhanced as well as advanced
training programs where research personnel have access to the IMR's cornucopia
of induced mutant models. This project will ensure the viability of this
scientific reserve.