* 9602123
* Assessing Resource Utilization and Trade Among Prehistoric  Rio Grande Glaze Paints Using Lead Isotope Analysis
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/1996,07/31/1998
* Judith Habicht-Mauche, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 07/31/1998
* USD 41,877.00

With National Science Foundation support Drs. Habicht-Mauche and A. Russell
Flegal will collect lead samples from prehistoric mines in the Galisteo Basin
area of central New Mexico and conduct lead isotope analyses on both these and
lead glazes on prehistoric ceramics also excavated in the same general area.
Because lead consists of 4 isotopes and the relative frequencies of each change
through radioactive decay over time, isotopic signatures may often be used to
fingerprint individual lead deposits. The mixture of lead ore with other
ingredients during ceramic manufacture makes sourcing studies using trace
elements of little value. However such mixing does not affect isotopic ratios
and therefore such analysis permits, in principle, archaeological ceramic
materials to be matched with lead source. In this first stage of an envisioned
long term project, the team will conduct a feasibility study to determine
whether variation in isotopic ratios is greater between lead sources than within
each and if matching between source and glaze is possible. In late prehistoric
times the Pueblo Indians of the U.S. Southwest developed large scale chiefdom
level societies which linked individuals and towns together in extensive
interaction networks. One of the fundamental hallmarks of this transformation,
which occurred ca. 1350 A.D. was the development of widespread networks of
community craft and resource specialization and systems of long-distance trade
which linked the towns and provinces in the northern Rio Grande region in a
series of shifting sociopolitical and economic alliances. While it is clear that
such interaction existed, archaeologists do not know whether or not these towns
were essentially egalitarian or whether they were arranged in a hierarchical
fashion. For example, certain villages and districts apparently dominated glaze
ware production, trading their products widely throughout the valley and beyond.
Unfortunately the details of this production and distribution are not well
understood and the proposed research will, hopefully provide a powerful tool to
trace interactions over a broad area. It should be possible to determine, for
example, whether a single village or small set of villages controlled access to
raw materials and if a single economic network or a multiplicity of networks
existed. The results of this project will increase our understanding of the
emergence of complex societies in the United States and will provide data of
interest to many archaeologists.