* 9602911
* Dissertation Research: The Acquistion of Spanish as a First Language
* SBE,BCS
* 02/01/1997,01/31/1999
* Nina Hyams, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Paul G. Chapin
* 01/31/1999
* USD 8,375.00

To answer the question of how children learn language as quickly as they do
with such impoverished input and no explicit instruction, one must assume that a
great deal of what children come to demonstrate in terms of their linguistic
behavior is the product of grammatical knowledge they bring into this world with
them. This study seeks to explain the appearance and then disappearance of
certain non-adult like phenomena of child Spanish as a consequence of this in-
born knowledge coming on-line. This study will focus on what preliminary studies
have shown to be three intriguing phenomena: the early lack of question
formation in child Spanish, the early lack of overt subjects in child Spanish as
well as the lack of negative imperative verbs in child Spanish. If language
acquisition proceeds as quickly and uniformly as it appears to because children
are born with highly specified linguistic knowledge of the kind characterized by
modern syntactic theory, then the emergence of the elements that syntacticians
have argued to be crucial to the three constructions mentioned should have
consequences for the development of these three constructions. Concretely,
certain grammatical elements (known as functional categories) and the
relationships among them are argued to be crucial for all three of the above
constructions. Some of these elements appear to be active from the beginning of
child Spanish, but others may not develop until after the second birthday.
Hence, investigating their development should shed light on the way in which
grammar develops in child language as well as the explanatory value of the adult
grammatical theories in question. The method used to investigate these
developmental consequences is a longitudinal study of three monolingual Spanish-
speaking children from the age of 1 year, 6 months until 2 years, 6 months. The
subjects will be taped and the tapes will be transcribed and grammatically
coded, paying special attention to three constructions in que stion. In this way
it will be possible to amass a large amount of monolingual Spanish child data
and to study language development during what appears to be the most interesting
and volatile period of the development of child Spanish syntax. An important
result of this study, in addition to its theoretical ambitions, will be the
construction of a rich, longitudinally-collected data base of monolingual child
Spanish. At present, no such database is widely available. The resulting data
base would be made available to the CHILDES Data Base (MacWhinney and Snow,
1985), thus providing to researchers from many disciplines (Linguistics,
Sociology, Anthropology, and Developmental Psychology), an invaluable resource
in an extremely widely-spoken language that has been understudied. In the same
way that data from the three children from the Brown Corpus (Brown, 1968) have
proven to be a virtual gold mine of insight into early child language
development, this study aims to furnish the international scientific community
with a linguistic resource of substantial value.