* 9602355
* The Midwest Center for Advanced Technology Education
* EHR,DUE
* 08/01/1996,01/31/2001
* Don Gentry, Purdue University
* Continuing Grant
* Rogers E. Salters
* 01/31/2001
* USD 1,363,301.00

The Midwest Regional Consortium for Advanced Technology Education supports a new
focus for promoting excellence in faculty development in technology education.
This focus enhances America's competitive position as world-class in
manufacturing and industrial distribution technology by developing the technical
and pedagogical skills of faculty members from high schools, community colleges,
and universities. This project is providing an opportunity for faculty
development through workshops and seminars offered at numerous locations in the
Midwest. The faculty involved in these seminars benefit from the existing
laboratories and facilities available in Purdue's School of Technology. Faculty
and teachers are learning new technologies and pedagogical skills which benefit
students in advanced technology fields from high school through graduate study.
This provides an opportunity to better educate the future industrial work force
and develop technology faculty members for the future. In addition to the
faculty development, the project is creating and adapting innovative curriculum
and instructional materials to benefit advanced technological education. Project
partners with Purdue include Cincinnati State Technical Community College in
Ohio, Macomb Community College in Michigan, Parkland and Triton Community
Colleges in Illinois, St. Louis Community College in Missouri, and Vincennes
University in Indiana as well as numerous secondary schools and industries.