* 9602494
* Exploring a Low-energy Frontier of Particle                 Physics Using Methods of Experimental Gravitation
* MPS,PHY
* 08/15/1996,07/31/2001
* Eric Adelberger, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Richard Isaacson
* 07/31/2001
* USD 763,380.00

The goals of this project are to make more precise and more general tests of the
Universality of Gravitational Free Fall. The standard, classical theory of
gravity, General Relativity, incorporates the Universality of Free Fall as an
exact statement about gravity. It is an experimental question, however, if this
principle holds exactly. There are two strong reasons for testing the principle.
First, General Relativity is not a quantum mechanical theory and some current
ideas about possible quantum-mechanical theories of gravity predict violations
of the Universality of Free Fall arising from additional `gravitational` scalar
or vector fields. Second, by searching for violations of a symmetry that
classical gravity holds to be exact, one can probe for new, ultra-weak, non-
gravitational forces. Because it is impossible to shield a gravitational field,
such ultra-weak forces would normally lie hidden `underneath gravity`. But any
new force is expected to violate the Universality of Free Fall and so can be
detected even if it is much weaker than gravity. The proposed tests require the
continued development of improved instruments for measuring tiny differences in
the accelerations of different materials attracted toward the earth, toward a
massive Uranium laboratory source, or to astronomical structures. Three
different torsion-balance instruments will be employed. Two of them, developed
under previous NSF support, will be upgraded for the proposed tests, and a new
more sensitive instrument will be constructed. The combination of these
instruments will permit tests of the Universality of Free Fall over length
scales ranging from 1 cm to infinity. In particular, it will be possible to test
whether gravity is the dominant long-range force between ordinary mater and the
cosmological dark matter; and, in conjunction with existing data on lunar laser-
ranging, to make a `loop-hole free` test of the gravitational properties of
gravitational binding energy. This last test will be performed by comparing the
accelerations toward the sun of `scale models` of the Moon and the Earth's
crust.