* 9602626
* Renovation and Repair of the Chemistry and Microbiology     Laboratory Facilities, University of Puerto Rico-Aguadilla
* O/D,OIA
* 04/01/1997,07/31/1999
* Aida Mendez-Cruz, University of Puerto Rico-Aguadilla
* Standard Grant
* Sherrie Green
* 07/31/1999
* USD 152,195.00

Established in 1972, the University of Puerto Rico - Aguadillia, is a public
institution serving the educational needs of students in the Northwestern region
of the island. A large majority of the students enrolled at the university are
first generation students with limited role models and support from home for
their university experience. The University is a beacon of hope to many in a
community plagued by illiteracy and poverty. Originally authorized to grant
associate degrees, the university has expanded its offerings to include
bachelors degrees, including biology and chemistry in the sciences. Striving to
become a model of excellence, the institution's strategic plan stresses the
importance of research and research training activities. In support of faculty
and students engaged in the scientific enterprise, the university with
assistance from the National Science Foundation, will provide financial
resources needed to improve research training facilities. Specifically funds
will be utilized to consolidate research space that has been shared with
instructional activities. Renovations will encompass: upgrading the electrical,
plumbing and HVAC systems; installing fume hoods, benches, cabinets and security
devices; and ensuring the facility complies with ADA regulations. A dedicated
laboratory will be created to allow faculty and undergraduates to conduct
investigative work in microbiology, biochemistry, inorganic, organic, analytical
and industrial chemistry. The project will enhance the ability of the Natural
Science Department to accomplish significant research and training endeavors,
provide assistance to the professional development of the secondary school
science community, and encourage students to pursue advanced levels of
scientific study.