* 9602285
* Renovation and Modernization of Plant Growth Facilities at  the University of Missouri-Columbia
* O/D,OIA
* 02/01/1997,01/31/2000
* Douglas Randall, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Sherrie Green
* 01/31/2000
* USD 1,000,000.00

The University of Missouri-Columbia has a long tradition of excellence in the
plant sciences and one of the strongest research and research training programs
in the nation. This strength is derived from the activities of the
Interdisciplinary Plant Group, which consists of 39 faculty representing six
departments and two colleges. An interactive group of faculty with diverse
research interest in basic plant research utilizes state of the art technologies
in plant physiology, genetics, cell and molecular biology, to investigate
fundamental biological questions. However, existing conditions of the
University's greenhouse facilities, built before 1925, are inadequate to support
experimental work. Funding from the Academic Research Infrastructure Program
will be used to partially support the replacement and consolidation of six aged
and inefficient greenhouses and their associated head houses into a modern
facility for plant science research. The new facility will consolidate existing
research growth facilities, enhancing efficiencies and cooperation among users.
Included in the structure will be a centralized seed storage facility with
temperature and humidity controls to ensure the viability of valuable genetic
stocks. The existing ventilation and evaporative cooling systems will be
improved to eliminate problems with stratification of air flow and non-uniform
temperatures, and provide increased usability, and temperature control. This
project will fortify and enhance interactions among research groups, assist in
the institution's ability to recruit new faculty and research trainees, and
expand the scope of research training for graduate students. Improvements will
increase opportunities for underrepresented groups to participate in basic
research, and ensure accessibility for the physically disabled.