* 9602511
* Construction of a Multi-user Hostel at the Mountain Research Station
* BIO,DBI
* 10/01/1996,09/30/1998
* Margaret Halloran, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* None
* 09/30/1998
* USD 190,000.00

The University of Colorado's Research Station (MRS) has been a premier
institution supporting research and teaching for over 70 years. The primary
focus has been on alpine tundra research, although the proximity to diverse
ecosystems makes the station a unique geographical location. The station
provides the primary logistical support for the Niwot Ridge LTER program, and
facilitates numerous individual investigators and several federal labs,
including EPA, NOAA, and the National Center for Atomospheric Research as well
as numerous projects supported by NSF summer courses for undergraduate and high
school students, and is the station a popular site for academic conferences.
Increased use of the MRS for research, teaching, and conferences in the past 5
years has put more of a premium on the availability of housing, resulting in an
inability of the MRS to accomodate all requests for the use of the facility.
Housing at the MRS is in rustic, but comfortable cabins and a hostel. The
majority of the cabins were built in the 1950's, with only one new built added
between 1960 and 1996. The hostel has provided affordable housing for
researchers and students, but its current state requires replacement, due to
utility and safety concerns. This project will support construction of a new
hostel to increase housing capacity, provide a new location for academic
meetings, seminars, classes, and symposia, and provide a winterized year-round
housing facility for researchers and students.