* 9602481
* Japan JSPS Program:  Investigation and Optimization of an   Observed Metal-Organosulfide Interaction in a Composite     Cathode Material
* O/D,OISE
* 03/15/1997,05/31/1998
* Kevin Gaw, Fellowships
* Fellowship Award
* Larry H. Weber
* 05/31/1998
* USD 3,000.00

9602481 Gaw This award supports a 12 month Japan Society for the Promotion of
Science (JSPS) Postdoctoral Fellowship for Dr. Kevin Gaw at the Tokyo University
of Agriculture and Technology, Tokyo, Japan. Dr. Gaw will work with Dr. Noboru
Oyama, professor of chemical engineering, on a research project entitled,
"Investigations and Optimization of an Observed Metal-Organosulfide Interaction
in a Composite Cathode Material". The proposed research will attempt to improve
upon the electrical characteristics of a lithium rechargeable battery by
incorporation of metal ions into a novel polymeric cathode material. More
specifically, it will investigate the properties of a novel rechargeable lithium
battery to improve its charging and discharging characteristics. The research
will try to alter the PAn/DMcT cathode material of lithium batteries through the
incorporation of metals that catalyze or assist the reactions that allow for
rapid and repeated discharge. Using a (PAn/DMcT) cathode supplemented with
metallic ions, the researchers hope to improve upon the safety of the cathode,
increase the desired characteristics of the rechargeable lithium battery, and
facilitate the intermolecular reactions that occur during use. The reactions
that occur will be fully characterized and the results used to improve upon
lithium batteries that are currently commercially available. ***