* 9602258
* Research Training Group in Optical Biomolecular Devices
* BIO,DBI
* 09/15/1996,08/31/2003
* J. Devens Gust, Arizona State University
* Continuing Grant
* Gerald Selzer
* 08/31/2003
* USD 1,411,000.00

The program of training envisioned by the ASU group involves a comprehensive
set of activities including formal coursework, laboratory introductions, a
seminar series with strongly participatory elements, and an evaluation structure
for monitoring the progress of each individual student at regular intervals.
Overall this portion of the team's presentation was a strength of the program.
It is clear that the group took the training function seriously and spent
considerably energy developing a highly ambitious program of training with many
innovative features. Obviously they have collectively evaluated those factors in
the training of advanced students in interdisciplinary areas which are likely to
be most valuable and have attempted to include those in the proposed program..
Comments below on the individual elements of the training program are meant to
help the team fine-tune the approach, rather than to detract from the overall
enthusiasm with which this portion of the presentation was received. The program
of formal coureswork, consisting of a laboratory and lecture course along with a
seminar series with serious participation by the students is very ambitious and
highly original. The lecture course seeks to provide an overview to all of the
students entering the program in a given year of the broad issues in biophotonic
devices from a top-down reverse engineering perspective. The strength of this
course is that it has the potential to provide a very broad perspective to
students at an early stage in their graduate careers, before they have had time
to develop disciplinary prejudices, which limit vision in more traditionally
trained students. The danger, and one which is explicitly recognized by the
team, is that any particular topic will be very deep for most of the class and
relatively shallow for a small segment. The inclusion of a section on
intellectual property issues from a legal perspective introduces an element of
"real world" consideratio ns which is responsive to currently popular concerns
about the relevance of traditional academic training. The laboratory course,
designed to expose students to a broad survey of issues important to biophotonic
device manipulation, is very challenging, perhaps too much so for a group of
students with the diverse backgrounds expected of students entering the program.
If carefully designed this highly ambitious experiment in graduate laboratory
work could be a cornerstone of a new way of thinking about interdisciplinary
training, which could be extended to other universities and other programs.
However, it is clear that there are practical issues, e.g., length of time of
produce workable mutants, familiarity with simple chemical synthetic
manipulations, etc., which need to be more carefully thought out. In both of
these formal course experiences it is important that the ASU administration has
agreed to add the proposed activities to the portfolio of courses currently
offered so that the assignment to either of these courses does not come as an
overload, which would detract from the overall effectiveness of the faculty
member involved. The seminar program aims to place students in real contact with
a variety of external experts and should prove to be a valuable addition to the
formal training program. Students, under direction of the course director, are
to carefully read and discuss the work of a selected set of speakers prior to
their talks and should be well-poised to benefit from the on-campus presence of
the speaker. In addition the multidisciplinary project meetings should be
extremely positive experiences for the students in the program. These meetings
which will have the character of an extended group meeting promise to allow
students from diverse backgrounds to delve into details of a research problem on
a common footing but from their own different perspectives. In short they are,
just the kind of experience many of them are likely to have as parts of research
teams in the industrial environment upon graduation. Recruitment/Woodbury This
is an ambitious program that will need a very high quality of students that have
a broad background and much curiosity, ambition, and drive. Recruitment into the
program will occur at two levels. In one, students will be attracted to come to
A.S.U. because they want to come into this program. However, students will also
be recruited out of the current pool of general applicants to science and
engineering. The goal is to attract 6 students per year from 5 departments (3 in
arts and sciences and 2 in the school of engineering). There is no provision for
students to transfer into the program after their first year in graduate school.
Standard recruitment strategies are largely in place. There are good, innovative
programs for attracting minority students. The current enrollment has a high
proportion of students that are eligible for support by N.S.F. There is good
faculty commitment to recruiting visits. The college makes an investment in
bringing students in to visit the college. They have mechanisms to contact
applicant that they hope to attract by email during the time the students are
making their decision. Current students talk of being attracted to the
university by coming on visits and meeting interested faculty. This program, by
the excitement of the intellectual offerings it provides should prove help them
ensure that the best students accept offers at A.S.U. The difficulty is to find
entry level students that are interested in this particular program. The average
A.S.U. graduate student might not be interested in this ambitious program.
However, the faculty quality is more than sufficient and there is a number of
students in the existing program who would meet the ambitious needs of the
program. They will need to get a few of the most ambitious students from each of
the 5 departments to join the program. One challenge may be to make sure that
the allocation of training positions is spread out equitably among the
departments. Thus, recruitment will require students to be directed to this
unusual and exciting program. Recruitment of students of students may be best
achieved by word of mouth within the scientific community. The visiting
scientist component of the grant can also serve as a recruitment mechanism,
since when colleagues return to their home institutions they will send their
best students. However, in order to maintain the right students it will be
important to maintain program's focus so that this remains a high visibility
offering at A.S.U.