* 9602605
* Modernization of Tissue Culture/Radioisotope Laboratory
* O/D,OIA
* 04/15/1997,09/30/1998
* Hsin-Yi Lee, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Sherrie Green
* 09/30/1998
* USD 127,000.00

This award will enable Rutgers University at Camden to renovate a tissue
culture and radioisotope laboratory to accommodate junior faculty and their
students engaged in neuroscience research. Constructed in 1964, the facility,
housed in the Science Building, has numerous structural deficiencies and
requires substantial renovation to make possible state-of-the-art research
involving the in vitro cultivation of cells. Air supply lines and a fume hood
for handling radioisotopes and biohazardous substances are absent from the
tissue culture room. Animal dissection is conducted in the same room where cells
are grown for long term experimentation, thus creating a non-sterile
environment. Also the lack of adequate storage area for culture media and cell
lines impedes research progress. Funds will be used to upgrade the laboratory
which will expand the variety and volume of research presently conducted
utilizing tissue culture techniques in the Department of Biology. Added to the
increased research activity is the prospect of accommodating additional research
faculty members whose work requires the growth of cell lines, hybridomas, or
sensitive cell systems that need antibiotic-free media. A modernized facility
will also contribute to the training of students, including underrepresented
minorities, who may pursue careers in biological and biomedical research. It is
anticipated that this project will assist in the establishment of a joint Ph.D.
program in Cell and Molecular Biology and Neuroscience with neighboring medical
research institutes.