* 9602053
* Market-Based Systems for Workflow Scheduling
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/1996,08/31/1997
* Patrick Harker, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Jonathan Leland
* 08/31/1997
* USD 100,000.00

Market-Based Systems for Workflow Scheduling This proposal presents the first
year of a plan of research to develop an agent and market-based approach for the
control of complex production processes, especially those arising in white
collar and service delivery systems. Such systems are characterized by their
complexity and by the ability of the service providers to create alternative
paths through the process by their actions. The goal of this research is create
theory based on agent and market-based control schemes which will guide the
implementation of intelligent workflow systems. With these market-based schemes,
control is decentralized to various human and computer agents (e.g., databases,
schedulers, models) that bid for the opportunity to work on various service
delivery tasks. Specifically, we wish to develop a general theory for market-
based control for complex production systems. Building upon the literature in
service process design and scheduling in operations management, agent-based
systems in computer science, mechanism design in economics, and optimization
theory, this research will explicitly deal with the following issues that
naturally arise in white-collar production systems, but are currently not dealt
with in the literature: (a) the sequence-dependent nature of production systems
that limits the use of standard auction/ bidding mechanisms (e.g., Vickrey and
Ledyard-Groves); (b) the stochastic nature of many of these systems and the need
for robust control schemes; (c) asynchronous communications between the agents
in the system, and (d) the need for agents to learn and adapt to changing
process conditions. In addition, a careful analytical analysis will be
undertaken to ascertain the relative merits of such a market-based schema as
compared to more traditional, centralized control systems such as optimization-
based scheduling models. The ultimate goal of this research is to create a
generic technology for adaptive intelligent workflow systems based on solid
theoretical underpinnings and to test its advantages and limitations as compared
with more traditional production/ resource scheduling methods. Through this
research, a rigorous approach will be taken to model white-collar work as a
collaborative effort between multiple people and computers. + _ Ûª▓ ÑOh ª' +'ª▒0
Ý + ] $ H l + ¢ ╗ D h + R:\WWUSER\TEMPLATE\NORMAL.DOT