* 9602361
* Building on the Crossroads in Mathematics Standards:        A Project to Develop Introductory Mathematics Curriculum    Materials
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/1996,09/30/1997
* James Mahoney, CORD
* Standard Grant
* Lee Zia
* 09/30/1997
* USD 107,817.00

Building on the Crossroads in Mathematics Standards: A Project to Develop
Introductory Mathematics Curriculum Materials Most students entering
postsecondary education lack the mathematical skills needed to succeed in
advanced technology education, engineering, and mathematics- and science-related
programs. Curriculum materials are needed for introductory college mathematics
to engage students and prepare them for the workplace or further education. In
this development project the Center for Occupational Research and Development
(CORD) and the American Mathematical Association of Two-Year Colleges (AMATYC)
have formed a partnership with faculty from two-year colleges and professional
societies who are experts in contextual learning, learning technology, and
professional development. The goals of this project are to identify a core set
of mathematical topics and themes that are essential for students preparing for
careers in the advanced technological workforce and to select one such theme or
topic and develop a rich collection of learning materials around that theme that
are based on real-world applications together with supporting pedagogical
materials. This modular set of material reflects the AMATYC content standards
for introductory level mathematics which include topics in college algebra,
trigonometry, introductory statistics, finite mathematics, precalculus, and
foundation topics often characterized as developmental mathematics. Furthermore,
the materials are being designed to serve the varying needs of all students who
need a foundational knowledge of mathematics for engineering, advanced
technology, and other technical and non-technical related careers.