* 9602721
* Renovation of the Romberg Tiburon Center for Environmental  Studies
* O/D,OIA
* 09/15/1996,04/30/2001
* Alissa Arp, San Francisco State University
* Standard Grant
* Sherrie Green
* 04/30/2001
* USD 1,586,944.00

The Romberg Tiburon Center for Environmental Studies is a marine laboratory
operated by San Francisco State University. The Center is the only academic
research facility on San Francisco Bay, and one of the largest estuaries in the
United States. Primarily a graduate facility, the Center's research mission is
aimed toward a fundamental understanding of the physical and biological
processes of the San Francisco Bay and its surrounding environments. Current
research projects, being conducted by the Center's eleven senior research
scientists, range from detoxification mechanisms of estuarine invertebrates to
studies of bacterioplankton in Antarctica. Presently research is conducted in
the main laboratory of Building 36 that was constructed approximately 50 years
ago. The antiquated infrastructure is so deficient that the laboratory cannot
adequately support research and research training activities. To rectify the
inadequacies, the Center will embark upon a renovation project to modernize the
facility. In order to accomplish this goal, funding from the Academic Research
Infrastructure Program, combined with resources from the San Francisco State
University, will be used to carry out a comprehensive renovation of the Center.
Specifically, NSF funds will be used for Phase I of the project that entails the
complete renovation of the first floor. General refurbishments will consist of:
upgrading the physical plant, improving vertical circulation, and bringing the
facility in compliance with safety and ADA regulations. Enhancements to
individual research laboratories will include utility upgrades, improved
emergency egress, and the installation of new counters and fixed equipment. Upon
completion, the new facility will enable scientists to conduct state-of-the-art
research, and promote the growth of the Center into a leading environmental and
educational institution. Modernized facilities will allow researchers at the
Tiburon Center to continue their work on the complex biological, chemical, and
physical environments of estuaries, and will serve to help ensure the future
recruitment of quality senior staff and students.