* 9602604
* Renovation of Biology Research Laboratories
* O/D,OIA
* 09/01/1996,08/31/1997
* James Hoerter, Ferris State University (Inc.)
* Standard Grant
* Sherrie Green
* 08/31/1997
* USD 224,760.00

Funding from the Academic Research Infrastructure Program will enable Ferris
State University to renovate research space to support the Department of
Biology's need to provide modernized laboratories for faculty research and
research training in biotechnology. This project is part of a larger effort to
renovate the 38 year old Science Building. Inadequate facilities have been an
impediment to current investigations focusing on four major areas of study: (1)
near-ultraviolet light radiation damage, (2) cytokine regulation, (3) free
sterols in the interorgan lipid transport system in the snail, and (4)
mitochronrial ATP synthase and cholorplast ATP synthase. Due to inefficient
space, few students can enroll in the biotechnology program, thus limiting
opportunities for them to learn techniques in recombinant DNA, protein
purification procedures, cell and tissue culture and immunology. The lack of
adequate research space has discouraged faculty to establish long-term programs
that involve undergraduates. Funds will be used to reconfigure laboratories,
update electrical and plumbing systems, and provide a centralized area for
equipment. Fixed equipment consisting of fume hoods, casework, benches and
storage cabinets will be installed to improve research utility. More efficient
space for faculty members and students, as they conduct various experiments,
will be accessible once renovations are completed. In addition to expanding
research opportunities for eight faculty members and forty students, the project
will strengthen the department's ability to compete for extramural support, and
eliminate the need for faculty to seek summer research appointments off campus.
Improved laboratory space will enhance the quality of the biotechnology research
training program, and provide a foundation for a research honors program.