* 9602430
* Development of User-Friendly Microcomputer-Based            Instructional Aids for Introductory Courses in Electrical   Engineering
* EDU,DUE
* 08/15/1996,01/31/2000
* Howard Smolleck, New Mexico State University
* Standard Grant
* Margaret D. Weeks
* 01/31/2000
* USD 169,177.00

Development of User-Friendly Microcomputer-Based Instructional Aids for
Introductory Courses in Electrical Engineering Issues concerning advanced
technological education relating to quality of learning, retention of at-risk
students, and the successful availability of such programs to traditionally
underrepresented groups have received national attention. Such issues are of
significant concern in New Mexico and other states where a substantial number of
students come from backgrounds which often include neither role models nor
incentives to pursue technical careers. This project is addressing these
concerns through development, implementation, and evaluation of a program of
interactive, animated software aids for enhancement of two-year technological
instruction. Primary areas of attention include vector analysis of AC circuits
and demonstration of electromagnetic devices and principles, which form the
basis of many courses taken not only by electrical technology students but also
by those in mechanical, civil, and other branches of engineering, technology,
and the sciences. Based upon extensive experience in successfully applying these
techniques to upper-division and industrially related instructional programs,
the developers are extending these ideas to the lower-division undergraduate
technology curriculum. The project is being conducted in partnership with five
two-year New Mexico institutions and two national laboratories, with New Mexico
State University (NMSU) servings as the lead partner. NMSU historically attracts
many students from these partner schools and is the lead university in the NSF-
sponsored New Mexico Alliance for Minority Participation (AMP) program.