* 9602810
* Replacement of Oceanographic and Atmospheric Instrument Test Facilities, Scripps Institution of Oceanography
* O/D,OIA
* 01/15/1997,06/30/1998
* Edward Frieman, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Standard Grant
* Sherrie Green
* 06/30/1998
* USD 300,000.00

The research performed at Scripps Institution of Oceanography encompasses all
of the ocean sciences including the relationship between the atmosphere and the
ocean. Over the years scientists have focused on developing and expanding basic
theorems to understand and predict the physical and biological world. Acquiring
field data is absolutely necessary to this work, and the success of field
research and the development of new research ideas is dependent upon the
technology available. The majority of researchers use field instruments to
collect data at sea or under extreme conditions of temperature, pressure or
humidity. Current instrument test facilities at Scripps are unreliable and
inadequate to support research in ocean acoustics, coastal dynamics, physical
oceanography, marine geology and geophysics, and marine and atmospheric
meteorology. NSF funds will be used to replace fixed equipment for
instrumentation facilities that will be consolidated as an integrated test
facility. This project will significantly improve efficiency and reduce the time
required to fabricate and modify instruments. Improved capabilities will amplify
and expand graduate training in the development, calibration, operating, and
modification research equipment. Modernized facilities will impact experimental
work conducted by 38 faculty, 38 postdocs, 60 Ph.D. graduate students and 124
research staff, and will continue to be an ocean science resource for the
scientific community.