* 9602828
* Renovation of the University of Oregon Zebrafish Facility
* O/D,OIA
* 01/15/1997,06/30/1999
* James Weston, University of Oregon Eugene
* Standard Grant
* Sherrie Green
* 06/30/1999
* USD 370,000.00

The last decade has witnessed an explosion in the understanding of vertebrate
nervous system development, largely based on work from a few models of genetic
organisms. Developmental and genetic research on the nervous system on the
newest of these models, the embryonic zebrafish, began at the University of
Oregon. International interest in this organism has grown tremendously,
primarily based on the success of the university's Institute of Neuroscience
research program demonstrating that zebrafish studies provide new insights in
the cellular, molecular and genetic mechanisms underlying vertebrate nervous
system development. Current facilities have posed a threat to the success of the
Institute's research program in isolating zebrafish mutations affecting
developmental processes. The shortage of functional and efficiently organized
space impairs the Department's ability to conduct research and accommodate
numerous graduate students, postdoctoral fellows, and visiting scientists
seeking advanced training. Funding provided by the ARI Program will be used to
upgrade electrical, plumbing and mechanical systems, upgrade the facility's
current flow-through water system to a recirculating water system and install an
anechoic chamber. Consolidation and modification of facilities will increase the
carrying capacity of the facility, allowing for the maintenance of all mutant
lines. This project will have an impact on the Department's ability to develop a
more diverse body of research personnel as well as maintain its leadership role
in zebrafish research.