* 9602505
* JSPS Japan Program:  Redox Control of Conductivity in       Intelligent Polymer Systems
* O/D,OISE
* 10/01/1996,12/31/1997
* Scott Paulson, Fellowships
* Fellowship Award
* Larry H. Weber
* 12/31/1997
* USD 6,100.00

Paulson 9602505 This award supports a 12 month Japan Society for the Promotion
of Science Postdoctoral Fellowship (JSPS) for Dr. Scott C. Paulson at the Tokyo
University of Agriculture and Technology, Tokyo, Japan. Dr. Paulson will work
with Dr. Noboru Oyama, Professor of Applied Chemistry, on a research project
entitled, "Redox Control of Conductivity in 'Intelligent' Polymer Systems." The
primary goal of the proposed research is to develop a multi-purpose sensor, for
use in aqueous solutions, that can detect changes in temperature, solvent
composition, ionic strength, and/or pH. The sensor is based on a N
alkylacrylamide polymer gel modified with an electrically conducting polymer and
works on the principle that changes in solvent environment will produce volume
changes within the polymer gel. Since the conductivity of an electrically
conducting polymer is related to the distance between polymer chains, any volume
changes exhibited by the bulk polymer would be directly translated into a change
in conductivity across the polymer. Interest in environment responsive polymer
gels has generated proposed applications ranging from temperature dependent drug
delivery systems to light activated memory devices. Development of these diverse
applications requires a fundamental understanding of the volume changes
exhibited by polymer gels in response to external stimuli. The proposed research
is designed to generate data on these issues, as well as data on how volume
changes affect the electrochemical behavior of modified polymer gels. * * *