* 9602651
* Renovation of Environmental Fluid Mechanics Laboratory
* O/D,OIA
* 09/15/1996,05/31/1997
* Robert Street, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Sherrie Green
* 05/31/1997
* USD 500,000.00

Stanford University's Environmental Fluid Mechanics and Hydrology Program, in
the Department of Civil Engineering, has long been recognized nationally and
internationally in the general areas of hydraulics, hydrology, fluid mechanics,
and water resources research. Within this program, the Environmental Fluid
Mechanics Laboratory (EFML) is the centerpiece for research activities in
experimental and computational fluid mechanics. Current research in the EFML
includes: turbulence and mixing in natural water bodies; stratified flows in
various bodies of water; natural and forced convection flows in energy systems;
energy and mass transfer across the ocean-atmosphere interface; and transport
and mixing of pollutants at regional and global scales in the atmosphere.
Presently the laboratory is housed in the south wing of Building 2-520, a
facility that was constructed in 1912. Existing laboratory space, antiquated
with limited utility, impedes on research experimentation requiring clean
conditions and/ or controlled environments. Thus certain procedures cannot be
performed in the present environment. Funding from the ARI Program will provide
partial support for the renovation of the EFML into a modernized facility.
Renovations will entail the reconfiguration of existing research space;
upgrading communications, electrical, and mechanical systems; and improving
space for safety and ADA compliance. In addition to furnishing proper drainage
and sewage facilities for laboratories, a clean room will be constructed to
permit investigations in biological and geochemical fluid dynamics to be
conducted. The creation of a high-speed fiber-optic network for communications
within the laboratory is critical for Stanford's NSF Grand Challenge project.
Not only will the renovated facility provide many research opportunities, but it
will encourage greater diversity and facilitate the growth of multidisciplinary
efforts.