* 9602778
* Renovation and Modernization of Eight Research and Research Training Laboratories in the Biology Department at St.      Joseph's University
* O/D,OIA
* 12/15/1996,05/31/1999
* John Tudor, St Joseph's University
* Standard Grant
* Sherrie Green
* 05/31/1999
* USD 425,000.00

The National Science Foundation, in a joint effort with Saint Joseph's
University of Philadelphia, will provide funding for the renovation of eight
laboratories for the Biology Department. The laboratories, some outfitted with
furnishings removed from a previous facility built in 1927, are housed in the
Science Center and have never been renovated since its original construction in
1971. In spite of inadequate space, the Department has maintained a quality
undergraduate research program for the past twenty years. Opportunities for
research are broad, including the following areas: microbiology, molecular
biology, genetics, behavior, environmental biology, plant pathology,
development, cell biology and anatomy. Renovations will consist of removing
antiquated and worn laboratory furniture and replacing it with modern laboratory
benches and cabinets installed in configurations appropriate to individual
research labs. New and increased electrical service will be provided as well as
new flooring, ceiling panels, and overhead lighting. Two rooms will be outfitted
with separate heating and air conditioning systems to meet environmental
requirements, and five laboratories will be equipped with new natural gas
fixtures located safely in convenient areas. Once renovations are completed,
faculty, undergraduate and graduate students will continue to engage in present
research activities, as well as conduct research that is currently not feasible
due to poor infrastructure. In addition to increase efficiency in space
utilization, and establishing a safe working environment, the renovated labs
will attract and accommodate more faculty and students, allowing for continued
growth and increased productivity. This project will enhance the Department's
ability to successfully train and prepare students, including women and
underrepresented minority students in an urban environment, for careers in the
life science.