* 9602520
* Japan JSPS Program:  First-principles Investigation of      Quantum Diffusion in Alkali Halides
* O/D,OISE
* 10/01/1996,12/31/1997
* Tina Briere, Fellowships
* Fellowship Award
* Larry H. Weber
* 12/31/1997
* USD 3,000.00

9602520 Briere This award supports a 12 month Japan Society for the Promotion of
Science (JSPS) Postdoctoral Fellowship for Dr. Tina Marie Briere at the
Institute of Solid State Physics, University of Tokyo in Tokyo, Japan. Dr.
Briere will work with Dr. Shinji Tsuneyuki, professor at the Institute, on a
research project entitled "First-principles Investigation of Quantum Diffusion
in Alkali Halides". The proposed research will utilize theoretical first-
principles techniques in order to study quantum diffusion of muonium in alkali
halides. Recent experiments using muon spin relaxation have mapped the diffusion
rate as a function of temperature. The curve of the diffusion rate is quite
different in the high and low temperature regions, indicating two different
types of diffusion: incoherent and coherent quantum. The goal of the proposed
research is to describe the diffusion rate in the low-temperature region from a
theoretical viewpoint whose basis does not depend on experimental parameters.
Muonium (Mu), a light atom consisting of a muon and an electron, has been chosen
for the analysis because its light mass has allowed for clear experimental
observation of quantum diffusion. The Car- Parinello first-principles method
will be used to map the potential energy surface as the muonium atom diffuses
through a KCl crystal. The wavefunction of Mu will then be determined
numerically, followed by calculation of diffusion parameters which can then be
compared to earlier experiments (e.g. Mu diffusion rate). ***