* 9602298
* Consolidation and Renovation of Research Facilities at the  Transmountain Campus of El Paso Community College
* O/D,OIA
* 02/15/1997,08/31/1998
* Maria Alvarez, El Paso County Community College
* Standard Grant
* Sherrie Green
* 08/31/1998
* USD 118,644.00

Founded in 1969, El Paso Community College (EPCC) serves a community
characterized by a high minority population. Located at the western tip of Texas
and bordered by New Mexico and Mexico, the mission of the College is to provide
educational opportunities for students who traditionally have not pursued higher
learning in a postsecondary educational environment. Unlike many community
colleges that have been excluded from the research enterprise, EPCC supports the
participation of faculty and students in summer research activities through
bridge programs with the University of Texas at El Paso. One program is the NSF
Alliance for Minority Participation Summer Bridge Program. Faculty also actively
participate in research activities on campus, engaging students in the study of
the environment. Research projects share a common environmental focus and
include a study of environmental factors that affect the survival of viruses in
groundwater, and microorganisms in the marine intertidal zone. Other
investigations conducted include systematic and biogeographic studies of the
flora and the fauna in the Chihuahaun Desert, and the development of sensors for
heavy metal contaminants in bodies of water. Because research was not considered
in the original design of laboratory facilities at EPCC's Transmountain campus,
other space has been used by students and faculty to conduct research. Fixed
equipment including fume hoods and an autoclave are in poor condition and must
be shared with instructional activities. This award will be used to consolidate
the various spaces used for research into a state-of-the-art research facility.
In addition to improving utility systems, an autoclave, a fume hood, a cold room
and fiber optics cabling will be installed. Although significant collaborations
already exist among faculty, having a dedicated research area will initiate a
chain reaction as more faculty and students experience the thrill of research.
The newly renovated laboratory will expose students, specifically students of
Hispanic origin, to research, encouraging them to become critical thinkers, and
motivating them to pursue careers in science.