* 9602368
* Teamed Internships:  Innovative Education Program for       Environmental Technicians and Engineers
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/1996,09/30/2000
* Gregory Ogden, Pima County Community College District
* Standard Grant
* Iraj Nejad
* 09/30/2000
* USD 330,000.00

Teamed Internships: Innovative Education Program for Environmental Technicians
and Engineers The project will create multi-disciplinary internships
encompassing regional industries, federal research facilities, and two and four
year educational programs. Teams of technicians from the Environmental Science
Department at Pima Community College and engineers from the Department of
Chemical &amp; Environmental Engineering at the University of Arizona will work
on industrial and academic projects under the direction of full-time faculty
from both institutions. The project will foster teamwork and communication
skills for technician and engineering students, include the development of
instructional materials, provide a basis for upgrading curriculum on both the
two- and four-year levels as well as teacher and faculty enhancement.
Perceptions and insights and educational modules developed during the project
will be disseminated to local secondary schools to foster interest in
environmental technology/environmental science. High schools with high
percentages of minorities in particular will be targeted. Dissemination on a
regional/national level will be accomplished through participation in
engineering, environmental and educational conferences and educational forums,
publication of results, and collaboration with other NSF sponsored ATE centers
or programs. Formative and summative evaluation tools will be used to direct the
course of the project and demonstrate its effectiveness on student outcomes, The
project is designed to bridge the gap between technicians and engineers to
facilitate smooth introductions of new technologies and foster teamwork between
operations and management. The project will also stress industrial educational
needs including students capable of working in teams, aware of their community
and possessing excellent written and oral communication skills. The increased
cooperation and understanding between engineers and technicians should lead to
increased industrial product ivity and personal development.