* 9602033
* Metals and Metallurgists in Sub-Saharan Africa:  Three Case Studies
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/1996,07/31/1999
* David Killick, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 07/31/1999
* USD 88,035.00

With National Science Foundation support, Dr. David Killick and his colleagues
will pursue three related anthropological projects which will shed new light on
past and present metal working practices in sub Saharan Africa. What links the
three is the examination of the relationship between metalworking technology and
the ability to use such information to sidelight on social organization. In a
first study Dr. Killick will examine the techniques used to work iron in the
Mandara region of Cameroon and Nigeria. While prehistorically many sub-Saharan
peoples smelted and worked iron to produce a range of artifacts, in very few
instances have these practices continued into modern times. In the Mandara
region anthropologists have observed and videotaped two instances of iron
smelting and collected information about many more. Dr. Killick will coordinate
and synthesize the data which has been collected. He will also conduct
metallurgical analyses of the slags which were produced and the finished
products. One major goal of the work is to examine the relationship between
ethnic affiliation and metallurgical technology and the extent to which specific
techniques are ethnically determined. Because archaeologists work primarily with
the material byproducts of human behavior and attempt to reconstruct social
organization through such remains, the insights which Dr. Killick will provide
will be a great methodological interest. Secondly, Dr. Killick and colleagues
will analyze a body of data collected at archaeological sites in northern South
Africa. These include finished metal products and slags which date to the last
2,000 years. Archaeologists wish to reconstruct the social organization of such
Iron Age societies which gave rise to the Zulu empire and other ethnographically
known groups. Because the geology of the region is well known and iron ore
deposits vary in chemical composition, it is possible to examine the results and
byproducts of smelting and match archaeologically recovered objects with ore
source. On this basis it is then possible to reconstruct trade networks and gain
insight into large scale social and economic organization. The research team
will undertake such an analysis and also reconstruct prehistoric southern
African metal working techniques. In a third part of this project the research
group will examine a series of materials recovered from archaeological contexts
on the East Coast of Africa. Swahili culture which is dominant in this region
consists of a mix of African and Islamic elements and it appears that several
thousand years ago traders from the Near East settled in this region.
Anthropologists are very interested in the mechanisms which underly culture
contact and interaction and in the Swahili case several models have been
proposed. It is unclear to what extent, over millennia, interaction has occurred
and whether the `immigrants` remained culturally and materially distinct.
Through the analysis of metal objects Dr. Killick hopes to gain insight into
this question. Since the smelting technologies of the Near East and Eastern
Africa are quite distinct, and it should be possible to determine whether they
are blended or remain separate on the East African coast. This research is
important for several reasons. It will help to develop a robust methodological
tool which will help scientists to gain insight into past social behavior. It
will help to answer a series of interesting areal questions and provide data of
interest to many archaeologists.