* 9602670
* Renovation of Old Science Center at Delaware State          University
* O/D,OIA
* 04/01/1997,03/31/2001
* Gabriel Gwanmesia, Delaware State University
* Standard Grant
* Sherrie Green
* 03/31/2001
* USD 1,000,000.00

Delaware State University (DSU), a Historically Black College and University,
is the recipient of ARI funds to revitalize and consolidate science laboratories
in the old Science Center. Constructed in 1964, the facility houses the
Departments of Chemistry and Physics, but is inadequate to support research and
training activities. Limitations include: poorly designed lab spaces,
insufficient power and gas supplies, an aged HVAC system and dilapidated
cabinetry and fixtures. Due to outdated facilities, specimen preparation for SEM
work is performed at other institutions. Renovations to targeted laboratories
will encompass: consolidating research space, upgrading HVAC, plumbing and
electrical systems, and installing new fume hoods. Upon completion laboratories
will comply with ADA and life safety codes. The renovations are essential to the
growth of the departments and will enhance research and training capabilities of
undergraduate and graduate students. The project will be instrumental in
facilitating interdisciplinary research and establishing collaborations between
DSU the and other institutions. Because of the University's historical mission,
many African American scholars will enter the pipeline contributing to the
nation's scientific infrastructure.