* 9602503
* NSF-CGP Fellowship: Nanofabrication Technology for          Optoelectronic Devices
* O/D,OISE
* 03/15/1997,08/31/1998
* Stella Pang, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Gerald Edwards
* 08/31/1998
* USD 73,625.00

9602503 Pang This award supports U.S.-Japan collaborative research between Dr.
Stella Pang of the Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science at
the University of Michigan and Dr. Toshiaki Tamamura of the Photonic Functional
Device Laboratories at NTT in Kanagawa, Japan. Dr. Pang will be supported for
six months at NTT in order to develop and apply advanced nanofabrication
technology for optoelectronic devices to semiconductor mirrors, waveguides, and
lasers. The effects of processing technology on the device characteristics and
reliability will be studied. Techniques such as in-situ passivation and
epitaxial overgrowth to remove or minimize process induced defects will be
developed. Comparisons will be made between quantum dots that are formed by
self-organized technique and by damage free dry etching technique. The U.S.
researcher brings to this collaboration her knowledge of low damage dry etching,
surface passivation, in- situ monitoring and process control, and Si-based
optical modulators. This is complemented by expertise in the area of high
resolution electronic beam lithography, epitaxial growth of strained layers and
self-organized quantum structures, and optical characterization of devices by
the Japanese researcher. The project is expected to result in new or improved
processing technology related to lithography, etching, material growth, and
device integration. In addition, the new technology will increase the design
flexibility and allow new high performance optoelectronic devices to be improved
and developed. It is expected that the cooperation between these laboratories
should foster future collaborations.