* 9602870
* Dissertation Research: Language Socialization in Rural and  Urban Communities in Dominica, West Indies
* SBE,BCS
* 10/01/1996,12/31/1997
* Bambi Schieffelin, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Paul G. Chapin
* 12/31/1997
* USD 5,008.00

9602870 Paugh In Dominica, a French creole (Kweyol) dating to early French
colonization remains in use along with different varieties of English (the
official language). An urban/rural split exists: the most "standard" English is
spoken in the capital town, while Kweyol and different varieties of English are
spoken throughout the rural village population. Though historically denigrated
by middle- class urbanites, Kweyol has figured centrally in the state's project
of building a unified post-colonial nation since Independence in 1978. But while
the attitudes of many middle-class urban adults towards Kweyol are changing,
rural villagers still struggle with restricted skills in English and view Kweyol
as a disability. Children growing up today face a sociolinguistically complex
environment where multilingualism is accompanied by multiple language ideologies
concerning language choice. How children become communicatively competent in the
language(s) and language ideologies of their communities in such a highly
variable, multilingual creole environment will be investigated through a
longitudinal child language socialization study of six children (in both town
and village). The children's naturally occurring speech with various
interlocutors during daily activities will be systematically audio-tape
recorded, transcribed, and analyzed. This study will investigate the links
between changing language ideologies and practices, language choice and identity
construction, and post-colonial nation building in Dominica. It will yield data
on multilingual language acquisition, the social organization of caregiving,
processes of language maintenance and shift, and the learning of cultural and
linguistic practices in a creole society. It will contribute to several growing
areas of research including linguistic ideologies. language and nationalism,
creole sociolinguistics, and Caribbean area studies. ***