* 9602567
* U.S.-India Cooperative Research:Phenomenological Studies in the Standard Model and Beyond, Award in Indian Currency
* O/D,OISE
* 07/01/1996,06/30/1999
* Rohini Godbole, Bombay University
* Standard Grant
* Marjorie Lueck
* 06/30/1999
* USD 17,129.00

Description: This research will investigate phenomenological issues concerning
different aspects of High Energy Physics with special emphasis on high energy
colliders. Considering the success over the last decade of new colliders at
Fermilab, SLAC, CERN, and that others are due to begin operation this year,
collider physics will continue to grow as an important branch of High Energy
Physics. The Standard Model of particle physics is generally believed to be
incomplete. The investigators will explore phenomenological implications of
Physics Beyond the Standard Model for current and future experiments at high
energy colliders. Examples include the search for supersymmetry, for Higgs-
bosons the only Standard Model particle yet to be discovered, as well as the
physics of neutrinos whose masses could provide clues to physics at high energy.
Professors Sandip Pakvasa and Xerxes Tata of the University of Hawaii at Manoa,
Honolulu will collaborate with physicist, Dr. Rohini Godbole of the University
of Bombay and the Tata Institute of Fundamental Research (TIFR). All
coinvestigators have been actively engaged in phenomenological research for the
last several years. This collaboration will allow Godbole to interact with the
large experimental group at the University of Hawaii that is involved with
experiments at Fermilab in the US, in China and in Japan. Scope: High energy
physics is an area of research that has been identified as a thrust area by the
Indian Government and is one of tremendous activity and strength among Indian
physicists. The research team has particular expertise in the areas of
investigation and they have worked effectively in the past. The modest support
requested for this project will allow the investigators to renew their
collaboration and also strengthen cooperative research betweens the growing
community of collider physicists in India and their counterparts in the US.