* 9602031
* Legal Orientations and the Rule of Law: Developing Measures in Russia and the United States
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/1996,01/31/1999
* William Reisinger, University of Iowa
* Standard Grant
* Patricia White
* 01/31/1999
* USD 66,552.00

9602031 Reisinger This project is designed to create and analyze a dataset of
legal orientations among legal specialists and the mass public in two societies,
Russia and the United States. Russia seeks to create a law-governed state
through fundamental changes in Soviet-era legal institutions and norms, The
United States has a long record of comparatively successful rule of law.
Democratic institutions, a market economy, or a pattern of peaceful conflict
resolution have little chance of surviving without a general respect for the
rule of law running throughout a society, from the highest officials down, and
without a properly functioning judiciary. Judicial institutions will fall short
of such fundamental goals as peacefully resolving interpersonal conflicts and
protecting the citizenry from violence unless the cases they handle form only a
tiny percentage of the potential cases. This in turn depends on most citizens
respecting judicial institutions and the law. Although much research has been
conducted into the American public's support for judicial institutions,
systematic empirical evidence of other aspects of the broader concept of legal
orientations, especially with regard to legal specialists and elites, is scanty.
Methodologically, this project entails collecting and analyzing information
about Russians' and Americans' legal orientations through a combination of
quantitative and qualitative content analytic techniques. The documents analyzed
will come from three periods: 1) 1980-81; 2) from mid-1988 through 1990; and 3)
1992-95. %%%%