* 9602939
* U.S.-Mexico Collaborative Research:  New Directions in      Stochastic Optimal Control; Non-Standard Optimality         Criteria, Algorithms, and Software Laboratory
* O/D,OISE
* 12/15/1996,11/30/1999
* Emmanuel Fernandez, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Harold Stolberg
* 11/30/1999
* USD 19,000.00

9602939 Fernandez This U.S-Mexico award will support Prof. Emmanuel Fernandez of
the University of Arizona in a research collaboration with Prof. Rolando Cavazos
Cadena of the Universidad Autonoma Agraria in Saltillo, Mexico. The
investigators intend to develop a collaborative program that integrates
innovative research activities and algorithmic software development in
stochastic control. In particular, the collaborators intend to pursue optimal
decision and control problems for controlled Markov models. Discrete event
stochastic dynamic systems (DESDS) constitute a broad and interdisciplinary area
of research at the intersection of systems and control, operations research, and
knowledge-based systems. The focus of DESDS research are the complex, man-made
systems that form the core of our technological society, for example,
telecommunications and computer networks; production and manufacturing systems;
and military and service industry logistics. A common feature of many of the
problems in the field attempts to obtain rules for operating a system, which
optimize an appropriate performance measure, and which explicitly take into
account the stochastic and discrete event-driven nature of the problems. The
proposed collaboration will bring together experienced researchers with
complementary skills: the Mexican investigator is an expert on the mathematical
and probabilistic theory of stochastic control and the U.S. investigator will
contribute his skills in the engineering and management applications of
stochastic control models and techniques, and in software development. ***