* 9602748
* Reclaiming &amp; Upgrading Research Laboratories in Crawford    Hall, Bowie State University
* O/D,OIA
* 10/15/1996,03/31/1998
* Douglas Council, Bowie State University
* Standard Grant
* Sherrie Green
* 03/31/1998
* USD 225,494.00

Bowie State University, a Historically Black University in Maryland, is the
recipient of ARI funds for the renovation of research and training laboratories
in Crawford Hall. Constructed in 1968, the building is home to the science
departments on campus, including Computer Science that claimed research space
designated for Biology. With the construction of a new facility specifically
designed for the needs of Computer Science, the current space assigned will be
reclaimed by the Biology Department. Renovations entailing the installation of
laboratory benches, cabinets, an autoclave, additional electrical outlets and
water deionizers are necessary to make the space functional for research
purposes. In addition, two rooms will be renovated as support facilities, a
darkroom and a sterilizer room. This project directly impacts ongoing research
programs in molecular and cellular biology. Designated research space will be
available for some faculty who are presently conducting research off campus.
Renovated facilities will assist the University in its endeavor to establish a
sound research program in biology, biochemistry, and structural biology that
serves as the core of the biological science program. Recognized as a NSF -Model
Institution for Excellence,` the project will enhance the University's efforts
in expanding research opportunities for minority students and will encourage
them to pursue advanced studies in science.