* 9602302
* Renovation of Harrington Hall Annex
* O/D,OIA
* 12/01/1996,02/28/1999
* Steven Sternberg, University of North Dakota Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Sherrie Green
* 02/28/1999
* USD 138,000.00

Funds from the Academic Research Infrastructure Program will be used to
renovate laboratory facilities at the University of North Dakota, for high
performance computing, material science, and environmental systems research
related to transport and adsorption in heterogeneous materials. Space dedicated
to the Multiscale Interdisciplinary Science and Engineering Research (MISER)
group, consisting of members from the Chemical Engineering, Physics, Chemistry,
Geology and Geological Engineering Departments, and the Energy and Environmental
Research Center will be renovated. Current projects focus on environmental
research related to groundwater monitoring, modeling and remediation, and the
removal of toxic metals from flue gas by adsorption. Other faculty use high
performance computing to complement this work by developing algorithms that
partition local and global interactions using novel procedures to obtain optimal
performance from vector and parallel architectures. Located in Harrington Hall,
the research laboratory as it currently exists, is inadequate to support the
operation of high precision, scientific research equipment. There is poor
ventilation, and inoperable fume hoods that do not meet current safety
standards. Once renovated, the lab will have a new drop ceiling, computer
cabling, chemical resistant floor, storage cabinets, and laboratory benches.
Modernizing the research space will rectify deficiencies and make the laboratory
ADA compliant. Establishing a central laboratory will result in significant
cross disciplinary interactions between student researchers. This project will
enhance the ability of MISER to attract additional extramural funding, increase
the number of students, particularly Native American students, involved in
research, and improve the quality of research and training available for all
students.