* 9602868
* U.S.-Germany Workshop on New Polymer Synthesis and          Properties; Leipzig, Germany; September 8-15, 1996
* O/D,OISE
* 08/15/1996,04/30/1997
* Julia Kornfield, California Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Mark A. Suskin
* 04/30/1997
* USD 15,725.00

This award supports the participation of eleven US materials scientists from
eleven different universities in a US-Germany workshop examining the frontiers
of knowledge about the properties of polymers and how to synthesize them. The
meeting was co-organized by Julia Kornfeld of Caltech, Bruce Novak of University
of Massachusetts, Friedrich Kremer of the University of Leipzig and Rudolf
Zentel of the University of Mainz. This will be the first such workshop held in
Germany since the unification of East and West Germany; the siting of the
workshop in Leipzig was intended to emphasize the contributions to this field
that were stimulated by the blending of the two research communities since that
time. The US and Germany are two leading countries in the field of polymer
science, and this meeting will benefit both countries by fostering cooperation
among the talented participants who are all at early stages in their scientific
careers. Polymers are highly deserving of special attention through
collaboration between world class scientists. The demands placed on molecularly
engineered materials requires the use of polymers possessing predetermined
properties and behaviors. Many properties depend strongly on small variations in
fine structural features. Architecturally well-defined polymeric materials will
play key roles in advancing existing materials and in developing emerging
technologies including optical fibers, electronic materials and biomedical
polymers. This workshop will examine the state of the art as well as areas for
fruitful collaboration in the areas of preparation, characterization and
applications of several classes of polymers.