* 9602602
* Renovation of Unusable Laboratories into a Modern           Pharmaceutical Engineering Research Facility
* O/D,STI
* 10/01/1996,09/30/1998
* Henrik Pedersen, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Sherrie Green
* 09/30/1998
* USD 500,000.00

In September 1995, Rutgers University's Department of Chemical and Biochemical
Engineering created the Pharmaceutical Engineering Program, the first one of its
kind in the United States. The Program was established to improve the
performance of the pharmaceutical manufacturing process by systematically
applying engineering concepts to generate a wide array of technologies needed
for the making and processing of materials. In some instances, the resulting
manufacturing procedures are highly unstable with respect to changes in
processing conditions or in raw materials properties, that the validity of the
production process is compromised. Engineering concepts such as mass, momentum
and energy balances, thermodynamics, transport phenomena, colloidal and surface
chemistry, are used to characterize basic operations in the process. Generating
advanced technologies, for improving the predictability, reliability, and
controllability of the manufacturing process, is one of the important objectives
of the program. Currently, research activities of the program are conducted in
five different buildings scattered across campus. This geographic dispersion
makes it difficult to achieve cohesiveness and develop effective collaborations.
Moreover, available laboratory space is poorly suited to perform many of the
necessary research investigations. This award will partially support the
renovation of Building C of the Engineering Complex on the Busch Campus.
Originally built in 1963, the existing structure has not been renovated since
that time and laboratories are in an advanced state of deterioration. This
project will correct deficiencies interfering with the conduction of research by
installing fume hoods, air handling equipment for proper ventilation, new
electrical and plumbing services, and reconfiguring laboratories. Targeted space
will be renovated into a modern powder technology research facility consisting
of five laboratories and six auxiliary instrument rooms, providing sufficient
space to consolidate all of the Program's experimental activities. Improved
research capabilities and strong collaborations, facilitated by the project,
will accelerate and multiply the development of new technologies, enhancing the
predictability and controllability of the manufacturing process. Because the US
suffers from an acute shortage of researchers trained in powder technology, the
project will have a major impact on the Department's ability to develop research
training activities, ensuring access to underrepresented groups in this
multidisciplinary area of study. It is anticipated that once the Program is
fully established, other academic institutions will be interested in developing
similar programs addressing the needs of an industry critical to the US economy.