* 9602136
* Maintenance and Plasticity at the Frog Neuromuscular        Junction
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/1996,08/31/2000
* Elizabeth Connor, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Continuing Grant
* Dennis M. Higgins
* 08/31/2000
* USD 223,000.00

IBN 9602136 PI: Elizabeth A. Connor Neurons communicate with their target cells
at specialized points of contact called synapses. The coordinated maintenance of
the synapse between a neuron and its target is necessary to ensure reliable
communication between these cells and the normal functioning of the nervous
system. Though some synapses between neurons and their targets persist
throughout the entire life of an animal, the mechanism by which neurons are
maintained at synaptic sites is not understood. The goal of this proposal is to
identify factors that contribute to the stability of neurons at synapses using
the frog neuromuscular junction as a model. At the frog neuromuscular junction,
a motor neuron forms a synapse with a target muscle cell. The frog neuromuscular
junction is a powerful system in which to study synapse stability since neurons
can be studied in the absence of target muscle to reveal nonmuscle stabilization
interactions normally masked in the presence of target. Further, the stability
of target-deprived neurons can be manipulated to test for stabilization factors.
The role of a glial support cell, the terminal Schwann cell, in the stability
and maintenance of the neuron will be determined by assessing the stability of
neurons after removal of terminal Schwann cells from identified synaptic sites.
The ability of a neurotrophic factor produced by Schwann cells to rescue and
stabilize neurons will be tested. The role of connective tissue molecules found
at or near synaptic sites in the stabilization of neurons will also be
determined. These experiments will yield new information on the mechanisms that
stabilize and maintain neurons at synaptic sites and will expand our
understanding of the molecular and cellular interactions that govern synaptic
plasticity.