* 9602081
* U.S.-Turkey Cooperative Research: Testing of Software       With an Operational Profile
* O/D,OISE
* 08/15/1996,07/31/2000
* Refik Soyer, George Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Osman Shinaishin
* 07/31/2000
* USD 25,000.00

Description: This award is to support a cooperative research project involving
Dr. Refik Soyer, Department of Management Science at George Washington
University (GWU) in Washington, D.C., and Dr. Suleyman Ozekici, Department of
Industrial Engineering at Bogazici University (BU) in Istanbul, Turkey. The aim
of the proposed research is to enhance the state of the art in software
reliability, especially those that are germane to the software testing. The
research involves development of failure models that consider operation profiles
that describe the environment in which the software is used. These models are
based on stochastic processes that reflect the dynamic nature of the
environment. The research also involves analysis of these models and their use
for developing optimal software testing strategies. The models will have various
degrees of complexity and will require computer-based techniques for their
implementation. In particular, in determining the optimal software release time,
the sequential nature of the decision problem makes computer intensive-solutions
and Monte-Carlo based techniques inevitable. Thus the proposed work will involve
development of such methodologies to implement these models in optimal software
testing. Scope: This award is to fund the travel of the U.S. P.I., the Turkish
P.I., and a third scientist from GWU, Dr. Singpurwalla, Professor of Operations
Research and Statistics. In addition, a professor and a graduate student at GWU,
as well as a professor at BU, will participate in the project, but will not
require grant funds. This award allows two teams with complementary skills to
work jointly to solve a problem in production of a highly technical product with
wide applications. The result, if successful, would have a number of
applications with possible significant benefits to the software industry. The
project also involves the training of a graduate student in a binational
collaborative research. This award is funded jointly by the Division of
International Programs and the Division of Design, Manufacturing and Industrial
Innovation.