* 9602717
* Renovation of Temple's Psychology Department Animal Colony
* O/D,OIA
* 01/01/1997,12/31/1997
* Donald Overton, Temple University
* Standard Grant
* Sherrie Green
* 12/31/1997
* USD 164,773.00

Temple University is the recipient of funds from the Academic Research
Infrastructure for the renovation and upgrading of the Department of
Psychology's animal housing and laboratory facilities. Recognized as one of the
nation's leading centers for research and research training in the field, its
research programs are diverse addressing both clinical and basic science issues
in comparative psychology, social behavior, neurochemistry of motivation,
behavioral analysis of cognition, and effects of traumatic experiences along
with work on the mechanisms and properties of classical and instrumental
conditioning. The majority of research is performed in Weiss Hall, a facility
that was constructed in 1973. However, due to changing regulations and codes,
the physical deterioration of the facility, and unsuitable space, animal housing
has decreased substantially. The continuing absence of adequate space has
negatively impacted individual faculty projects and programs. Renovations will
include removing asbestos containing doors, resurfacing walls, floors, and
ceilings, improving lighting and HVAC systems, and installing a new cage washer.
Upon completion, the renovated facility will increase efficiency and meet
federal requirements. The upgraded facility will assist the faculty as they
attempt to meet the research and educational goals of the University in the
recruitment of new faculty and students pursuing careers in psychology. As an
urban university, Temple's Department of Psychology provides a route for under-
represented minorities and women to obtain advanced degrees in science. This
project will enhance the Department's endeavors to sustain research excellence
and training for future scientists in the next century.