* 9602796
* Renovation of Research Space in Molecular and Cellular      Physiology
* O/D,OIA
* 10/15/1996,09/30/1999
* David Millhorn, University of Cincinnati Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Sherrie Green
* 09/30/1999
* USD 722,000.00

During the past several decades work on prokaryotic and eukaryotic cell systems
have provided significant insights on basic mechanisms that regulate the
expression of the gene. Little is known about how specific genes regulate
physiological function in the whole animal. Recently, investigators studying in
the area of Molecular and Cellular Biology have witnessed the development of
exciting new technologies that allow manipulation of the mammalian genome in the
intact animal. The University of Cincinnati is recognized as a national leader
in the development and experimental use of transgenic and gene targeted mice.
These animals provide unique models for studying the physiological significance
of expressed genes on organ systems function. The development of experimental
approaches and techniques to determine the functional phenotype and study the
physiological performance in gene manipulated animals is a primary institutional
and national need. Funding from the National Science Foundation, in addition to
resources from the institution and the State of Ohio, will be used to renovate
existing research space located in the Medical Science Building for the
Department of Molecular and Cellular Physiology. Renovations will consist of:
upgrading electrical, plumbing, HVAC systems, reconfiguring space, and
installing benches, fume hoods, and other fixed equipment. The Department has
strong programs in membrane biophysics, molecular endocrinology, signal
transduction, gene regulation, neurophysiology, muscle energetics and
metabolism, membrane transport, and cardiovascular/pulmonary physiology. The
renovations will strengthen these programs by providing modern faculty research
laboratories, a molecular biology core facility, a transgenic physiology core
facility, and shared research support facilities. Modernization of this space
will significantly augment the Department's efforts in recruiting new faculty
with research expertise in molecular physiology, and attract outstanding
graduate students interested in using molecular biological approaches to study
organ system physiology. This project will enhance the ability of the Department
to have an impact on biology-oriented research at the University and in the
nation.