* 9602629
* Renovation of an Isotope Geochemistry Laboratory for North  Carolina Triangle Universities Consortium
* O/D,OIA
* 11/15/1996,10/31/1998
* Allen Glazner, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Sherrie Green
* 10/31/1998
* USD 170,000.00

This ARI award will provide funding for the renovation of an obsolete Isotope
Geochemistry Laboratory at the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill (UNC-
CH) on behalf of The North Carolina Triangle Universities Consortium. Housed in
Mitchell Hall, the 32 year old lab is used to support analytical procedures
including acid digestion of samples, elemental chromatographic separations,
mineral leaching and purification, and sample loading preparation for mass
spectrometry. Faculty and students of three Geoscience Departments, UNC-CH, Duke
University, and North Carolina State University, use the facility to prepare
samples for isotopic and chemical analysis using the VG Sector 54 thermal
ionization mass spectrometer. However, the instrument cannot be used to full
capability because the laboratory lacks modern, clean facilities required to
prepare small, low-level samples for high-precision analyses. An inordinate
amount of time has been spent discovering and eliminating sources of
contamination, therefore impeding progress. Corrosion of metallic light
fixtures, ceiling grids, fume hood casings, and pipes contribute significant
contaminating particles, especially since air in the lab is not filtered. Air
flow is low, and acid fumes are not adequately vented from work areas, thus
creating a potential hazardous health environment for research personnel.
Current space design limits the training opportunities for additional students
and limits the range of research and analytical experiments that can be
performed. Laboratory renovations will consist of: installing new fume hoods,
including four Class 100 laminar flow hoods; installing benchtop workstations,
and providing HEPA filter evaporating boxes. Corroded electrical outlets, gas
and water pipes will be replaced as well as ceiling grids. Renovations will
enable research personnel to: analyze a wider variety of samples, and smaller
quantities of a sample at very low concentrations; decrease errors associated
with isotopic measurements, and accommodate additional users. This will allow
research growth in areas that require accurate Pb abundances and isotopic
ratios; perform source apportionment studies to assess relative contribution of
trace pollutants for natural and anthropogenic sources, perform exposure
assessment of humans to atmospheric pollutants, and expand isotopic tracer
studies to plant and animal research. More students, including students from
Historically Black Colleges and Universities in North Carolina, will learn a
broader range of scientific procedures of geologic and environmental importance.