* 9602213
* The Renovation of the Sixth Floor Research and Research     Training Facilities in the Albert Nerken School of          Engineering at Cooper Union
* O/D,OIA
* 09/15/1996,02/28/1997
* Richard Stock, Cooper Union
* Standard Grant
* Sherrie Green
* 02/28/1997
* USD 267,100.00

The Albert Nerken School of Engineering, constructed in 1957, is one of three
schools at Cooper Union. The department's philosophy focuses on engineering as a
field of study directed to the practical solutions of problems that effect
contemporary life. Four traditional disciplines of study: chemical, civil,
electrical, and mechanical are included in the curriculum in conjunction to
innovative cross-disciplinary fields, such as biomedical, environmental,
materials, and manufacturing engineering, are integrated into the structure. To
assist the department in achieving its research and research training goals, the
National Science Foundation, in partnership with Cooper Union, will provide
funds for the renovation of space on the sixth floor of the structure for
environmental and bioengineering. Currently, the laboratory is antiquated with
inadequate ventilation. Renovation will consist of asbestos removal, electrical
and plumbing work, a modern HVAC system, and installing new fume hoods, lab
benches and cabinets. Space will be reconfigured to provide the department with
seven laboratories dedicated to environmental and bioengineering research. Areas
of concentration include: (1) asphalt technology; (2) soil/sludge bioremediation
and treatment; (3) biotechnology separation research; (4) biomechanics; (5) room
safety testing; (6) low light level microscopy, video imaging, digitization;
and, (7) bioanalytical and environmental applications of a biosensor. Upon
completion, this project will improve research capabilities by fostering
advances in urban environmental engineering, providing students with
opportunities to learn new technologies for the 21st century, and encouraging
interdisciplinary research. Having a large base of women minority students, this
project will attract under-represented students to these specialized fields of
study.