* 9602502
* A Shared Computer Workstation and Storage System for        Social Science Research
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/1996,08/31/1997
* Andrew Beveridge, CUNY Queens College
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 08/31/1997
* USD 20,694.00

With National Science Foundation support, Queens College will purchase a shared
computer workstation and data storage system to support the research activities
of Sociology Department members. Both data and facilities will also be made
available to a wider group of scientists. The system consists of a DEC 500 5/266
with peripherals and software, a EXABYTE EXB-10H tape jukebox system and a 9
gigabyte SCSI hard drive. The 9 gigabytes of hard drive space will make it
possible to acquire and analyze large data sets. The five core facility users
employ a variety of computer based techniques that include the following
elements: 1. the acquisition and analysis of very large and complex data sets
such as current and historical foreign and domestic censuses and large
longitudinal studies; 2. the implementation of recently developed maximum
likelihood based statistical analytic methods; 3. the use of visualization
techniques including three dimensional graphing and geographical information
systems. Their studies are directed towards a number of socially relevant
questions including: the career trajectory of men and women in science and
engineering; math and science education of white, black and Latino men and women
in the middle and high school grades; changing demographic patterns in the New
York metropolitan area; change in occupation and income distribution over a long
time period; the impact of immigrant streams on science and engineering labor
markets; empirical analyses of success or failure of over 90,000 union
organizing drives; the impact of migration trends; intermarriage of various
groups; historical changes with respect to the family; and the success or
failure of coalitions throughout the US in combating substance abuse harm and
use. Each of these projects involves complex analyses on large data sets and the
system provided in this award will permit the researchers to pursue their work
with increased effectiveness. Queens College has a large an active Sociology
Department with a large student enrollment. The instrumentation provided will
assist faculty in their teaching role.