* 9602959
* Prehistoric Coastal Adaptations in Northern Baja California
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/1997,08/31/2001
* Jerry Moore, California State University-Dominguez Hills Foundation
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 08/31/2001
* USD 97,047.00

With National Science Foundation support Dr. Jerry Moore will conduct two
seasons of field survey and excavation in the Bahia San Quintin and Rosario
Valley region of Baja California. Covering 630 sq. km. the project area extends
from sea level to approximately 500 m. elevation and includes a variety of
vegetational zones. Thus the research should provide information which is
relevant to understanding the prehistory within other portions of this long
peninsula. Given its proximity to the United States and the very extensive
archaeological investigation conducted in coastal regions of US southern
California, it is surprising that the prehistory of Baja is almost unknown.
Therefore it provides an excellent context to examine and attempt to validate
patterns observed to the North. There archaeologists have noted that complex -
at a hunting and gathering level of subsistence - forms of social organization
developed. These were characterized by specialized production of socially
significant items such as shell beads and large scale trade networks. Many
archaeologists believe that a reliance on stable and productive marine resources
is primarily responsible for this phenomenon. However other archaeologists have
noted that resources such as shellfish require significant amounts of time to
process and prepare for consumption. They also point out that complex societies
failed to develop in many other resource rich coastal areas and therefore other
important factors must be involved. Baja California with its long coastline and
its proximity to southern California makes an excellent venue to address this
question. Dr. Moore's project will address three basic issues: 1. What is the
antiquity of coastal adaptations in the region? 2. What is the nature of
prehistoric responses to climatic fluctuations over the last ca. 12,000 years?
and 3. Given current ethnohistoric and ethnographic data, what were the basic
patterns of settlement and subsistence employed in the area. The research will
involve: a systematic survey based on a stratified sample of the project area;
preparation of detailed site plans; and collection of selected radiocarbon
samples to develop a corpus of absolute dates for the region. California State
University Dominguez Hills is a multiethnic institution of undergraduate
education and the project will serve to introduce students to archaeological
field research and, hopefully, encourage them to pursue careers in science.