* 9602716
* Renovation of Research Space in Taggart Science Building
* O/D,OIA
* 05/01/1997,08/31/2000
* Leotis Williams, Miles College
* Standard Grant
* Sherrie Green
* 08/31/2000
* USD 216,470.00

Founded in 1905, Miles College, located in Birmingham, AL, is one of the
nation's Historically Black institution of higher learning. The College, in
partnership with the National Science Foundation, is the recipient of ARI funds
for the renovation of research laboratories in the Taggart Science Building.
Constructed in 1965, the building houses the Division of Natural Science and
Mathematics. Except for minor modifications to the HVAC system, and making
provisions for ADA compliance, no major renovations have been made to the
facility. Currently research activities are contained in inadequate facilities
dispersed over two floors. The lack of adequate plumbing and electrical wiring,
and the shortage of sink, hood, and bench space has proven to be a deterrent to
research productivity. Several projects are performed at neighboring
institutions due to outdated research space. Specifically funds will be used to
upgrade the HVAC, electrical, plumbing and lighting systems, install new fume
hoods and cold rooms, and provide suspended ceilings in each laboratory.
Infrastructure improvements will advance biological and chemical research and
training programs by strengthening the quality of research conducted at the
College, and improving collaborative efforts with the University of Alabama at
Birmingham. Because of its historical mission, the project will assist Miles
College in its endeavors to increase the number of African American students who
desire to pursue graduate degrees in science, and therefore increasing the
nation's competitiveness in the science and engineering enterprise.