* 9602276
* Renovation of the Chemistry and Biology Facilities in the   Merkert-Tracy Science Center
* O/D,OIA
* 02/01/1997,06/30/1998
* Sandra McAlister, Stonehill College
* Standard Grant
* Sherrie Green
* 06/30/1998
* USD 492,122.00

Stonehill College, a private undergraduate institution located in
Massachusetts, and the National Science Foundation will establish a partnership
to renovate research space in the Merkert-Tracy Science Center. Constructed 48
years ago, the building is home to the Departments of Biology and Chemistry and
is currently unsuitable to support research efforts pursued by faculty and
students in these areas of science. Faculty must relocate experiments and
materials to different rooms that impacts negatively on research and research
training activities. Existing laboratories are ill-configured, have outdated
heating and ventilation systems, and are not compliant with ADA regulations.
Renovations will consist of reconfiguring space, upgrading the HVAC system, and
installing casework and fume hoods. With redesigned laboratories to support
research, faculty will be able to enhance the quality and quantity of research
involving the interface of biology and organic chemistry, analytical chemistry,
molecular biology, environmental biology and population genetics. Having
properly configured laboratories, with adequate climate control and
communication lines, will create a natural science community in an environment
that is supportive of active, investigative learning. Improving research and
training programs in Biology and Chemistry is critical to the success of
Stonehill's plan to strengthen the sciences.