* 9602933
* U.S.-Chile Program:  International Meeting:  The Southern   Connection; Valdivia, Chile, January 6-11, 1997
* O/D,OISE
* 11/01/1996,10/31/1998
* Thomas Veblen, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Beverly Diaz
* 10/31/1998
* USD 49,428.00

9602933 Veblen This Americas Program award will fund travel and related expenses
for eleven scientists and two graduate students to participate in the Southern
Connection Congress to be held in Valdivia, Chile, January 6-11, 1997.
Organizers are Dr. Thomas T. Veblen, University of Colorado, Boulder, in
collaboration with Dr. Mary Kalin Arroyo, Universidad de Chile, Santiago. This
congress will be organized around the theme of Southern Temperate Biota and
Ecosystems: Past, Present and Future. The theme will be developed by
presentations and discussions around major biological and ecological questions,
recent advances in research on southern temperate biota and ecosystems,
evaluations of science-based strategies for the sustainable use of resources,
and the interface between pure research and development. The Southern Connection
was created to bring together scientists conducting research on the biota and
ecosystems of the temperate latitudes of the Southern Hemisphere with the
purpose of improving communications among scientists working in the region.
Participation of US-based scientists will allow them to interact with a broad
diversity of Southern Hemisphere scientists Through such interaction and
exchange of information, research on a wide range of environmental biology
topics will be stimulated and improved. ***