* 9602695
* Renovation of the North Pod Laboratory of Vivian Hall to    Create the Center for Nanoscale Structure, Processes, and   Materials
* O/D,OIA
* 10/15/1996,09/30/2000
* Gordon Park, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Sherrie Green
* 09/30/2000
* USD 550,000.00

The University of Southern California is the recipient of ARI funds for the
renovation of Vivian Hall to create the Center for Nanoscale Structure,
Processes and Materials. Constructed in 1965, the building formerly housed the
Civil Engineering Laboratory, and an Anechoic Chamber used by Aerospace
Engineering. With the consolidation of Civil Engineering in another building,
the North Pod of Vivian is now available to form the Center. Four laboratories
supporting six professors, 25 graduate students, and eight post docs, whose
synergistic and multidisciplinary research and training is connected through a
common theme of nanoparticles, nanostructures, and nanophase materials, will be
relocated. The four laboratories to be relocated on the ground floor of Vivian
Hall are: the Laboratory for Molecular Robotics, Laboratory for Engineered
Nanostructures, Compound Semiconductor Laboratory for Nanostructure Photonic
Devices, and Laboratory for Nanoscale Composites. Current research programs are
housed in several buildings on campus lacking supporting infrastructure
necessary for conducting research. Space in Vivian Hall is ideally suited for
this type of research because it provides a close to vibration-free environment.
Possessing a high-bay area will permit the accommodation of instruments that are
over eight feet tall. Establishing this facility will allow the School of
Engineering to move towards more innovative research and education in new multi-
and interdisciplinary focus fields.