* 9602351
* A Partnership for Computer-Based Curriculum Development     in Atmospheric Technology
* EHR,DUE
* 10/01/1996,09/30/2000
* Randolph Borys, Nevada System of Higher Education, Desert Research Institute
* Continuing Grant
* Alexander Grushow
* 09/30/2000
* USD 450,000.00

Title: A Partnership for Computer-Based Curriculum Development in Atmospheric
Technology The objective of this project is to develop computer-interactive
training modules in Atmospheric Technology, which are designed to significantly
involve environmental technology degree curricula at community colleges
nationwide. The project addresses each of the three activities described for an
ATE Project (a) Curriculum and Instructional Materials Development, (b) Teacher
and Faculty Enhancement, and (c) Instrumentation and Laboratory Improvement.
Project goals are: (1) Provide training in Atmospheric Technology which
adequately prepares students for employment in careers such as air quality
monitoring and meteorological data applications; and (2) Develop a summer
workshop program to train community college teachers to incorporate the
computer-based training modules with field and laboratory instrumentation for
environmental technology applications. The project is a collaborative effort of
the Desert Research Institute (DRI), of the University and Community College
System of Nevada, the Colorado Mountain College (CMC), and the University
Corporation for Atmospheric Research (UCAR). The DRI operates a mountaintop
research laboratory on a 10,500 ft. peak, within 5 miles of the CMC Alpine
Campus, which will serve as a field and classroom location for the development
of instructional graphics, video and datasets for the training modules. The
laboratory and co-located community college campus will also host the teacher
workshops. The partnership between the CMC, DRI and UCAR scientists and faculty
includes the design, development, assessment and dissemination of the computer-
based training modules. A minority population group, Native Americans, is
specifically identified for enhanced outreach activities. In addition, an
Advisory Committee with members representing industry, government agency, and
environmental education groups will provide guidance on the technology
curriculum content and empl oyment targets.