* 9602437
* National Center for Advanced Technological Education in     Chemical Technology
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/1996,03/31/2000
* Robert Hofstader, University of Cincinnati Main Campus
* Continuing grant
* Alexander Grushow
* 03/31/2000
* USD 1,098,276.00

Advanced Technological Education in Chemical Technology The American Chemical
Society and the College of Applied Science, University of Cincinnati are
developing a project to help provide chemistry-based technicians ChT with the
education and skills required for successful high-level careers in laboratories
and plants in chemistry-based industries throughout the United States. The
mission calls for three goals: (1) development of human resources so that
chemical technicians possess the skills and knowledge required for employment in
laboratories and plants that require ChTs to the mutual benefit of employee and
employer, (2) creation of a system that effectively supports local efforts that
address local needs, and (3) provision of a forum for employer, academe and
community awareness of the roles and functions of ChTs, and effective
information exchange among all stakeholders. To achieve these goals the project
is concentrating on three primary activity areas: (1) facilitating the
development of networked alliances that nurture and support ChT education at the
local level and sharing of ideas and experiences at the national level; (2)
developing and evaluating curriculum and instructional materials for ChT
education; and (3) enhancing two-year college and high school faculty members
involved with ChT education.