* 9602284
* Modernization of the Pohl Conservatory, a Vital Resource for Plant Biology Research and Research Training
* O/D,OIA
* 10/15/1996,12/31/1998
* Jonathan Wendel, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Sherrie Green
* 12/31/1998
* USD 350,000.00

The Richard W. Pohl Conservatory is a resource facility that is central to the
research and research training mission of the Botany Department and to basic
Plant Biology programs at Iowa State University. Located on the roof of Bessey
Hall, the Conservatory provides the primary plant growth facilities for research
in ecology, evolutionary biology, molecular biology, and biotechnology. In
addition, the facility houses the second largest greenhouse collection of plant
species west of the Mississippi River. Funding from the National Science
Foundation will be used to convert an outdated greenhouse containing inadequate
and decaying facilities into a state-of-the-art research plant facility. A
portion of the space will be modified specifically for biotechnology and
transgenic plant research. Obsolete environmental controls and utility
infrastructure will be updated with integrated regulators. The leaky and
precarious glass roof and side panels will be replaced with modern materials and
will be reglazed. A renovated facility will enhance the Department's ability to
conduct transgenic plant research and training in a conducive and safe working
environment. The significance of this project extends beyond Iowa State to
national and international levels by the numerous and varied research programs
that involve collaborations which directly or indirectly use the facility. It is
anticipated that these collaborations will continue to increase as unique
genetic plant materials are created and grown in the renovated greenhouse. In
conjunction to genetically engineered plants, the conservatory collection
represents a unique source for plant species that is not available anyplace else
in the world. Plant materials are regularly supplied to research laboratories
around the world and this project will maintain this vital scientific resource
and enhance the role of the conservatory in future years.