* 9602057
* U.S.-NIS Clearinghouse for Developing the Infrastructure    of Science and Technology in the Former Soviet Union
* O/D,OISE
* 08/15/1996,01/31/1998
* Beth Boswell, American Association for the Advancement of Science
* Standard Grant
* Cassandra Turczak
* 01/31/1998
* USD 149,863.00

INT-9602057 Kirk This award to the American Association for the Advancement of
Science AAAS is for a "Clearinghouse for Developing the Infrastructure of
Science and Technology in the Former Soviet Union". For the past two years,
AAAS, AAAS affiliated societies, and their counterparts in the newly independent
states (NIS) of the former Soviet Union have been implementing a program to
enhance scientific infrastructure-building activities in these states. The goals
of this program are to: (1) assist NIS counterparts in development of decision-
making processes in science institutions which are based on competition, peer
review, and democratic norms, and which promote the advancement of science and
the public understanding of scientific issues; (2) encourage the development of
nongovernmental scientific societies whose members cut across research,
educational, and industrial sectors of the scientific community; and (3) enhance
US scientists' understanding of NIS science and promote cooperation between US
and NIS scientists including the open exchange of scientific information. AAAS
has also been acting as a clearinghouse of information about other US and
European programs in NIS states to foster better coordination and understanding
of these efforts. Economic constraints and the closed culture of many of these
new states have resulted in major divisions and difficulties in the scientific
community and have impeded its progress toward institutions more akin to Western
norms. AAAS plans to continue and intensify its infrastructure-building
activities in this region over the next year by: (1) Conducting two workshops on
proposal-writing skills and two follow-on workshops on project management and
evaluation; (2) Assisting in the development of nongovernmental scientific
societies through five additional fellowships and by supporting some of these
fellows on a longer-term basis to assist in the establishment of sustainable
nongovernmental scientific societies; and (3) intensifying its cl earinghouse
function by continuing to collect and disseminate information, in written and
electronic form, on US and European scientific and technical programs in NIS
states and on NIS science institutions and their activities. This clearinghouse
fulfills the program objectives of bringing together leading experts in the U.S.
and the NIS to combine complementary efforts and capabilities in areas of strong
mutual interest and competence on the basis of equality, reciprocity, and
mutuality of benefit. ??