* 9602273
* Renovation of the Cornell University Environmental          Engineering Laboratories
* O/D,OIA
* 09/15/1996,08/31/1997
* James Gossett, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Sherrie Green
* 08/31/1997
* USD 320,500.00

The Cornell School of Civil and Environmental Engineering is recognized as one
of the top ten national programs in the training of environmental scientists and
engineers. The orientation of study in the Environmental Engineering program is
toward understanding the principles, phenomena, and engineering techniques that
are applicable to the maintenance of environmental quality. Research in the
program focuses on pertinent biological, chemical, physical and engineering
knowledge. This scientific and engineering knowledge is used in conjunction with
analytical, computational, and laboratory skills, in the planning, analysis and
design of processes, facilities and systems that are essential to advancing
environmental quality objectives. Environmental Engineering research and
training facilities are housed in Hollister Hall, which was constructed in the
early 1950's. Existing conditions of laboratories in Hollister have become major
impediments in the Department's research and training efforts. All fume hoods
fail to meet current safety standards and none of the rooms have adequate
ventilation, and are poorly designed. As a part of its continuing commitment to
research training in environmental engineering, Cornell University, with
assistance from the National Science Foundation, will modernize a laboratory to
house equipment and serve as a graduate research analytical facility. The
renovated facility will also be used as the site for a new undergraduate
research training course. In addition to resolving utility, space, and fume hood
inadequacies, the department will create an innovative research training
facility that will serve as a national model for integration of faculty research
with the training of students in research methods once renovations are
completed.