* 9602075
* Regulation of Pattern Formation in Retinal Photoreceptors
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/1996,07/31/2000
* Pamela Raymond, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Dennis M. Higgins
* 07/31/2000
* USD 294,035.00

IBN 9602075 Pamela Raymond, PI Development of an embryo into a mature organism
is a process in which orderly structures arise out of initially unorganized
masses of cells, much like a house is built from a pile of crude lumber. Groups
of cells, especially those that become the neurons of the brain, adopt unique
and specialized identities, in a process developmental biologists call
"differentiation". Differentiated cells of the same type are not clumped
together helter-skelter, but are often positioned in a precise arrangement. For
example, cone photoreceptors, which constitute a sheet of light-sensitive
neurons in the retina of the eye, come in several varieties, distinct in that
they express a specific visual pigment which is maximally sensitive to light of
a certain color (red, green, blue or, in some animals, ultraviolet). In some
vertebrates, such as fish, the cones are arranged in a regular, repeating
lattice or mosaic array. The developmental mechanisms that build the lattice,
i.e., that control the spacing and determine the fate of the presumptive cone
photoreceptor cells, are not well understood. Most developmental biologists
agree, however, that immature, differentiating cells often send signals to their
neighbors instructing them what, or what not, to become. To begin to understand
this process, the earliest stages in the differentiation of the cone mosaic in
the fish embryo are being studied. Fish are an advantageous choice for this
work, since at early developmental stages the embryo is small (about 1 mm in
diameter) and transparent. Molecular markers are being used to identify the cone
types by the specific visual pigment that they express -- red, green, blue or
ultraviolet, and to distinguish them from the other major class of
photoreceptors, called rods. The hypothesis under investigation is that
precocious rod photoreceptors are the "founders" of the mosaic array. They
establish a blueprint of the repeating pattern, and then through specific
signaling mechanisms (as yet unide ntified), they induce differentiation and
patterning of the array of red, green, blue and ultraviolet cones. These
experiments will provide new information about the way cells communicate with
each other during development.