* 9602322
* Renovation of Hughes Hall Chemistry Research Facilities
* O/D,OIA
* 10/01/1996,09/30/2001
* Jan Jaworski, Miami University
* Standard Grant
* Sherrie Green
* 09/30/2001
* USD 560,000.00

Miami University, located in Oxford Ohio, is the recipient of ARI funds for the
renovation of Hughes Hall, home of the Department of Chemistry. Constructed in
1970, the building's systems are inadequate to support research programs in
analytical and organic chemistry and biochemistry. Faculty are currently engaged
in the following investigations: utilizing mass spectrometry to explore the gas-
phase chemistry of biomolecules; Fourier transform ion cyclotron resonance (FT-
ICR) studies of peptide and protein ions; synthetic and physical organic
chemistry, fatty acid biosynthetic pathways in plants; electrocatalysis, and
microsporogenesis and nuclear-mitochondrial communication. The condition of the
existing facility is now a detriment to the growth of the Department's research
strength. Laboratories limit the rate at which experimental work can be
performed by researchers and, therefore, limit the productivity of faculty.
Research space does not comply with modern safety standards, nor is it designed
to accommodate more than two research students. The project will consist of
renovating twelve laboratories, representing four laboratories in each of the
targeted fields, converting an exiting laboratory into a dedicated facility for
the departmental FT-ICR, and modernizing an antiquated cold room. New fume hoods
and laboratory casework and benches, will be installed in addition to upgrading
HVAC, electrical and plumbing utilities. This project is critical to the
continued development of the graduate program in Chemistry, and since 40% of
women are enrolled in the Program, the project will have a definite impact on
the education of future women chemists.