* 9602212
* Renovation of Laboratories in the Daniels and Mathews       Chemistry Building University of Wisconsin-Madison
* O/D,OIA
* 10/15/1996,09/30/2001
* F. Fleming Crim, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Sherrie Green
* 09/30/2001
* USD 1,600,000.00

This ARI award, with substantial matching support from the State of Wisconsin,
will be used to renovate research laboratories for the Chemistry Department on
the campus of the University of Wisconsin at Madison. Specific floors of the
Daniels and Mathews Buildings, constructed 29 and 33 years ago respectively, are
targeted for renovation. Standards for the practice of modern experimental
chemistry have changed dramatically in the 30 years since the construction of
the department's facilities at UW-Madison. Existing research space lacks
adequate ventilation for synthetic chemistry, chemical storage, and large
instrumentation spaces with appropriate infrastructure for analytical and
physical chemistry. Current space is inefficiently configured for a safe working
environment. Renovations will include: installing fume hoods and distillation
enclosures, upgrading ventilated chemical storage areas, increasing safety
measures, creating facilities for small instrumentation, and installing a
chilled water cooling loop for major equipment. This project will provide well
designed and modern space for programs in biologically related fields of
chemistry, synthetic chemistry, polymer chemistry, and in the chemistry of
surfaces and interfaces. Clustering of research groups, currently dispersed
throughout the building, will facilitate intellectual interactions, enhance
access to shared instrumentation, and improve the safe handling of hazardous
materials. UW-Madison's Chemistry Department maintains distinguished programs of
excellence in both graduate student training and research and has done so
consistently over a period of many decades. This renovation project dramatically
enhances the Department's ability to continue to achieve this level of
excellence in future years.