* 9603808
* Mechanical Influences on Mammalian Limb Joint Modeling
* BIO,IOS
* 08/15/1997,07/31/1999
* Mark Hamrick, Kent State University
* Standard Grant
* William E. Zamer
* 07/31/1999
* USD 25,000.00

Hamrick 9603808 Modeling refers to the process of cartilage and bone formation
and resorption during growth. Theoretical models predict that mechanical factors
such as joint movement and loading guide the modeling of mammalian limb joints.
This study seeks to test these theoretical predictions directly by investigating
the influence of changing body size, muscle morphology, and locomotor behavior
on marsupial limb joint shape during growth and development. These empirical
data are called for to address the following outstanding questions concerning
limb joint structure and function. For example, how is limb joint design
modified in relation to increasing organismal size? What changes in joint
morphology are evident following the onset of independent locomotor behavior?
How do joint surfaces adapt to morphological changes in the muscles acting on
them during growth? Finally, are certain aspects of joint shape more labile and
others more invariant during the modeling process? The proposed study will
provide a much needed developmental perspective on limb joint structure and
function by identifying those aspects of joint morphology which are highly
canalized during growth and those which are instead more variable under
different mechanical conditions. These data have clinical relevance for
understanding the developmental basis of joint malformations in humans, and more
general biological significance for understanding the factors underlying both
within- and between-species variation in mammalian limb joint form.