* 9603839
* Understanding Protein Folding:  From Lattice Models Towards Real Proteins
* BIO,MCB
* 04/01/1997,03/31/2001
* Jose Onuchic, University of California-San Diego
* Continuing Grant
* Kamal Shukla
* 03/31/2001
* USD 543,000.00

9603839 Onuchic The funnel landscape theory of protein folding will be fully
developed. The main idea that emerges from the statistical energy landscape
theory is that globally the folding landscape resembles a funnel that is to some
extent rugged, i.e. riddled with traps, in which the protein can transiently
reside. Detailed simulations of lattice and off-lattice minimalist models will
be performed to investigate the details of the folding energy landscape. Using a
law of corresponding states, the connection between the landscapes of simple
minimalist models and the ones of small fast folding proteins becomes possible.
An important feature of this funnel picture is that it enables the determination
of the ensemble of configurations that participate in the folding event simply
by thermodynamically sampling the configurational space. No kinetic information
is necessary. This is essential since full kinetic simulations are impossible
for a protein with full atomic details. With the aid of the law of corresponding
states and the sampling scheme, simulation of proteins at full atomic details
will become possible and one will be able to predict quantitatively the
importance of different amino-acids in the folding kinetics of different
proteins. The initial protein that will be studied is a three-helix bundle
protein (fragment B of Staphylococcal protein A) because of its simplicity
(fully alpha-helical and preliminary simulations already exist) but it will be
followed by investigations of other fast folding proteins, such as the monomeric
lambda-repressor and chymotrypsin inhibitor 2, for which many more site-directed
mutagenesis experiments exploring folding stability and folding kinetics are
available. To understand how proteins fold is of great importance in biology. To
perform its biological function, a protein can not be thought of simply as a
linear string of amino acids; its activity depends on its three dimensional
structure and dynamics. How can one predict the protein structu re by simply
knowing its sequence? A robust productive method would aid the understanding of
biological processes at the molecular level by providing deeper insights into
the structure/function relationship in biomolecular activity. Although this
question has haunted scientists for several decades, very little progress has
been made until recent years. Where knowledge is being gained, it arises from
the integration of information from physics, chemistry, molecular biology and
computer science. Achieving this integration towards the understanding of the
folding mechanism is the goal of this work.