* 9603976
* Role of Hormones in the Control of Behavior
* BIO,IOS
* 04/01/1997,12/31/2000
* James Truman, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Christopher Platt
* 12/31/2000
* USD 327,816.00

9603976 Truman To be adaptive, an animal's behavior must change depending on the
organism's physiological and developmental state. The behavior is typically
organized in stereotyped sequences that progress through discrete behavioral
phases each characterized by its suite of motor acts. Neuropeptides, small
protein-like substances that are released into the blood or locally within the
nervous system, are thought to play important roles in inducing and maintaining
such behavioral phases. Using a relatively simple invertebrate system, Dr.
Truman is examining how specific behaviors are controlled by these peptide
modulators. He has proposed a model in which each behavioral phase is controlled
by a different neuromodulator. Employing a variety of electrophysiological,
neurochemical, and molecular and genetic techniques with a combination of in
vitro and in vivo analyses, Dr. Truman will examine whether a hierarchy of
neuroendocrine interactions is then responsible for the progression through a
specific behavioral sequence. He will determine whether the basic organization
of this cascade is that the hormone modulator directing the behavior for one
phase also acts on the neuroendocrine cells that contain the neuromodulator for
the next phase. The results from this comprehensive series of studies will
provide new knowledge on the role of neuropeptides in the functioning of the
nervous system and the mechanisms used by peptides to alter behavior. This
fundamental research may also serve as the foundation for the development and
application of practical procedures in controlling agricultural and medical
insect pests.