* 9603153
* Procedures for Analytical Ultracentrifugation
* BIO,DBI
* 01/01/1997,03/31/2001
* David Yphantis, University of Connecticut
* Continuing Grant
* Joyce Fernandes
* 03/31/2001
* USD 555,679.00

Procedures for Analytical Ultracentrifugation The ultracentrifuge provides
direct and reliable information about the molecular weights and the interactions
of macromolecules as they exist in solution. Sedimentation equilibrium
approaches are based on equilibrium thermodynamics and thus can provide reliable
estimates of the parameters of molecules in solution. Interferometric
observations of concentration distributions provide a high degree of precision
for such estimations. The recent commercial introduction of automated
interferometry in a modern ultracentrifuge provides a powerful tool with a high
"signal to noise ratio" for studying macromolecular distributions. The proposed
research will examine ways to improve the precision of such measurements. This
should lead to the ability to carry out experiments under a wider range of
conditions and to better distinguish amongst alternative explanations (models)
of the systems investigated both for equilibrium and velocity experiments.
Software and new approaches to equilibrium sedimentation experiments, if
successful, will make experiments easier to carry out, and either faster or more
precise and thus able to provide more meaningful information. These improvements
would, for example, facilitate determinations of levels of impurities in protein
preparations or estimations of the strength of interactions between molecules.
The programs to be developed should make it easier (and sometimes possible) to
obtain information from difficult interacting systems, such as the complexes
formed between cytokines and their receptors. These systems often exhibit a
sequence of complex formations where it is difficult to determine
stoichiometries. These various approaches will be applied to problems of topical
interest, largely, but not completely, from biotechnology enterprises to try to
answer interesting questions.