* 9603161
* Conference on Aminoacyl tRNA Synthetases in Biology and     Disease being held February 1, 1997 in Taos, New Mexico
* BIO,MCB
* 01/15/1997,12/31/1997
* Susan Martinis, Keystone Center
* Standard Grant
* Kamal Shukla
* 12/31/1997
* USD 5,000.00

9603161 Martinis This project is to organize a meeting with focus on tRNA
synthetase. The meeting will be held as a part of the Keystone Symposia, at
Taos, New Mexico from February 1 to 6, 1997. It is to provide a state of the
artÄ± forum at an international level for the exchange of information engaging
both young and seasoned investigators. The keystone conferences have an
established policy for the participation of women, minorities and persons with
disabilities, and representation from industry versus academic institutions, and
will be adhered to in both the spirit and the practice. The Scientific program
will cover a range of topics which include diversity, interaction, structure,
recognition, processing, acylation, and unusual functions and is to be presented
by speakers from France, England, Japan, Israel and USA. The support from NSF
will be used to subsidize 10 students and two cochairs for travel. The tRNA
synthetases constitute a group of enzymes whose exquisite substrate specificity
helps to insure proper translation of the genetic code. An international
conference on this topic was held in 1990, and much progress has been made
since. Another meeting would be timely and desired. The conference being
organized will be held at Taos, New Mexico from February 1 to 6, 1997, under the
auspices of the Keystone Symposium. While the program will feature presentation
by international experts on the subject, the support will be used mainly to help
defray expenses of student participants. January 8, 1997 (PCH) 9604680 Fane The
proper assembly of viral proteins and nucleic acids into a biologically active
virion involves numerous and diverse macromolecular interactions. The main
objectives are to elucidate these critical interactions and to define the
structural domains of the responsible macromolecules. A combination of genetic,
biochemical and structural approaches (X-ray crystallography) will be employed
to accomplish the objectives. Like molecular chaperones, scaffol ding proteins
direct other proteins in achieving their proper three-dimensional conformations.
Within the context of this analogy, the atomic structure of a procapsid offers a
depiction of a chaperone-like protein complexed with its substrate. Prior
results suggest that the Microviridae internal scaffolding proteins, gpB, share
many properties with molecular chaperones. Prior results also indicate that the
internal scaffolding proteins either possess inherent flexibility or interact
with their substrates in nonspecific manners, perhaps via interfaces.
Determining the atomic structures of hybrid procapsids, containing foreign
scaffolding proteins, will directly address this question. The present (X174
procapsid structure does not contain the internal scaffolding protein which is
lost during purification. During the first year of support, alternate genetic
and purification strategies will be explored to stabilize this protein. The
current protocols will still be employed to gather additional data to refine the
external scaffolding protein structure. Also within the first year, the genetic
and purification strategies needed to generate alpha procapsids will be
developed. Continuation of the structural work, done in collaboration with Dr.
M. G. Rossmann, will proceed throughout the support period. The recently solved
atomic structure of the external scaffolding protein, gpD, suggests that it also
shares many features with molecular chaperones. Thus gpD, like a molecular
chaperone, can bind to other proteins in many different ways. While some domains
make contact with the coat protein in varied manners, one of these domains may
determine the protein's substrate specificity for a particular viral coat
protein. the plasmid-based cross complementation system has been extended to
this gene. Unlike the internal scaffolding proteins which exhibit a great deal
of divergence in primary structure, the external scaffolding proteins share 75%
sequence identity. The (X174 protein, however, is un able to productively direct
the assembly of other Microviridae virions. A comparison of the primary
structure reveals that the divergent residues are localized to the NH2 -termini
of the proteins which forms a large (-helix in the (X174 atomic structure. These
observations suggest a model in which the scaffolding's specificity for a
particular viral coat protein resides in this region. This hypothesis will be
tested with chimeric polypeptides. During the first year of support, restriction
sites needed to construct chimeric external scaffolding proteins will be
introduced. The (X174 gene will be recloned and clones of other Microviridae D
genes will be generated. Characterization of the chimeric genes and gene
products will commence in the second year. The results of these analyses may
also provide insights into the design of recombinant proteins. All viruses must
assemble themselves by means of multiple protein interactions. viral assembly is
often dependent on proteins known as scaffolding proteins. Analogous to
scaffoldings used in the construction of buildings, scaffolding proteins are
found in virus assembly intermediates but not in the mature viruses. Two
different scaffolding proteins, external and internal, are required for the
assembly of the Microviridae family of viruses. With These viruses we are able
to purify viral intermediates which still include the external scaffolding
protein. By examining the atomic structure of the external scaffolding protein
and performing genetic analyses with both the internal and external proteins, we
have determined that different regions of the scaffolding proteins may have
specific and identifiable functions. Refining the atomic structure of these
proteins and testing our hypotheses regarding their various functions by
constructing hybrid Microviridae scaffolding proteins are the main objectives of
the proposed work. The results of these analyses will provide further insights
into virus assembly and the design of recombinant proteins.