* 9603016
* U.S.-Japan Joint Seminar:  Pesticides and the Future-       Minimizing Chronic Exposure of Humans and the Environment
* O/D,OISE
* 04/15/1997,03/31/1999
* Ronald Kuhr, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Larry H. Weber
* 03/31/1999
* USD 22,000.00

9603016 Kuhr This award supports the participation of American scientists in a
U.S.-Japan seminar on Pesticides and the Future: Minimizing Chronic Exposure of
Humans and the Environment, to be held in Chiba, Japan from May 26-30, 1997. The
co- organizers are Professors Ronald J. Kuhr of North Carolina State University
and Naoki Motoyoma of Chiba University in Japan. This seminar will address a
broad range of issues related to pesticides, including pesticide epidemiology,
new modes of action to minimize nontarget exposure, bioremediation of
contaminated areas, molecular biology of the modes of action and detoxication of
pesticides, and the dynamics of pesticide movement in the environment. %%%
Although efforts continue toward reduction or elimination of pesticide chemicals
in the management of pests in agriculture, public health and the urban arena,
chemicals will continue to be one of the main weapons in control of insects,
weeds, nematodes, and plant diseases for some time to come. Information on the
chronic effects from exposure to pesticide residues is limited. This seminar
will address both practical issues related to pesticide use and fundamental
questions related to metabolic pathways and ecosystem dynamics. The exchange of
ideas and data with Japanese experts in this field will enable the U.S.
scientists to advance their own work, and will set the stage for future
collaborative projects. The seminar proceedings are expected to be published as
a book. ***