* 9603553
* Analysis of Multiple Drug Resistance in Saccharomyces
* NONE,NONE
* 03/15/1997,02/28/2001
* John Golin, Catholic University of America
* Continuing grant
* Philip Harriman
* 02/28/2001
* USD 283,064.00

Golin 9603553 Bacteria and eukaryotic cells can become resistant to a number of
structurally and mechanistically distinct toxic agents in a single step. In
yeast, resistance to multiple toxin resistance is mediated in large part by the
product of a gene called PDR5. Sequence analysis of this gene shows that it
resembles the ABC family (ATP-binding cassette) of transmembrane proteins.
Included in this group are specific permeases such as the prokaryotic histidine
transport system, the Drosophila brown and white pigment transport proteins, and
the yeast hormone STE6, which facilitates the release of mating factor from
yeast cells. Lack of the product of this gene leads to hypersensitivity to a
number of toxins, due to inability to transport toxins out of the cell.
Revertant strains have been isolated that have regained some resistance to
toxins, even if the PDR5 gene is deleted. Genetic experiments carried out to
date show that it is unlikely that resistance is the simple recruitment of a
different transporter, and genes that have mutated are being characterized as to
their possible functions, taking advantage of the known sequence of the yeast
genome. An unexpected result of these studies is that most of the revertants
appear through genetic tests to be mutations in two closely linked genes rather
than a single gene, even though the frequency of such double mutations occurring
in the same cell should be too low to be observed. Thus, the two mutations are
most likely the result of a single event. To better understand this phenomenon,
experiments are being done to clone, sequence and analyze resistance factor
genes from each such cluster of paired revertant strains. The sequence data
should determine whether or not there is extensive homology between the clusters
and whether resistance might be due to gene conversion and/or DNA
rearrangements. This research will provide insight into how noxious compounds
are normally removed from cells and alternative strategies cells can use when th
e major transport system is disrupted. In addition, it will lead to an
understanding of an unusual genetic mechanism that leads to the multiple
mutations by which cells can activate the alternative systems.