* 9603344
* San Francisco Electronic Library
* EDU,DRL
* 10/01/1996,06/30/1999
* Kenneth Dowlin, San Francisco Public Library
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth VanderPutten
* 06/30/1999
* USD 254,438.00

9603344 Dowlin San Francisco has just completed building a new state-of-the-art
Main library. The San Francisco Public Library will be a front line proving
ground for how to implement new science and technology in a modern library and
then expand it to branch libraries for systemic reform. The Electronic Library
project will explore how to integrate important technological advances into
librarians' normal routines, inform and involve the local education community,
and educate the public, expanding, but not abandoning the societal role
libraries have traditionally filled. The Electronic Library Project will focus
on the challenges inherent in implementing new computing systems, networking and
communications technology to access local multimedia and remote sources of
digital materials and explore new ways to create, store, organize, and catalog
unique materials and develop user friendly interfaces for searching, retrieval,
and dissemination of the information available now and in the future. Within
this comprehensive program of transformation and implementation, the Electronic
Library project provides and opportunity to focus on and research the unique
issues involved in providing electronic resources to children and youth. The
project will introduce children to the expanding world of information technology
and resources, and provide free and equal access to knowledge materials for use
in fulfilling school assignments and independent inquiry. The Library's
Electronic Discovery Center, with it's multimedia computers and extensive
digital collection has created a place which will provide a collaborative
environment for using technology, to enable development of a new kind of
creative potential for children, promote the development of electronic literacy,
extend access to remote resources, and provide positive mentoring experiences
between older and younger children. The project will explore professional
development opportunities for librarians and teachers, and involve parents and
familie s. The Library will seek appropriate strategies for cataloging,
searching evaluating and adding age appropriate electronic materials to the
collection. Also, librarians will be helped in learning how to integrate
electronic materials with traditional print materials in their reference
strategies. An easy to use interface will be developed and provided that enables
easy access to electronic materials and on-line resources for pre-schoolers as
well as teenagers. Support and instruction in the use of digital materials will
be provided for the young users, along with opportunities to explore the maximum
capabilities of the computing and communication technologies at their
fingertips. Teen volunteers and college interns will help with hands-on training
and on-going support for younger patrons. School librarians will participate in
professional development presentations and workshops. To educate teachers about
available resources and methods to integrate electronic materials into standard
curriculum, every elementary classroom in San Francisco will visit the new Main
Library and have a demonstration of the new media resources, and special
seminars and training opportunities will be developed for teachers. Pre-
schoolers will enter school already familiar with technology and high-schoolers
will learn skills that can carry them into high growth careers. Special
programming for school librarians, teachers and parents will help the community
to learn to use and integrate the resources of an Electronic Library as a
regular part of a self-sustaining independent learning infrastructure. This
should result in better preschool preparation and increased student achievement.
Professional development will enable teachers and librarians to become
comfortable with utilizing technology based information as a regular resource.
San Francisco Public Library's Electronic Library activities will promote
educational innovation and systemic reform for librarians and teachers, and a
new resource for the community and will create a replaceable model of an
Electronic Library. ***