* 9603678
* Composite Auxin Response Elements and the Auxin Signal      Transduction Pathway
* BIO,MCB
* 04/01/1997,03/31/2001
* Gretchen Hagen, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Continuing Grant
* Susan Porter Ridley
* 03/31/2001
* USD 330,000.00

9604208 Guilfoyle The plant hormone auxin is involved in or controls a wide
variety of developmental processes. Auxin-induced cell division, cell elongation
and cell differentiation all involve distinct patterns of gene expression. A
variety of early or primary response genes that are specifically induced by
auxin have been identified in these growth and developmental processes. Most of
the early auxin response genes are expressed in a tissue-specific and organ-
specific manner in the absence of exogenous auxin application. To observe a
substantial induction of these genes by exogenous auxin, it generally is
necessary first to deplete auxin by bathing excised organs in auxin-free medium.
Soybean GH3 is an early auxin response gene that differs from others in four
important ways. First, it is expressed at very low levels in the absence of
exogenous auxin application. Second, GH3 mRNA can be induced at least 50-fold in
seedlings and plants without subjecting excised organs to the auxin depletion
protocol. Third, the gene is induced in virtually every cell, tissue or organ of
a seedling or plant. Fourth, the GH3 promoter is highly responsive to auxin in a
variety of heterologous plant species whether assayed transiently in protoplasts
or in stable transformants. The GH3 gene promoter consists of at least three
separate auxin response elements (AuxRE) within 250 base pairs of the
transcription start site, which have been characterized with respect to
independent function, tissue/organ-specific expression, DNA sequence, and auxin
responsiveness. Moreover, novel AuxREs have been constructed that are equivalent
or several fold more inducible by auxin than natural AuxREs or the entire GH3
promoter, and transcription factors have been cloned that bind specifically to
composite AuxREs. This research will use both natural composite and more active
synthetic AuxREs to precisely determine how AuxREs function in auxin-responsive
promoters, and to identify transcription factors that interact with composite
AuxREs and determine their mechanism of action. The plant hormone auxin is
involved in or controls a wide variety of developmental processes. Auxin-induced
cell division, cell elongation and cell differentiation all involve distinct
patterns of gene expression. A variety of early or primary response genes that
are specifically induced by auxin have been identified in these growth and
developmental processes. Soybean GH3 is an early auxin response gene that is
induced in virtually every cell, tissue or organ of a seedling or plant. The
regulatory region (promoter) of the GH3 gene consists of at least three separate
auxin response elements (AuxRE) which have been characterized with respect to
independent function, tissue/organ-specific expression, DNA sequence, and auxin
responsiveness. Moreover, novel AuxREs have been constructed that are equivalent
or several fold more active than natural AuxREs. This research will use both
natural composite and more active synthetic AuxREs to precisely determine how
AuxREs function, and to identify transcription factors that interact with AuxREs
and determine their mechanism of action.