* 9603582
* RUI:  Dynamics, Structure and Formation of Polyene Channels
* BIO,MCB
* 06/01/1997,12/31/2000
* Scott Hartsel, University of Wisconsin-Eau Claire
* Standard Grant
* Kamal Shukla
* 12/31/2000
* USD 218,150.00

9603582 Hartsel Amphotericin B is one of the classic model compounds to study
membrane ion channel formation and properties, but the molecular structure of
the channel is still controversial. The goal is to use fluorescence, absorbance
and circular dichroism techniques to liposomal membrane vesicles treated with
the polyene natural product Amphotericin B to uncover the molecular structure
and kinetics of this membrane channel-forming compound. Many polyenes may form
ion permeable pores in cellular lipid membranes by organizing molecules with the
polar polyalcohol region in the middle. However, the size and nature of the
channels seem to vary depending upon which sterol, ergosterol or cholesterol, is
present in the phospholipid membrane and under conditions of osmotic stress
(swelling). The condition of osmotic stress in simple membranes will be used in
an attempt to "trap" the exclusive active channel structure(s) with a minimum of
complications. Biological membrane channels or pores are ultimately the key to
regulating fundamental processes from neurotransmission all the way to basic
uptake of and elimination of nutrients and wastes in every cell. This reach
should advance our knowledge of polyene channels and membrane channels in
general. In addition, the proposed work will heavily involve undergraduate
students in carrying out every aspect of the work, from experimental design and
collection of data through polishing and presenting the data at scientific
conferences and ultimately publication in peer-reviewed journals. The P.I. has
had extensive experience and success in using undergraduate research as a
pedagogical tool for training of science students.