* 9603139
* U.S.-Sri Lanka Cooperative Research:  Mathematical Modellingof Fertilizer Pollution of Ground/Surface Water
* O/D,OISE
* 08/01/1996,07/31/1999
* Valipuram Manoranjan, Washington State University
* Standard Grant
* Osman Shinaishin
* 07/31/1999
* USD 15,000.00

Description: This project supports a collaborative research project by V.S.
Manoranjan with two scientists from Sri Lanka, Dr. K. Tennakone, Department of
Physical and Chemical Sciences, and Dr. E.I.L. Silva, Department of
Environmental Studies, at The Institute of Fundamental Studies in Kandy, Sri
Lanka. They plan to conduct an exploratory study of the problem of groundwater
and surface water contamination, especially with nitrate and phosphorus
pollution, from chemical fertilizers. The study will employ mathematical models
in conjunction with laboratory measurements and field observations. The models
will be constructed to describe the movement of contaminants in soil and water
bodies, and will be validated using laboratory and field experimental data that
will be obtained in Sri Lanka. These models will be employed in predicting
phosphate/nitrate leaching, especially where measurements are difficult to
conduct. Scope: This project supports collaboration of a U.S. applied
mathematician with physical and environmental scientists in Sri Lanka, to
develop and test a model for an environmental problem that impacts many of the
developing countries as well as the United States. The pollution of ground water
by leaching of fertilizers affects many of the water supply sources and leads to
serious environmental deterioration as well as to human health problems. The
collaboration helps scientists in the United States by having access to data
collected in field studies in foreign countries by the foreign scientists, and
helps the Sri Lankan scientists by having access to advanced analytical modeling
techniques and to high computing facilities in the United States. It is being
funded jointly by INT and the Division of Mathematical Sciences.