* 9603690
* Regulatory Nucleotide Binding Site on Eukaryotic Flagella
* NONE,NONE
* 05/01/1997,04/30/2001
* Charlotte Omoto, Washington State University
* Standard Grant
* Michael L. Mishkind
* 04/30/2001
* USD 263,449.00

9603690 Omoto Technical Eukaryotic cilia and flagella are found widely in algae,
lower plants, animals, and protozoa. Their basic 9+2 microtubular structure, the
axoneme, is common among these wide variety of organisms. Dynein ATPases power
ciliary and flagellar movement, yet it is not understood how the forces produced
by dynein ATPases are regulated to produce oscillatory motion of cilia and
flagella. Previous results from this laboratory suggest that specific nucleotide
binding may play a role in such regulation. The aim of this project is to
identify and characterize nucleotide binding sites in the axoneme involved in
regulation. By combining the classic genetic tools available in the model
organism Chlamydomonas with biochemical, motility, and molecular genetic
analyses, the investigator proposes to identify the nucleotide binding site(s)
important for regulation of motion. Two of the outer arm dynein heavy chains may
contain regulatory nucleotide binding sites. Biochemical evidence will be sought
to confirm or refute the presence of multiple nucleotide binding sites on the
outer arm dyneins. Simultaneously, mutants with potential defects in regulatory
nucleotide binding sites will be selected. There are good reasons to believe
that at least some of these mutants will be dominant; therefore, dominant
motility mutants will be selected, focusing on dominant paralyzed mutants.
Mutants whose biochemical and motility phenotypes suggest that they are likely
to have a defect in regulatory nucleotide binding site(s) will be characterized
at the molecular level. Non Technical Many eukaryotic cell types use flagella or
cilia either to swim through a fluid medium or to move the fluid medium around
the cell. Examples of the former include the swimming of sperm and protozoa such
as Paramecium; examples of the latter include bronchial epithelial cells, which
use their cilia to move mucus upward and out of the lungs. The free-swimming
single-celled alga, Chlamydomonas, has long been used as a model system for
studying how flagella work. As a result of these studies, much is already known
about the machinery of flagella, including the 9+2 (cylinder + core) arrangement
of microtubules and their associated motor proteins, the flagellar dyneins. The
dyneins are mechanochemical transducing enzymes, which convert energy obtained
by the hydrolysis of ATP into the sliding movement of one set of microtubules
relative to another. However, it is clear that there are still important gaps in
our understanding of how the flagella work, particularly with regard to how
these sliding movements are regulated to produce the oscillatory (back and forth
wave-like) motion characteristic of the flagella. There is reason to believe,
from previous work by Dr. Omoto, that some of this regulation involves the
binding of ATP or other nucleotides at sites in the flagella (probably on some
dynein molecules) that are not involved in the powering of the sliding motion.
Chlamydomonas mutants that are defective in flagellar regulation would be
expected to be paralyzed in a genetically dominant manner. Therefore, Dr. Omoto
will select for and characterize dominant paralyzed mutants in order to
determine where these specific regulatory nucleotide binding sites are in the
flagella. ***