* 9603871
* Regulation of a MAPK Signaling Pathway in Yeast by Two      Protein Tyrosine Phosphatases
* BIO,MCB
* 03/01/1997,02/28/2001
* Irene Ota, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* Randolph Addison
* 02/28/2001
* USD 305,000.00

Abstract 9603871 Ota MAP kinase (MAPK) signaling pathways regulate growth and
development in vertebrates, Caenorhabditis elegans, Drosophila and the yeast
Saccharomyces cerevisiae. Mechanism regulating MAPK pathways are the subject of
intensive research, however the inactivation of these pathways is poorly
understood. Protein tyrosine phosphatases (PTPs) are negative regulators of
these pathways. By genetic techniques this investigator has isolated 2 PTPs that
inactivate a stress response MAPK pathway in the yeast S. Cerevesiae. This
pathway, known as HOG for high osmolarity glycerol, regulates the response to
osmotic stress. One of the aims of this research is to establish the specificity
of action of these enzymes for Hog 1. This is important because the identity of
protein phosphatases that inactivate MAPKs remains unclear. Another goal of
these studies is to identify the mechanisms by which specificity of the
phosphatases for MAPKs is achieved. Since multiple MAPK cascades operate in
yeast and mammalian cells, mechanisms to ensure signaling specificity must
exist. The genes encoding these enzymes will be systematically mutagenized and
the effects of these mutants examined in vivo and in vitro. The regulation of
these genes will also be studied. These studies will provide a greater
understanding of the roles of PTPs in regulating MAPK signaling, and thereby the
regulation of growth and development in yeast and mammals. The research of this
grant is to study the enzymes that inactivate one of the major signaling
pathways in eukaryotic cells. This signaling path involves a series of protein
kinases, and these are inactivated by protein phosphatases, the subject of this
grant. These studies will provide a better understanding of the regulation of
these signaling pathways which are important in growth, development and many
other cellular processes. ***