* 9603556
* Theoretical Analysis of Slow Motions in Proteins
* BIO,MCB
* 03/01/1997,02/28/2001
* Oleg Jardetzky, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Kamal Shukla
* 02/28/2001
* USD 100,000.00

9603556 Jardetzky The goal of this research is to (1) To develop a physical
model to relate the motion of the protein backbone to the ensemble average of
auto-correlation functions for NH and CH bond vectors, which are measured using
NMR. In order to overcome the time limit (1 ns) on calculating molecular
dynamics of proteins, molecular dynamics with random walks in dihedral angle
space - the MCDIS-MD (Monte Carlo in Dihedral Angle Space with Molecular
Dynamics) procedure recently reported by Zhao and Jardetzky will be used.
Correlation functions based on the investigator's theoretical results will be
calculated from the trajectory, which can be Fourier transformed to spectral
density functions. Probability distribution and correction matrices among the
various dihedral angles will also be constructed. (2) To identify relevant time
scales by carrying out a detailed analysis of relaxation data, using the
formalisms developed by Lefevre et al. and King and Jardetsky. Three proteins on
which extensive relaxation data are already available are chosen for the initial
analysis: lysozyme staphylococcal nuclease and trp-repressor. (3) To use the
percolation formalism of Hoch to identify clusters of trajectories that reflect
conformational transitions that may be expected to be slow and to match the
spectral density terms calculated from each cluster against the spectral density
terms independently derived from experiment. Modeling the types of motions that
can account for the slow motion terms in NMR data would be a significant advance
in the understanding of protein dynamics. Understanding a protein as a molecular
mechanism - which it is - requires detailed and accurate knowledge of its
structure and dynamics. Knowledge of protein structure is by now very extensive
- over 1000 structures at atomic resolution have been determined by x-ray and
NMR. In contrast, knowledge of protein dynamics is still rather fragmentary.
Theoretical Molecular Dynamics simulation s of protein motions have contributed
greatly to the understanding of proteins, but remain limited to the study of
very fast (piconanosecond) motions for both theoretical and practical reasons.
To interpret the information on slow motions ( on nano-to microsecond or longer
time scales) contained in NMR relaxation and proton exchange measurements, more
powerful statistical mechanical tools must be applied, such as the MCDIS-MD
method to be developed under the terms of this grant.