* 9603730
* Cytoplasmic Structuring by Non-motor Microtubule Associated Proteins (MAPs)
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/1997,07/31/2000
* Joanna Olmsted, University of Rochester
* Standard Grant
* Eve Ida Barak
* 07/31/2000
* USD 200,000.00

9603730 Olmsted The long range goal of the proposed research is to understand
how microtubule- associated proteins that are not motors participate in the
function and organization of microtubules and the structuring of the cytoplasm.
These studies focus on MAP 4, a microtubule-associated protein that is expressed
during early development and in specific adult tissues in mice. The working
hypothesis is that the functions of this ubiquitous protein are context-
specific; MAP 4 structure and functions in cycling cells may differ from those
in differentiated tissues. The basic approach will be to dissect how variations
which naturally arise either by alternative splicing or by post-translational
modification affect MAP 4 behavior within cells. Chimeras will be generated in
which MAP 4 constructs are modified at sites corresponding to characterized
post-translational modifications or which reflect primary sequence variations
observed in specific tissues. Living cells transfected with MAP 4 constructs
tagged with green fluorescent protein or its spectral variants will be analyzed
to deduce how such changes in MAP structure affect microtubule dynamics in
interphase and mitotic cells. Other aspects of cytoplasmic organization,
including the distribution of cytoskeletal elements or major membranous
organelles, will also be analyzed to assess whether specific domains of MAP 4
may interact with non-microtubular structures. These studies should provide
fundamental information on whether this ubiquitous protein has multiple roles
depending on its place of expression. Microtubules comprise one of the three
major cytoskeletal systems in eukaryotic cells, and one of two such systems
known to be involved in intracellular motility phenomena by serving as specific
"tracks" along which ATP-powered molecular motors (dyneins and kinesins) move.
In addition to the motor proteins, other specific proteins ("Microtubule-
Associated Proteins, or MAPs) are known bind to microtubules, although their
functions are far from established. Dr. Olmsted will carry out functional
studies of one of these MAPs, termed MAP-4. The structure of the MAP-4 protein
is known to vary among different tissues, as a result of alternative splicing
(different ways in which the cell "reads" the gene) and/or posttranslational
modifications; however, the functional significance of these variations is
unknown. These functional studies will employ state-of-the-art approaches such
as site-directed mutagenesis and "green fluorescent protein" (a marker that
allows one to literally see, in a microscope, exactly where the MAP-4 protein is
located within the cell). Evidence increasingly suggests that these various
cytoskeletal systems are not independent, but rather are dependent upon one
another in terms of their function within cells. The results of these studies
are expected to help us understand MAP-4 function and its possible role in
coordinating microtubule function with various cellular structures, including
other cytoskeletal systems. ***