* 9603877
* Alpha and Beta Parvalbumins:  Functional Consequences of    Divergent Tertiary Interactions
* BIO,MCB
* 02/01/1997,07/31/2001
* Michael Henzl, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Continuing Grant
* Kamal Shukla
* 07/31/2001
* USD 252,976.00

9603877 Henzl Despite their general similarity, parvalbumin (PV) isoforms
exhibit substantial physical and functional diversity. This project will examine
three potential mechanisms for achieving isoform-dependent variation. The
importance of tertiary interactions between the C-terminus and residues 26- 36
will be examined in select site-specific PV variants -- employing differential
scanning calorimetry, Ca2+-binding measurements, titration calorimetry, and 15N
NMR relaxation measurements. To assess the impact of overall electrostatic free
energy on metal ionbinding behavior, the consequences of the S55D and G98D
mutations on Ca2+- and Mg2+- binding affinity will be examined in PV isoforms
differing widely in their isoelectric points. Finally, the minimal sequence
requirements for the metal ion-facilitated association of CPV3, an avian -PV,
will be examined. The energetics of complexation will be investigated by
analytical ultracentrifugation and scanning calorimetry. Low- resolution
structural information on the trimer will be obtained by antibody reactivity and
chemical crosslinking studies. Detailed structural data will be obtained via x-
ray crystallography and/or NMR. Contemporary protein research seeks to identify
the physical principles that dictate protein structure and function. The
parvalbumins offer an attractive system for examining these issues. The
vertebrate-specific family of small Ca2+ binding proteins illustrates the
application of the same basic protein architecture to the solution of distinct
biological problems -PVs play a rather passive role in maintaining cytosolic
Ca2+ levels below the toxic threshold. By contrast, in higher vertebrates, -PVs
are utilized for highly specialized signaling roles. This functional variation
is accompanied by corresponding variation in physical properties. For example,
-PVs display greater structural rigidity than -PVs. Thus, one objective of this
project is to investigate the molecular basis for this difference. Additionally,
whereas all -PVs bind Ca2+ very tightly, the -PVs display highly variable
affinity for the ion. Therefore, a second objective of this project is to assess
the impact of the overall charge on metal ion-binding properties. Lastly,
although parvalbumins are widely viewed as non-associating monomeric proteins,
the avian -PV CPV3 forms a trimeric complex in the presence of Ca2+ or Mg2+.
Thus, a third goal of this project is to identify the structural idiosyncrasies
responsible for this self- complementarity. This work will illuminate
demonstrably successful strategies for tailoring the physical stability and
ligand-binding properties of macromolecules through subtle sequence alterations.
The knowledge gained from these studies may assist in achieving the long-term
goal of manipulating existing biological activities and designing new ones.