* 9603551
* Transport and Chemoreception of Aromatic Compounds by Pseudomonas putida
* BIO,MCB
* 10/01/1997,09/30/1999
* Caroline Harwood, University of Iowa
* Standard Grant
* Philip Harriman
* 09/30/1999
* USD 100,000.00

Harwood 9603551 Aromatic compounds are abundant in the environment as major
constituents of the woody tissues of green plants. Large quantities of aromatic
pollutants have also been released into the environment as industrial waste
products. Many of these compounds can be broken down by bacteria, and a
reasonable amount is known about the enzymology of aromatic compound
biodegradation. By contrast, little is known about how bacteria seek and acquire
aromatic substrates from the environment; processes that are governed by
chemotaxis and transport. This project will examine these poorly understood
aspects of biodegradation by the bacterium Pseudomonas putida. Studies will
focus on PcaK, a protein that appears to have dual functions as a
4-hydroxybenzoate chemoreceptor and permease. The pcaK gene is coordinately
regulated with genes for the biodegradation of 4-hydroxybenzoate. PcaK
accumulates 4-hydroxybenzoate against a concentration gradient and is the first
example of a transport protein for aromatic acids. The PcaK protein also appears
to function as a chemoreceptor because P. putida pcaK mutants are not attracted
to 4-hydroxybenzoate or related compounds in chemotaxis assays. PcaK is not
homologous to known bacterial chemoreceptors, and thus appears to represent a
new kind of chemoreceptor. Research will explore the hypothesis that PcaK can
initiate sensory signaling required for chemotactic responses to aromatic
compounds by a mechanism distinct from known bacterial chemotaxis systems.
Studies will be carried out to define proteins that interact with PcaK to effect
transmission of sensory information to the flagella of P. putida to cause
chemotactic responses. The goal of the project is to understand how bacteria
sense and respond to the presence of environmental pollutants in their
environment. This could aid in elucidating the role of chemotaxis in recruiting
swimming bacteria to particular environmental sites, including those
contaminated with pollutants. The res earch should lead to an increased
understanding of the role of bacterial behavioral responses in the
biodegradation of human industrial wastes.