* 9603073
* U.S.-Panama Cooperative Research:  Using Ecological Insightsin Search of Biologically Active Compounds from Rainforest  Plants
* O/D,OISE
* 11/01/1996,10/31/1999
* Todd Capson, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Beverly Diaz
* 10/31/1999
* USD 37,200.00

9603073 Capson This Americas Program award will fund a collaborative research
project between Dr. Todd Capson, University of Utah and Drs. Mahabir Gupta and
Pablo Solis, University of Panama. They will conduct a search of biologically-
active compounds from plants in the rainforest of Panama. The scientific goals
of the project are to examine the efficacy of ecological insight for finding
novel natural products with biological activities. Rainforest plants are subject
to greater levels of attack by insects and pathogens than are plants from any
other region of the world. As a consequence, they have evolved both higher
levels of chemical defenses as well as a greater diversity of compounds. Mmst
studies on the chemical defenses in rainforest plants have been done in easily
collected mature leaves, but recent studies show that expanding leaves are
better defended chemically than mature leaves. To optimize the discovery of
biologically-active compounds, the researcher will be using leaf collections
that have been guided by ecological insight into plant defenses, rather than by
random collections of plants. Extracts from freshly collected leaves will be
subjected to a broad panel of biological screens, and those showing significant
biological activity will be subjected to bioassays to determine their individual
components and structure. To assess the efficacy of the ecologically- directed
collections, random collections will also be made, and their extracts will be
subjected to the same bioassays as the targeted collections, to allow for a
direct comparison. Although some of these biologically active natural products
could be medicinally-relevant compounds, most are likely to be invaluable tools
for researchers in disciplines such as neurobiology, cell biology, biochemistry
and physiology. Results from this work will provide information that will guide
future studies directed towards the discovery of these products. The knowledge
of the Panamanian scie ntists about the rainforest flora of the country, and
their expertise in the use of modern techniques for vegetative identification of
plants, will be an important contribution to this study. ***