* 9603051
* U.S.-Japan Cooperative Science:  Nuclei with Double         Strangeness
* O/D,OISE
* 05/01/1997,04/30/2000
* Gregg Franklin, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Larry H. Weber
* 04/30/2000
* USD 27,000.00

9603051 Franklin This award supports a three-year collaborative research project
between Professor Gregg Franklin of Carnegie Mellon University and Professor
Kenichi Imai of Kyoto University in Japan. The researchers will be undertaking
studies relating to nuclei with double strangeness. Our understanding of the
structure of the nucleon and the interactions between nucleons is based on
quark-gluon inspired models which, at this time, include a mix of
phenomenological inputs. These models will be tested and refined by extending
them into systems which contain strange-quarks in addition to the up- and down-
quarks found in the neutron and proton. Systems with two strange-quarks are
particularly interesting. They can be created using beams of K- mesons and
identifying reactions which result in an outgoing K+ meson. At present, two
suitable beamlines exist in the world; one at Brookhaven National Labs and one
in Japan at the National Laboratory for High Energy Physics. The operational
parameters of the two lines differ considerably. Researchers from both countries
will cooperate to maximize the utilization of these two beam lines by targeting
appropriate experiments and sharing resources, knowledge, and manpower. Through
the exchange of ideas and technology, this project will broaden our base of
basic knowledge and promote international understanding and cooperation. ***