* 9603418
* U.S.-Cooperative Science:  Regulatory Mechanisms of         Gibberellin Biosynthesis and response in Arabidopsis
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/1997,05/31/2002
* Tai-ping Sun, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Myra McAuliffe
* 05/31/2002
* USD 34,750.00

9603418 Sun This award supports a three year collaborative research project
between Professor Tai-ping Sun of Duke University in North Carolina and Dr. Yuji
Kamiya of the Institute of Physical and Chemical Research (RIKEN) in Saitama,
Japan. The project is a study of the regulatory mechanisms of gibberellin
biosynthesis and response in Arabidopsis. Gibberellins (GAs) are diterpenoid
compounds, some of which are plant growth regulators, controlling such diverse
processes as seed germination, stem elongation, and flower development. There
are three major goals of this project: 1) examine the effect of light on the
expression of the first gene (GA1) in the Arabidopsis GA biosynthetic pathway to
understand how light regulates GA concentrations in responding tissues; 2)
examine the effects of overproduction of the first two enzymes (ent- kaurene
syntheses A and B) in the GA biosynthetic pathway on plant growth; and 3)
measure the GA content of new GA-response mutants that have been isolated to
determine whether these mutations alter GA metabolism. The project brings
together the efforts of two laboratories that have constituted different parts
of the process: the Americans will provide the new GA-response mutants and the
Japanese will perform the GA measurements. The results of this project will
identify regulatory mechanisms of GA biosynthesis and organ-specific GA
responses that are now unclear. Through the exchange of ideas and technology,
this project will broaden our base of basic knowledge and promote international
understanding and cooperation.