* 9603022
* U.S.-Japan Cooperative Science:  Biochemical Control of     Larval Settlement and Recruitment of an Abundant Reef-      Building Coral in Japan
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/1997,05/31/2001
* Daniel Morse, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Larry H. Weber
* 05/31/2001
* USD 48,000.00

9603022 Morse This award supports a three year collaborative research project
between Dr. Aileen Morse of the Marine Science Institute at the University of
California at Santa Barbara and Dr. Makomoto Omori of the Akajima Marine Science
Laboratory in Okinawa, Japan. The project will investigate biochemical control
of larval settlement and recruitment of an abundant reef-building coral. The
major goals of this research are: 1) to determine the extent to which molecular
signals and mechanisms similar to those that control larval settlement,
metamorphosis and recruitment of Caribbean agariciid corals regulate these
centrally important processes in Acropora nasuta, one of the most abundant and
widely distributed ecologically important reef-building corals in the Indo-
Pacific; and 2) to develop and investigate the potential usefulness of an
acroporid- specific "larval flypaper", as a unique tool for field experiments.
Their long-term goals are to understand the mechanisms by which chemical signals
in the ocean control reproduction, larval dispersal, settlement, metamorphosis,
recruitment, gene expression, and the interactions of organisms with other
organisms and with the environment. The project brings together the efforts of
two major laboratories that have constituted different parts of the process. The
Americans have expertise in molecular marine biology, larval settlement and
spawning cue biochemistry and molecular mechanisms controlling recruitment.
Japanese expertise is in the area of biology and ecology of mass- spawning
corals and cultivation of their larvae. Techniques to be developed for the
control of spawning and metamorphosis should accelerate research on the
ecologically important corals world-wide, and should ppovide an alternate means
of production that can reduce the existing pressure of commercial harvesting on
natural stocks. Through the exchange of ideas and technology, this project will
broaden our base of basic knowledge and pro mote international understanding and
cooperation. ***