* 9603023
* U.S.-Latin America Dissertation Enhancement:  The Impact of Global Environmental Agreements on Biodiversity Policy in   Bolivia and Costa Rica
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/1996,09/30/1998
* Daniel Press, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Standard Grant
* Beverly Diaz
* 09/30/1998
* USD 26,480.00

9603023 Press This Americas Program award will fund a dissertation enhancement
project for Paul Steinberg, University of California, Santa Cruz, under the
supervision of Dr. Daniel Press. They will be working with Dr. Carlos Quesada-
Mateo, Director of the Center for Research on Sustainable Development,
University of Costa Rica, and in Bolivia with Professor Kathy Mihotek,
Universidad Autonoma Moreno, Santa Cruz. The research project will analyze the
trajectory of species preservation efforts in Bolivia and Costa Rica over the
past twenty-five years, to explore to what extent international conservation
agreements have influenced national policies, and by what means. Specifically,
they will test two hypotheses. First, to see if international agreements have
catalyzed changes in cultural values regarding species preservation in Costa
Rica and Bolivia, and, secondly, find out if the international agreements have
precipitated concurrent changes in national conservation policies. While there
exists a large and growing literature on international environmental treaty
making, little scholarly attention has been devoted to the impact of treaties
and their associated organizations on national policies in developing countries.
Successful conclusion of this research will shed light on how conservation
regimes can work more intentionally to foster cultural value shifts toward
regime goals, and how international regimes can use networks of domestic
advocacy-oriented experts to facilitate regime goals. The results should make a
substantial contribution to the progress of the current research program in the
effectiveness of international environmental regimes on state and substate
behavior. The work has the potential to make a major advance in our capacity for
studying how networks of policy experts and the negotiators of international
treaties can affect conditions on the ground in places removed from their direct
sovereignty. ***