* 9603336
* Internet Database Access: Scaleability of projects          through shared database creation and use
* EHR,DRL
* 07/15/1997,12/31/1999
* Barbara Mihalas, Lenk & Associates, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Nora Sabelli
* 12/31/1999
* USD 263,212.00

9603336 Lenk The rapidly expanding use of the Internet coupled with an explosive
growth of diverse, quality resources available on the Internet, can provide
learners with hitherto unparalleled access to current scientific data and
information. In fact, the ability of K-12 students and teachers to participate
in the creation and use of scientific databases is a core educational
application of the Internet, and central to a number of NSF-funded projects in
K-12 science education. The openness of these Internet resources means that
large numbers of learners in schools, homes, or other out-of-school settings
with Internet access have the potential to participate in these database
projects. However, most funded projects have the financial and human resources
to involve only a relatively small number of participants. If such Internet
database projects are to have the widest possible dissemination, finding ways to
broaden participation and scale-up these resources to reach a diverse and large
group of users is essential. The Internet Database Access project will develop,
evaluate, and disseminate database models and strategies that promote the
scaling up of Internet science education database resources so that they are
widely accessible to K-12 classrooms, as well as, to a diverse group of children
and adults in homes and other out-of -school settings. The project builds on
three database projects currently being developed for K-12 science education and
funded by NSF and other federal agencies: WhaleNet (whale observation data),
EnviroNet (environmental monitoring data), and Hands-On Universe (astronomical
images). In designing new database models and approaches, this project will take
advantage of both the capabilities of the web and new database tools for web-
based applications. Concurrently the project will disseminate the ongoing
results of its work through web-based mechanisms. The proposed project will
undertake activities in three major areas: * Design, develop, and evaluate new
web-ba sed database prototypes that facilitate the scaling-up of these science
education databases to increase participation by K-12 students and teachers who
are currently not involved in these NSF-funded projects. * Concurrently, design
and assess strategies that increase participation and collaboration in these
database resources by a broad range of participants, including children and
adult learners in homes and other out-of -school settings. * Disseminate
information about our database models and scaleability strategies through the
Internet and other media to assist other web-based educational projects in
designing, implementing, and scaling-up their resources. * ***