* 9603346
* Tools for Systemic Reform: A Dissemination Initiative       for School Board Members
* EDU,DRL
* 09/15/1996,03/31/1998
* Cheryl Williams, National School Boards Association
* Standard Grant
* Larry E. Suter
* 03/31/1998
* USD 123,677.00

9603346 Williams Findings from recent studies indicate that educational
technology has had positive effects on student achievement, on student attitudes
toward learning, and on students' self- concept. Experts agree that the future
of education depends upon the successful integration of technology into
classrooms across the country. However, hundreds of efforts to integrate
technology into schools fail each year because school board members-most lacking
an understanding of the value of technology and of the policy support that
technology requires, and few being technology-users themselves-are often
barriers to the integration of technology into the education of all students.
Simply stated, in order to make technology accessible in classrooms and enable
teachers to use that technology effectively, school board members must be helped
to understand technology's potentials. The National School Boards Association
(NSBA) Foundation requests a grant of $123,677 from the National Science
Foundation's Network Infrastructure for Education program to launch a project to
engage school board members as leaders in bringing the benefits of technology to
school districts across the country. NSBA is the national organization that
supplies information to the 95,000 school board members nationwide and, through
NSBA's Institute for the Transfer of Technology to Education (ITTE), is uniquely
suited to address the issue of helping school board members make appropriate
policy decisions and become advocates for technology implementation in schools.
The Tools for Systemic Reform: A Dissemination Initiative for School Board
members project described on the following pages will disseminate a policy
makers tool kit of information on systemic school reform supported with
technology and facilitate the tool kit's use with expert-guided on-line
discussion and with hands-on help. The tool kit will be distributed to public
school board members and other school decision makers through a variety of
electronic and other f ar-reaching dissemination methods, and will include
modules of information on case studies of successful school models, contact
information, research-based findings, discussion guides, and a broad range of
strategies for utilizing technology to improve student achievement in math,
science, and other subject areas. Information disseminated will help policy
makers understand the positive change that technology can bring to the dynamic
of teaching and learning, encourage their personal use of technology, and will
establish a foundation of the appropriate policy and management support
necessary to hasten widespread, effective use of technology throughout school
districts across the country.