* 9603622
* Neuroendocrine Control of Brain Aging
* BIO,IOS
* 02/15/1997,01/31/2000
* David Norris, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Roy L. White
* 01/31/2000
* USD 81,513.00

Jones &amp; Norris IBN 9603622 Pacific salmon, after being born in freshwater
streams, migrate downstream to a lake or to the ocean. Then, after several
years, they migrate upstream to their original place of birth. Pacific salmon
are semelparous; i.e. they breed once and die soon thereafter. During this
upstream breeding migration, blood levels of stress (glucocorticoids) and
reproductive hormones (gonadotropins, estrogens and androgens) surge, and their
reproductive organs mature. After spawning, they all die within 7 to 14 days.
Before death, their bodies (e.g skin, muscle, heart) exhibit pathological
changes that are remarkably similar to those seen in aging humans. Recently, Dr.
Jones and Dr. Norris discovered that the brains of spawning salmon exhibit
neuronal degeneration and beta-amyloid plaque deposition. They also found
changes in glucocorticoid hormone receptor immunoreactivity in specific brain
regions. The presence of amyloid-like plaques and dying neurons are very
striking observations since this is also seen in older humans, especially those
with Alzheimer's disease. Dr. Jones and Norris will now examine more precisely
the timing of these changes in wild salmon and determine the role of steroid
hormones. Greater understanding of salmon brain aging, especially the role of
stress and reproductive hormones, could help in the management and conservation
of Pacific salmon, some of which are endangered. Dr. Jones and Norris will also
verify that salmon brain aging is similar to that in other species, including
human. Thus, the synchronized, predictable, and rapid aging of salmon may serve
as an ideal model system to help us understand normal aging processes in the
brain, as well as in abnormal conditions such as Alzheimer's disease.