* 9603550
* RNA Modification and Splicing
* BIO,MCB
* 03/15/1997,02/28/2000
* Jeffrey Patton, University of South Carolina at Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Susan Porter Ridley
* 02/28/2000
* USD 80,000.00

9603550 Patton It is becoming increasingly clear that modified nucleotides in
RNA have important functional roles. Of the 93 different modified nucleotides
currently known to occur in RNA molecules, pseudouridine is the most abundant.
Pseudouridine is important in tRNA function and is thought to participate in the
peptidyl transfer reaction of rRNA. Pseudouridine also occurs in highly
conserved positions in snRNAs (small nuclear RNAs), essential co-factors in pre-
mRNA splicing. Splicing is accomplished by the splicosome, an assembly of co-
factors which includes snRNPs (small nuclear ribonucleoprotein particles)
composed of snRNAs and proteins. Conserved nucleotide modifications in
splicosomal snRNAs are concentrated near the catalytic center of the splicosome
and nearly all are found where snRNAs interact with the pre-mRNA or other
snRNAs. Pseudouridines occur in regions of U2 snRNA sequence know to be
essential for its function as a spicing co-factor. This research will test the
hypothesis that pseudouridine modification of U2 snRNA is required for the
assembly and/or function of the U2 snRNP. U2 snRNPs will be assembled in vitro
using either U2 RNA synthesized in vitro or fully modified U2 snRNA isolated
from HeLa cells. Post-transcriptional inhibitors of pseudouridine formation
which do not prevent other U2 RNA modifications such as methylation will be used
to control the presence or absence the pseudouridine in the U2 RNA synthesized
in vitro. U2 snRNPs reconstituted in vitro will be used in a complementation
assay of pre-mRNA splicing to determine if pseudouridine modification of U2
snRNA affects splicosome function. It is becoming increasingly clear that
modified nucleotides in RNA have important functional roles. Of the 93 different
modified nucleotides currently known to occur in RNA molecules, pseudouridine is
the most abundant and has been implicated in both tRNA and rRNA function.
Pseudouridine also occurs in snRNAs (small nuclear RNAs), essential co-factors
for the "sp licing" of pre-mRNAs into functional mRNAs in the cell nucleus.
Splicing is accomplished by the splicosome, an assembly of snRNPs (small nuclear
ribonucleoprotein particles) composed of snRNAs and proteins. Conserved
nucleotide modifications in splicosomal snRNAs are concentrated near the
catalytic center of the splicosome and nearly all are found where snRNAs
interact with the pre-mRNA or other snRNAs. Pseudouridines occur in regions of
U2 snRNA sequence known to be essential for its function as a spicing co-factor.
This research will test the hypothesis that pseudouridine modification of U2
snRNA is required for the assembly and/or function of the U2 snRNP.