* 9603858
* The Strain Dependence of the Kinetic Constants of the       Elementary Steps of the Cross-Bridge Cycle in Mammalian     Skeletal Muscle Fibers
* BIO,IOS
* 05/01/1997,04/30/2001
* Masataka Kawai, University of Iowa
* Continuing Grant
* Ione Hunt Von Herbing
* 04/30/2001
* USD 213,000.00

9603858 Kawai The long range goal of this research is to document the molecular
mechanisms of contraction in skeletal muscle cells. The specific aim of this
proposal is to determine the intermediate metabolic products and characterize
the kinetic constants of the chemical reactions between the metabolic products.
Skinned muscle fibers, in which the cell membrane has been removed by chemical
treatment, are used so that ions and molecules of experimental interest can be
placed into the muscle cells. A step length change is applied to muscle fibers
during maximal activation, which, in turn, induces a change in tension. From the
time course of tension, three time constants are obtained and these are studies
as functions of ATP (the energy source), ADP (a product), and phosphate (another
product) concentrations. Dr. Kawai is also able to observe the ATP hydrolysis
rate, which characterizes the slowest chemical reaction. From these data the ten
kinetic constants which characterize the chemical steps between individual
metabolic products are deduced. These procedures will allow for the rigorous
testing of many hypotheses including step-length dependence of the chemical
reactions. The proposed studies will yield answers to questions that cannot be
obtained from studies of purified muscle proteins.