* 9603429
* U.S.-Japan Joint Seminar:  Formation of Ion Nanobeams and   Application to Material Processing
* O/D,OISE
* 04/01/1997,03/31/1999
* Jon Orloff, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Larry H. Weber
* 03/31/1999
* USD 20,690.00

9603429 Melngailis This award supports the participation of American
scientists/engineers in a U.S.-Japan seminar on Formation of Ion Nanobeams and
Applications to Materials Processing to be held in Nara, Japan from November
16-21, 1997. The co- organizers are Professors John Malngailis of the University
of Maryland and Kenji Gamo of Osaka University in Japan. This seminar will
address a broad range of topics related to ion beams and their application to
materials processing, including ion sources and optics, ion beam irradiation
effects, nanofabrication, application of focused ion beams to maskless device
processing, and the use of ion beams for microanalysis. %%% Focused ion beams
are now widely used in the integrated circuits industry for precisely sectioning
individual components in integrated circuits during failure analysis, for
rewiring integrated circuits during the prototyping phase, and for repair of
masks. As minimum dimensions in integrated circuits shrink, significant advances
will be needed for ion microbeams to continue to serve these functions. In
addition, present research may lead to new applications in micromachining and
semiconductor devise fabrication. The main practical developments in the area of
finely focused ion beams have occurred in the United States and Japan. This
seminar brings together researchers from both universities and industry. The
exchange of ideas and data with Japanese experts in this field will enable U.S.
participants to advance their own work, and will set the stage for future
collaborative projects. ***