* 9603803
* Evaluation of Avian Cognitive Abilities
* BIO,IOS
* 05/01/1997,04/30/2000
* Irene Pepperberg, University of Arizona
* Continuing Grant
* John A. Byers
* 04/30/2000
* USD 151,375.00

Pepperberg 9603803 The PI's goals are to examine the cognitive and
communicative capacities of Grey parrots. Results from these studies will
provide insights into the evolution of intelligence, how input affects learning,
and comparative neurobiology and anatomy. (1) Comparisons with other
"language"-trained animals (e.g., on representational abilities and how well
problem-solving skills are transferred to new contexts) will demonstrate the
extent to which intelligence has evolved (independently) in mammals and birds:
It is not yet known, for example, if labels acquired by Grey parrots represent
board or narrow (specific) concepts: Do parrots that, for example, label a
particular sound pattern as "3" understand that this concept of "threeness"
extends to physical entities? The PI will examine how well such transfer occurs
without training. In addition, can a bird extend concepts, such as
bigger/smaller, that are learned in one context (e.g., mass) to respond to
questions in another context (e.g., ordinality of number)? The experiments will
provide information about parrots' comprehension of such concepts and data for
cross- species comparisons. (2) Data on how various aspects of input affect
learning and the extent of parrots' communicative abilities may enable us to
improve programs for other interspecies communication projects and possibly for
dysfunctional humans: Parrots that are taught a human- based code can undergo
experimental manipulations to determine optimal conditions for learning the
code; these conditions may be extended to other species. The experiments focus
on the extent to which acquisition is affected by (a) species identity of the
trainer and (b) the amount of reference, functionality, and social interaction
in the training input. (3) Showing how parrots, with brains and vocal tracts so
unlike those humans, acquire meaningful English speech provides comparative data
on neuroanatomical correlates of cognition and on how differen t anatomical
structures produce similar sounding utterances. Differences exist in psittacine
and human neural and auditory mechanisms, yet speech patterns are mutually
comprehensible; my data should provide insights into speech perception and
information processing. Parrots and humans differ with respect to lungs,
bronchi, trachea, nasal cavity, larynx, and tongue, and parrots uniquely use
air-sacs and a syrinx whereas humans uniquely use lips and teeth; I am therefore
studying alternative mechanisms for producing human speech. (4) Finally,
elucidating the intelligence of Greys may encourage conservation efforts for all
psittacids.