* 9603359
* The Well-Connected Educator
* EHR,DRL
* 10/01/1996,09/30/1998
* Stanley Solomon, Learning Resources, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Nora Sabelli
* 09/30/1998
* USD 166,368.00

9603359 Solomon The Well-Connected Educator will be a place on the Internet for
publishing teachers' and other educators' writing-their great ideas, models,
strategies and information about the use of technology for teaching and
learning. The objectives of The Well-Connected Educator include creating an
arena for educators to publish; disseminating lessons learned; providing a forum
for discussion of educational technology issues; encouraging reflective practice
and collaboration, and promoting thinking among teachers, administrators, and
others in the education community about education reform and the impact of
technology on reform. It will give a voice to those who are most directly
concerned with implementing educational technology and give their peers
valuable, first-hand information about using technology for teaching and
learning. All articles will be archived and searchable on a variety of
categories. Ultimately, the goal is to create an environment of trust for
educators to publish and read each others' works in order to learn from one
another. If this environment is sustained over a period of years, it may help to
change the culture of teaching to one that includes respect for educators as
professionals, self respect, and the knowledge that teachers have valuable
information and should publish it. In addition, it can serve as a vehicle for a
cadre of teacher-leaders to emerge, giving them a national voice while it
encourages them to remain in the classroom. In addition, it can help the various
groups to understand one another's perspectives; such understanding is key to
education reform. ***