* 9603568
* RUI:  Regulatory Volume Decrease by Amphibian Red Blood     Cells
* BIO,MCB
* 05/01/1997,04/30/2001
* Douglas Light, Ripon College
* Standard Grant
* Randolph Addison
* 04/30/2001
* USD 153,495.00

Abstract 9603568 Light Water flows freely across the plasma membrane, so any
changes in extracellular or intracellular composition that alter the
thermodynamic equilibrium will elicit movement of water, and change cell volume.
Since animal cells cannot maintain hydrostatic pressure gradients across their
membranes, they would quickly lyse without the operation of compensatory
mechanisms that limit cell swelling. Exposure of animal cells to a hypotonic
solution results in an initial increase in cell size, followed by a slower,
spontaneous regulatory volume decrease (RVD) close to the original size. This
compensatory response results from a swelling-induced increase in membrane
permeability to intracellular solutes, thereby decreasing the driving force for
water influx. Although the general features of RVD have been described, the
details of the cellular mechanisms that underlie this process, especially the
regulation of ion channels, are largely unknown. The specific objectives of this
grant are to characterize the properties and regulation of potassium channels
involved with RVD, and to examine the signal transduction and intracellular
mechanisms that regulate RVD. These studies will be done on the Necturus
maculosus (mud puppy) red blood cells. These cells have a great ability to
regulate their volume in hypotonic media, and this process depends on ion
channels and intracellular messengers. Osmotic fragility and cell volume will be
measured, and ion channels will be studied by the patch clamp technique. These
studies will increase our understanding of the transduction step between cell
swelling and ion efflux, and provide insight on the properties and regulation of
ion channels used for RVD. Since cell membranes are freely permeable to water,
they need to regulate their volume in dilute solutions. When exposed to large
volumes of water or very dilute solutions cell show an initial increase in cell
size, and then a regulatory volume dec rease (RVD) to their original size. This
grant will study the mechanism of this process, by studying the regulation of
ion channels involved. ***