* 9603805
* Structural Studies of Pectate Degrading Enzymes
* BIO,MCB
* 04/01/1997,03/31/2000
* Marilyn Yoder, University of Missouri-Kansas City
* Standard Grant
* Kamal Shukla
* 03/31/2000
* USD 240,000.00

9603805 Yoder The project will study the structural properties of plant
virulence factors secreted from bacterial plant pathogens. Two proteins will be
studied, polygalacturonase and pectate lyase. The main method to be employed in
obtaining structural information will be x-ray diffraction analysis. The
proteins chosen for the study include two polygalacturonases and two pectate
lyases. The polygalacturonases are Pg1A, from Pseudomonas solanacearum, and
Peh1, from Erwinia carotovora. The pectate lyases are PelA from E. chrysanthemi
and Pe1153 from E. carotovora. Each protein will be crystallized, and three-
dimensional structure determined by x-ray substrate analog will be sought as a
means of elucidating amino acids involved in catalysis. Polygalacturonase and
pectate lyase both cleave the same saccharide substrate, but by different
enzymatic mechanism. Structural comparisons of the two classes of pectinases
will be analyzed. The major aims of the proposed four year project are: 1)
Purify and crystallize the two polygalacturonases and two pectate lyases. 2)
Determine the three-dimensional structure of the pectolytic proteins. It is
anticipated that the polygalacturonase structures will be solved using standard
multiple isomorphous replacement techniques. The pectate lyase proteins may be
amenable to structure determination by molecular replacement techniques. 3)
Determine the three-dimensional structure of polygalacturonase bound to
inhibitors. Several naturally occurring compounds have been identified as
potential inhibitors. 4) Analyze structural differences between
polygalacturonases and pectate lyases. Structural components attributing to
enzymatic differences will be emphasized. The general question behind the
experimental approach for this project is: What are the structural features of
two different enzymes--polygalacturonase and pectate lyase--that bind and cleave
the same substrate, polygalacturonate, but by different enzymatic mechanisms?
The amino acid sequence similarity between these two protein families is very
small. Polygalacturonate is the primary component in pectate, an acidic
saccharide polymer found in the middle lamella and cell wall of higher plants.
The saccharide is important in both cellular adhesion and cell wall integrity.
Polygalacturonase cleaves pectate by a hydrolytic mechanism, while pectate lyase
cleaves the saccharide by a ( elimination mechanism, requiring calcium for
activity. Pectate lyases are structurally unique proteins. Pectate lyase C and E
from E. chrysanthemi were the first proteins solved that were composed of a core
structure of parallel ( sheets, the folding motif is referred to as a parallel (
helix. The functional implications of this unusual protein fold is unclear. it
is unknown if polygalacturonase will adopt the same protein fold as the pectate
lyases. The proposed studies will help clarify these questions. The two
polygalacturonase proteins will provide a means of comparing the structures of
two enzymes with the same enzymatic mechanism, but with different catalytic
properties in respect to final endproducts and endproduct inhibition. The
structure of PelA will aid in further characterizing the requirements for
catalysis and substrate binding with direct comparison to two other known
pectate lyase structures from E. chrysanthemi, PelC and PelE. PelA has
significantly less enzymatic activity than either PelC or PelE. Pell53 is a
pectate lyase that is inefficiently secreted and predominantly localized in the
periplasm. A comparison of the structure of Pe1153 to the other Erwinia PL's may
be informative in characterizing the targeting signals for secretion.