* 9603733
* Molecular Genetic Analysis of Protein Phosphatase 2A        Function
* BIO,MCB
* 04/01/1997,09/30/2001
* Richard Hallberg, Syracuse University
* Continuing Grant
* Philip Harriman
* 09/30/2001
* USD 314,500.00

Hallberg 9603733 While a large number of serine/threonine protein kinases have
been described, the number of serine/threonine protein phosphatases that have
been characterized is, by contrast, far smaller. It is probably unlikely that
the removal of phosphates from particular proteins is not as highly regulated as
their addition, so this apparent inequality in modifying and "de-modifying"
enzymes is an interesting problem. With regard to the 2A subset of protein
phosphatases (PP2A), an enzyme whose activity has been causally linked to the
regulation of DNA replication, RNA transcription, signal transduction, and
intermediary metabolism, it has recently been recognized that: 1) the active
enzyme is a heterotrimer composed of a catalytic (C), structural (A), and
regulatory (B) subunit, and 2) the regulatory (B) subunit can be one of several
totally different proteins. It is now known that the kind of B subunit assembled
into the trimer can affect both the localization of the enzyme within the cell
as well as changing its substrate specificity. Thus, apparently by regulating
the "quality" of its PP2A trimers, the cell can endow PP2A catalytic subunits
with a variety of much narrower substrate targets. In order to better understand
how this enzyme regulates particular cellular processes, we need to understand
the "population dynamics" of the different cellular forms of PP2A and to define
their in vivo targets. A combined molecular genetic and biochemical approach to
identifying PP2A functional and structural dynamics is readily pursuable using
the baker's yeast, Saccharomyces cerevisiae. The genes encoding two, and
possibly three, C subunits, two B subunits, and an A subunit from S. cerevisiae
have been cloned and characterized. Specific phenotypes of strains expressing
mutant alleles of a number of these different genes have shown that PP2A
function is required for the control of specific steps in the cell cycle, bud
site selection and bud growth, and regulation of expression of the general stres
s response. This laboratory has begun developing yeast strains unable to
correctly express one or more components of PP2A or to express altered forms of
such components and then examining the phenotypic consequences of such
alterations and also assess the state of assembly of PP2A trimers in the cell.
Immunoprecipitation procedures and non-denaturing polyacrylamide gel
electrophoresis combined with western analyses will make it possible to follow
the dynamics of assembly and disassembly of virtually all the now known PP2A
components during different growth and cell cycle stages. In addition, by
immunofluorescence microscopy, it will be possible to localize within the cell
where specific forms of PP2A may accumulate. As different forms of PP2A have now
been shown to be critical in the regulation of cell division, the studies
described should add to our understanding of the mechanisms by which a cell
controls the timing of when or when not to divide, a critical capacity that
differentiates normal from uncontrolled growth .