* 9603458
* Successfully Transferring New Technology to School Systems  Key Individual, Organizational, and Contextual Factors
* EDU,DRL
* 09/15/1996,02/28/1999
* Edward Friedman, Stevens Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Larry E. Suter
* 02/28/1999
* USD 118,182.00

9603458 Holahan The Center for Improved Engineering and Science Education
(CIESE) at Stevens Institute of Technology is leading the New Jersey Networking
Infrastructure in Education Project (NJNIE). NJNIE is an NSF funded testbed
project to reform K-12 science education. SIESE is in the second yar of this
three-year, $219 million dollar program that is being implemented in
collaboration with the New Jersey Statewide Systemic Initiative (NJSSI). CIESE's
experience to date indicates that in some cases these technology transfer
efforts have met with tremendous success, while in other cases little or no
change has occurred despite equal access to resources, training, individualized
assistance, etc. A deeper understanding of the individual, organizational, and
contextual factors associated with successful technology transfer will allow us
to increase our effectiveness as change agents by designing interventions which
are specific to the school or school district;s needs. Moreover, deeper
understanding of the factors necessary for success will enable us to achieve a
better return on investment by more wisely allocating scarce resources. The
first objective of this project is to develop a model of the individual,
organizational and contextual factors that are important determinants of
successful technology transfer. In this case successful technology transfer
means successful integpation of telecommunications technology into the science
curriculum and the use of the Internet in teaching K-12 science. The second goal
of this project is to validate this model on a random sample of schools
participating in the NJNIE project. The model to be developed will investigate
three clusters of categories of predictors: (1) characteristics of the school's
administrators and teachers (individual level factors), (2) characteristics of
the school itself (organizational factors), and (3) characteristics of the
context in which the school operates (district level factors). The literature
suggests that all three classes of variables play a role in successfully
transferring new technology. However, there is little in the way of evidence to
suggest (a) which variables within each of these three classes of variables are
most important to successful transfer, and (b) which of the three classes of
variables overall is most important. Therefore, a third goal of the project will
be to determine the relative importance of the variables in explaining
successful technology transfer. Understanding the relative immportance of the
various predictor variables should allow us to design interventions and allocate
resources in ways that will have the greatest impact on desired outcomes.