* 9603710
* Neuropeptide Control of Ecdysone Biosynthesis
* BIO,IOS
* 06/15/1997,05/31/2001
* Lawrence Gilbert, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Continuing Grant
* William E. Zamer
* 05/31/2001
* USD 225,000.00

9603710 Gilbert These studies concentrate on the means by which a hormone from
the insect brain acts upon specialized glands (prothoracic glands) to cause
these glands to synthesize a specific steroid hormone, an ecdysteroid.
Ecdysteroids cause the insect to molt i.e. shed its exoskeleton, so that it can
grow. These hormones also elicit metamorphosis i.e. the phenomenon by which a
caterpillar is transformed into a pupa and then into an adult moth or butterfly.
The brain neurohormone that is synthesized and released as a result of
environmental cues and the synthesis and release of ecdysteroids by the
prothoracic glands must be extremely precise if the insect is to survive and be
successful. This grant will allow the PI to study the means by which this
peptide hormone interacts with the prothoracic glands via a cascade of events
that includes compounds known as second messengers i.e. cyclic AMP and protein
kinases. The role of these second messengers is the focus of this grant
application and the mechanisms the PI has thus far examined are very similar to
that of the human adrenal cortex which is stimulated by a pituitary hormone that
also elicits the synthesis of steroids i.e. corticosteroids. By utilizing the
insect prothoracic glands which are composed of a single layer of homogenous
cells, the PI hopes to gain insights into the mechanism of general peptide
hormone induced steroidogenesis that would not be possible with the more
heterogenous adrenal gland. Further, any differences found between the two
systems could be exploited by those studying the control of insect pests which
so adversely affect human health and nutrition.