* 9603387
* The Digital Desert Library: Expanding Libraries into Living Laboratories through Cross-Cultural Development
* EDU,DRL
* 10/01/1996,09/30/1999
* Jeanne Gleason, New Mexico State University
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth VanderPutten
* 09/30/1999
* USD 250,000.00

9603387 Lownds The Digital Desert Library (DDL) project envisions a new kind of
expanding library, available via the Internet and DC-ROM, providing both
instructional materials and space for continuous scientific collaboration,
communication, and development among diverse school, museum, and university
participants. In addition to providing a means for teachers and communities,
particularly those with traditionally under-represented groups, to share their
own scientific "funds of knowledge" (Moll, 1993), other currently undigitized
resources also will become available to schools. For example, The Smithsonian
Institution's National Museum of Natural History will contribute historical,
scientific and cultural resources from its highly acclaimed The Seeds of Change
program; and New Mexico State University will contribute scientific results and
video clips from its experiment station and video productions (such as Survivors
in the Sand). The project will build on other work already underway, such as The
Desert Classroom, a laserdisc and instructional materials developed with
teachers through New Mexico SIMSE (NSF-funded Systemic Initiative in Science and
Mathematics Education); and Los Ninos y La Tierra (The Children and the Earth),
with cultural and gardening resources from small villages in Northern New Mexico
gathered by a non-profit group to support cultural traditions in science
education. Collaboration will be the key method employed, meaning teachers will
work with, not for, university and museum multimedia developers and educators to
create exciting resources and spaces for learning science, including well-
developed models, accessible through this digital library. The Objectives can be
summarized as: 1) creating top-quality electronic library resources through
collaboration among diverse students and teachers, with nationally recognized
specialists in information, multimedia, video, science, and education; 2)
creating digital and real-world environments for asynchronous and synchrono us
learning across time, location and cultures; 3) modeling adaptation of exemplary
curricula with local, real-world learning in multicultural classrooms through
the power of digital technologies; 4) distributing both the library resources
and successful development and implementation models; and 5) institutionalizing
the Digital Desert Library, the developmental process, and the implementation
strategies to ensure sustainability. The numerous expected outcomes focus on
both creating an outstanding digital library of resources from scientific and
multicultural communities, and also on modeling a process for integration of
these products into meaningful learning. The DDL, its development process and
implementation strategies will be institutionalized within the Smithsonian's
Natural Partners Initiative, the systemic change initiative programs, and NMSU's
Extension and 4-H programs to ensure sustainability and expansion of the
processes after this funding is completed. ***