* 9603670
* Chemo-Mechanical Energy Transduction
* BIO,MCB
* 11/01/1997,06/30/2000
* Hugo Martinez, University of the Pacific
* Continuing Grant
* David Rockcliffe
* 06/30/2000
* USD 200,000.00

Morales 9603670 Technical This study examines the interface between actin and
myosin S1 that lead to chemomechanical transduction of energy during muscle
contraction. Thus site-directed mutagenesis is used to specify regions
responsible for the hydrophobic and coulombic interactions, and to deduce the
involvement of myosin ATPase. Specific questions are: 1 Why do the actin
affinities for the "no ligand" and the MgATP" intermediates differ by a thousand
fold? 2 Is it possible that only NMR methods can explain this conformational
change, if this affinity difference is not due to charge, but to a myosin
conformational change? and 3 How is the transition rate of the "MgADP"
intermediate to the "no ligand" intermediate influenced by interaction with
actin? Site-directed mutations and simulations with energy minimizations are
used to elucidate the structural basis of the strong "no ligand" affinity. A
structure of the "MgADP" intermediate with suitable attributes is simulated. The
NMR chemical shift findings of Shriver/Sykes (At high T there is one, and at low
T there are two coexisting conformers of myosin, detectable by 31-P and 19-F
probes) will be followed to guide studies on a variety of intramolecular myosin
crosslinks which trap these "MgADP" intermediary conformers, so that whether
coexistence includes structures "missed" by current myosin crystallography can
be determined. Furthermore, as an effort to understand actin activation of
myosin ATPase, attempts are made to perturb structures that appear to affect the
MgADP "leaving rate". The sites of interest are E99 and E100 for actin, K572,
K574, D463 and Y135 for myosin, and a putative EDC crosslink site including
D471; the activating effect of a bulky constituent (e.g. IATR) at C707 is
energy-minimized. "Coexisting conformers such as the transitions between "ATP"
and "ADP.Pi" are also examined. The significance of this study may lie in its
molecularly defining the use of catalysis principles in energy-transduction in
an important biological contratile system. Non-Technical The aim of this
research is to understand the features and mechanisms that allow a biological
entity to function as a machine - that takes in a fuel , transforms some of
which into useful work, and generates others as waste , while the machine itself
suffers no net change in this operational cycle. The paradigm being studied here
is the biological machine used to contract muscle, particularly the involvement
of the protein myosin which absorbs the fuel as well as ejects the waste. Static
pictures in atomic detail of the structural states and flexibility of myosin are
examined with physical methods such as nuclear magnetic resonance, comparing
artificially altered and the natural wild versions. The effect of these
alterations on operation is analyzed. Anchorage of the movement of the machine
at each step by another protein, actin , is also studied. Although the central
purpose of this research is to figure out how the muscle machine works, it is
expected that the knowledge so gained will be used by researchers to understand,
construct and repair biological machines in general, or to copy the
extraordinary attributes of natural machines into man-made entities.