* 9603521
* Molecular Mechanisms and Functional Diversity of the Hemocyanin Gene Family in Cancer magister
* NONE,NONE
* 02/15/1997,03/31/2000
* Nora Terwilliger, University of Oregon Eugene
* Continuing grant
* Judith A. Verbeke
* 03/31/2000
* USD 276,150.00

9603521 Terwilliger Molecular mechanisms and functional diversity of the
hemocyanin gene family. The purpose of this grant is to study the relationships
between three members of one gene family. Hemocyanins are giant copper-
containing protein molecules found freely dissolved in the hemolymph or blood of
arthropods and molluscs. Like hemoglobin, hemocyanin transports oxygen. The PI
has found that hemocyanin of a crab, Cancer magister, undergoes changes in
structure and oxygen binding properties during development of the crab from
megalopa to adult. The PI seeks to explore how expression of hemocyanin subunits
during development is influenced by internal, physiological factors including
hormones and external, environmental factors such as temperature and food
availability. The crab also contains another hemolymph protein, cryptocyanin,
that is similar to hemocyanin in size and shape but does not combine with
oxygen. A third related protein is present in the crab's nervous system. The
presence of three potential members of the hemocyanin gene family in one
organism offers a unique opportunity to compare the expression of their genes
and their physiological functions. The PI will prepare specific molecular probes
to study the site of synthesis of each protein and assess the effects of
hormones, temperature and food levels on protein synthesis. The PI will use
techniques such as polymerase chain reaction, Northern blots, in situ
hybridization, and antibody recognition. The PI will also examine the role of
cryptocyanin in molting and in forming the crab's new exoskeleton. Comparisons
of the amino acid sequences of the proteins will be used to help us understand
the evolutionary relationships between these proteins and similar proteins found
in insect hemolymph. Results of this study will significantly increase our
understanding about the structure, function and development of hemocyanin and
related proteins. The studies may lead to a better knowledge of how giant,
multisubunit prote in molecules are synthesized and assembled. Basic knowledge
about the effects of factors like hormones and nutrition on development, molting
and growth of these economically important crustaceans will be beneficial to
maintaining a healthy fishery as well. ***