* 9603935
* Solid-State NMR Derived Structure:  Membrane-Bound          Polypetides to Protein
* BIO,MCB
* 02/01/1997,04/30/2000
* John Quine, Florida State University
* Continuing Grant
* Kamal Shukla
* 04/30/2000
* USD 360,000.00

9603935 Cross The knowledge gained from the gramicidin studies will now be used
to face the challenges associated with a biosynthetically prepared protein, M2
protein, studied as a dilute species in a lipid bilayer. Improvements in
sensitivity will come from modications in the sample geometry, increased field
strength and improvements in the experimental protocols. Linewidths in the M2
samples are primarily dominated by sample heterogeneity which through
adjustments in sample preparation techniques can be addressed and there is also
reasonable expectations that linewidths (in ppm) at least in some cases will
decrease the increasing field strength. The mathematical challenges will involve
the characterization of imperfect alpha-helices that are prevalent in membrane
proteins. The work will take this solid state NMR method that utilizes
orientational rather than distance constraints and apply it to a "real" protein
system. High technology methods involving Nuclear Magnetic resonance (NMR)
spectroscopy will be developed to solve the three-dimensional structures of
macromolecules. Typically such structures are determined by diffraction methods
applied to crystallized samples, but there are many important macromolecules
that are not crystallizable. This unique NMR approach uses samples that are
uniformly aligned, in other words they are oriented in one dimension, while
crystals involve three-dimensional order. The molecular system that will be used
for demonstrating these methods is protein that forms an ion channel in
membranes. The NMR data obtained will be analyzed by new mathematical approaches
that will be generally applicable to many molecular systems. Overall, the
development of this structure determination approach will open new avenues of
research for a great many types of molecules that are not easily crystallized.
The work will provide great training opportunities for graduate students and
postdocs in an interdisciplinary environment where molecular biology, synthetic
chemistr y, NMR spectroscopy, NMR hardware development, molecular modeling and
mathematical analysis occur in the confines of this research effort.