* 9603234
* U.S.-Japan Cooperative Research:  Seismological Study of    the Upper Mantle Transition Zone Associated with            Northwestern Pacific Subduction Zones
* O/D,OISE
* 05/15/1997,04/30/1998
* Craig Bina, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Larry H. Weber
* 04/30/1998
* USD 12,436.00

9603234 Bina This award supports a one year collaborative research project
between Professor Craig Bina of Northwestern University, Professor Fumiko Tajima
of the University of Texas in Austin and Dr. Yoshio Fukao of the Earthquake
Research Institute at the University of Tokyo in Japan. This project involves a
seismological study of the upper mantle transition zone associated with the
Northwestern Pacific subduction zones. The major goal of this project is to
improve the 3-D images produced by tomographic inversion. The project brings
together the efforts of two major laboratories that have constituted different
parts of the process: the Americans will produce thermal and bulk compositional
models for the mantle and subduction zone and the Japanese will correct for
residuals and modify the 3-D travel time inversion code to include travel time
data for later arrivals. The seismic structure of the upper mantle transition
zone, from 400-700 km depth is of fundamental importance for understanding the
mode of convection within the Earth's mantle. Improving the 3-D whole mantle
tomographic models will provide for better understanding of this structure.
Through the exchange of ideas and technology, this project will broaden our base
of basic knowledge and promote international understanding and cooperation.