* 9604680
* Icosahedral Virion Scaffolding Proteins
* BIO,MCB
* 02/01/1997,01/31/1999
* Bentley Fane, University of Arkansas
* Continuing Grant
* P. C. Huang
* 01/31/1999
* USD 176,000.00

9604680 Fane The main objectives of this study are to elucidate the critical
interactions during viral assembly, and to define the structural domains of the
responsible macromolecules, the scaffolding proteins, in Microviridae viruses. A
combination of genetic, biochemical and structural approaches including X-ray
crystallography will be employed. The results of these analyses may provide
further insights into the assembly of viruses and the design of recombinant
proteins. The Microviridae internal scaffolding proteins, gpB, share many
properties with molecular chaperones. Prior results indicate that the internal
scaffolding proteins either possess inherent flexibility or interact with their
substrates in nonspecific manners, perhaps via interfaces. Determining the
atomic structures of hybrid procapsids, containing foreign scaffolding proteins,
will directly address this question. For those instances in which foreign
scaffolding proteins do not cross function, genetic analyses will be employed to
define domains which may confer substrate specificity. Gain of function
mutations in viral coat proteins, allowing for the utilization of foreign
scaffolding proteins, have been isolated and will be examined. The atomic
structure of the external scaffolding proteins, gpD, of Microviridae suggests
that they also share many features with molecular chaperones. They bind other
proteins in many different ways using various surfaces, the specificity for a
particular viral coat protein may thus reside in specific domains. Unlike the
internal scaffolding proteins which exhibit a great deal of divergence in
primary structure, the external scaffolding proteins share 75% sequence
identity. The inability for Phi X174 protein to productively direct the assembly
of other Microviridae virions is therefore attributable to the divergent
residues localized its NH2-termini, which forms a large alpha-helical structure.
This hypothesis will be tested with chimeric polypeptides, and the plasmid-based
cross complementation system will be used. *** All viruses must assemble
themselves by means of multiple macromolecular interactions, the assembly is
often dependent on proteins known as scaffolding proteins. Analogous to
scaffoldings used in the construction of buildings, scaffolding proteins are
found in virus assembly intermediates but not in the mature viruses. Two
different scaffolding proteins, external and internal, are required for the
assembly of the Microviridae family of viruses. With these viruses it is
possible to purify viral intermediates which still include the external
scaffolding protein. By examining the atomic structure of the external
scaffolding protein and performing genetic analyses with both the internal and
external proteins, it has been determined that different regions of the
scaffolding proteins may have specific and identifiable functions. The main
objectives of this research are to refine the atomic structures of these
proteins and to test hypotheses regarding their various functions by
constructing hybrid Microviridae scaffolding proteins. The results of these
analyses will provide further insights into viral assembly.