* 9604213
* The Structural and Energetic Bases of Extreme Thermal       Stability in Proteins
* BIO,MCB
* 02/15/1997,04/30/2000
* Frederick Dahlquist, University of Oregon Eugene
* Continuing grant
* Thomas E. Smith
* 04/30/2000
* USD 240,000.00

96-04213 Dahlquist This study is designed to elucidate the nature of
hyperthermostability in the CheY protein from Thermotoga maritima (TMY), which
undergoes reversible thermal unfolding at 95oC. The CheY isolated from Bacillus
subtilis is the same length and is 75% identical in amino acid sequence to TMY
but denatures about 35oC lower in temperature. Each of the 30 residues that
differ in the two proteins will be substituted in order to monitor the
contribution that each makes to the overall stability of the protein. Selected
mutants will be examined by a variety of physical methods including circular
dichroism, solution nuclear magnetic resonance methods, differential scanning
calorimetry and X- ray crystallography for possible relationships between the
thermal stability of a protein and its structural and dynamic properties. A
thermally-induced structural change in TMY that occurs about 50o below its
thermal unfolding will also be characterized. This transition, similar to those
observed in other proteins from hyperthermophilic sources, results in extensive
line broadening and chemical shift changes in the 15N-1H correlation spectra of
TMY. The information so gained in this study should provide a rich experimental
database for the understanding of the structural and energetic contribution to
the exceptional thermal stability seen in proteins from hyperthermophilic
sources. Proteins from organisms that live at very high temperatures
(hyperthermophiles) are much more stable than similar proteins from organisms
that live near body temperature (mesophiles). This study undertakes a systematic
investigation of the source of stability in a small, well behaved protein, CheY,
which is involved in sensory signaling in both hyperthermophiles and mesophiles.
About 20 amino acids of this protein, isolated from a hyperthermophile has, are
likely to account for a near 50oC increase in its thermal stability, as compared
to the similar protein from a mesophilic source. These residues will be varied
by sitedirected mutation so that the role of these residues in the stability of
the protein and its structure, as determined by X-ray diffraction and nuclear
magnetic resonance methods, can be recognized. In addition, there is a change in
structure as temperature increases that occurs near body temperature in the CheY
protein from the hyperthermophile. This structural change may reflect a change
from a catalytically inactive form at low temperature to a functional form at
high temperature. This change and the reasons that it occurs will be
characterized to yield a general understanding of how proteins function under
extreme environmental conditions.