* 9604282
* RUI:  Regulation of the Pyrimidine Pathway in Plants
* BIO,MCB
* 07/01/1997,06/30/2001
* Robert Slocum, Goucher College
* Standard Grant
* Susan Porter Ridley
* 06/30/2001
* USD 264,917.00

SLOCUM Pyrimidine nucleotides are precursors of DNA and RNA biosynthesis and are
constituents of activated intermediates in many metabolic processes which are
fundamental to growth and development in plants and all other living organisms.
The basic biochemical steps in de novo pyrimidine synthesis have been conserved
in prokaryotes and eukaryotes but regulation of the pyrimidine pathway is
accomplished by several different strategies involving subcellular
compartmentation of enzymes and metabolites, gene duplication and gene fusion,
and different metabolic control mechanisms. In plants, little is known about the
mechanisms which regulate pyrimidine biosynthesis, but most evidence suggests
that the important sites of regulation are the first and/or second steps in the
pathway, involving the enzymes carbamoylphosphate synthetase (CPSase) and
aspartate transcarbamoylase (ATCase). This research will focus on the
elucidation of various molecular mechanisms regulating the activity of ATCase
and CPSase in plants. As a first step toward this goal, cDNAs encoding three
different ATCases in pea (pyrB1, pyrB2 and pyrB3) have been cloned. The pyrB1
and pyrB2 genes have been shown to be differentially expressed in pea tissues.
These genes encode ATCase proteins whose primary sequences differ by 25% and it
is likely that they have very different kinetic properties. and may participate
to different degrees in the regulation of pyrimidine pathway activities. This
possibility is being investigated, using a variety of approaches which includes
the following: 1) kinetic characterization of the pyrB1 and pyrB2 products
expressed in an ATCase-deficient strain of E. coli, 2) use of nucleic acid and
antibody probes to investigate expression of the genes encoding ATCase in
different plant tissues and in response to various treatments that would be
expected to impact pyrimidine biosynthesis. Recently, the first plant genes
encoding CPSase in Arabidopsis were cloned by the investigators. Availabili ty
of cDNAs encoding the small and large subunit proteins of this plant CPSase
(carA and carB genes, respectively) will permit the characterization of this
gene and its expression in plant tissues. Expression of these CPSase proteins in
appropriate E. coli CPSase mutants will facilitate biochemical and kinetic
characterizations of the plant enzyme. Overexpression of the Arabidopsis CPSase
proteins in bacteria will also facilitate their purification for biochemical
studies and the production of CPSase antisera. These antisera, and the cDNAs
encoding the plant CPSase proteins, will be invaluable tools in investigations
of the regulation of CPSase and pyrimidine pathway activities. The investigators
have now established that the basic genetic organization of the pyrimidine
pathway in plants more closely resembles that of bacteria than other eukaryotes.
Nonetheless, plants remain the only major group of organisms in which the
fundamental control mechanisms regulating de novo pyrimidine synthesis have not
been elucidated. Issues such as subcellular compartmentation of ATCase and
CPSase activities, the kinetic and regulatory properties of the ATCases and
CPSases themselves, metabolic interactions and regulation of pyrimidine and
arginine pathway activities and many other questions will be addressed in this
study. Studies such as these contribute to a broader understanding of plant
primary and secondary metabolism and suggest strategies for the manipulation of
plant biochemistry for many practical purposes, including the development of
herbicides or other compounds that modify plant growth or development, and
production of plant-derived pharmaceuticals and other useful metabolites. Apart
from any purely scientific advances resulting from these studies, several
undergraduate students will participate in the research. These students will
gain valuable training in a modern research laboratory which will help to
prepare them for post-baccalaureate careers in science.