* 9604450
* A Molecular Genetic Analysis of Polyhydroxyalkanoate        Metabolism and Inclusion-Body Structure in Bacillus         Megaterium
* BIO,MCB
* 04/15/1997,03/31/1999
* Maura Cannon, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Philip Harriman
* 03/31/1999
* USD 60,000.00

Cannon 9604450 Polyhydroxyalkanoates (PHA) are polyesters that accumulate within
inclusion-bodies in many bacteria and archaea as carbon and energy reserves.
Despite the fact that the gene for PHA synthase has been cloned and sequenced
from more than twenty strains of bacteria, the genetic regulation and the links
between PHA accumulation and other metabolic pathways are poorly understood.
Most of our present knowledge in this area comes from studies of Pseudomonas and
Alcaligenes. Apart from some inclusion-body structural studies, very little of
our present knowledge comes from studies of the Bacillus genus. The decision to
diversify and pursue this study of PHA accumulation in B. megaterium is likely
to reveal important new insights into the regulation of PHA accumulation and its
links with other cellular processes. An understanding of the regulation of PHA
inclusion-body synthesis and its coordinated regulation with other aspects of
cellular metabolism is the subject of this research. The following strategy is
being undertaken: (1) It has been shown that PHA accumulates in a growth phase
dependent manner, and the sequence and characterization of the phaB/phaC region
of B. megaterium has been determined. Three novel genes and two divergent
promoters associated with PHA accumulation have been identified. This research
seeks to demonstrate the functions of the three novel gene products and to
determine what regulates the two divergent promoters (pl and p2). The effects of
over-expression (gene dosage) and deletion (knock-out by marker substitution),
of each of these three genes, individually and in combinationq with each other,
will be tested. Effects of these mutations will be measured in relation to
transcription from the pl and p2 promoters, translation of the messages, PHA
accumulation, and size and shape of inclusion-bodies throughout growth of the
culture. (2) It is hypothesized that spore formation is not occurring during PHA
accumulation, based on promoter studies of the genes involved. This suggests
that PHA accumulation has a regulatory role in spore formation. This hypothesis
will be tested by examining the relationship of transcription from the p2
promoter to spore formation. For example, replacement of p2 with a constitutive
promoter would be expected to block sporulation, while a deletion mutation in
the p2 promoter, may result in very high sporulation rates. (3) A PHA over-
producing transposon mutant of B. megaterium has been isolated and the tagged
DNA has been identified as a cluster of gas vesicle genes (gvp). The relevance
of gas vesicles to PHA inclusion-bodies in B. megaterium is being examined. This
is being done by measuring the effects of deletion or over-expression of gvp
genes on PHA accumulation (as in 1, above). The accumulation in bacteria of the
biodegradable polymer PHA is the result of the combined effects of pha gene
products and prevailing environmental conditions, which are reflected in many
cellular processes. The results of these experiments should increase our
understanding of the integrated genetic regulation of these processes with PHA
accumulation.