* 9604875
* Probing Chromosome Structure and Function With Phage Mu     Transposition
* BIO,MCB
* 03/01/1997,02/29/2000
* Norman Higgins, University of Alabama at Birmingham
* Continuing Grant
* Philip Harriman
* 02/29/2000
* USD 285,000.00

Higgins 9604875 A new method has been developed to probe the structure of
bacterial chromosomes inside living cells. This technique, which is called
Muprinting, uses PCR reactions to generate a high-resolution picture of the
transposition target sites in a bacterial population infected with phage MU.
With Muprints, it is possible to detect the location of sequence-specific DNA
binding proteins like repressors and RNA polymerases, to identify hot spots and
cold spots for transposon insertion, and to follow changes in chromosome
structure when cells are placed in different physiological environments. Two
primary objectives will be pursued. First, detailed Muprint maps will be made
for a 40 kb segment of the S. typhimurium chromosome, which includes the cob and
pdu operons (1% of the whole genome). These operons are tightly repressed under
aerobic growth conditions but become actively transcribed and translated under
anaerobic growth conditions. The Muprint profile will provide detailed
information about the binding of proteins involved in repression or activation
of these operons, including ArcA, ArcB, PocR, and CRP. The second objective is
to use the Muprint mapping to discern how a large segment of DNA can become
shielded from transposition. Transposition immunity means that when a copy of
phage Mu already exists at one chromosomal site, the frequency of a second Mu
transposon moving near the first is very low. Thus, as a chromosome becomes
infiltrated with replicating Mu elements, immunity guarantees that the
replicating Mu elements become spaced relatively evenly over the bacterial
chromosome. The immunity distance will be measured for a Mu insertion in the
cobT gene. Genetic factors and DNA sites that influence how and how far immunity
spreads through a chromosome will be defined. Developing methods to
systematically investigate the mechanics of protein-DNA movement inside living
cells has been one of the most challenging and perplexing problems in modern
molecular biology. T he information gained from Muprinting technology will
provide a perspective on chromosome structure that may stimulate new genetic and
biochemical models for genome function. It will also provide a model for
understanding processes that generate stochastic gradients along the DNA
sequence like silencing in yeast and immunoglobulin recombination in higher
vertebrates.