* 9604379
* Engineering the Function of Serine Proteases
* BIO,MCB
* 06/01/1997,05/31/2002
* Charles Craik, University of California-San Francisco
* Continuing grant
* Parag R. Chitnis
* 05/31/2002
* USD 281,000.00

96-04379 Craik Part 1. Technical The study is to provide insight into the
substrate specificity, catalytic mechanism, and structure of the chymotrypsin
family of serine proteases. Variant enzymes will be generated using current
methods of protein engineering. Two general approaches are used to alter the
enzyme: (1) targeted substitutions followed by analysis of the variant enzyme;
and (2) random substitutions coupled with an in vitro affinity selection. In
each case, variants of serine proteases are generated according to structural
and/or functional principles to understand the specificity and catalytic power
of the enzyme and use this understanding to alter the activity of the enzyme in
a predictable fashion. Variant enzymes are designed, isolated, and purified, and
their kinetic parameters compared with the native enzyme. Selected variants are
then chosen for more detailed kinetic, theoretical, and three-dimensional
structure analysis. Results form the inital modifications will provide a basis
for introducing future amino acid changes into the enzyme. Initial experiments
have been successful in addressing the role of specific amino acids in substrate
recognition and catalytic mechanism of the enzyme trypsin and in using that
information to alter the enzyme activity using designed metal binding sites and
substrate assisted catalysis. Other experiments involve amino acid replacements
for studies including substrate recognition and metalloregulation. Variant
proteases are designed by computer modeling based on our current understanding
of proteases including fiddler crab collagenase, granzymes, and other related
members of this family. These studies will contribute to our understanding of
structure/function relationships in serine proteases. In addtion, these studies
will help develop unique specificities for peptide and protein hydrolysis. Part
2. non-technical The relationship between the three dimensional structure and
the function of an enzyme is still poorly understood. This is particularly
evident in the field of protein engineering where efforts are made to alter the
activity of a protein in a predictable fashion. Macromolecular recognition and
the basis of catalytic power in an enzyme remain unexplained in terms of basic
general principles that can be applied to a protein catalyst. This study will
address these two fundamental questions as a long term goal by studying the
contributions of certain amino acids in the substrate specificity and catalytic
mechanism of serine protease. The aim is to be achieved by creating and
analyzing altered protease which contribute to our understanding of mechanisms
involved in ligand binding and bond making and bonding breaking. The altered
enzyme will be generated using current methods of protein engineering as
designed by computer modeling based on our current knowledge of proteases of
this family. These studies will contribute to our understanding of
structure/function relationships in protein degradative enzymes. ***