* 9604254
* Spectroscopic Insights into the Mechanism of Enoyl-CoA      Hydratase
* BIO,MCB
* 03/15/1997,02/28/2001
* Peter Tonge, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Continuing Grant
* Parag R. Chitnis
* 02/28/2001
* USD 298,000.00

9604254 Tonge Part 1-Technical The enzyme enoyl-CoA hydratase catalyzes the
addition of water across the C-C bond of (,(-unsaturated fatty acid thiol
esters. Binding of conjugated subtrate analogs to the enzyme is accompanied by
substantial alterations in the electronic structure of the conjugated molecules.
The PI describes a series of experiments to investigate the direct relationship
between the observed alteration in electronic structure of the substrate analogs
and the enzyme's ability to catalyze the hydration of (,(-unsaturated ethylenic
bond. The recently described X-ray crystal structure of 4-chlorobenzoyl-CoA
dehalogenase, an enzyme that is 28% identical and 50% similar to the hydratase,
presents a unique opportunity to dissect the catalytic mechanism of the enzyme.
In order to investigate the direct relationship between substrate polarization
and enzyme catalysis, residues around the substrate will be systematically
modified by site-directed mutagenesis. Combined spectroscopic-reactivity studies
will then be performed on each mutant protein to assess the effects of the
mutations on catalysis and substrate polarization. These experiments will
facilitate the establishment of a direct structure-reactivity correlation for
the enzyme-substrate complex and are expected to provide general insight into
the role of electrostatics in enzyme catalysis. Part 2- Non Technical Enzymes
are proteins that function as biological catalysts, accelerating the rates of
chemical reactions by many orders of magnitude. There is intense interest in
understanding how enzymes work and in identifying the fundamental basis for
enzyme activity. The focus of this proposal is enoyl-CoA hydratase, an enzyme
involved in the breakdown of fatty acids in the body. Using site directed
mutagenesis, the PI plans to identify and analyze the amino acid residues in the
active site of the enzyme that are responsible for the chemical steps of the
reaction. A specific goal of this proposal is to quantitatively re late the
structure of the substrate in the active site to the rate of the reaction. The
structural information will be provided using Raman and NMR spectroscopy. In
addition he intends to elucidate the role of the protein's 'electric field'
through mutagenesis and monitoring the effect on substrate structure and
reactivity. Not only will this information be of great value in understanding
the mechanism of enoyl-CoA hydratase, but it will also provide direct insight
into the role of electrostatic forces in enzyme catalysis.