* 9604667
* Regulatory Mechanisms That Control Pax-3                    Expression
* BIO,IOS
* 03/01/1997,02/28/2001
* Andrew Lassar, Harvard University
* Continuing Grant
* Judith Plesset
* 02/28/2001
* USD 400,000.00

Lassar, Andrew B. IBN: 96-04667 The central goal of this grant is to understand
how signals from surrounding tissues activate the expression of Pax-3 in the
dermomyotome. Work in Dr. Lassar's lab is focused on understanding the
regulatory signals that induce formation of vertebrate skeletal muscle. Although
it is clear that expression of either MyoD or Myf-5 is essential for the
formation of skeletal muscle, it has hitherto been unclear how these genes are
activated during development. He has recently begun to address what regulatory
molecules mediate the induction of MyoD and Myf-5 by signals from either the
axial tissues (i.e. the neural tube/notochord) or the overlying ectoderm.
Recently he has found that the same signals that induce somitic myogenesis
induce somitic expression of the paired box transcription factors, Pax-3 and
Pax-7, prior to inducing high level expression of either Myf-5 or MyoD.
Furthermore, infection of somites in vitro with a retrovirus encoding Pax-3
(which is normally expressed in the dermomyotome) is sufficient to induce
expression of MyoD, Myf-5 myogenin, and myosin heavy chain in paraxial mesoderm
in the absence of inducing tissues. His results indicate that signals that
activate somitic expression of Pax-3/Pax-7 also activate somitic myogenesis and
that ectopic expression of Pax-3 can activate myogenesis in the absence of other
inducing signals. Together, these findings suggest that Pax-3 may mediate
activation of MyoD and Myf-5 in response to the muscle inducing signals from
either the axial tissues or overlying ectoderm. In this study, he seeks to: (1)
identify the region(s) of the Pax-3 gene that drives dermomyotomal expression of
a Pax-3 transgene in transiently injected mice embryos, (2) identify the
sequences in this regulatory region that directly respond to Shh/Wnt signals or
ectodermal signals, and (3) clone the transcription factors that interact with
these regulatory sequences. The goal of this study is to elucidate how signal
transduction pathways are integrated in the paraxial mesoderm to control
expression of a key regulatory gene, Pax-3, which itself induces somitic
myogenesis.