* 9604477
* Functional Analysis of Even-skipped Stripe 2 Enhancer Evolution
* BIO,MCB
* 04/01/1997,03/31/2000
* Martin Kreitman, University of Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* DeLill Nasser
* 03/31/2000
* USD 331,000.00

Kreitman 9604477 Technical section The phenotypic consequences of evolutionary
changes in the DNA sequence of a regulatory region controlling expression of the
pair-rule gene even-skipped (eve) will be examined. Eve is expressed in early
Drosophila embryos as a series of seven transverse stripes which demarcate the
boundaries of future alternating segments in the fly. A 671 bp enhancer element
located approximately 1.1 kb upstream of the eve transcription start site
regulates strip 2 expression (s2e). Four regulatory proteins, the activators
bicoid (bcd) and hunchback(hb), and repressors giant (gt) and Kruppel (Kr), each
bind at multiple sites within the enhancer and interact to determine the
expression of eve stripe 2 in developing embryos. Through extensive site-
directed mutagenesis of binding sites and P-mediated transformation, a
comprehensive understanding of s2e structure and function has recently emerged.
Recently discovered extensive DNA sequence variation in the s2e within and among
Drosophila species allows an exploration of the functional evolution of this
regulatory sequence. The phenotypic consequences of this sequence variation on
the timing, spatial localization and intensity of stripe 2 expression will be
investigated. The working hypothesis to be tested is that individual
evolutionary changes in binding sites (or in spacing) will have measurable
effects on expression, but that combinations of such changes will have occurred
to assure a near-wildtype pattern of expression in each species. Naturally
occurring s2e sequences from several Drosophila species will each be linked to a
reporter gene (lacZ) and inserted into the D. melanogaster genome. The
expression pattern of the reporter gene in developing embryos will be precisely
quantified both spatially and temporally relative to the native eve expression
by doubly staining embryos for both reporter transcript and for eve protein.
Chimerical s2e sequences will be constructed to evaluate phenotypic consequences
of specific evolut ionary substitutions, both for the regulatory protein binding
sites and for the spacing of the sites. More complex chimerical sequences will
also be constructed and tested to evaluate the possibility of compensatory
changes within a s2e. Non-technical section The functional consequences of
regulatory sequence evolution in the even-skipped stripe 2 enhancer of
Drosophila will be investigated. The work will provide a foundation for
understanding microevolutionary forces governing regulatory sequence evolution
and the role natural selection plays in this process. The studies should
illuminate basic molecular mechanisms of gene regulation and also evolutionary
mechanisms of regulatory sequence variation and change.