* 9604860
* Shapes of Biomacromolecular Complexes by Solid-State NuclearMagnetic Resonance
* BIO,MCB
* 04/01/1997,03/31/2001
* Jacob Schaefer, Washington University
* Continuing grant
* Kamal Shukla
* 03/31/2001
* USD 480,000.00

9604860 Schaefer The goal of the work is the characterization by solid-state NMR
of proteins and DNA that are part of a supramolecular structure or assembly.
These include cross-linked proteins in insect cuticle, marine organisms and
plant cell walls, as well as proteins encapsulated in stabilizing lyoprotectant
matrices, and DNA compacted by dendrimer-like macromolecules. Dipolar couplings
between stable-isotope labels will be measured directly in these complicated
biomacromolecular assemblies by REDOR (Rotational-echo double resonance) and
REDOR-like NMR recoupling experiments. In the work on insect, mussel, and plant
proteins, specific chemical questions will be answered as to how these
structures are cross-linked and stabilized. A search will be made for new ways
to stabilize fragile protein complexes in a buffered sugar glass. These matrices
will then be used to examine the natural-substrate reaction intermediates of
enolpyruvylshikimate 3-phosphate synthase which have been trapped in the glass.
Finally, a dopant will be created for dynamic nuclear polariation experiments by
burying a stable free radical in the core of an amphiphilic particle that
complexes proteins and compacts DNA. REDOR will be used to characterize the
local structure and the resulting distances will be used as constraints in
molecular dynamics simulations designed to visualize the overall shapes of the
complexes. Many biochemical and biophysical processes are carried out by or in
molecular superstructures. These superstructures are macromolecular complexes or
aggregates for which there is no atomic-level structural information because
they are not soluble (no solution NMR) and don't crystalize (no x-ray
crystallography). This work will provide specific insights into important
practical problems (insect pest management, barnacle fouling of ship hulls,
enzyme reaction pathways, DNA compaction) and generate a new kind of biophysical
structural tool with atomic-level resolution (solid-state NMR) that is applic
able to otherwise intractable systems.