* 9604206
* Rod Retinal Pathways and Scotopic Visual Function
* BIO,IOS
* 03/01/1997,08/31/2001
* Franklin Naarendorp, Northeastern University
* Continuing grant
* Linda M. Kennedy
* 08/31/2001
* USD 204,925.00

The retina of the eye in many mammals has what is known as a 'duplex' property,
with photoreceptor cells for color vision, called cones, as well as
photoreceptor cells for night vision called rods. The cones only work in fairly
bright light, while the rods work well in dim light. These photoreceptor cells
send information via an intermediate group of retinal cells, called bipolar
cells, then the signal passes eventually to the retinal ganglion cells, which
are the neurons that give rise to the optic nerve to the brain. It is thought
that there are two distinct pathways for the signal of light intensity from the
rods to be transmitted within the retina to the ganglion cells. In one pathway
the rod signal travels directly to rod bipolar cells; in the other pathway the
rod signal is believed to cross a junction between rods and cones, then enters
the cone pathway. This project uses a unique approach combining physiological
recording of retinal activity with specific pharmacological blockers of certain
kinds of neurotransmitters to isolate the contribution of these two pathways to
vision. The results will further our understanding of the complex visual
processing that occurs in the retina. Results will be important not only to
retinal physiology, but to understanding visual perception and perhaps to
artificial vision devices.