* 9604727
* Multi-User Shared Phosphorimager with Chemifluorescence     Capability
* BIO,DBI
* 07/15/1997,06/30/1999
* Tarun B. Patel, The University of Tennessee, Memphis - The Health Science Center
* Standard Grant
* Gregory K. Farber
* 06/30/1999
* USD 59,651.00

The purpose of this application is to acquire a phosphorimager with
chemifluorescence capabilities for the use of seven major users and several
secondary users. The University of Tennessee, Memphis is committed toward the
acquisition of this instrument. However, because the desired system is
expensive, the University cannot provide total funding for the equipment.
Therefore, the request to the NSF represents 67.66% of the costs that we will
incur; the University of Tennessee, Memphis will provide the remainder 32.33% of
the costs for the system. A number of investigators in the Departments of
Pharmacology, Physiology &amp; Biophysics, and Biochemistry at our Institution
are employing a variety of molecular biological techniques for the performance
of their research. These techniques range from detection of phosphorylated
proteins to Northern, Southern, and Western analyses, as well as in-situ
hybridization. Presently, a number of the users in this proposal use
autoradiography for detection of radioisotopes in their phosphorylation,
Northern, Southern, and DNA sequencing protocols. For Western analyses the
investigators rely heavily upon the chemiluminescence detection assay which also
requires the use of X- ray film. Although these procedures involving use of
X-ray film are adequate for detection, the low linear range of the film
severely, limits quantification of the differences that one observes. The
problem of quantifying data from X-ray film exposed to radioisotopes or
chemiluminescence is further compounded by the fact that the film has to be
subjected to densitometric analyses. Thus, depending upon the quality of the
image on the X-ray film and the capabilities of the densitometer, in the final
analyses, the data may at best be semi-quantitative. The StormTM system that we
have requested has the capability of detecting radioisotopes as well as
chemifluorescence signals. The system uses the phosphor storage technology and
provide s a larger linear range as compared to the X-ray film. In addition, the
system provides direct quantification of signals and therefore, the need for a
separate densitometer is circumvented. These features coupled with the
versatility of the Imagequant software which permits the quantification of
irregular shapes (e.g. ellipses) as would be seen in phospho-peptide mapping
provides a rapid, exquisitely sensitive, and quantitative method for analyses of
radioisotopes and chemifluoresence. One of the added advantages of the StormTM
system that we envisage is that because of its ability to detect
chemifluorescence, several investigators will be able to switch to non-
radioactive detection methods for their protocols. This would be highly
desirable since some of our experimental protocols, by decreasing the generation
of hazardous radioactive waste, will become more environment-friendly. Moreover,
the direct fluorescence capabilities of the StormTM system will also allow us to
switch over to certain procedures not involving mutagenic, hazardous chemicals
such as ethidium bromide to detect DNA. The availability of the StormTM
instrument will not only expedite the progress of the research of several
investigators as elaborated upon in the proposal but also facilitate the
interpretation of their data. Preliminary data are provided to demonstrate the
sensitivity of the system that is proposed over conventional X-ray film
technology. In addition to using the StormTM system for research, we also intend
to use the equipment for educational purposes involving graduate students,
postdoctoral fellows and high school as well as college students from the Mid-
South area who participate in a variety of programs at our Institution.