* 9604370
* Hormonal Mechanisms for Parental Control
* BIO,IOS
* 04/01/1997,09/30/2002
* Douglas Mock, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Standard Grant
* Jerry  O. Wolff
* 09/30/2002
* USD 102,691.00

PI: Douglas W. Moc, CO-PI: Hubert G. Schwabl IBN-9604370 In recent years, the
general assumption that parents value all of their offspring equally has come
into question. In many animals and plant groups, parents produce greater numbers
of concurrent young than can ordinarily be supported fully, forcing a subsequent
adjustment downward in family size. The underlying reasons for parental
overproduction stem from multiple sources of environmental unpredictability
(including resource unpredictability, accidental losses of progeny, partial-
brood predation, cannibalism by family members or others, ect.), but the fact of
it simultaneously generates sibling rivalry, which creates incentives for
parents to produce a hierarchical sibship to minimize the costs of such rivalry.
Thus, parents confer special advantages on some offspring and/or handicaps on
other, so called marginal brood members. The best-studied manifestation of
biological parental favoritism is probably asynchronous hatching in many
predatory birds species. There, early onset of incubation gives embryos in the
first- laid eggs a developmental head-start that facilitates their success in
any ensuing sibling competitions for limited food. Hubert Schwabl s recent
discovery that female laboratory canaries deposit increasing amounts of
testosterone into yolks as the laying process proceeds suggested a new mechanism
for parental manipulation of offspring vigar and inspired the collection of
fresh eggs from cattle egrets (Bubulcus ibis), a species known to practice fatal
sibling aggression (or siblicide ). The marginal third egg of this species
contained much less yolk testosterone (plus two similar steroids) than those of
its two nestmates, which normally hatch 1-3 days earlier. The fact that the
egret pattern (decreasing steroid dose) is exactly opposite that found in
canaries, but congruent with the effects of hatching asynchrony, suggests that
hormone depositions into yolks could be a widespread and flexible parental
adaptation for rigging intra-brood competitive dynamics and survival. The
proposed study aims to explore this matter through two field studies. First, the
cattle egret system will be experimentally manipulated by injecting various
levels of a 3-steroid cocktail into last-laid eggs, then measuring the
subsequent competitive behaviors (begging and fighting) of the hatchlings under
field conditions. If steroid-manipulation is part of an evolved parental
strategy for managing sibling competition, broods with boosted last- eggs should
show escalated fighting and begging, ultimately to the detriment of parental
interests. Second, to test whether the mother s cutback on steroids is a general
phenomenon and associated with families in which sib- competition is especially
keen, an exploratory survey will be made of the other siblicidal species, each
paired with a closely-related but nonaggressive sister species. As with cattle
egret pilot work, clutches of eggs will be collected as soon as each is laid,
their yolks frozen for later laboratory assays of steroid content. Through this
work, we expect to increase understanding of the reproductive strategies of
parents under natural conditions and to determine whether maternal steroid
dosing is a general mechanism used to enhance parental fitness.