* 9604659
* Synapse Specification Among Motor Neurons in Caenorhabditis Elegans
* BIO,IOS
* 06/01/1997,11/30/1998
* W. Walthall, Georgia State University
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Platt
* 11/30/1998
* USD 30,158.00

ABSTRACT 9604659 WALTHALL The production of a functional neural circuit begins
with the differentiation of nerve cells and ends with synaptic communication
between cells. Comparative studies of the mechanisms and molecules that
orchestrate cellular differentiation and that mediate communication at synapses
have revealed a tremendous amount of conservation across evolutionarily diverse
animals. Much less is known about a critical intervening step, the selective
formation of synapses as the circuit is assembled. The award will allow Dr.
Walthall and his students to investigate the genetic and molecular mechanisms
that create the synaptic patterns that distinguish two related classes of
motoneurons in the nematode Caenorhabditis elegans. Unique features of C.
elegans make it ideal for an experimental approach that integrates the roles of
genetic and cellular programs involved in establishing orderly synaptic
patterns. Two classes of locomotory neurons in C. elegans, the dorsal D
motoneurons (DD mns) and the ventral D motoneurons (VD mns), make up a cross-
inhibitory network that plays a critical role in the animal's serpentine
movements. The DD and VD motorneurons share many structural and neurochemical
features, but they are distinguished from one another by their synaptic
patterns. The similarities between the two motoneuron classes appear to be due
to the expression of ge