* 9604622
* Signal Transduction Mechanisms Regulating Axon Guidance     of Drosophila Pioneer Neurons
* BIO,IOS
* 02/15/1997,01/31/2001
* Mark VanBerkum, Wayne State University
* Standard Grant
* Harold E. Vaessin
* 01/31/2001
* USD 260,116.00

9604622 PI: VanBerkum After neurons are born, they must extend axons over great
distances to innervate their target cells. The tip of the extending axon, called
the growth cone, detects a variety of molecular cues along its path which guide
the neuron to its target. These cues are converted inside the neuron into
signals regulating axon outgrowth, steering and ultimately the formation of a
functional connection (a synapse) with a target cell. Calcium ions are critical
to this conversion process inside a neuron. In his previous work, Dr. VanBerkum
established that the inhibition of calcium signaling in selected outgrowing
axons causes these axons to stall or follow abnormal trajectories. The goal of
the present experiments is to elucidate which proteins are used inside the axon
to correctly convert calcium-dependent guidance information into proper pathway
formation. A combination of cell and genetic experiments are being conducted to
specifically inhibit individual components of the calcium signaling pathway
inside these neurons. The inhibition of a protein component is expected to
elicit similar developmental defects as previously observed. Thus the results of
these experiments will elucidate the molecular mechanism by which calcium
regulates the development of functional connections in the nervous system.
Moreover, since calcium is also used in the adult to modulate synaptic activity,
these experiments will shed light on how calcium is used during learning and
memory.