* 9604238
* Corticofugal Control of Central Auditory Sensitivity
* BIO,IOS
* 06/15/1997,11/30/1999
* Philip Jen, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Avijit Chaudhuri
* 11/30/1999
* USD 149,766.00

IBN-9604238 PI: Jen During sensory signal processing, the brain has the built-in
ability to edit and adjust the flow of information that reaches it. It is known
that the cortex has neural pathways, called corticofugal pathways, that descend
to influence the neural activity carrying information coming up to the cortex by
the ascending sensory pathways. We know very little about how and when these
descending pathways exert their influence, but in the auditory system they are
believed to be important in functions such as pattern recognition and
localization of acoustic signals. This project uses a physiological approach to
determine how descending cortical pathways can affect the response activity of
single auditory nerve cells in a midbrain auditory structure called the superior
colliculus. Electrophysiological recordings will examine corticofugal regulation
of intensity coding, frequency tuning, and auditory spatial sensitivity of these
neurons. This system may be a way for the brain to 'focus in' on important but
faint auditory signals in a noisy environment, for example in echolocation
behavior. Results from this work will be important for developing a more
realistic and dynamic model of central auditory processing. It also will enhance
our understanding of active regulation of signal processing by the brain, and so
will have a potential impact on understanding other sensory systems, as well as
on fields such as neuroethology, animal behavior, and on bioengineering
including development of aids for hearing.