* 9604493
* U.S.-Korea Cooperative Research: Theoretical Study of       Dielectric Response Function and Applications to the  Screening, Optical, &amp; Superconducting Properties of Solid Syst
* O/D,OISE
* 06/15/1997,05/31/1999
* Steven Louie, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Gerald Edwards
* 05/31/1999
* USD 11,890.00

9604493 Louie This award provides funds to permit Drs. Steven G. Louie and
Marvin L. Cohen, Department of Physics, University of California, Berkeley, to
pursue with Dr. Kee Joo Chang, Department of Physics, Korea Advanced Institute
of Science and Technology (KAIST), and Dr. Jisoon Ihm, Center for Theoretical
Physics, Seoul National University, for 24 months, a program of cooperative
research on the dielectric response function and its applications to solid
systems. Applications will be made to investigate optical properties,
quasiparticle excitations energies, electron-electron repulsive interactions in
superconductors, and dielectric screening of large systems. Recent theoretical
advances, going beyond the standard momentum space formalism, have allowed the
efficient first-principles calculation of the dielectric matrix and the
electronic structure of solids. The significance of the proposed research is to
provide deeper insight into the understanding of electron- electron interactions
in solids, in particular, those manifested in exchange-correlation effects and
local-field screening. The collaborators are recognized experts in the field of
this research. Their collaboration, which will include their graduate students,
is intended to provide an intellectual bridge between the U.S. and Korea in this
field of science. This project is relevant to the objectives of the U.S.-Korea
Cooperative Science Program which seeks to increase the level of cooperation
between U.S. and Korean scientists and engineers through the exchange of
scientific information, ideas, skills, and techniques and through collaboration
on problems of mutual benefit. This project provides an international research
experience for a U.S. graduate student. Korean participation is supported by the
Korea Science and Engineering Foundation (KOSEF). ***