* 9604918
* Limonene Hydroxylases as a Model for Cytochrome P450        Catalysis
* BIO,MCB
* 02/01/1997,07/31/2001
* Rodney Croteau, Washington State University
* Continuing grant
* Susan Porter Ridley
* 07/31/2001
* USD 366,674.00

9604918 Croteau The cytochrome P450 hydroxylases are an important class of
enzymes in both plants and animals. They are responsible for key biosynthetic
steps in the formation of plant and animal hormones and play essential roles in
detoxification of environmental toxins in animals and herbicides in plants. As a
class, the cytochrome P450 hydroxylases have been difficult to study because
they are recalcitrant to crystallization for x-ray structure determination and
they are highly diverse in form and in reaction type, thus providing limited
opportunity to understand the relationship between enzyme structure and specific
function. The limonene hydroxylases of mint species provide a unique opportunity
for exploring how enzyme structural features determine the three-dimensional
course of the reaction catalyzed. Three distinct limonene hydroxylases have been
cloned from common mint species, each of which carries out the specific addition
of a hydroxyl group to a different position on the same, very simple terpenoid
substrate limonene. These cytochrome P450 enzymes are very similar in primary
structure (amino acid sequence), and it is likely that very subtle differences
in the shape of the active sites determine the specific position of
hydroxylation on the substrate. Photoactive substrate analogs are being used to
locate the active sites, and mutagenesis studies are being employed to determine
which specific amino acids of the active site direct the position of
hydroxylation. Fluorinated analogs of limonene have been synthesized and will be
used in conjunction with nuclear magnetic resonance spectrometry to correlate
the precise binding geometry of the substrate with the reaction carried out by
each native and mutant enzyme. Completion of these experimental objectives will
provide a level of structural understanding that has not been possible with
other types of cytochrome P450 enzymes. The information gained may allow the
manipulation and redesign of important metabolic pathways in plants, broad
implications for the production of novel plant products, such as
pharmaceuticals, agrochemicals and industrial intermediates, and for the
improvement of disease, insect, and herbicide resistance of crop species. This
project is concerned with a class of plant enzymes called cytochrome P450s. They
catalyze a variety of reactions that are necessary for plants to make important
secondary metabolites such as taxol, defense mediators, and hormones. In
addition, P-450s can detoxify pollutants and breakdown compounds such as
herbicides. This project will result in new information about exactly how these
enzymes interact with their substrates to direct synthesis of diverse products.
The work has implications for metabolic engineering, bioremediation, and crop
disease resistance.