* 9604848
* Mechanisms by Which Marine Algae Respond to Environmental   Variables Affecting Reproductive Success
* NONE,NONE
* 02/01/1997,01/31/2001
* Susan Brawley, University of Maine
* Continuing grant
* Kitti Williams
* 01/31/2001
* USD 364,035.00

9604848 Brawley Many marine species reproduce by external fertilization. This
mode of reproduction might be expected to result in low levels of fertilization
and recruitment because of the dilution of eggs and sperm by the turbulent sea.
Recent work, however, demonstrates that fucoid algae (i.e., brown seaweed's that
are important components of rocky, intertidal zones and estuaries) sense water
motion and release eggs and sperm only when the sea is calm. Nearly 100% of
their eggs are fertilized. The proposed experiments will determine how these
algae sense water motion and whether similar responses are found in several
other species that are harvested commercially or are important nuisance species.
Studies of the reproductive tissues with electron microscopic and physiological
techniques will establish the basis of the mechanical forces that expel eggs and
sperm from adults and how these are blocked by high water motion. Field studies
of natural communities in New England estuaries will complement the laboratory
work. These studies will advance understanding of the mechanisms by which marine
algae respond to environmental variables that affect reproductive success. This
information should be useful to basic scientists, marine engineers, coastal zone
managers, and mariculturists.