* 9604658
* Regulation of mRNA Stability in Plastids
* BIO,MCB
* 07/01/1997,06/30/2000
* Wilhelm Gruissem, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing grant
* Susan Porter Ridley
* 06/30/2000
* USD 300,000.00

9604658 Gruissem Current information suggests that regulated mRNA stability is
an important control point of gene expression in light-dependent development of
chloroplasts and activation of photosynthesis. Recent work on mRNA processing
and turnover in prokaryotes, eukaryotes and cellular organelles indicate the
3'end plays a key role in generating functional mRNA and regulating its
degradation. This laboratory previously has shown that mRNA 3' stem-loop
structures act in concert with nucleases and regulatory proteins to direct
correct mRNA processing or degradation in chloroplasts. These nucleases are
assembled into a high molecular weight (HMW) complex, which is similar in
function to the recently reported RNA 'degradosome' in E. coli, but in
chloroplasts is regulated by ancillary nuclear-encoded CS-type RNA binding
proteins to produced correctly processed and stable mRNA 3'-ends. Plants
expressing antisense RNA to the CS-type proteins die early in development
consistent with the critical role of these proteins in chloroplast function.
Once a stable mRNA has been formed, its degradation is determined by RNA binding
proteins that regulate the endonucleolytic removal of the stabilizing 3' stem-
loop structure. Degradation of the cleaved RNA is accelerated by 3'
polyadenylation, which also can accelerate degradation of the mature 3' stem-
loop RNA by a light-regulated mechanism. These results indicate that in plant
cells polyadenylation of cytoplasmic and plastid mRNAs operates in parallel but
with different consequences for the metabolism of the respective mRNAs. This
research will focus on the functional dissection of the chloroplast HMW nuclease
complex using component proteins which have been purified and cloned. Combined
biochemical and genetic approaches will clarify the roles of enzymes that
participate in mRNA metabolism and establish the function of the CS-type RNA
binding proteins in light-regulated chloroplast mRNA processing and decay.
Understanding the mechanisms by which pla stid mRNA decay is regulated will
provide important new information on the nuclear control of organelle gene
expression, and because of the importance of photosynthesis for plant
productivity, will have relevance to future plant and agricultural
biotechnology. Current information suggests that regulated mRNA stability is an
important control point of gene expression in light-dependent development of
chloroplasts and activation of photosynthesis. This research will employ
combined biochemical and genetic approaches to clarify the roles of enzymes that
participate in mRNA metabolism and to establish the function of RNA binding
proteins in light-regulated chloroplast mRNA processing and decay. Understanding
the mechanisms by which chloroplast mRNA decay is regulated will provide
important new information on the nuclear control of organelle gene expression,
and because of the importance of photosynthesis for plant productivity, will
have relevance to future plant and agricultural biotechnology.