* 9604424
* Integration of Canopy and Hydraulic Architecture in         Neotropical Shrubs Along Light and Moisture Gradients
* BIO,IOS
* 03/01/1997,08/31/2001
* Robert Pearcy, University of California-Davis
* Continuing Grant
* Jack Hayes
* 08/31/2001
* USD 270,000.00

9604424 Pearcy This research will investigate the interrelationships between the
hydraulics of a plant crown, and the amount and arrangement of leaf area on that
crown that functions for light capture using the in species of the genus
Psychotria, a prominent genus of shrubs. The basic hypothesis is that there is a
tradeoff between maximizing light capture and providing sufficient stem
conductivity to supply water to the leaves and that this tradeoff differs
between species adapted to areas subject to drought and species adapted to areas
more or less permanently wet. The species to be utilized occur along habitat
gradients of light and fry season severity so that the selective pressures for
hydraulics versus light capture will differ among them. A computer simulation
model that can reconstruct the three-dimensional architecture of a plant will be
used to estimate the light capture capacity and efficiency of the crown
architectures of the different species. The stem hydraulic conductances and the
vulnerability to cavitation, which is the formation of air bubbles in the xylem
that blocks water flow and can lead to death of the shoot, will be determined.
Finally, stem hydraulic conductances will be mapped onto the crown architectures
and used in the simulations to explore the consequences of species differences
in the vulnerability to cavitation under different drought scenarios. This
research will provide insight into how the functional morphology of the crowns,
the most visible manifestation of species differences, relates to species
distribution along light and moisture gradients. Since light and moisture
gradients are important determinants of biodiversity in tropical forests the
research will ultimately provide insight into the functional controls on
biodiversity in these forests.