* 9604070
* Comparative Physiology of Renal Transepithelial Phosphate   Transport in Three Vertebrate Systems
* BIO,IOS
* 04/01/1997,03/31/2001
* J. Larry Renfro, University of Connecticut
* Continuing Grant
* William E. Zamer
* 03/31/2001
* USD 234,400.00

9604070 Renfro Inorganic phosphate has important functions in all cells and is a
vital part of structural components of the body such as bones and teeth. The
amount of phosphate within an organism can alter calcium balance, acidity of
body fluids, and growth. Dietary phosphate intake and renal excretion determine
the availability of inorganic phosphate for normal metabolism. Inadequate
dietary phosphorous intake can cause hypophosphatemia, which, if chronic is a
potentially deleterious state, especially in a growing animal. Hypophosphatemia
is avoided by rapid mobilization of phosphate from muscle and bone. This can
result in hypercalcemia and increased renal calcium excretion. Thus, the kidney
mechanisms of transport as well as their control are important areas of
investigation. Renal excretion of phosphate is regulated, or otherwise
influenced, by a variety of factors including serum phosphate concentration,
acid-base balance, and calcium metabolism as well as a variety of hormones. In
the vertebrates, a multitude of hormones has been shown to alter renal phosphate
transport, but our understanding of the control of this process is incomplete.
Recently, both stanniocalcin and somotolactin, hormones which were thought to be
unique to fish, have been found in other vertebrate classes including mammals
(rats and humans). Because these hormones stimulate phosphate transport in
flounder, it is important to examine their effect on phosphate transport in
other vertebrates. Dr. Renfro will examine the processes by which these factors
alter body phosphate.