* 9604072
* The Origin of Phyllotactic Pattern
* BIO,IOS
* 04/01/1997,03/31/2000
* Ian Sussex, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Judith Plesset
* 03/31/2000
* USD 158,531.00

Sussex 9604072 During vegetative growth, the shoot apical meristems of a given
plant species initiate leaves in a predictable pattern. This arrangement of
leaves about the stem is called phyllotaxy. Although phyllotaxy has been the
subject of a great deal of research by developmental biologists, physiologists
and mathematicians, our understanding of this patterning process remains
rudimentary. This project examines the emergence of phyllotactic pattern on
newly formed, adventitious meristems of the commercially cultivated flax plant,
Linum usitatissimum. This approach differs from previous studies which focused
primarily on the maintenance of the established phyllotactic pattern on older
shoots. The long term objective of this research is to better understand the
processes involved in the establishment of phyllotactic pattern. Flax
adventitious meristems are an excellent model system in which to study the
emergence of phyllotactic pattern. When flax seedlings are decapitated just
below the cotyledons, many new shoot meristems form on the stump of the
hypocotyl which remains. Because these adventitious shoot meristems are derived
from a small number of epidermal cells, meristem and leaf primordium formation
are easily observed and experimentally manipulated. The first leaf formed by
these adventitious meristems consistently emerges in a predictable position. In
addition, the first leaf often displays a "multiple" leaf phenotype suggesting
that two leaf primordia have fused together. Both the predictability of leaf
position and the formation of multiple leaves provide opportunities to test many
of the theoretical explanations of phyllotaxy which have been set forth in the
literature. Three specific aims will be addressed in this proposal. First, a
variety of surgical and physiological manipulations will be used to investigate
the influences involved in the predictable positioning of the first leaf formed
by a flax adventitious meristem. These experiments will directly test the
importance of p hysical and chemical properties of the meristem in phyllotactic
patterning. Second, the formation of multiple leaves on flax adventitious
meristems will be characterized using scanning electron microscopy of serial
replicas of meristems. In other plant species, the presence of multiple leaves
has often been reported on shoots which are undergoing a shift in phyllotactic
pattern, but the ontogeny of these leaves has not been carefully studied. This
project will focus on the process by which multiple leaves form, emphasizing the
connections between the development of these leaves and theories of phyllotaxy.
Finally, transgenic plants which express green fluorescent protein exclusively
in meristematic tissue will be developed; confocal microscopy will be used to
observe the earliest stages of adventitious meristem development in living
tissue and, perhaps, to distinguish between meristematic tissue and incipient
leaf primordia. The ability to visualize very young meristems and leaf primordia
in living plants will provide insight into phyllotactic patterning events which
has not been available previously.