* 9604800
* High-Performance Liquid Chromatography System for The Center for Bioremediation and Detoxification
* BIO,DBI
* 07/01/1997,06/30/1999
* Hector Flores, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Gregory K. Farber
* 06/30/1999
* USD 63,668.00

&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;9604800.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; This proposal explains the
need to replace the current high-performance liquid chromatography (HPLC)
systems in the Center for Bioremediation and detoxification at The Pennsylvania
State University. A new HPLC system is required because the present systems are
deteriorated and outdated. They lack several important features that would allow
various essential analyses. We have selected the instruments available from
Hewlett Packard (HP) and Isco. Our decision was based on the versatility,
reliability, and reputation of the companies (i.e. one-call service, high up-
time, onsite installation, and demonstration of the features by qualified
engineers). We believe the instruments described below provide the maximum
versatility and time-cost effectiveness available in a high-performance liquid
chromatography system needed by our Center.&lt;br/&gt; The research at the
laboratories of the Center is mostly concerned with the fate of environmentally
important chemicals and bioremediation of contaminated sites. The Center's
interdisciplinary program integrates science with engineering through the
research expertise of engineering, chemistry, biology, agronomy, plant
pathology, geochemistry, mining engineering, ecology, and microbiology faculty.
&lt;br/&gt;