* 9604356
* Signal Integration in Individual Neurons
* BIO,IOS
* 01/01/1997,12/31/1999
* Dejan Zecevic, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Roy L. White
* 12/31/1999
* USD 297,494.00

Understanding the biophysical properties of single neurons and how they process
information is fundamental to understanding how the brain works. Previous
studies of signaling in neuronal processes were limited to electrode recordings
from a single site and to high-resolution imaging experiments using
intracellular ion-indicators. However, regional electrical properties of neurons
are extraordinarily complex and impossible to understand in the absence of
detailed, spatially well resolved measurements of electrical signals. Recent
developments in this laboratory now permit monitoring membrane potential
transients at many sites by an optical imaging technique that employs
intracellular voltage-sensitive dyes. The long-term goal is to use the
information about individual nerve cells as the basis for understanding of the
fundamental question of how networks of interconnected neurons operate to
control behavior. The main objective of this proposal is to investigate by
direct measurement how one particular neuron is functionally organized and to
build a complete biophysical compartmental model. The model would represent a
full description of the computational properties of a nerve cell. For instance,
the obtained information will be used to test directly the hypothesis that
individual neurons can be functionally subdivided, with some of the processes
functioning as independent units. If true, this postulate would have important
implications for the functional complexity of individual neurons. Individual
nerve cells will be selectively stained in situ by intracellular application of
a membrane impermeant voltage- sensitive fluorescent dye. Propagation of and
interactions between electrical signals evoked by stimulating the cell will be
analyzed by optically monitoring voltage transients at multiple sites in the
soma and neuro nal processes. Standard electrophysiological techniques for
recording and stimulation and advanced modeling software will also be used. One
exemplar neuron, the giant metacerebral cell of the land snail Helix, will be
characterized in detail. The complete description will include: (1)
determination of the number, size, and position of spike trigger zones; (2)
determination of the propagation properties of different axonal branches; (3)
determination of the spatial distribution of synaptic inputs; (4) determination
of spatial and electrical distances between trigger zones and functionally
important parts of the neuron (sites of synaptic contacts and axonal branch
points). The results of this analysis will bear on the basic neuroscience of
signaling.