* 9604409
* The Role(s) of Forked Proteins in Actin Fiber Bundle        Formation
* BIO,MCB
* 05/15/1997,04/30/2001
* Nancy Petersen, University of Wyoming
* Standard Grant
* Michael Mishkind
* 04/30/2001
* USD 149,954.00

Nancy S. Petersen 9604409 (Technical Abstract): In Drosophila melanogaster
forked and singed mutants, actin fiber bundles are dramatically reduced in
developing bristles. As a result, in the adult fly, the bristles are twisted and
branched. The normal genes corresponding to these two mutations have recently
been cloned and sequenced. The singed protein is homologous to sea urchin fascin
and bundles actin fibers in vitro, indicating that it may play a role similar to
fimbrin in intestinal brush boarder microvilli. The forked gene in Drosophila is
essential for normal bristle development and encodes six proteins with
overlapping coding regions which differ primarily in their amino-terminal ends.
Preliminary data indicates that the forked proteins are also actin binding
proteins. Their amino acid sequences are similar to the predicted sequence of a
newly-identified actin binding protein called espin, has been found in rat
testis ectoplasmic specializations. Furthermore, an antibody to espin
specifically recognizes forked proteins on Western blots. This suggests that
forked belongs to a new family of actin binding proteins that are involved in
actin fiber bundle assembly. The aim of this project is to study the role of
forked proteins in actin fiber bundle formation in Drosophila bristles.
Preliminary data using confocal microscopy, affinity chromatography and actin
sedimentation assays indicates that the forked proteins bind to actin and are
involved the initiation of actin fiber bundle formation as well as in connecting
actin fiber bundles longitudinally in the very long (> 100 mm) bundles. The
actin binding sites in the forked proteins will be identified and characterized
using quantitative assays involving in vitro co-sedimentation with F-actin.
Specific antibodies will be made for each of the different forked proteins,
which will be used to examine the distribution of forked proteins in bristles
from normal pupae and several forked mutations in which certain of the forked
proteins are not synthesized. The actin fiber bundle structure will be examined
in wild type and mutant pupae by confocal microscopy. Homologues of forked will
be identified in vertebrate tissues which have actin bundles similar to those in
Drosophila bristles. (Lay Abstract): Actin microfilaments are a major class of
cytoskeletal elements ubiquitous to all eukaryotic organisms. Regulation of the
assembly of actin microfilaments into bundles or fibers is required for many
cellular functions, including cell movement, changing and maintaining cell
shape, and cell division. Actin binding proteins are essential in regulating
these processes. The common fruit fly, Drosophila melanogaster, is a well
established model system for studies of genetics and development, and is
becoming an increasingly important model system for cell biology. It is possible
to use appropriate mutants of Drosophila to study the actin fiber bundles
involved in bristle development during the pupal stage. These fiber bundles are
morphologically very similar to actin fiber bundles present in vertebrate
intestinal brush border and in stereocilia in the ear and kidney, and the
information obtained in these studies about actin-binding proteins will likely
be relevant not only to the biology of Drosophila but eukaryotic organisms in
general. ***