* 9604270
* Regulation of Glucose-6-Phosphate Dehydrogenase Expression  in Nostoc Punctiforme
* BIO,MCB
* 06/01/1997,05/31/2001
* John Meeks, University of California-Davis
* Continuing grant
* Hector E. Flores
* 05/31/2001
* USD 300,000.00

9604270 Meeks The overall goal of this project is to characterize
transcriptional and posttranslational regulation of glucose-6-phosphate
dehydrogenase (G6PD) expression in the nitrogen fixing, facultatively
heterotrophic cyanobacterium Nostoc punctiforme. G6PD is the initial enzyme of
the oxidative pentose phosphate pathway. Previous work in this laboratory
established that G6PD is essential for nitrogen fixation and dark growth of N.
punctiforme, that transcription of G6PD increases during growth in the absence
of ammonium and presence of N2, and that G6PD catalytic activity is dependent on
the product of a cotranscribed gene termed opcA. The specific objectives are to:
1. Identify the mechanisms of regulation of transcription of G6PD with the
respect to the nitrogen responsive operator/promoter region P1 and P5. Promoter
activity in the 5' regions of P1 and P5 will be verified by in vivo (reporter
gene expression) and in vitro (footprinting and runoff transcription assay)
experiments. The regulatory 5' regions of P1 and P5 will be used in mobility
shift assays to identify and isolate DNA binding proteins that function as
activators or repressors. 2. Determine the role of OpcA in G6PD catalytic
activity. Assays of specific activity, and activity stains and immunodetection
in native protein gels will be used to examine the catalytic and aggregation
states of G6PD, dependent on OpcA, in extracts from wild-type and opcA- mutant
strains. This work will provide information about transcription in an
ecologically significant organism. The overall goal of this project is to
identify the biochemical mechanisms involved in expression of the enzyme
glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase (G6PD) in the cyanobacterium (blue-green alga)
Nostoc punctiforme. Previous work in the laboratory established that G6PD is
essential for nitrogen fixation in this, and related, organisms. Photosynthetic,
nitrogen fixing cyanobacteria are the most nutritionally independent organisms
on earth and have an es sentially ubiquitous distribution in habitats exposed to
light; thus, they are important for maintaining stable environments might be
used in bioremediation of certain polluted habitats. DNA sequences that regulate
the synthesis of enzymes such as G6PD could be used to construct biodegrading
metabolic pathways in cyanobacteria. There are two specific objectives in this
project: identification of DNA sequence important in regulation of enzyme
synthesis, and of protein-protein interactions in enzyme activity. Biochemical
assays monitoring protein-DNA interactions will be used to identify the
important DNA sequences and regulated steps in the synthesis of G6PD. The role
of an associated protein in the formation of more active highly aggregated
states of G6PD will be determined by concurrently measuring enzyme activity and
molecular size (aggregated state). This project will provide new information
about an ecologically significant group of organisms.