* 9604334
* Cell-Cell Influences on the Form of an Identified Motor     Neuron
* BIO,IOS
* 02/15/1997,07/31/2000
* Karla Kent, Oregon Health & Science University
* Continuing Grant
* Dennis M. Higgins
* 07/31/2000
* USD 310,868.00

Kent 9604334 Steroid hormones are known to exert profound developmental and
behavioral effects on organisms ranging from insects to humans. One way that
steroids exert these effects is by influencing the shape and structure of
specific neurons in the central nervous system. The shape of each neuron will
determine, in part, the numbers and types of connections it makes with other
neurons and these connections, in turn, will dictate or influence behavior. As a
result of development, aging, injury, or disease, neuronal connections may be
altered and an individual's behavior changed. Although steroid hormones have
been implicated in playing a role in these processes, the mechanisms by which
steroids influence individual neurons and their connections is still poorly
understood. Dr. Kent's research is directed towards understanding how a steroid
hormone can influence the shape of an neuron. By using individual steroid-
sensitive neurons from a simple model insect system, she will define the
conditions under which steroid hormones exert their effects on neuronal shape
and size and then identify cellular and molecular mechanisms underlying these
steroid induced changes. Information gained in the course of these studies will
contribute to a growing understanding of steroid action on the nervous system
and ultimately to the development of strategies ranging from the control of
insect pests to the treatment of birth defects, age-related diseases,
neurological damage, and psychiatric disorders.