* 9604785
* Combined Atomic Force and Total Internal Reflection         Fluorescence Microscopy for Biological Research
* BIO,DBI
* 02/15/1997,01/31/1999
* William Reichert, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Lee C. Makowski
* 01/31/1999
* USD 132,227.00

The Center for Cellular and Biosurface Engineering at Duke University requests
funding to purchase atomic force microscopy (AFM) instrumentation for the shared
use of faculty within the Center. No such instrumentation currently exists
within the Center for shared use. A significant number of the core investigators
have used atomic force microscopes at other institutions. The requested Digital
Instruments MultiMode/BioscopeTM AFM allows simultaneous optical microscopy and
AFM imaging. We propose to further extend the capabilities of the BioscopeTM AFM
by incorporating total internal reflection fluorescence microscopy (TIRFM) into
its optics. This instrument will enhance the research of six members in the
interdisciplinary Center for Cellular and Biosurface Engineering (from four
departments) in the following research projects: (1) characterization of
crystalline, two-dimensional bacterial s-layer protein arrays and nanopatterned
protein arrays directed by the s-layer nanotemplates; (2) elucidation of the
mechanism of mechanical signal transduction in musculoskeletal cells; (3)
characterization of photopatterned antibody arrays designed for a multianalyte
integrated optical waveguide sensor; (4) quantitative imaging of endothelial
cell attachment and spreading processes on novel, micropatterned cell-adhesive
ligand substrates; (5) characterization of a DNA chip: multiplexed, spatially-
localized oligonucleotide arrays on silicon substrates; (6) analysis of motor
proteins by AFM; and (7) development of a biophysical model to relate protein-
ligand recognition energetics to AFM-measured intermolecular forces. The
acquisition of an AFM will also significantly enhance the educational mission of
the Center for Cellular and Biosurface Engineering at Duke University. The
Center was the recent recipient of a special opportunity award from the Whitaker
Foundation for educational enhancements to the program at both the undergraduate
and graduate levels. The Center is committed to developing innovative laboratory
classes that utilize contemporary experimental techniques to understand,
quantify, and visualize the fundamental forces, stresses, and recognition
processes at the molecular and cellular levels that are central to biological
phenomena. The ability of the atomic force microscope to investigate these
phenomena in a biologically-relevant milieu in real time combined with its
relative ease of use makes it an ideal experimental technique for a number of
the laboratory components of a new graduate course under development.