* 9604566
* New Applications for Atomic Force Microscopy of Biomaterials
* BIO,MCB
* 04/01/1997,09/30/2000
* Helen Hansma, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Continuing grant
* Kamal Shukla
* 09/30/2000
* USD 435,000.00

9604566 Hansma This research on atomic force microscopy (AFM) of biomaterials is
being carried out on two classes of biomaterials: 1) DNA and DNA-protein
complexes, and 2) Synaptic vesicles. More specifically, 1) the research on DNA
and DNA protein complexes includes: a) unzipping DNA--pulling apart the 2
strands of the double helix in such a way that the base pairs have the
possibility of separating one by one, and, b) imaging individual enzyme
molecules in action on DNA. The first enzyme to be imaged in action on DNA will
be E. coli RNA polymerase (RNAP), because it is active even when bound to a hard
surface. The template for this enzyme will be a 42-base circular DNA molecule,
because it replicates continuously, so that active enzyme molecules can be
imaged for several minutes or more with the AFM. 2) For the research on synaptic
vesicles, synaptic vesicles from the electric organ of Torpedo californica and
from rat brain will be probed by imaging and force mapping in aqueous buffer and
by phase mode imaging in air to investigate vesicle fusion, to measure the
elasticities of the vesicles (Young's Moduli) and to probe the adhesive
properties of the inner and outer surfaces of the vesicle membranes. The main
objective of this research is to extend the capabilities of the atomic force
microscopy (AFM) and probing biomaterials. The research on imaging enzyme
molecules in action on DNA will yield information about the motion of individual
enzyme molecules in the presence and absence of a substrate. The research on
unzipping DNA will provide valuable information about the forces between the two
strands of DNA. It is possible that sequence-specific information about DNA can
be obtained in this way. The ability to visualize and probe individual synaptic
vesicles in physiological solutions will complement the genetic and biochemical
advances that have been made in this field. The AFM is just beginning to realize
its potential as a valuable tool for biological research. This research also
educates students in the use of the AFM, a new microscope that is becoming
increasingly useful.