* 9604216
* Rough Eye: A Gene Involved in Morphogenesis of the          Drosophila Retina
* BIO,IOS
* 06/01/1997,03/29/1999
* Ulrike Heberlein, Ernest Gallo Clinic and Research Center
* Continuing grant
* Lawrence F. Kromer
* 03/29/1999
* USD 164,424.00

PI: Heberlein IBN-9604216 It is becoming increasingly obvious that the molecules
that carry out important steps during the development of animals as diverse as
fruitflies and mammals are quite similar, both in their structure as well as
their function. This conservation has recently been extended to molecules that
govern the development of the eye. For example, a fly gene (called eyeless) that
plays a crucial role in building the eye has a human homolog known to be mutated
in patients with Aniridia. Dr. Heberlein's group is studying the mechanisms and
molecules that are required for the proper development of the eye in the
fruitfly Drosophila. Of particular interest are two molecules, called hedgehog
and decapentaplegic, which are needed for cells in the eye to communicate with
each other so that the process of differentiation and assembly of the eye occurs
in an orderly fashion. Dr. Heberlein's group has shown that, as the first
photoreceptor cells differentiate in the retina, they begin expressing hedgehog.
This hedgehog induces undifferentiated neighboring cells to activate the
decapentaplegic gene and to differentiate as photoreceptors. These newly
differentiated photoreceptors then begin to express hedgehog, which then induces
their neighbors to undergo the same fate. This process repeats itself multiple
times as the eye gradually develops into an orderly structure that is crucial
for proper vision. Dr. Heberlein's group has also found that a fly mutant called
Rough eye disrupts the normal development of the retina. When this occurs, the
photoreceptor cells are disorganized, leading to a rough appearance of the eye's
normally smooth surface. In this mutant, photoreceptors produce excessive
amounts of hedgehog, and the process by which differentiation sweeps across the
retina is disrupted. Dr. Heberlein plans to clone the gene disrupted by the
Rough eye mutation and analyze the role of this gene during normal eye
development. Results from this study will not only give us kn owledge about the
intricate process of retinal development in Drosophila but probably reveal
valuable information about eye development in a wide variety of organisms,
including humans.