* 9604377
* In Vitro Evolution of RNA Modifying Ribozymes from Random   Sequence
* BIO,MCB
* 04/01/1997,03/31/2001
* Laura Landweber, Princeton University
* Continuing Grant
* Parag R. Chitnis
* 03/31/2001
* USD 313,827.00

9604377 Landweber In vitro selection (IVS) or directed molecular evolution,
allows the isolation and amplification of rare sequences that pass a selection
criterion. It can be used both to modify existing ribozymes and to isolate novel
ones from a large heterogeneous pool. the objective of this research is to use
the selection system to explore the possible link between RNA catalysis, RNA
editing and modification. Experiments are designed to test the role of RNA
catalysis in prebiotic evolution and the antiquity of a variety of forms of RNA
processing and modification, and to explore the evolution of ribozymes that have
the ability to modify RNA. The scope of RNA catalysis and "catalytic task space"
available to prebiotic systems will be investigated by selecting and
characterizing novel classes of ribozymes from different pools of approximately
1016 random sequences. One specific aim is to isolate novel 2'-o-methylating
ribozymes from random RNA sequences containing a core which binds the methyl
donor as a cofactor. The approach is isolating a methylating ribozyme is based
on the resistance of an oligonucleotide containing a single 2'-o-methyl ribose
to alkali hydrolysis as a means of separating methylated from unmethylated
ribonucleotide substrates and their associated ribozymes. As additional aim is
to analyze a ribozyme, discovered by IVS (under prior NSF SGER support), that
catalyzes a novel template-directed ligation involving non-canonical GU and G-G
interactions at the ligation site. The emergence of this unexpected RNA-
catalyzed ligation suggests that is could have been involved in the prebiotic
synthesis of longer RNA templates from oligoribonucleotide precursors. *** The
recent demonstration of the ability to isolate new ribozymes (RNA catalysts)
from a large pool of random oligonucleotide sequences has fueled an excitement
about the possibility of uncovering early pathways of RNA evolution, or even
resuscitating ribozyme activities that may have been exti nct for over three
billion years. Molecules present in as few as one in 1015 copies, which have
noval catalytic properties and could even serve as potential therapeutic agents,
can now be retrieved by the new approach of in vitro genetics. Thus a fantastic
tool is available for the synthesis of novel catalysts through combinatorial
chemistry or probing the stepwise prebiotic evolution of complex prebiotic
pathways, such as the ability to self-replicate or to edit RNA. This study takes
advantage of this advent in concept and methodology, with experiments designed
to explore RNA evolution, particularly the ribozymes that have the ability to
modify RNA. The role of RNA catalysis in prebiotic evolution and the antiquity
of a variety of forms of RNA processing and modification will also be studied.