* 9604342
* Analysis of the Inheritance and Positioning of the Golgi    Apparatus
* BIO,MCB
* 10/01/1997,09/30/2000
* Benjamin Glick, University of Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Eve Ida Barak
* 09/30/2000
* USD 309,000.00

9604342 Glick The Golgi apparatus has a distinctive structure and protein
composition, but the processes that give this organelle its unique character are
only beginning to be elucidated. For example, it is still unclear how Golgi
structures are inherited during cell division or how the Golgi is localized to a
particular region of the cytoplasm. A key to understanding these phenomena comes
from the finding that Golgi stacks are often situated near vesiculating
"transitional" regions of the endoplasmic reticulum (ER). The working hypothesis
for this project is that Golgi stacks are located near transitional ER sites
because Golgi assembly occurs at these sites, with new Golgi cisternae forming
by the coalescence of ER-derived vesicles. In this view, the Golgi can be
considered a dynamic outgrowth of the ER. The ultimate goal of this work is to
determine how a cell creates and propagates the transitional ER subdomains that
give rise to Golgi stacks. The experimental approach is to analyze Golgi
inheritance and positioning in two budding yeasts, Saccharomyces cerevisiae and
Pichia pastoris. In S. cerevisiae, the Golgi has a fragmented structure and
rarely displays a stacked cisternal morphology. Nevertheless, it is possible to
study Golgi inheritance in S. cerevisiae by monitoring the movement of Golgi
elements into the bud. For studies of Golgi positioning, P. pastoris is the
organism of choice because it contains a small number of discrete Golgi stacks
that resemble the organelles found in higher eukaryotes. Golgi stacks in P.
pastoris are located next to vesiculating membranes that evidently correspond to
transitional ER. Because P. pastoris is closely related to S. cerevisiae and can
be genetically manipulated in much the same way, it will be valuable to perform
a comparative study of the Golgi in these two yeasts. The project has two
Specific Aims. The first is to analyze the mechanism by which proteins are
localized to the transitional ER in P . pastoris. Antibodies are being raised
against P. pastoris components of the COPII- coated vesicle system, which
defines the transitional ER. Immunolocalization experiments will be performed to
confirm that these proteins are restricted to discrete subdomains of the ER.
Based on functional studies in S. cerevisiae, it seems likely that the specific
recruitment of COPII components to the transitional ER depends upon a restricted
localization of Sec12p, the protein that initiates the COPII assembly pathway.
This prediction will be tested by modifying the P. pastoris SEC12 gene in an
attempt to alter its localization. In addition, affinity methods will be used to
isolate partner proteins that may anchor Sec12p in transitional ER zones. The
second aim is to carry out genetic screens for identifying proteins that mediate
Golgi inheritance in S. cerevisiae. A strain of yeast has been created in which
Golgi organelles are labeled with Green Fluorescent Protein (GFP). These cells
will be mutagenized and screened visually to identify mutants that show defects
in Golgi inheritance. The relationship between ER and Golgi elements will be
examined in the mutant cells, and the genes responsible for the mutant
phenotypes will be cloned and characterized. The Golgi apparatus is a complex
organelle of eukaryotic cells which consists of a highly specialized collection
of membrane-enclosed compartments in which newly synthesized proteins and
certain complex glycoconjugates are covalently modified and other complex
glycoconjugates are synthesized. Most of the proteins and complex
glycoconjugates within the Golgi complex, whether soluble inside the
compartments or membrane-bound, are only transiently resident there; once the
syntheses and modifications are completed, these macromolecules are sorted and
transported to other sites inside or outside the cell, where they carry out
their specific functions. The Golgi complex may assume different morphologies
and subcellular locations (and even specific metabolic functions) depending on
the specific cell type and the stage of the life cycle of the cell. Although the
Golgi complex has been studied intensively for decades, and much is known about
specific Golgi enzymes and the fate of macromolecules that pass through the
complex, there is still much about it that remains poorly understood. This
project addresses fundamental questions about the biogenesis of the Golgi
complex, utilizing cutting-edge technologies and approaches. If the results
support Dr. Glick's hypothesis, they will force a change in the way
investigators think about the Golgi complex, in terms of its function and its
origin within the cell. ***