* 9604699
* Comparative Aspects of the Air-Breathing Transition in the  Oxudercine Fishes
* BIO,IOS
* 07/15/1997,09/30/2001
* Jeffrey Graham, University of California-San Diego
* Continuing Grant
* Jack Hayes
* 09/30/2001
* USD 199,977.00

Graham 9604699 The mudskipper fish are in the subfamily Oxudercinae of the
family Goblidae. There are10 genera and about 25 species of oxudercines,
including the mudskippers. This subfamily has a broad geographic range, from
West Africa to Samoa, and most species live in shallow, warm, hypcxic tropical
regions. The mudskippers (Periophthalmus, Periophthalmodon, Boleophthalmus, and
Scartelaos) are distinguished from other oxudercines by their ability to live at
the water surface, with their heads exposed to air, or to even leave water and
live in the air for extended periods. Mudskippers accordingly have adaptations
for air breathing, for terrestrial locomotion, and for aerial vision, as well as
other specializations related to being out of water. This study will examine
some of these adaptations and attempt to understand the macroevolutionary
sequence of their acquisition, - - - that is to say, the point in the expansion
of this group when adaptations related to air exposure appeared. This sequence
is important to know because, while the current theory about the evolution of
vertebrate life on land is replete with details, based on fossils, about the
structural changes that accompanied the land invasion, much less detail is known
about the changes that occurred at the behavioral, sensory, physiological and
biochemical levels. Because the oxudercines contains species that never leave
water and others that are highly terrestrial, this group provide a special
window to the "bows" and "whys" of terrestrial invasion. This study will
investigate the nature of the functional elements related to the transition from
water to land, in particular, how access to aerial oxygen affected breathing and
metabolism. The mudskippers, in an ecological sense, are exploiting an open
ecological niche between water and land, one that was not filled by amphibians.
The PI thus provide clues as to how ancient ancestors of ail land animals may
have made the transition from living in shallow-water to living on land.