* 9604016
* Studies of Elongation Arrest and Transcript Hydrolysis by RNA Polymerase II
* NONE,NONE
* 02/01/1997,01/31/2000
* Diane Hawley, University of Oregon Eugene
* Continuing grant
* Susan Porter Ridley
* 01/31/2000
* USD 285,000.00

9604016 Hawley In recent years it has become increasingly clear that eukaryotic
transcription is regulated not only before synthesis of the transcript is
initiated, but also at the level of elongation of the RNA chains. Little is know
about how this regulation is implemented or about the structure and function of
RNA polymerase when it is in the process of elongating along the DNA template.
This research is a biochemical analysis of the proteins and nucleic acid
sequences that determine the transcription elongation behavior of human RNA
polymerase II in vitro. Two proteins that alter the elongation properties of RNA
polymerase II will be studied: TFIIF which increases the rate of elongation and
SII which enables RNA polymerase II to read through DNA arrest sites that would
otherwise block it progression. The structure and function of arrested and
productive elongation complexes will be investigated with the goal of obtaining
mechanistic information about how arrest occurs at arrest sites (which share
some features with better understood termination sites), and how TFIIF and SII
interact with those complexes to prevent or relieve elongation arrest.
Transcription complexes will be isolated and studied in vitro by attaching a DNA
template consisting of a promoter and the adenovirus major late arrest site to
agarose beads and assembling initiation, elongation or arrested complexes in an
extract of nuclear proteins from human cultured cells. Such complexes were used
previously to show that the base pairing of an oligonucleotide to the RNA in
transcription complex has a profound effect on the behavior of the complex
depending on where the base-pairing occurs. This work led to the hypothesis that
arrest results in a region of the nascent RNA being pulled back into the
polymerase, and will be further examined by analyzing the relationship between
oligonucleotide hybridization position and the conformation of the RNA
polymerase at the arrest site. Other experiments will map the upstream and do
wnstream boundaries of the polymerase on the DNA template in arrested and
productive elongation complexes, and will investigate the contribution of the
surrounding DNA sequence and the mechanism of TFIIF stimulation by measuring the
rate of single nucleotide incorporation into the RNA chain at defined positions
on the DNA template. This research will provide a detailed view of the structure
of RNA polymerase II elongation complexes and will suggest possible mechanisms
by which these complexes can be regulated. In recent years it has become
increasingly clear that eukaryotic transcription is regulated not only before
synthesis of the transcript is initiated, but also at the level of elongation of
the RNA chains. Little is known about how this regulation is implemented or
about the structure and function of RNA polymerase when it is in the process of
elongating along the DNA template. This research is a biochemical analysis of
the proteins and nucleic acid sequences that determine the transcription
elongation behavior of human RNA polymerase II. This research will provide a
detailed view of the structure of RNA polymerase II elongation complexes and
will suggest possible mechanisms by which these complexes can be regulated.