* 9604323
* Genetic Analysis of the Drosophila Immune Response
* BIO,MCB
* 04/01/1997,03/31/1999
* Kathryn Anderson, Sloan Kettering Institute For Cancer Research
* Continuing Grant
* DeLill Nasser
* 03/31/1999
* USD 250,000.00

9604323 Anderson Technical The long-term goal of the project is to characterize
the signaling pathways that are activated in Drosophila in response to infection
by pathogens and to learn how the signaling pathways are coordinated between
different tissues. In this proposal, a set of third chromosomal mutants that
block specific aspects of the immune response will be characterized and one gene
that affects multiple aspects of the immune response, ird1, will be
characterized molecularly. 1. The ird1 gene will be cloned and its expression in
hemocytes, fat body and other larval cell types assayed. Genetic mosaics will be
constructed to determine whether ird1 affects multiple branches of the immune
response because it coordinates these responses or whether it is required in
each of the cell types. To determine what signals activate ird1 and how ird1
implements the immune response, genetic interactions of ird1 with other mutants
response will be tested. 2. The genetic pathways that control specific branches
of the immune response and coordinate the immune responses of different cell
types will be defined. Complementation and mapping experiments will define the
number and location of third chromosomal genes that control the immune response.
The phenotypes of the novel genes affecting immune response will be
characterized and compared with the phenotypes of previously-identified genes
that may affect the immune response. Non-technical In all animals, the first
rapid response to infection by pathogens is mediated by the innate immune
response. Both the general strategies used in the innate immune response and a
number of molecular mechanisms appear to be conserved between invertebrates and
vertebrates. This is a proposal to initiate a systematic genetic study of the
innate immune response in Drosophila. These experiments will identify genes
required for the recognition of pathogen, for triggering the tissue-specific
responses to pathogen and for coordinating the immune responses of diff erent
tissues.