* 9604968
* Undergraduate Research in Experimental Physics:  Summer     Bridge Program
* MPS,PHY
* 03/01/1997,08/31/2000
* Robert Thews, University of Arizona
* Continuing Grant
* Terrence W. Rettig
* 08/31/2000
* USD 204,000.00

*** Thews Opportunities for undergraduate students to participate in ongoing
research projects in experimental physics are structured in a summer REU program
at the University of Arizona. Students may choose from a wide variety of
forefront physics activities, under the direction of senior faculty members from
the Department of Physics. The main student audience will be those who have
finished the equivalent of the first or second year curriculum in science or
engineering at Pima Community College, in preparation for transfer to a 4-year
degree program. This program is also available to similarly prepared students
from regions outside southern Arizona who will be resident in Tucson during the
summer. Graduate Teaching Assistants from the physics department serve as
mentors for the students. Special orientation and skills activities are
individually tailored to enable the students to continue their associations with
the research project after the completion of the summer REU program, most often
as paid laboratory associates. Recruitment activities place special emphasis on
women and underrepresented minorities. Because most students will start in this
program at a very early point in their scientific education, we encourage
continuity in their development by allowing past participants to apply for
admission in subsequent summer sessions. ***