* 9604265
* The Biochemical Basis and Ecological Significance of        Vertebrate Chitin Digestion
* BIO,IOS
* 04/01/1997,03/31/2001
* Allen Place, University of Maryland Biotechnology Institute
* Continuing Grant
* Kitti Williams
* 03/31/2001
* USD 229,613.00

9604265 Place Chitin is the second most abundant carbon biopolymer on earth,
after cellulose, yet the full details of its metabolism in vertebrates are not
well know. The goals of our proposal are to elucidate the origin of endogenous
chitin digestion in vertebrates, to develop a nonradioactive based method for
measuring chitin assimilation applicable to other species including man, and to
determine whether such assimilation contributes a significant cost or benefit to
the vertebrate ingestor. The investigation will first focus on a detailed
biochemical characterization of the vertebrate enzymes involve in chitin
breakdown (specifically in rainbow trout, Leach's Storm-petrel, a representative
seabird, and the European Starling, a representative passerine). Each of these
species have been shown to ingest natural prey high in chitin content and
possess extensive gastric chitinolytic activity. However, the ability to
breakdown chitin does not match with chitin utilization, since digestibilities
range from near zero in the trout to nearly 59% with Leach's Storm-petrel. No
evidence providing chitin assimilation efficiencies in vertebrates is currently
available. The data obtained will explain this apparent discrepancy between
chitinolytic enzyme activity and assimilation and perhaps explain why man does
not digest chitin very efficiently.