* 9604793
* Ecological Research Aircraft with Remote Sensing and        Flux Instrumentation
* BIO,DBI
* 04/01/1997,03/31/2001
* Walter Oechel, San Diego State University Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Gerald Selzer
* 03/31/2001
* USD 359,300.00

This proposal is to purchase and equip a very-light aircraft (RANS S-12 Airaile)
with remote sensing instruments (e.g. ground penetrating radar, infrared digital
multispectral camera, hyperspectral radiometer, and high-speed true and false
color video), net CO2, H2O vapor, energy balance sensors (NOAA-ATDD Mobile Flux
Platform), and meteorological sensors. This instrumentation will provide users
with integrated ecophysiological and biophysical data for arctic tundra and
semi-arid shrubland and woodland ecosystems, and builds on existing research
efforts by all users who have ongoing ecosystem research programs sponsored by
NSF (OPP) and others (e.g. DOE, NIGEC, EPRI, and USGS). By combining instruments
and research needs on a single aircraft, a dedicated reliable system for
integrated data collection will be established. This aircraft fills a critical
need of a group of researchers from several universities and agencies working on
the effects of global change and on ecosystem and landscape processes in the
arctic and southwest US. Projected ecological factors, such as impending climate
change and increasing concentrations of atmospheric CO2 and other greenhouse
gases, have the potential to alter global ecosystem structure and function.
These regional and global phenomena highlight the importance of large-scale,
process-based research. For example, although much process-based C balance
research has recently been conducted, the challenges of scaling these
predominantly plot-level estimates of ecosystem C exchange has been hampered by
the inability to directly assess the scaled, regional-level estimates. The
technology for directly assessing regional C balance and the biophysical
controls on ecosystem C balance has recently become available. Aircraft
platforms have been used extensively in recent initiatives to determine net CO2,
H20, and energy exchange of terrestrial ecosystems (FIFE, ABLE 3 A, BOREAS, and
NSF-LAII), and when linked with remote sensing instrument ation, significant
progress has been made in understanding spatial feed backs between surface
features and ecosystem C exchange.