* 9604966
* US-Turkey Cooperative Research:  Transfer of Energy from    High-Frequency to Low-Frequency Modes in Structures
* O/D,OISE
* 04/15/1997,03/31/2001
* Ali Nayfeh, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Osman Shinaishin
* 03/31/2001
* USD 20,000.00

Description: This award is for support of a cooperative project by Dr. Ali
Nayfeh, Professor of Engineering at Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State
University, Blacksburg, VA, and Dr. Gunay Anlas, Assistant Professor of
Mechanical Engineering at Bogazici University in Istanbul, Turkey. The main
objective of this research is to understand the effect of the lamination scheme
on the behavior of laminated composite plates under dynamic loads, and the
mechanism responsible for the transfer of energy from high-to-low frequency
modes. Different composite systems have laminates that are laid on top of each
other with different, prescribed, orientation. That difference in orientation
alters the properties of the laminate. Energy exchanges in multi-degree-of-
freedom systems, from high-to-low frequency modes can be the result of
combinations of internal resonances and the interaction between widely-spaced
modes. In this project both theoretical and experimental studies are planned.
Composite plates with various thickness and lay-ups will be built and tested at
VPI&amp;SU. Theoretical studies of the systems will be carried out at Bogazici
U. in Istanbul. Exchanges of visits will enable the researchers to better
correlate the experimental data to the understanding of the behavior of these
materials. Scope: This project will involve an established scientist, with
extensive experience in both analytical and experimental mechanics at
VPI&amp;SU, with a young Turkish scientist who has demonstrated analytical
capability in the same field, and who is particularly familiar with the behavior
of that class of materials, namely laminated composites. The combination of
facilities and graduate students at VPI&amp;SU with the analytical skills of Dr.
Anlas and the support of students and computing facilities at Bogazici
University is particularly useful in accomplishing the stated objectives of this
project. The American scientist is currently conducting extensive research in
this area under a grant from NSF's Division of Civil and Mechanical Systems
(CMS), and this international component should enhance the benefit to the US
team as well as to the Turkish side. The use of composite materials is growing
rapidly in many industries, including the aerospace industry and other, less
exotic, industries. The results of this research should help designers select
composites that will meet the required criteria for strengths and fatigue
resistance. Graduate students from the US and from Turkey are expected to
participate in the project. The project fits well with the objectives of the
Division of International Programs.