* 9604546
* Functional Analysis of Miniparamyosin in vivo
* NONE,NONE
* 08/01/1997,07/31/2000
* Sanford Bernstein, San Diego State University Foundation
* Continuing grant
* Eve Ida Barak
* 07/31/2000
* USD 196,119.00

9604546 Bernstein The goal of this project is to determine the function of
miniparamyosin, a thick filament protein that is likely to be important in
myofibril assembly and muscle contraction. This protein was discovered a few
years ago in Dr. Bernstein's laboratory. The N-terminal quarter of this protein
is unique, while the remainder is identical to the C- terminal half of the thick
filament core protein paramyosin. From the work of others, miniparamyosin is now
known to be a component of many invertebrate muscles, and its presence in a
number of phyla suggests that it serves an important role in myofibril assembly
and/or function. In situ hybridization studies showed that miniparamyosin mRNA
is expressed in only a subset of adult Drosophila muscle cell types. Antibody
studies from other laboratories have shown that miniparamyosin is a component of
the thick filament and that it has a different localization pattern in indirect
flight muscles and tubular muscles of the adult. The overall aim of this project
is to directly test the role of miniparamyosin in muscle structure and function
and its interplay with other elements of the thick filament in vivo. The project
will employ transgenic, ultrastructural, and physiological approaches designed
to directly test the function of this protein in vivo in Drosophila
melanogaster. The specific objectives for the grant period are as follows: 1, to
isolate and/or construct Drosophila strains which are mutant for miniparamyosin
and analyze their genetic, ultrastructural and physiological defects; 2, produce
transgenic flies that express greatly increased levels of miniparamyosin in
their indirect flight muscles. By analyzing the ultrastructure of such muscles,
it will be determined whether thick filament length, diameter or electron
density are affected as a result of changing the ratio of this protein to that
of myosin heavy chain and paramyosin. Antibodies against miniparamyosin will be
used to define whethe r over-expression results in protein relocalization within
the thick filament. It will also be determined how over-expression of
miniparamyosin in flight muscles affects the biophysical properties of these
muscles; 3, determine whether the amount of paramyosin influences the
accumulation and localization of miniparamyosin within thick filaments. This
will be accomplished by over-expression of paramyosin in the indirect flight
muscles in lines producing normal and elevated levels of miniparamyosin. This
goal is based on observations that the amount of paramyosin correlates with the
level and pattern of miniparamyosin accumulation. The subcellular machinery of
muscle cells that allows them to carry out their contractile function consists
of two sets of complex filaments, termed thick and thin filaments, which are
arranged in parallel arrays within a larger structure termed the myofibril. In
fully "relaxed" muscles, these parallel arrays only partially overlap each other
Contraction occurs when the thick and thin filaments slide over each other in a
coordinated manner to increase the extent of overlap, thereby shortening the
myofibrils (and thus shortening the cell), a process which requires hydrolysis
of ATP. The "motor" which transduces the energy of hydrolysis of ATP into
movement is myosin, the major component of the thick filaments. In order to
fully understand how muscle cells function, it is necessary to understand the
fine molecular structure of the myofibril. Recently, a new protein, termed
miniparamyosin, has been discovered as a component of thick filaments in a model
invertebrate, the fruit fly Drosophila melanogaster. This project will explore
the role that this newly-discovered thick filament protein plays in the assembly
and function of myofibrils, and will undoubtedly lead to new insights into those
processes. ***