* 9604865
* Juvenoid/Ecdysteroid Interaction on a Cell Line Derived from Moth Imaginal Wing Discs
* BIO,IOS
* 03/01/1997,02/28/1999
* Judith Willis, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Elvira Doman
* 02/28/1999
* USD 50,000.00

9604865 Willis Metamorphosis endows many animals with the ability to occupy
diverse niches within the life span of a single individual. Chemical disruption
of metamorphosis has been a successful approach to pest control. It is known
that two classes of hormones, juvenoids and ecdysteroids, regulate insect
metamorphosis. Some limited information also exists about how gene expression
changes during insect metamorphosis. Past work has focused on whole insects,
isolated parts, and short term cultures of tissues derived from them. Despite
elegant experiments by many workers, there is total ignorance of the mechanisms
by which juvenoids control metamorphosis or even of the level at which gene
expressions is regulated during metamorphosis. One of the most fascinating
features of metamorphosis in advanced insects is that many pupal and adult
structures arise from packets of seemingly undifferentiated cells, imaginal
discs, that were set aside during embryonic or early larval life. Imaginal disc
cells proliferate in larvae and evaginate and differentiate during an
ecdysteroid-induced molt that is initiated in the absence of juvenoids This
project is designed to learn if an established cell line (PID2A), derived from
the wing imaginal discs of the Indian Meal Moth, Plodia interpunctella can serve
as a simple model to study metamorphosis. The PI has already learned that these
cells are responsive to ecdysteroids and that their response is blocked by
juvenoids. Proposed work will focus on identifying proteins and gene transcripts
that are differentially expressed following different hormone treatments. The
treatments will be those that in the intact animal would either initiate or
block metamorphosis. If the PI can show that some synthetic activities of these
cells mimic those that occur n vivo, then a simple model system can be used to
test hypotheses, factors, and genes that are being implicated in metamorphic
regulation. ***