* 9604594
* Cytoskeletal Determinants of the Physical and Material      Properties of Cytoplasm
* NONE,NONE
* 04/15/1997,01/31/2001
* Katherine Luby-Phelps, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center
* Continuing grant
* Michael Mishkind
* 01/31/2001
* USD 239,998.00

9604594 Luby-Phelps Technical Much current thinking about cellular biochemistry
and metabolism is extrapolated from assays performed in homogeneous, dilute
solutions, in which the diffusion of the reactants is unhindered. However, the
interior of a cell is neither dilute, nor homogeneous. The intracellular
concentration of certain enzymes is orders of magnitude higher than the
concentrations commonly used to assay enzyme activity in vitro, and the total
protein concentration may be as high as 200 to 300 mg/ml. In addition, a large
body of theological, biochemical, and electron microscopic evidence suggests
that cytoskeletal filaments interact to form a three-dimensional network in the
cytoplasm. This network may present a barrier to diffusion as well as providing
a framework that allows cells to establish asymmetric shapes and resist
mechanical stresses. The translational diffusion of test particles in the
cytoplasm of living cells is observed to be hindered in a size-dependent manner.
A model developed from studies of these test particles in solution suggests that
in living cells diffusion is slowed by a combination of collisions with other
macromolecules and sieving by a network of entangled or crosslinked filaments.
In addition, particles 50 nm in radius are excluded from some subcompartments of
the cytoplasmic volume. Many of the intracellular components involved in protein
synthesis, respiration and particle transport are also absent from these
compartments, raising the possibility that they represent functional, as well as
structural differentiation's of the cytoplasm. Although it is presumed that the
cytoskeleton is responsible for both hindered diffusion and the differential
partitioning of large and small particles, this has not been tested directly. In
response to mechanical stimuli, cytoplasm does not behave as a simple, visous
fluid. A variety of evidence indicates that cytoplasm is viscoelastic. That is,
interactions among its constituent macromolecul es prevent it from flowing
freely under shearing stress and cause it to recoil when the stress is removed.
The most likely source of the elasticity of cytoplasm is the cytoskeleton.
Individual cytoskeletal filaments are highly elastic and solutions of these
filaments exhibit viscoelastic behavior similar to cytoplasm. However, direct
tests of this hypothesis are few and none of them have been carried out under
physiological conditions. The objectives of this proposal are to define the
constraints on diffusion in non-excluding compartments, to determine the role of
each of the three main types of cytoskeletal filament in restricting the
diffusion and partitioning of test particles, and to examine the contribution of
these filaments to the material properties of cytoplasm. A multi-disciplinary
approach will be employed, combining microinjection of proteins and inert
fluorescent test particles into living cells, fluorescence recovery after
photobleaching and single particle tracking to measure intracellular diffusion
coefficients, and digital fluorescence microscopy to study the partitioning of
injected molecules. The mechanical response of cytoplasm to physiological
tensile stress will be studied by using microinjected fluorescent microspheres
as markers of cytoplasmic deformation. Drug treatments and molecular genetics
techniques will be used to disrupt specific subsets of cytoskeletal filaments.
Fluorescent antibody localization of endogenous molecules will be used to
correlate effects on the diffusion and partitioning of test particles or on the
mechanics of cytoplasm with changes in the cytoskeleton. Ultimately, the
information obtained from this research should lead to a better understanding of
how cytoarchitecture affects the kinetics and mechanisms of biochemical
reactions in the living cell, the transport and localization of intracellular
components and the mechanical responses of cells. Non Technical The interior of
cells is a fluid space termed cytoplasm that has been characterized as a
solution in which various subcellular structures freely move. Recent results
indicate that this model is incorrect and that the cytoplasm is highly
structured. Cytoplasmic structure is maintained by filaments of the cytoskeleton
that traverse through the cell. Dr. Luby-Phelps will study how the various
components of the cytoskeleton mediate the partition of the cytoplasm into
distinct domains. Her research will define how the filaments of cytoskeleton
constrain particles within the cytoplasm into specific domains. This research is
important because it addresses a fundamental question of how the fluid
environment contained within all living cells is organized to facilitate the
activities necessary to maintain the living state. ***