* 9604679
* The Mechanism of Glycine Betaine Mediated Cellular          Osmoregulation-Revision 2
* BIO,IOS
* 06/01/1997,10/12/1999
* Sidney Pierce, University of Maryland, College Park
* Continuing Grant
* Zoe Eppley
* 10/12/1999
* USD 160,000.00

Pierce 9604679 This proposal requests funds to continue a study of the
mechanisms that regulate the concentration of the intracellular osmolyte,
glycine betaine, in response to high salinity stress. Glycine betaine is an
extremely common and important osmolyte in a wide variety of species ranging
from bacteria to plants and animals. Although a great deal is known about the
salinity-induced regulation of glycine betaine in bacteria, far less is known
about its regulation in plants, and even less in animals. The PI had found
previously that oysters (Crassostrea virginica) from the Atlantic coast utilize
substantial amounts of glycine betaine to regulate intracellular osmotic
concentrations following high salinity stress. Conspecific oysters from the
Chesapeake Bay have much smaller levels of glycine betaine that do not change
following salinity stress and the Bay oysters are not as salinity tolerant. In
addition, the PI's previous work has indicated that the basis of this difference
in glycine betaine accumulation and salinity tolerance lies within synthetic
pathways that reside in the mitochondria. Furthermore, in bacteria and plants,
salinity-induced glycine betaine accumulation is regulated by a family of genes
that is osmotically-activated. Almost nothing is known about osmotically
activated genes in animals. The experiments described in this project propose to
exploit the differences between Atlantic and Bay oysters in glycine betaine
metabolism to begin to understand how this important, but scarcely studied
osmolyte is regulated in animals cells. Further, since all of the Bay oysters
are parasitized by the haplosporidian parasite, Perkinsus marinas, which has
devastated the Bay oyster fishery, the initial experiments will focus on the
possibility that the parasite is causing the biochemical differences between the
two oyster groups. The results will contribute a great deal to the understanding
of glycine betaine regulation, salinity tolerance mechanis ms, cellular
osmoregulation and, perhaps, uncover some of the biochemical consequences of
that parasite on oyster metabolism.