* 9604562
* Collaborative Research:  Genetic Analysis and Metabolic     Engineering of Solventogenic Clostridia
* NONE,NONE
* 09/15/1996,08/31/2000
* Frederick Rudolph, William Marsh Rice University
* Continuing grant
* Philip Harriman
* 08/31/2000
* USD 436,354.00

9604562 Bennett This proposal is on research to genetically alter the metabolism
of anaerobic solventogenic clostridia (Clostridium acetobutylicum and related
species) to determine their potential applications for producing solvents
(butanol and acetone) and other oxychemicals. This requires further
understanding of the applied molecular genetics and associated methods needed to
redirect the cellular metabolism. This research is aiming to (1) establish the
techniques needed for the generation of stable overproducing strains (such
strains are necessary for batch or continuous processes without using any
antibiotics to maintain genetic stability), (2) develop a more detailed
molecular understanding of the regulation of a cluster of genes known as the sol
locus, (3) develop the means which would allow one to express clostridia genes
in other hosts or heterologous genes in clostridia in order to form products not
normally produced by the respective cells, and(4) develop additional tools for
flexible carbon-flux control. Specifically, this research will develop methods
needed for: desirable gene expression (in terms of strength and timing), single
or multiple chromosomal gene inactivations in order to inactivate or eliminate
undesirable pathways or traits, and stable chromosomal integration (of one or
more copies) of genes in order to increase the protein activities (and
presumably carbon fluxes) of desirable pathways. ***