* 9604647
* Characterization of Proteins that Interact with CDPK        Gamma
* NONE,NONE
* 03/15/1997,03/31/2001
* Alice Harmon, University of Florida
* Continuing grant
* Randolph Addison
* 03/31/2001
* USD 240,000.00

9604647 Harmon Technical Calmodulin-like domain protein kinases (also called
calcium-dependent protein kinases or CDPK) are a new family of protein kinases
that are directly regulated by calcium. They contain not only a catalytic
domain, but also a calcium-binding domain that is similar to calmodulin. These
enzymes are maximally stimulated by micromolar concentrations of Ca2+ and are
thought to play a role in cellular responses to diverse stimuli such as light,
growth regulators, pathogen attack and environmental stress. A large family of
CDPKs is present in plants. Since the activity of these enzymes is regulated by
free calcium, they are capable of perceiving and transducing intracellular
calcium signals evoked by numerous stimuli. However, information about the
specific roles of these kinases in signaling pathways is still lacking. Few
protein substrates of CDPKs have been identified, and it is unknown if the
enzymes interact with regulatory or anchoring/targeting proteins. To identify
proteins that are substrates or regulators of CDPK or serve to target them to
specific cellular locations, interaction cloning was undertaken. Screening of a
soybean cDNA expression library with three 32P-labeled recombinant CDPKs,
identified twelve cDNA clones that encode proteins that interact with CDPKg.
Eight of these clones encode known proteins, and several are phosphorylated by
CDPKg in vitro. Two of the interacting proteins are serine acetyl transferase
(SAT) and glutathione S-transferase (GST), which are involved in cysteine
synthesis and glutathione metabolism, respectively. Another is polyubiquitin,
which is the precursor of monomeric ubiquitin that is involved in protein
degradation pathways. Current evidence points to roles for glutathione (a
cysteine-containing tripeptide) metabolism and protein degradation in cellular
responses to stress or pathogen attack. The objective of this proposal is to
characterize the interaction between the proteins identified in our screen and
CDPKg in vitro and t o use a soybean cell culture model system to study their
interactions and roles in vivo. We will test the hypothesis that CDPKg activity
and its interaction with ubiquitin, SAT, GST and other proteins play roles in
the response of soybean cells to stress or pathogen attack. These studies are an
important step towards identifying specific roles of CDPKg in vivo and may
provide insight into cellular components involved in plant defense responses.
The objectives of this project are to first characterize the interaction of
CDPKg with the proteins identified by interaction cloning. Clones encoding known
proteins will be expressed as a fusion proteins with maltose binding protein or
another affinity tag. Antibodies to interacting proteins will be made and the
subcellular location of the proteins determined. Binding of the interacting
proteins to recombinant CDPKg on protein blots and in solution will be
characterized. Phosphorylation of substrate proteins will be characterized, and
the effect of phosphorylation on these proteins will be determined. Initial work
will focus on serine acetyltransferase whose activity is regulated on cultured
cells or protoplasts for characterization of the role of CDPKg in vivo.
Autophosphorylation of CDPKg and phosphorylation of substrate proteins in cells
or protoplasts in response to changes in by phosphorylation. 2. Use a model
system based intracellular free calcium concentration induced artificially or in
response to stimuli will be measured by immunoprecipitation of proteins
metabolically labeled with 32P. The hypothesis that activation of CDPKg and
phosphorylation of substrate proteins identified by interaction cloning are
involved in cellular responses to stress or pathogen attack will be tested.
Initial work will focus on serine acetyltransferase. Nontechnical How
environmental changes are detected in order to evoke specific responses in
plants is one of the large questions of plant biology for which there is
presently little information. Calcium ions appear to have an important role in
transmitting the signal from sensors to downstream effects of protein synthesis
and alterations. This project will analyze how a calcium-dependent protein
kinase attaches phosphate molecules to specific proteins in response to biotic
and abiotic stress. This modification of specific proteins is proposed to be a
critical step in the stress reponse. This research is important because it will
address a fundamental aspect of how plant perceive stress situation and transmit
the signal to initiate a response.