* 9604247
* Genetic and Molecular Analysis of Differentiation Mechanismsin Saccharomyces cerevisae
* BIO,MCB
* 07/15/1997,06/30/2000
* Alan Myers, Iowa State University
* Continuing Grant
* Philip Harriman
* 06/30/2000
* USD 315,000.00

Myers 9604247 This project seeks to characterize mechanisms that specifically
regulate cellular form and function in response to environmental stimuli. The
ascomycete Saccharomyces cerevisiae can switch between the yeast form (YF) and
the pseudohyphal form (PH) in response to defined culture conditions. Cellular
characteristics that are affected in this differentiation include cell shape,
cell size, cell polarity, and cell division cycle mechanisms. This project has
identified two protein kinases, Elm1p and CDC28, in which mutations cause cells
to adopt pseudohyphal form characteristics in all growth conditions. Elimination
of Elm1p function causes cells to adopt the pseudohyphal form constitutively,
indicating that this protein inhibits development of pseudohyphal
characteristics in inappropriate environments. One or more forms of the cyclin-
dependent kinase complex (CDK) in which CDC28 is the catalytic subunit also
regulates yeast- pseudohyphal differentiation. A specific amino acid
substitution in CDC28 causes constitutive execution of most aspects of the
pseudohyphal form. These data are consistent with the hypothesis that various
signaling processes impinge on CDC28, which in response, is functionally
modified in a specific way. Modified CDK activity then causes various aspects of
the pseudohyphal growth form to occur. In this way CDK may function to integrate
various input signals from the environment and control the decision of whether
or not to execute a certain differentiation process. This project will address
the following specific objectives: 1) Determination of whether CDK alteration is
required for cells to attain the pseudohyphal form in response to either of two
signaling regimes known to induce this differentiation process in wild type
cells; 2) Characterization of the functional differences between CDK in yeast
form- and pseudohyphal form cells; 3) Characterization of the interaction
between Elm1p and the evolutionarily conserved protein kinase cascade coded for
by SEL2, SWE1, and CDC28; 4) Characterization of additional proteins that
function in this differentiation circuitry. Completion of this research will
advance our knowledge of the basic mechanisms by which genetically identical
cells convert between different functional forms, and the mechanisms by which
cell division is controlled. Cells with identical genetic information can take a
wide variety of shapes and execute many different functions. Because
multicellular animals and plants develop from a single cell, specific mechanisms
must exist that cause the various descendants of the progenitor cell to adopt
the specific forms and functions that arise reproducibly in mature organisms.
Fundamental understanding of how multicellular organisms arise requires an
understanding of these mechanisms, however, little is understood currently about
the ways in which cells are instructed to adopt a specific shape. This project
uses a tractable experimental system in which cell shape changes reproducibly in
response to an external signal. By discerning the molecular mechanism that
control this programmed shape change, fundamental information regarding the
processes by which multicellular organisms develop is likely to be obtained.