* 9605180
* Physics Research Experiences for Undergraduates at the      Pennsylvania State University
* MPS,PHY
* 05/01/1997,04/30/1998
* John Yeazell, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Rolf M. Sinclair
* 04/30/1998
* USD 60,000.00

*** Gramila This grant will support a Research Experiences for Undergraduates
(REU) site in the physics department of The Pennsylvania State University at the
University Park campus during 1997. The REU site will involve 14-20 students in
research projects each summer. Students will be involved in projects covering a
wide range of frontier research. Such involvement has been demonstrated in the
department's extensive record of undergraduate research. As an REU site, the
Penn State physics department will mount an aggressive campaign to recruit
students into the program, with a wide recruitment area covering Pennsylvania
and surrounding, mid-Atlantic region states. Active efforts to encourage
minority student enrollment will include personal visits to targeted HBCU
physics departments at Morehouse, Clark-Atlantic and Cheyney, and will make use
of the Committee on Institutional Cooperation (CIC) of the Big 10 schools. In
addition to their own research projects, students will attend special weekly
seminars designed to broaden their knowledge of physics and encourage
interaction with faculty. The summer program is completed in a day long seminar
in which talks by the student participants are presented describing their
research projects. Throughout the program, emphasis will be placed on
encouraging the students' interest in careers in physics. ***