* 9605235
* US-India Cooperative Research:  Phase Transitions in the    Early Universe and Probes of Large Scale Distribution of    Matter in the Universe, Award in US and Indian Currencies
* O/D,OISE
* 07/01/1997,06/30/2000
* Edward Kolb, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Marjorie Lueck
* 06/30/2000
* USD 39,984.00

9605235 Schramm Description: This is a U.S.-India research collaboration
entitled Phase Transitions in the Early Universe and Probes of Large Scale
Distribution of Matter in the Universe. This project will build on a joint
program in theoretical astrophysics developed in 1987 thru 1992 between the
University of Chicago and the Tata Institute of Fundamental Research (TIFR). The
current project is under the direction of David Schramm, University of Chicago
and Pijushpani Bhattacharjee, Indian Institute of Astrophysics (IIA), Bangalore.
These nodel institutions will serve as organizational centers rather than sole
research venues for the participants. The research will build on the earlier
effort which in the beginning had a natural focus on the Supernovae, and later
on the role of the quark-hadron phase transition in the early universe and ultra
high energy cosmic ray interactions. The current objectives will be to work out
cosmological and astrophysical implications of phase transitions in the early
universe, particularly the implications of topological defects and electroweak
baryogenesis; and to study the phase space distribution of dark matter in the
Galaxy and the phenomenon of gravitational lensing as a probe of large-scale
distribution of dark matter in the universe. Scope: This collaboration is an
outgrowth of an earlier joint program established among several of the most
distinguished astrophysicists in the UQ and India. The output has been most
impressive including the pioneering work of the Indian PI. This award supports
several short-term visits by Indian coPIs and postdocs, as well as visits to
India by the US group. In addition to the advances in fundamental knowledge
expected from the research, the exchange of ideas with Indian leaders of
cosmology will be valuable for the US scientific community. ***