* 9605034
* US-Pakistan Workshop & Symposium on Genomics and            Computational Biology, Lahore, Pakistan, October 16-19, 1997
* O/D,OISE
* 05/01/1997,10/31/2000
* Lawrence Grossman, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Osman Shinaishin
* 10/31/2000
* USD 26,000.00

Description: This award is for support of a US delegation to attend a
U.S.-Pakistan Workshop and Symposium on Genomics and Computational Biology to be
held in Lahore, Pakistan in October 16-19, 1997. Leading the US delegation are
Dr. Lawrence Grossman, of Johns Hopkins University, and Dr. Richard Roberts,
Director of Research, New England Biolabs in Beverly, MA. The Pakistani co-
organizer is Dr. Sheikh Riazuddin, Director, the National Center of Excellence
in Molecular Biology at the University of Punjab in Lahore. The symposium will
be attended by scientists and graduate students from Pakistan and several
neighboring countries. The topics will include: DNA sequencing efforts in C.
elegans, rice, humans, H. influenza and other organisms. Separate sessions will
be devoted to the computational analysis of sequence data, the identification of
genes associated with major genetic diseases and/or traits of economic
importance. The US participants will conduct separate visits to research
facilities in this field in universities and government laboratories in the
Lahore area. The workshop is intended to identify research areas of common
interest and to assess the potential for joint research in this emerging field.
Scope: The research projects that would be recommended in this meeting could be
done successfully in Pakistan, since they do not entail expensive facilities,
other than computational equipment, and since Pakistan could provide basic
population biology information, and can also make intellectual contributions in
the processing and interpretation of the data. The topic of the workshop is
important to the United States and to Pakistan. The American P.I. and co-PI are
eminent scientists. The Pakistani scientist was responsible for establishing the
National Centre of Excellence in Molecular Biology. His activities have
strengthened collaborative research between American and Pakistani scientists,
especially in areas where the Pakistani side complements the capability in the
United States, such as by providing new enzymes, or by doing extensive data
collections or experiments. Research in computational biology should be one
additional area for beneficial complementary cooperation. It is planned to
include at least one woman scientist, and one junior scientist within the US
delegation. This proposal meets INT objective of increasing U.S.-foreign
collaboration in areas that benefit both sides, and in enhancing junior
scientists' international experience.