* 9605149
* Undergraduate Research in Molecular Biology at the          University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* BIO,DBI
* 05/01/1997,04/30/2000
* William Marzluff, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* William R. Gordon
* 04/30/2000
* USD 150,000.00

The University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill will continue its Research
Experiences for Undergraduates site. Academically successful students will be
chosen from a national applicant pool to participate in research projects of UNC
faculty. Faculty will be investigators using molecular-biological approaches,
but research will not be limited to a single field. Emphasis will be placed on
recruiting students from schools with limited research opportunities, students
without prior independent research experience, and students from groups
historically underrespresented in the sciences. The primary focus of the
training program will be encouraging and facilitating pursuit of research
careers and, secondarily, assisting students with interests in other science-
based careers to appreciate the nature of research. Other goals include
introducing students to a diversity of biological research areas and technology,
teaching the process of independent research and conducting controlled
experiments, fostering self-confidence and team-working ability, promoting
development of skills in observation, recording, and interpreting data,
providing opportunities for oral and written communication of research findings,
and providing career guidance and information about scientific professions in
academia, government, and industry. Program activities will include (1) 10 weeks
of independent research during the summer, (2) weekly meetings with invited
speakers from academic, government, and private research institutions, (3) field
trips to major research pharmaceutical companies, the National Institute of
Environmental Health Sciences, the Environmental Protection Agency, and the UNC
Institute of Marine Sciences, (4) a graduate-student roundtable to discuss the
nature of postgraduate training and (5) a symposium in which all participants
will present oral reports of their work. The University will defray part of the
cost of sending up to 10 program participants a year to scientific meetings.
Program effectiveness will be assessed from exit surveys and long-term tracking;
the Office of Educational Development will provide consultation in design of
evaluation tools.