* 9605168
* Research Experience for Undergraduates (REU) in Ecology &amp; Evolutionary Biology
* BIO,DBI
* 05/01/1997,04/30/2001
* Michael Klug, Michigan State University
* Continuing Grant
* Robert W. Taylor
* 04/30/2001
* USD 160,000.00

9605168 Klug The Research Experience for Undergraduates (REU) Site at Michigan
State University's W. K. Kellogg Biological Station (KBS) offers undergraduate
students an opportunity to participate in interdisciplinary research activities
in the fields of ecology and evolutionary biology. Students are exposed to
concepts and techniques from a variety of disciplines and levels of biological
organization, from genes to landscapes, including microbial ecology, animal
behavior, and plant ecological genetics. Individual research projects are
carried out under the supervision of faculty advisors, and weekly seminars and
other activities help foster intellectual exchange among students, faculty, and
visiting scientists. The KBS offers a wide variety of terrestrial and aquatic
habitats, both natural and managed, for observational and experimental research,
as well as superb laboratory facilities; active year-long programs bring
numerous graduate students, postdoctoral associates, and senior researchers to
the Station regularly, who can be expected to interact with and help mentor
undergraduates. Students participate in their own REU Noon Seminar series as
well as other seminars and discussion groups at KBS, which exposes them to other
areas of research. Each student develops and conducts an independent research
project during the summer sessions, involving all stages of the scientific
process: identification and refinement of a scientific question or hypothesis;
experimental design and sampling techniques; field and laboratory work; data
analysis and presentation. Students present their research to the KBS community
at a REU Symposium, and are encouraged to synthesize their results for
publication in collaboration with their faculty advisors.