* 9605191
* US-Egypt Cooperative Research: Segmental Orientation and    Strain Induced Crystallization in Regular Bimodal Poly      (tetramethylene oxide) (PTMO) Elastomers
* O/D,OISE
* 04/01/1997,03/31/2000
* James Mark, University of Cincinnati Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Osman Shinaishin
* 03/31/2000
* USD 36,000.00

Description: This award is for support of a cooperative project by Dr. James E.
Mark and Dr. Gregory Beaucage of the Department of Chemistry at the University
of Cincinnati and Dr. M.A. Sharaf, Department of Chemistry, Cairo University at
Beni-Suef, Egypt. The main objective of this research is to study factors that
influence the important mechanical properties of elastomers. These scientists
plan to use functionally capped poly(tetramethylene oxide) (PTMO) oligomers to
prepare regular bimodal networks of a mixture of very short chains with
relatively long chains, through controlled end linking reactions. In such
networks, regularity is ensured by having each junction connected to a constant
number of both long and short chains. Improvements in the ultimate properties
are due to innate intramolecular effects pertaining to the limited extensibility
of short chains. In addition, these particular networks are susceptible to
strain-induced crystallization with remarkable consequent improvements in
ultimate properties from crystalline reinforcement. The networks so prepared
will be employed to better understand the relevant molecular aspects of rubber
elasticity, segmental orientation, and strain-induced crystallization. Scope:
The combination of data from scattering techniques with those of the modulus,
birefringence, and infrared dichroism measurements provides a powerful tool for
analysis of the interaction between the size-scale of the complex structural
features of both short and the long chains and physical properties in general.
Also, mechanical properties and scattering techniques will be employed to
investigate both the thermodynamic and kinetic aspects of strain-induced
crystallization in these well-characterized elastomeric networks. These studies
can result in obtaining elastomers with optimized structure-property
relationships through molecular design. The collaboration brings a unique
combination of interest and research experiences of the participants from the
two countries for improving and optimizing the properties of the economically-
important elastomeric materials. This award will also enable a junior US
scientist, and a US graduate student, to gain international research experience.
The project is well in line with the objectives of the Division of International
Programs.