* 9605227
* U.S.-Chile Cooperative Research:  Ellipsometric Studies of  Alkane Selective Adsorption
* O/D,OISE
* 05/01/1997,04/30/2002
* Haskell Taub, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Harold Stolberg
* 04/30/2002
* USD 32,904.00

9605227 Tau` This Americas Program award will support a collaborative research
project between Dr. Haskell Taub, University of Missouri, Columbia, and Dr.
Ulrich Volkmann, Pontificia Universidad Catolica, Santiago, Chile, to conduct
ellipsometric studies of alkane selective adsorption. A fundamental problem in
polymer science concerns how a polymer species adsorbs from a multicomponent
fluid mixture onto a solid surface. The goal of the research is to use model
systems to elucidate the mechanism of selective adsorption in which one
molecular species preferentially adsorbs from solution at a solid interface.
Recent scanning tunneling microscopy (STM) studies have revealed crystalline
structures for long-alkane monolayers on the graphite basal-plane surface as
well as qualitative features of the molecular packing. They have not, however,
answered basic structural and dynamical questions related to their selective
adsorption. The proposed research will address these questions. A microscopic
understanding of this selective adsorption could impact greatly on technologies
related to coatings, adhesion, and lubrication. The collaboration between the
two researchers will provide a unique opportunity to apply complementary
experimental techniques to the studies. Professor Volkmann is one of the world's
experts in the use of ellipsometric techniques to investigate the structure and
growth of physisorbed films, while Dr. Taub brings his expertise in the
application of neutron scattering techniques. ***