* 9605197
* US-India Cooperative Research: Dispersion-Flocculation      Phenomena in Colloidal Oxide Suspensions at Low             Concentrations of Polymers
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/1997,05/31/2002
* Ponisseril Somasundaran, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Marjorie Lueck
* 05/31/2002
* USD 16,129.00

9605197 Somasundaran Description: This award is for the US-India Cooperative
Research: Dispersion-Flocculation Phenomena in Colloidal Oxide Suspensions at
Low Concentrations of Polymers. The collaborators are Dr. P. Somasundaran,
Department of Chemical Engineering, Columbia University and Dr. Pradip of the
Tata Research, Development & Design Centre, Pune, India. This research will
focus on usage of combinations of low polymer concentrations for flocculation of
oxide minerals. The motivation stems from novel results obtained from a current
project on iron oxide-alumina where at low concentrations of polyacrylic acid,
it was found that alumina can be effectively flocculated. The researchers will
study the fundamental mechanisms of polymer-polymer, particle-particle and
polymer-particle interactions in order reach the goal of this research which is
to develop a unified theory of polymeric flocculation. The knowledge gained from
this study will help develop strategies for an industrially important and
technologically challenging problem--the selective separation of fine
particulates in general and oxide suspensions in particular. Scope: This project
supports pioneering research at two well regarded laboratories and between
scientists with complementary expertise and excellent research track records.
Students in both countries will be involved in the research. The project
enhances international collaboration in an area of high scientific interest and
mutual benefit. The project meets INT objectives. ***