* 9605069
* US-India Cooperative Research:  Interaction of Toxic        Metals with an Abundant Natural Material, Capsular          Polysaccharide from Indian Cyanobacteria
* O/D,OISE
* 05/01/1997,04/30/2002
* John Plude, University of Wisconsin-Oshkosh
* Standard Grant
* Marjorie Lueck
* 04/30/2002
* USD 30,785.00

9605069 Parker Description: This award is for the "U.S.-India Cooperative
Research: Interaction of Toxic Metals with an Abundant Natural Material,
Capsular Polysaccharide from Indian Cyanobacteria". The project is directed by
Dorothy Parker, University of Wisconsin and L.C. Rai, Banaras Hindu University.
This project will examine the accumulation of toxic metals by cyanobacteria and
cyanobacterial polysaccharides from Indian waters. In addition to having unique
metal content, many Indian ponds are a biologically-reliable and
environmentally-constant source of the cyanobacterium Microcystis which adsorbs
specific metal ions. The research will contribute to fundamental knowledge on:
cyanobacterial polysaccharides with affinities for toxic or valuable metals; the
role of these polysaccharides in the cycling or accumulation of metals in
aquatic ecosystems; the range of extracellular polysaccharides produced by
cyanobacteria from two continents; and the utility of these polysaccharides in
metal- related biotechnology. Scope: This collaboration was initiated by an INT
supported planning visit for Dr. Parker, plus a sabbatical visit to Baneras
Hindu University. The collaboration which links two university research
laboratories expands the capabilities of both groups and makes it possible to
examine novel questions that pertain to environmental concerns and biotechnical
applications affecting India and the U.S. ***