* 9605163
* U.S.-Korea Cooperative Research on Production of Dissolved  Organic Carbon and Taste-and-Odor Compounds Through Extra-  Cellular Excretion and Cell Death in Cyanobacteria
* O/D,OISE
* 08/01/1997,07/31/2001
* G-Yull Rhee, Health Research Incorporated/New York State Department of Health
* Standard Grant
* Larry H. Weber
* 07/31/2001
* USD 27,130.00

Rhee 9605163 This award supports a three-year collaborative research project
between Dr. G-Yull Rhee of the New York State Department of Health and Dr. Jin-
Hwan Lee of Sangmyung University in Seoul, Korea on "Production of Dissolved
Organic Carbon and Taste-and-Odor Compounds Through Extracellular Excretion and
Cell Death in Cyanobacteria." The goals of the project are: 1) to determine the
effect of light intensity on the production of dissolved organic carbon and
major odor producing compounds, and the relative importance of excretion and
cell death in their production, 2) to elucidate the seasonal dynamics of the
compounds in a reservoir, and 3) to identify problem species which produce off-
flavor compounds. The production and consumption of dissolved organic carbon in
the aquatic ecosystem has important implications for primary productivity,
heterotrophic microbial production and nutrient cycling. From a public health
standpoint, high concentrations of dissolved organic carbon and taste and odor
producing compounds can impair potability and recreational use of water. This
study will help elucidate the release of these compounds from cyanobacteria, a
prevalent group of phytoplankton often associated with eutrophication. The
expertise and facilities of the U.S. and Korean research groups will be combined
in an effort to significantly advance the work. ***