* 9605128
* Summer Undergraduate Research Program
* MPS,PHY
* 03/01/1997,02/28/1998
* Truell Hyde, Baylor University
* Standard Grant
* Rolf M. Sinclair
* 02/28/1998
* USD 30,143.00

*** Hyde This grant continues a summer undergraduate research program already in
place for the past three summers at Baylor and currently supported by both
Baylor and the National Science Foundation. Seven students will be selected from
open applications with the program advertised at universities around the nation,
smaller undergraduate institutions with little or no research capability and
historically minority institutions. Complete application information,
departmental research information as well as the ability to apply to the program
"on line" is provided through a World Wide Web page located at
www.baylor.edu/homepages/emp/Truell_Hyde/Scripts/URC.html. (This allows students
whose institutions do not customarily encourage such summer programs to have
access to the required information and offers them the opportunity to apply).
The recruiting process (particularly for minorities, women and students from
small schools) is aided by the PI's contact with faculty at such small schools
in the five state area as well as by the PI's graduate students (two of which
are women) who provide personal contact with the NSF Fellows starting with the
recruitment process and continuing through the summer program. Taken together,
these allow identification and recruitment of outstanding students from small,
private institutions in the Texas, Oklahoma, Louisiana, Arkansas and Kansas
areas. Predominantly Black and Hispanic campuses will be specifically targeted
as well predominantly minority junior colleges. Every college and university in
the state of Texas will be included in the recruitment effort since many of them
have large Hispanic enrollments. The NSF Fellows will interact during the summer
with Baylor undergraduate and graduate students from both the United States and
several foreign countries. They will participate in twice weekly seminars,
social activities, an end of the summer Undergraduate Research Symposium and
specially designed classes in various phy sics research fields of interest. As
in the past, it is expected that at least some of the summer research done by
the NSF Fellows will result in peer- reviewed publications. Trips to nearby
industries and research facilities, social activities as well as joint research
seminars will be offered (as in the past) in cooperation with the NSF Chemistry
REU Summer Program to be held in the same building. This provides for a much
larger number of NSF Summer Fellows with which to interact during the ten week
period and aids in producing a "large" program feel. ***