* 9610159
* CRB: Then Effect of Habitat Fragmentation on Biodiversity   and Trophic Linkages in Experimental Fractal Landscapes
* BIO,DEB
* 08/15/1997,01/31/2000
* Kimberly With, Bowling Green State University
* Standard Grant
* William Michener
* 01/31/2000
* USD 65,000.00

9610159 With Habitat fragmentation is one of the biggest threats to
biodiversity. Yet conservation biology has no formal theory to predict at what
point landscapes are likely to become fragmented, and thus when populations are
at risk of extinction. Neutral landscape models provide quantitative predictions
about when habitat fragmentation occurs and how species respond to habitat
fragmentation. Neutral landscapes are grid maps in which habitat is generated
using a theoretical spatial distribution. These theoretical models predict that
habitat fragmentation occurs suddenly across a very small range of habitat loss.
As a consequence, species may abruptly go extinct at this critical threshold in
habitat loss, even though suitable habitat is still available on the landscape.
Exactly where the threshold occurs depends upon the spatial arrangement of
habitat and the dispersal abilities of the species. For example, a species with
poor dispersal abilities will be affected by habitat fragmentation sooner than a
species with good dispersal abilities. The potential for threshold effects in
habitat fragmentation and the subsequent extinction of populations have been
identified as major unsolved problems facing conservationists. The investigators
will test neutral landscape theory by assessing the effects of fragmentation on
biodiversity and trophic interactions. Because the principles and predictions of
neutral landscape theory should apply at any scale, the investigators will
develop an experimental model system consisting of microlandscape plots. These
plots will represent a range of habitat abundance and fragmentation severity.
The plots will be constructed using the habitat distributions predicted by the
theory. The investigators intend to examine the response of insect herbivores
and their natural enemies within these experimental landscapes. Specifically,
they will explore how species with different life-history strategies and
dispersal abilities are affected by f ragmentation. They will also study how
habitat fragmentation affects the ability of natural enemies (predators,
parasitoids) to control their prey or host species. The application of such
"microcosm" experiments has recently led to important insights into the
structuring and maintenance of biodiversity in natural ecosystems. The research
proposed here may be useful in the conservation and management of native agents
of biological control in agricultural systems. G:\crb97\With.crb