* 9610042
* Vortex Motion and Dynamical States in Josephson Arrays
* NONE,NONE
* 08/01/1997,09/30/2000
* Terry Orlando, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing grant
* H. Hollis Wickman
* 09/30/2000
* USD 310,000.00

w:\awards\awards96\num.doc 9610042 Orlando This experimental research project
focuses on the physics, dynamical excitations, and potential applications of
arrays of Josephson junctions, devices which nonlinearly interact. Three areas
are to be studied: (1) Novel and universal dynamical states, including a fully
frustrated array with junctions along every branch, where the dynamics can be
reduced to three dynamical variables. (2) Inductively coupled arrays, which form
a model system for coupled layers of high-temperature superconductors and for
coupled systems of nonlinear oscillators. (3) Flux-flow in 2-d arrays will
provide a model system for investigating the similar vortex dynamics that occurs
in thin films of high temperature superconductors. The study of vortex motion in
this system will clarify aspects of pendula-like whirling modes in discrete
systems. Other dynamical states corresponding to local and global phase-locking
mechanisms will be also be studied. The research is characterized by integration
of experiment, numerical simulation, and mathematical analysis, and will exploit
existing commercial foundry service for fabrication of arrays of Josephson
junctions. %%% This experimental research project is in the types of "motions"
or excitations that can exist in a two-dimensional array of non- linearly
interacting systems (Josephson junctions). One example of an excitation is a
magnetic flux quantum (vortex) trapped within a closed loop through which a
supercurrent flows. Such vortices can move about the lattice, and can also
interact with other vortices which simultaneously exist. The mathematical
equations describing such systems are non-linear and can have singular solutions
called solitons, in which considerable interest exists in other areas of
science. In fact, the project to be carried out in major parts will attempt to
model the behavior of other systems of interest, including aspects of the motion
of magnetic flux in high temperature superconductors. The researchers will
combine experimental measurements with numerical simulations and with more
conventional analytical mathematics to understand the observed behavior, which
may have implications on additional systems than the systems specifically at
hand. In one of its aspects the array of Josephson junctions may have
applications in detecting and in generating microwave radiation, which will also
be of interest in this project. Results from this research may include unusual
new effects or devices which may find new application in technology. This
research project is interdisciplinary in nature and involves graduate students
who will be excellently trained to enter positions in industry, government or
education. The project will also foster inclusion of women and under-represented
groups into the national scientific work force. ***