* 9610037
* Collaborative Research:  Content Based Queries in Image     Databases
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/1997,12/31/2001
* Raghunath Ramakrishnan, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Maria Zemankova
* 12/31/2001
* USD 244,895.00

This is an inter-institutional collaborative project involving Ramesh Jain at
the University of California, San Diego and Raghu Ramakrishnan at the University
of Wisconsin, Madison. The research focuses on content-based querying of large
collections of images stored in a general-purpose (i.e., application domain
independent) database. The goal is to develop scalable methods for dealing with
very large numbers of images by exploiting similarities in groups of images,
e.g., a group of frontal face images. The approach taken is to provide the user
with the ability to describe a collection of images in sufficient detail to
allow the system to tailor feature extraction, indexing, etc., to support a rich
class of content-based queries. Descriptions are in an "image data definition
language" and are specified in terms of image characteristics such as color,
shape, etc. The system architecture is designed to be extensible in that user-
provided feature extraction algorithms can be easily incorporated, and efficient
high-dimensional indexing techniques are utilized. While there have been many
efforts to build systems that can effectively retrieve images from a given image
domain, a general purpose system poses many difficult problems. This research is
expected to greatly increase the expressiveness of content-based queries that
can be efficiently supported in general image databases, making possible novel
applications involving large numbers of images from diverse domains.