* 9610128
* High Resolution UK37 Alkenone Paleothermometry at Bermuda   Rise:  The Last Interglacial to the Little Ice Age
* GEO,AGS
* 04/15/1997,03/31/2000
* Scott Lehman, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* Steven M. Colman
* 03/31/2000
* USD 542,208.00

Abstract ATM-9610128 Lehman, Scott J. University of Colorado Title: High
Resolution UK37 Alkenone Paleothermometry at Bermuda Rise: The Last Interglacial
to the Little Ice Age Subtropical sea surface temperature (SST) is an important
climate boundary condition within much of the North Atlantic basin. It is not
known, however, whether sub-polar millennial- and century- scale SST changes
also affected the subtropical gyre, and to what degree such changes were
connected with variations in the rate of formation of North Atlantic Deep Water
(NADW). Recently recovered long cores, by the Marion Dufresne, provide an
unparalleled opportunity to study highly resolved proxy records of SST and NADW
variations. Work supported by this grant will establish a time series of SST at
50-yr to 100-yr sample spacing for the past 150 kyr in sediments of the Bermuda
Rise using the alkenone paleo-temperature estimation technique. Similar
measurements made in a pilot study of the last 15 kyr provide evidence of large
swings in SST during the last deglaciation. This is consistent with SST
estimates from foraminiferal assemblage data. The pilot results demonstrate that
the proposed studies are likely to yield a high-amplitude signal of SST
variations for the North Atlantic subtropical gyre. The fidelity and geographic
representativeness of the Bermuda Rise results can be cross-checked at key
intervals by analysis of a second high deposition-rate core from Blake-Bahama
Outer Ridge. Combining this work with other proxy studies will produce paired
proxy records of SST and NADW variation and will allow the evaluation of the
role of the ocean thermohaline circulation in climate changes occurring on these
timescales.