* 9610130
* Constitutive Equations for Process and Product Design of    Lightweight HCP Metals
* NONE,NONE
* 05/01/1997,10/31/2001
* Lallit Anand, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing grant
* Ken Chong
* 10/31/2001
* USD 240,000.00

9610130 Anand Whatever the mode of' transportation, materials used in
construction of vehicles need to combine -good structural stiffness. strength,
and toughness with high resistance to corrosion, and they must be as lightweight
as possible in order to save fuel. Aluminum alloys have long been used for skins
and frames of aircraft. and are beginning to be used in the automotive industry.
Two other important light metals for the transportation industry ire titanium
and magnesium. The recent progress in the development of a mathematical theory
of polycrystalline plasticity which predicts not only the anisotropic
macroscopic stress-strain response and shape changes, but also the evolution of
crystallographic texture during deformation, has occurred primarily for
materials with face-centered-cubic (fcc) crystals. Much less progress of this
type has occurred for materials with hexagonal-close-packed (hcp) crystal
structure. Compared with fcc materials, the hcp materials exhibit more complex
modes of plastic deformation due to their lower symmetry. Inelastic deformation
resistances of different slip systems can be substantially different in the hcp
materials, and unlike the fcc aluminum alloys, the hcp titanium and magnesium
alloys exhibit deformation twinning. This causes pronounced anisotropies in
their macroscopic deformation characteristics, and these anisotropies need to be
properly accounted for in developing a robust computational capability for 1.
Process Design - deformation processing, and 2. Product design - improved
structural response of components, made from titanium and magnesium1. Of
particular importance is the development of a fundamental understanding of the
inelastic deformation behavior of these materials by slip and twinning, and the
development of accurate elasto- viscoplastic constitutive equations which
describe this deformation behavior. We propose to develop anisotropic, elasto-
plastic constitutive equations and computational procedures for modeling and
simulation of inelastic deformation due to both crystallographic slip ,and
twinning in hcp titanium and magnesium. The computational capability will be
useful in simulating the development of anisotropy due to the evolution of
crystallographic texture. The mathematical models and procedures that we propose
to develop should be useful in the design of a variety of deformation-processing
operations, and the design of components for structural performance.
_______________________________ 1 Although the majority of processing of
magnesium allows is done by casting, magnesium is also wrought to form tubes,
plates, and sheet.