* 9610507
* Redox Active Inorganic Materials from Fullerene and Metal   Cluster Building Blocks
* MPS,CHE
* 05/01/1997,10/31/2000
* Alan Balch, University of California-Davis
* Continuing Grant
* Katharine Covert
* 10/31/2000
* USD 374,000.00

This grant in the Inorganic, Bioinorganic and Organometallic Program funds the
research of Professor Alan L. Balch of the University of California at Davis.
The oxidation of fullerenes to mono-oxo species will be studied and the oxidized
species will used to form electropolymerized thin films, whose reactive and
conductive properties will be studied. A family of flat triangular gold(I)
complexes, which exhibit remarkable solvoluminescence properties, and analogs
with Ag(I), Hg(II) and Tl(I) will be used to construct supramolecular species.
The possibility of electron transfer through columns of these triangular
clusters will be tested by examining their photoconductive properties. The
possibility of charge-transfer complexes forming between the gold clusters
(electron donors) and fullerenes (electron acceptors) will be probed. Co-
crystallization of fullerenes with porphyrins has already yielded an interesting
class of compounds in which the fullerene nests in the porphyrin. This project
is concerned with new inorganic materials that exhibit novel redox activity or
luminescence. Fullerenes and triangular gold(I) complexes will be used as
precursors for constructing the new materials, such as supramolecular arrays and
molecular co-crystals. Fullerene films will be explored as new highly conductive
materials. A new form of luminescence called solvoluminescence, which is light
emitted upon the dissolution of a previously irradiated substance, will be
studied. The hypothesis that this results from a long range separation of an
electron from its original site in a column of triangular gold units will be
tested. Understanding such charge separations is fundamental to our
understanding of natural energy storage and transduction devices and developing
new materials along these lines. Information gained from either fullerene or
triangular gold precursor classes will have an impact on how the other class is
developed and their combination may lead to entirely new materials. Porphyrin
complexes that can wrap partially around fullerenes will be used to develop new
ways of chromatographically separating fullerene molecules according to their
various shapes, which may make unusual fullerenes more available for
development.