* 9610413
* CRB: Direct and Indirect Effects of Key Alien Species in    Two Hawaiian Forest Communities
* BIO,DEB
* 08/15/1997,07/31/2001
* Stephen Weller, National Tropical Botanical Garden
* Standard Grant
* Scott L. Collins
* 07/31/2001
* USD 99,996.00

9610413 Lorence A key issue in conservation and restoration biology is the role
of invasive, alien species. Although the value of developing invasion ecology as
a predictive science is increasingly recognized, this may be difficult unless
manipulative experiments are used more frequently. In the proposed research,
manipulative experiments will be used to analyze the effects of invasive species
in a dry forest site on the Island of Hawaii where communities have long been
noted for their disturbance prone features. The goal of the research is to
determine how native Hawaiian communities change in response to the removal of
alien species. Specifically, experiments will determine the regeneration
potential of native species in disturbed and protected habitats. It is presumed
that key alien species have a disproportionate effect on the distribution and
abundance of native species in these forests. The experimental site will be
located in the Kaupulehu Preserve on the island of Hawaii in an area where the
alien, fire promoting fountain grass is now widespread. Recruitment of native
and alien species following removal of fountain grass and control of rats will
be monitored. Removal of fountain grass and control of rats is expected to
result in an increase in recruitment of the native canopy, shrub, and herbaceous
species. Secondary effects will also be investigated such as the invasion of
other alien species suppressed by fountain grass, and increased levels of
herbivory on native species as they increase in abundance. The extraordinarily
high degree of endemism and endangerment of Hawaiian species is not
justification for the proposed research; of more general significance is an
increased understanding of the role of alien species in disruption of native
plant communities, and the significance of primary and secondary effects. The
apparent extreme susceptibility of Hawaiian plant communities to invasion by
aliens should make it easier to see the consequences of removal of alien
species. Lessons learned in the Hawaiian Islands about the role of alien species
should have broad applicability to other plant communities.