* 9610187
* Rapid Reactions of Ions and Radicals in Organized and Constrained Media: Polymer Films and Zeolites
* NONE,NONE
* 02/15/1997,01/31/2001
* J. Kerry Thomas, University of Notre Dame
* Continuing grant
* Kenneth M. Doxsee
* 01/31/2001
* USD 497,500.00

Supported by the Organic Dynamics Program, Professor Kerry Thomas of the
University of Notre Dame studies rapid reactions of ions and radicals in
organized and constrained media. Low-energy photochemical and high-energy
radiolytic reactions of organic probe molecules held within zeolites and solid
polymers permit assay of the rates of development of spectra of the resulting
ions, allowing the exploration of the effects of host modification on the unique
ion kinetics occurring in these systems. Small pools of organic solvents are
created within the cavities of zeolites, constraining and stabilizing usually
short-lived charge-separated ionic species which would otherwise be rapidly
neutralized. Migration of energy and charge to probe molecules held within solid
polymeric hosts is induced by excitation of the polymer. Both the zeolite and
the polymer systems share a common feature, the rapid migration of energy
deposited in one region to a selected region, creating chemistry at the targeted
site. Fundamental questions of energy conversion, transport, and loss are at the
heart of many important technological processes. Through an examination of the
reactions with light and with high-energy electrons of organic molecules
constrained to remain within a tightly-defined `cage` rather than freely moving
in solution, Professor Thomas explores the mechanisms of formation and reaction
of free electrons, organic radicals (compounds containing an odd number of
electrons), and organic ions (compounds bearing either positive or negative
charges). Ongoing studies target the role of the `host` both in the generation
of these reactive species through the transfer of energy from the host to the
organic molecules contained within it and in the moderation of the transport and
reactivity of these reactive species. These studies shed light on energetic
excitation processes such as those employed in x-ray photolithography, wherein
high-resolution structures of use, for example, in microelectronic circuitry
production, are produced through the radiation-induced formation or destruction
of polymeric materials