* 9610004
* Gordon Research Conference on Sea Ice Ecology, March 1997,  Ventura, California
* GEO,OPP
* 02/01/1997,07/31/1997
* Stephen Ackley, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* Bernhard Lettau
* 07/31/1997
* USD 15,000.00

This project will provide funds for the partial support of participants at a
Gordon Research Conference on sea ice ecology, to be held in Ventura,
California, in March 1997. The amount requested from NSF will allow partial to
full support of approximately 20 of the expected 135 participants. Selection for
support will be by application, based on need and contribution to the
conference, and to establish a balance among established researchers, beginning
researchers, and students who are actively engaged in the topical areas of the
conference. This conference on sea ice ecology is the first in an expected
series of Gordon Research Conferences on the polar marine sciences. Gordon
Research Conferences provide a framework designed to foster creative activities
in science and to enhance productive interactions among the international
scientific community through free and unfettered discussions on innovative
frontier research. Sea ice ecology is an interdisciplinary study concerning the
interaction among geophysical, biological, oceanographic, and geochemical
processes within the sea ice and the underlying water column. Areas of
particular emphasis are the influence of the sea ice and snow cover on
biologically significant processes, the operation of the polar marine food web
through the seasonal ice growth and decay, and the transfer and exchange
processes of carbon, silica, and other biogenic minerals.