* 9610361
* Chlorinated Poly (Vinyl Chloride) with High-Performance     Properties and the Detection of Labile Structures in        Vinylidene Chloride Polymers
* MPS,DMR
* 05/01/1997,04/30/2003
* William Starnes, College of William and Mary
* Continuing Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 04/30/2003
* USD 261,000.00

9610361 Starnes The proposed research is directed toweard the ultimate goal of
obtaining useful polymers with superior properties. Two parallel projects are
envisaged. They are related in the sense that both are concerned with
chlorinated polymers and with free-radical chemistry. One project deals with the
preparation of new forms of chlorinated poly(vinyl chloride) (CPVC) having
unusual physical properties that should make these resins excellent candidates
for utilization as high performance materials. In this context, a specific
synthetic target is poly(1,2-dichloroethylene)(PDCE), whose glass transition
temperature has predicted to be much higher than those of the current commercial
CPVC's. Approaches to the preparation of PDCE and other new CPVC's will include
(a) the chlorination of poly(vinyl chloride)(PVC) with molecular chlorine in the
presence of various solvents that can complex chlorine atoms, (b) the
chlorination of PVC with other reagents whose selectivities are unusual, and (
c) synthesis by alternative routes in which no substantive chlorination occurs.
This work will be extended eventually to the preparation of other new chlorine-
containing polymeric materials. The other project is designed to identify and
enumerate the anomalous (defect) structures in vinylidene chloride polymers
(PVDC's) and to elucidate the mechanisms by which these structures are formed
during polymerization. Particular attention will be paid to thermally labile
structures, because their mechanisms of formation may suggest ways of modifying
the polymerization procedures in order to create polymers whose stabilities are
greatly enhanced. %%% This research could lead to the preparation of important
new materials that are very useful technologically and are in the family of
polymers that contains PVC, the world's second most widely used thermoplastic.
The work also will make a major contribution to science education by training
advanced researchers and by all owing Chemistry students at one of the nation's
premier undergraduate schools to do research in a frontier with an
internationally recognized group. ***