* 9612035
* Development of Cuttability Criteria for Rocks
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/1996,07/31/2000
* Emmanuel Detournay, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Clifford J. Astill
* 07/31/2000
* USD 184,334.00

9612035 Fragmentation of rock is important for many applications in rock
engineering. The excavation of underground facilities is increasingly sought to
accommodate the complex demands of today's society, and it is important to
develop new ways to safely and cost-effectively remove rock, particularly hard
rock. Very few mechanical excavators have been designed to operate in hard rock,
basically because of a lack of knowledge of the cutting process. This research
will lead to an improved understanding of the basic mechanisms involved in
mechanical breakage of rock, and will thus ultimately contribute to improvements
in the design and/or mode of operation of rock excavation machines. The main
objectives of the proposed research are to develop (1) cuttability criteria and
(2) and index test to evaluate the ability to cut rocks using mechanical
indentor-type tools (such as disk cutters used on tunnel boring machines, TBMs).
The essential mechanism involved in the mechanical breakage of rocks by
indentation is the development of a crushed zone as a prelude to the formation
of tensile cracks, which eventually cause chipping of the rock. The existence of
this crushed zone imposes constraints on the efficiency or even the ability to
cut rocks by mechanical means. Indeed, compressive damage of the rock beneath
the indentor limits the magnitude of the compressive stress required to initiate
and propagate tensile cracks. ***