* 9612216
* Technical Assistance to Facilitate the Development of a     State Action Plan to Increase the Participation of          Minorities in MSE Research and Teaching Careers
* EDU,DRL
* 02/15/1997,02/28/1998
* Shirley McBay, QUALITY EDUCATION FOR MINORITIES NETWORK
* Standard Grant
* Larry E. Suter
* 02/28/1998
* USD 512,263.00

9612216 McBay The proposed project builds upon the Quality Education for
Minorities (QEM) Network's Technical Assistance Project (TAP) that was funded by
the National Science Foundation (NSF). TAP's long-term goal is to significantly
increase the participation in mathematics, science, and engineering (MSE) fields
of groups historically underrepresented as students and teachers in higher level
pre-college mathematics and science courses as well as in MSE fields at the
college and graduate levels. Non-Asian minorities constitute only about five
percent of the pool of highly skilled technical workers the country needs but
represent a sizable (more than 20 percent) and growing percentage of the U.S.
population. To focus efforts on this problem, both the NSF and QEM have
established numerical goals for the year 2000 for minority MSE baccalaureate and
doctoral degree recipients. The proposed project seeks to strengthen the
capacity of minority and nonminority institutions within a selected state to
produce well-prepared minority graduates who enter MSE teaching and research
careers in numbers commensurate with the percentage of minority students in
higher education enrolled in that state. A major outcome will be a state action
plan, developed under the leadership of a state steering committee established
during the prior award, that will enable the state to make its proportionate
contribution to the minority MSE degree numerical goals. The plan will emphasize
articulation agreements between two- and four-year institutions, the use of
technology, and strengthening teacher education programs. Various forms of
technical assistance will be provided to the participating institutions that
will be designed to increase institutional capacity and infrastructure as well
as to facilitate coordination and collaboration, and information sharing. ***