* 9612058
* Investigation of Microscale Radiation Phenomena Affecting   Thermal Processing of Patterned Wafers
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/15/1996,08/31/2000
* Ioannis Miaoulis, Tufts University
* Standard Grant
* Delcie R. Durham
* 08/31/2000
* USD 307,660.00

DMI-9612058 Miaoulis The microscale effects are pertinent to thermal processing
of microelectronic devices which requires careful control of the temperature
distribution of the wafer. These effects play a significant role in material
processing when the wavelength of radiation is of the same order of magnitude as
the layer/film thickness or feature sizes of the material processed. Thermal
problems lead to defect generation and propagation in the material, excessive
diffusion of microelectronics features, and non-uniform film deposition. As
these devices become smaller and smaller, these issues become increasingly
critical to the future of electronic materials manufacturing. The semiconductor
industry, in particular, the manufacturing equipment sector, is in need of a
thorough understanding of these phenomena. This research project will develop a
set of simulation and experimental tools and techniques to examine the
microscale radiative phenomena and to develop a novel temperature and stress
measurement system. The outcomes of the study would yield useful tools and
models for sub-micro patterned wafers manufacturing. The study will be conducted
based on a microelectricalmechanical (MEMS) approach. This project is a
collaboration between the Thermal Analysis of Materials Processing Laboratory of
Tufts University and the Microfabrication Laboratory of the Northeastern
University.