* 9612113
* Collaborative Research:  The Flood Basalt-Alkalic           Magmatism-Kimberlite Connection and the Temporal-Spatial    Evolution of the Siberian Mantle Plume
* GEO,EAR
* 09/15/1996,08/31/1998
* Paul Renne, Berkeley Geochronology Center
* Standard Grant
* John L. Snyder
* 08/31/1998
* USD 40,000.00

9612113 Renne This project is to conduct a multi-disciplinary study of field,
petrologic, geochemical. isotopic and geochronological study of a suite of
ultrabasic-alkaline and mafic rocks of Maimecha-Kotui region of the northern
Siberian platform. The volcano-plutonic complexes of this region are closely
associated in time and space with the Siberian Flood Basalt Province (SFBP) of
permo-Triassic age. As part of this study The P.I.s will also include the
kimberlites with the alkalic and tholeiitic pulses of the SFBP mantle plume.
Preliminary data on 3He/3He measurements in olivines of the alkalic rocks
suggest a lower mantle source for the 3He and links the alkalic-Maimecha phase
to the plume-related SFBP. More noble gas isotope ratio measurements (He, Ne, Ar
and Xe) are needed for confirmation. 40Ar/39Ar age dating of kimberlites and of
the ultrabasic-alkaline and mafic rocks of the 2.8 km thick Maimecha-Kotui
volcanic section are proposed to determine age and duration of volcanism. Nd,
Sr, Pb-isotopic and trace elemental analyses, including the rare earth elements
by TCP-MS, will also be performed on these rocks during the two-year tenure of
the grant period. The analytical results will be used to examine whether there
is a common petrogenetic link (e.g., mantle-derived plume) for the origin of the
Kharamai kimberlites, the ultrabasic-alkaline and mafic volcanic rocks of the
Maimecha-Kotui section, and for the voluminous, predominantly tholeiitic SFBP.
In the event that these data do not support such a hypothesis, the acquired date
will still be useful in formulating and substantiating other petrogenetic
models.