* 9612574
* Dissertation Research:  Economy, Interaction and Community  in the North Highlands of Peru--Excavations at the Recuay   Site of Chinchawas (Ancash)
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/1996,06/30/1999
* Richard Burger, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 06/30/1999
* USD 11,960.00

Under the direction of Dr. Richard Burger, Mr. George Lau will collect data for
his doctoral dissertation. He will conduct archaeological fieldwork at the site
of Chinchawas which is located in the northern highlands of Peru. Chinchawas
lies on the western slopes of the Andes atop an isolated ridge which affords a
strategic position over the primary pass between two major valleys. Although the
site is relatively small, the architecture shows variability in form, quality of
manufacture and function, including defensive, residential burial and ceremonial
buildings. Included are high status mortuary structures and numbers of carved
stone sculptures which, because of extensive looting, are rarely found in
primary context. While prior work indicates that the site dates to the Early
Intermediate period very little is known about either it or the Recuay culture
of which it forms a part. Through excavation and analysis of recovered materials
Mr. Lau will add significantly to understanding this entity. The research has
five primary goals: 1. to develop a local chronology for the Early Intermeidate
period; 2. to describe the prehistoric occupation and spatial configuration of
Chinchawas; 3. to reconstruct the local subsistence system; 4. to determine the
extent and character of coast-highland interaction; 5. to model local social
organization at Chinchawas and evaluate hypotheses on the trajectory and
complexity of Recuay political developments. To accomplish these goals Mr. Lau
will conduct a program of both surface mapping and excavation. In addition to
lithics and ceramics the work should yield both faunal and floral remains which
permit dietary reconstruction. Through the analysis of `exotic materials` such
as sea shells and non-local stone it will be possible to reconstruct larger
interaction networks. Peru provides an example of pristine development of
civilization. Over the course of several thousand years, groups proceeded from
small hunting and gathering societies to large units such as the Inca empire
which covered thousands of square miles and integrated many diverse peoples into
a single state. It appears that this process took place without influence from
other parts of South or Middle America and archaeologists wish to understand how
this occurred. Although much information is available on the more accessible
coastal regions of Peru, relatively little research has been conducted in the
highland Andean region. It is clear from the architectural material as sites
such as Chinchawas that such highland areas played an important role is the
early stages of this process and Mr. Lau's research will help to fill an
important gap. The research is also important because it will help to train a
promising young scientist.