* 9612853
* Reconsidering Fragmentation and Reassembly
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/1997,10/27/1999
* George Varghese, Washington University
* Continuing Grant
* Dwight D. Fisher
* 10/27/1999
* USD 163,716.00

Reconsidering Fragmentation and Reassembly The Internet Protocol(IP)'s success
for the last 15 years, during which several new technologies emerged, is due to
its support for diversity. IP's solution to the use of different maximum packet
sizes on different networks is to split packets that are too big into fragments,
and to reassemble these fragments at the destination. This project reconsiders
several issues related to fragmentation and reassembly IP. Reassembly is
reconsidered first. The current reassembly algorithms are too slow. A simple
expected case optimization can be used to improve reassembly performance to 38
instructions per fragment if the fragments arrive in FIFO order; a goal for this
project is to implement this optimization in the NetBSD UNIX kernel. The project
also introduces the new idea of Graceful Intermediate Reassembly (GIR), which is
a generalization of the existing IP mechanisms of destination and hop-by-hop
reassembly. In GIR, fragments are coalesced at an intermediate router in order
to use the largest sized packets on its outgoing interface. It can be shown that
GIR always outperforms the usual IP mechanism of hop-by-hop reassembly. A goal
for this project is to modify existing IP router code to show that GIR can be
implemented economically in routers with small processing and memory costs. The
project also reconsiders fragmentation. It is shown that that avoiding
fragmentation has costs of its own in terms of increased packet processing
and/or round-trip delays. Measurements are described in which TCP performance
improves after turning on fragmentation. For example, on Ethernet under NetBSD
using a 536 byte segment size for TCP results in a throughput of only about
6Mb/s, whereas a throughput of 8.45Mb/s is obtained using a segment size of 1460
bytes (without fragmentation) and a throughput of 8.82Mb/s using a segment size
of 16260 bytes with fragmentation. The project will also investigate simple
performance models th at can be used to determine when fragmentation is
beneficial. Finally, the project address the major disadvantages of
fragmentation. A major problem is that when a fragment is lost, the entire TCP
segment must be retransmitted, resulting in reduced or zero goodput under loss.
A new mechanism --- dynamic segment sizing, in which the segment size is
dynamically reduced after loss --- is introduced, which addresses this problem.
Simulations (using a modified NetBSD kernel) will be used to show that dynamic
segment sizing keeps the goodput at reasonable levels even under extremely lossy
conditions. All mechanisms (reassembly optimization, GIR, and dynamic segment
sizing) are orthogonal and can be applied to other protocol suites besides
TCP/IP. Ongoing information about the status of this project can be found in
http://dworkin.wustl.edu/~varghese/FRAG/fraginfo.html