* 9612426
* Presidential Awards For Excellence In Science, Mathematics  and Engineering mentoring.
* EHR,ESR
* 10/01/1996,09/30/1998
* Richard Tapia, William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* Alexandra King
* 09/30/1998
* USD 10,000.00

9612426 Tapia Tapia is Noah Harding Professor of Mathematical Sciences,
Associate Director of Minority Affairs (Office of Graduate Studies), and
Director of Education and Minority Programs), Center for Research in Parallel
Computation (CRPC), at Rice University. Tapia s accomplishments include: I.
Directing the advanced work of 28 students, including seven minority students,
in computational and applied mathematics; II. Overseeing the college careers of
hundreds of minority students, as Dean of Education and Minority Programs; III.
Originating a five-point program addressing minority education issues at every
level, from graduate recruitment to high school awareness in his role at CPRC,
an NSF Science and Technology Center (STC) -- in less than a decade, he has
spearheaded a nationally recognized model educational outreach program for
minorities and women that has trained more than 575 students and 600 teachers in
mathematics, science, and engineering; this core of students, in turn, continues
to impact thousands of others; IV. Significantly impacting Rice University
institutionally -- by helping increase the minority percentage of Rice s
freshman class from less than 5% to approximately 15% over the past few years;
Rice has graduated the most minority Ph.D. students of any mathematics
department in the country; 14 of 24 of Tapia s Ph.D. or M.A. students have been
minority; V. Being elected the first Mexican-American to the National Academy of
Engineering; voted by students as the 1991 winner of Rice s George R. Brown
Award for superior teaching; named by the National Research Council (NRC) as one
of the 20 most influential leaders in minority mathematics education; awarded
the Hispanic Engineer National Achievement Award for Education from the Society
of Professional Hispanic Engineers; and serves on the Board of Directors o f the
Society for the Advancement of Chicanos and Native Americans in Science.