* 9612334
* EGF Receptor-Mediated DNA Uptake and Expression:  A Model   System for Engineering Selective Gene Delivery
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/1996,07/31/1997
* Douglas Lauffenburger, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* David Boron
* 07/31/1997
* USD 50,000.00

9612334 Lauffenburger In spite of their efficient gene transfer capabilities,
current viral vectors fall short of ideal vector for human in-vivo gene therapy.
Among the most serious problems are the random gene insertion into the host
chromosome, immune responses caused by the natural viral proteins, and low cell
selectivity and efficiency in the transfer. Also, neither adenoviral nor
retrovial vectors can incorporate genes over 7 or 8 kb in size. There is a
growing body of work demonstrating that certain ligands have the ability to bind
DNA and effect its transfer into cells through very selective surface receptor
binding. Thus conjugate gene delivery offers and improved delivery potential but
has not been studied in enough detail to demonstrate feasibility. For gene
transfer use. This proposal seeks to gain information on the rate- limiting
steps of the receptor-mediated DNA/ligand- conjugate transport from the cell
surface to the nucleus. Specific aims include: A. Determine whether cellular
internalization is a limiting factor; B. Determine where in the endosomal
sorting pathways conjugates escape to the cytosol; C. Predict and test desirable
ligand properties to effect the transfer. The program will study the transfer of
the epidermal growth factor (EGF) gene into mouse fibroblast cells that contain
previously transfected EGF receptors. This robust system will allow variation of
all the key factors. The P.I.'s lab has extensive experience working with the
EGF system and has already demonstrated reasonable success transferring EGF to
the mouse fibroblasts. ***