* 9612176
* Type Systems for Secure Remote Evaluation
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/1996,08/31/1999
* Geoffrey Smith, Florida International University
* Standard Grant
* D. Helen Gill
* 08/31/1999
* USD 118,072.00

A remote evaluation system is characterized by a client that sends a program to
a compute server for execution on its behalf. The server returns to the client
the results of executing the program. This is in contrast to RPC and CGI scripts
which are examples of server-side programs, not remote evaluation. Remote
evaluation appears to be gaining currency as evidenced by new programming
languages emerging to support it. Among them are Telescript, Tcl, Oblique and
Java. The download-and-execute paradigm supported by Java and Java-compatible
Web browsers is an example of remote evaluation; in this case, however, a Web
server sends a Java-enhanced HTML file to a browser which the browser then
executes. Server security is a major problem with remote evaluation. A server's
availability, privacy and integrity must not be compromised. Current techniques
for ensuring server security is ad hoc. There is no precise characterization of
what kind of security properties these techniques can guarantee. Consequently,
the typical reaction is to limit, or in most cases prohibit altogether, an
application's access to server resources. This greatly weakens the remote
evaluation paradigm. This research investigates the role of programming language
design and type systems in ensuring the security of servers in remote evaluation
systems. Specifically, the long-term objective is to develop static analyses,
within the context of type systems, to ensure that remotely-evaluated programs
do not violate a server's privacy or integrity. Type soundness theorems are
being developed and proved with respect to a formal semantics for a core
imperative language. They precisely characterize the security properties of
well-typed programs written in the language. The impact of features such as
concurrency and exceptions in a programming language on security properties is
also investigated. ***