* 9612165
* Large-Scale Experimental Evaluation of the Lateral Load     Response of Unbonded Post-Tensioned Precast Walls with      Horizontal Connections
* ENG,CMMI
* 03/15/1997,02/29/2000
* Le-Wu Lu, Lehigh University
* Standard Grant
* John Scalzi
* 02/29/2000
* USD 150,552.00

Recent experimental and analytical research has shown the benefits of using
unbonded post-tensional to improve the seismic behavior of precast beam-to-
column joint subassemblages. Compared with current industry practice, the use of
unbonded post-tensional in a seismic structural system is a significant
innovation. The seismic behavior of unbonded post-tensioned precast concrete
walls with horizontal connections has been investigate analytically. However,
the experimental evidence needed to verify the wall analytical model is not
currently available. This project is to experimentally evaluate the lateral load
behavior of multi-story unbonded post-tensioned precast concrete walls. The
research has two specific objectives: (1) to verify the wall analytical model
that has been developed to predict the flexural wall behavior under seismic
loading; and (2) to qualify the shear capability of the horizontal connections
of these walls. Cyclic and monotonic lateral load tests will be performed on
half-scale models of eight walls. Two lateral load profiles, based on nonlinear
dynamic analyses, will be used. The first lateral load profile produces a large
base-moment-to-base shear ratio. Five walls will be tested under this load
profile. The second lateral load profile produces a small base-moment-to-base-
shear ratio. Three walls will be tested under this load profile. Experimental
results will be compared with predicted behavior to identify improvements that
need to be made in the models and methods for predicting flexural and shear slip
behavior.