* 9612646
* Presidential Awards for Excellence in Science,              Mathematics and Engineering Mentoring.
* EHR,ESR
* 10/01/1996,09/30/1998
* Kevin Matthews, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Alexandra King
* 09/30/1998
* USD 10,000.00

9612646 Matthews Established over thirty years ago, the Double Discovery Center
(DDC) was designed with the assistance of University faculty to address the lack
of formal science, mathematics and technology education faced by many of the
young people who enroll in DDC. DDC s strengths include: Inclusion of a science
and technology curriculum among program offerings with which students from
Harlem schools can strengthen preparation for college; this curriculum broadens
students grasp of career potentials in SEM fields and students are required to
complete specific courses in mathematics and science; Strong parental
involvement; Number and diversity of students served -- currently serves over
1,000 minority students over the age of twelve (12) annually, approximately 75%
of whom come from low income and first generation college backgrounds; Success
of students mentored -- 97% high school graduation rate (with an average number
of 186 high school seniors); 98% college enrollment rate compared to the
national enrollment rate of 66%; 88% retention rate and 66% college graduation
rate versus the national rate of 58%; Special opportunities for students --
academic research experiences, academic support systems; and strategies leading
to successful matriculation and degree completion in science, mathematics, and
engineering fields; and Demonstrated quality of institutional life fostering
viable learning, contacts, and career development networks -- creation of an
impressive network between parents and students and administrators, alumni,
faculty and students at Columbia University.