* 9612889
* University of Alaska's Participation in INDOEX (Indian Ocean Experiment)
* GEO,AGS
* 12/15/1997,11/30/2000
* Glenn Shaw, University of Alaska Fairbanks Campus
* Standard Grant
* Jay S. Fein
* 11/30/2000
* USD 69,276.00

Abstract ATM 9612889 Shaw, Glen University of Alaska Title: University of
Alaska's Participation in INDOEX (Indian Ocean Experiment) The Indian Ocean
Experiment (INDOEX) is an international field experiment with participation from
France, Germany, India, the Netherlands, and the United States. The main effort
under the U.S. component focuses on assessing the role of sulfates and other
continental aerosols in global radiative forcing and is being supported jointly
by the Department of Energy and the National Science Foundation. In addition,
complementary studies involving investigations of a variety of related chemical
and radiative processes will be undertaken by scientists from other federal
agencies and other international partners. The composite observing system
consists of a wide range of platforms, from ships to aircraft, as well as
surface-based and balloon measuring systems, and satellite data. The main part
of the three year effort will be a four-month intensive field phase which begins
January 1999. The ultimate goal of this program is to obtain a better
understanding of the decadal and longer time scale climate forcing. The
equatorial Indian Ocean during the northeast winter monsoon season provides a
unique natural laboratory for this experiment. The experimental area is probably
the only place in the world where an air mass which has been modified by intense
sources of continental aerosols, anthropogenic trace species, and their reaction
products (e.g., sulfates and ozone) from the northern hemisphere comes into
contact with the pristine air of the southern hemisphere, which has been
transported via cross equatorial monsoonal flow, at the Intertropical
Convergence Zone. The juxtaposition of these two very distinct air masses will
allow a thorough examination of both the direct and indirect effects of the
aerosols on the radiative properties of the atmosphere. Dr. Shaw's role in
INDOEX is to measure the concentration and supersaturation spect rum of Cloud
Condensation Nuclei (CCN) aboard the Indian research vessel ORV Sagar Kanya in
the spring, 1998 INDOEX science cruise. The purpose is to test the hypothesis
that aerosols transported from the Indian Subcontinent affect the number
distribution and therefore the albedo of clouds in the Indian Ocean.