* 9612549
* Scientific Collaboration Between The Catholic University of America and Delft University of Technology: Engineering Research on Shoulder Biomechanics
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/1996,08/31/1998
* Jack Winters, Catholic University of America
* Continuing grant
* Gilbert B. Devey
* 08/31/1998
* USD 12,219.00

9612549 Winters The long-term objective of this project is to establish a closer
relationship of collaboration between the Catholic University of America (CUA)
and the Delft University of Technology (DUT) in the Netherlands. Many of the
research interests of the Man-Machine Systems Group at DUT and the Biomedical
Engineering Program at CUA are similar and complementary to each other. This
complementarity is a natural incentive for both groups to expand interaction,
and to establish more formal collaboration. The proposed bidirectional
collaboration between the universities is envisioned to include the development
of sister facilities for in-depth biomechanical and neuromotor study of the
human shoulder, and a continuing exchange program of students and researchers
from both institutions. The research universities, CUA and DUT, provide
engineering expertise, while corresponding clinical expertise is provided by the
National Rehabilitation Hospital in Washington, DC and the University Hospital
in Leiden, the Netherlands. The two facilities would have the capability of
collecting and analyzing data for the same battery of shoulder function tests.
Another important component of the project is the proposed student exchange
program. In the first exchange, a doctoral student at CUA will spend several
months with the Dutch Shoulder Group (comprised of DUT and two other Dutch
universities). The student will document DUT's procedures and methodologies, and
participate in the research activities of the Shoulder Group. Upon returning to
CUA, the student will spend several weeks helping to replicate the Dutch
capabilities at CUA, and to coordinate subsequent research plans. During the
second year, the principal investigator and a student will return to Delft for
two weeks to share findings, refine common methodologies, and plan future
activities. Two doctoral students from DUT will also conduct short-term research
at CUA. The expanded scientific collaboration b etween CUA and DUT will be
beneficial to both institutions and to the field of biomedical engineering as a
whole. Some of the more outstanding benefits include intellectual development of
researchers at both institutions, advancement of research projects, and the
resulting increase in knowledge for the wider community of biomedical
professionals, with its concomitant potential improvements in health care. ***