* 9612304
* Geometrical Approaches to Frustrated Antiferromagnets
* NONE,NONE
* 11/15/1996,10/31/2000
* Christopher Henley, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* G. Bruce Taggart
* 10/31/2000
* USD 183,000.00

9612304 Henley This grant supports work on a variety of cutting-edge problems in
material magnetism. In a continuation of a successful program, the current
project includes: (1) discrete spin models in 2 dimension with interface
representations, (2) Application of semiclassical (path integral) approaches to
spatially finite spin systems and (3) Spin order in highly frustrated Heisenberg
antiferromagnets. These projects involve use of a combination of analytical
skills and numerical methods. The two specific projects where the original
problems are long- standing questions and which are expected to be resolved
during the present grant using some of the techniques developed by this PI are:
the ground state of an S=1/2 quantum antiferromagnet on a triangular lattice and
properties of SrCrGaO, a magnetic material with a two layer Kagome sandwich
structure. %%% This grant supports work on a variety of problems in material
magnetism that are both highly complex in that they remain unsolved (after a
half century of careful search for solutions) so far and are derived from state
of the art questions in material magnetism. There are magnets where the
interaction between individual spins (the constituent unit at the atomic level)
is strong but highly competitive and "frustrated" in the sense that the
neighboring spins demand conflicting orientation for a specific spin. These
materials become magnetic, if at all, only at very low temperatures and then
they often have strong anomalous properties. This project is a theoretical study
of the experimental properties of frustrated magnets that have been reported
recently. ***