* 9612122
* Piezo and Thermal Resistance Sensor Properties of Ni-ZrO2   Cermet Films On Silicon Substrates
* NONE,NONE
* 07/15/1997,06/30/2001
* Taeun Park, University of Cincinnati Main Campus
* Continuing grant
* Filbert J. Bartoli
* 06/30/2001
* USD 283,105.00

9612122 Buchanan Cermet (metal-oxide composite) films for sensor applications
require high temperature coefficient of resistance (TCR), wide resistance range
(20-10k(), and high piezoresistive strain sensitivity. Such Ni-ZrO2 cermet films
have been successfully prepared on silicon substrates by the MOD process. The
formation of molecular clusters during this process offers distinct advantages
in achieving homogeneous microstructures in these difficult to fabricate cermet
films. Controlled sintering in a reducing atmosphere modulates the Ni phase and
the resistive properties of the cermet films. Electrical conduction in cermets
is controlled by key microstructural features such as grain size, grain
morphology and porosity. In all cases, conductive paths must be formed through
the structure in order to have dominant metallic behavior with low resistance
and positive TCR. In cermets, both TCR and piezoresistance are of interest near
the percolation conductivity threshold composition. At this threshold, as
insulator content increaqes, resistance increases several orders of magnitude,
TCR changes from positive to negative, and piezoresistive gauge factor
increases. Positive TCR, negative TCR (NTC), and piezoresistive sensor materials
can all be produced within a tight volume % metal range in this transition
region. This behavior will be thoroughly investigated in this study. Ni-ZrO2
represents a 2 phase composite system containing a non-noble metal component
that does not react with the insulative component. The thin film MOD Ni-ZrO2
system, therefore, is of interest for several reasons. Increased ZrO2 in the Ni-
ZrO2 thin film cermet allows the design of higher resistance films with high
TCR. Films fabricated by the author exhibit high TCR of 3000-6800 ppm/(C over Ni
volume contents in the 30-80 vol.% Ni range. Advantages of these Ni-ZrO2 thin
films are: silicon compatibility, controlled thickness in micron range films
(0.2-l(m), high strength, and adherence to Si, SiO2 and A1203 sub strates, and
demonstrated pressure sensitivity. Resistive changes indicating piezoresistive
gauge factors approaching 50 have been measured for the MOD derived Ni-ZrO2
cermet films. In the proposed work the effects of the deposition process,
including the underlying solution chemistry will be investigated. The effects of
sintering variables, including rapid thermal annealing(RTA), on resistance
properties in the Ni-ZrO2 cermet composite films will also be studied, with a
view to developing a model for predicting sensor properties. ***