* 9612519
* Improving NEXRAD-Based Estimates of Precipitation Rates and Hydrometeor Classification
* GEO,AGS
* 09/01/1996,08/31/1999
* Steven Rutledge, Colorado State University
* Continuing Grant
* Stephan P. Nelson
* 08/31/1999
* USD 340,000.00

9612519 Rutledge The U.S. Weather Research Program (USWRP) is an interagency
activity designed to perform and implement the research necessary to improve the
delivery of weather services to the nation. Under this Program, the National
Science Foundation and the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration are
jointly evaluating and supporting weather research of high priority to the
USWRP. This proposal seeks support for participation in initial research efforts
of the U.S. Weather Research Program. The research will center on improving
estimates of precipitation amounts and type (hydrometeor identification) from
the NEXRAD (Next Generation of Radar) WSR-88D radar network. The Principal
Investigators will employ research-quality polarimetric radars to improve radar
derived precipitation estimates, as well as in evaluating NEXRAD algorithms for
hydrometeor identification. Two instrumented mobile vans, one of them equipped
with the Austrian two dimensional video disdrometer, and the other with
capacitance-type rain gage, electronic hail sensor and NCAR hail catcher net
(for manual collection) will be deployed for in situ verification. Since current
radar derived precipitation estimates are virtually ineffective beyond ranges of
100 km or so, the researchers will develop statistically-based techniques for
estimating precipitation at such longer ranges (e.g., cumulative distribution
function matching or neural network techniques). Two pilot field programs are
planned, one for the summer of 1996, and the second for the winter of 1996-97. A
third field program is planned for the summer of 1998 in Oklahoma using the
National Severe Storm Laboratory's polarimetric upgraded prototype WSR-88D. This
research will have an immediate impact on quantitative precipitation forecasting
by providing more robust information on precipitation amounts and type. ***