* 9612485
* Prediction of Pre-Landfall Intensity and Post-Landfall      Precipitation in Hurricanes
* GEO,AGS
* 09/01/1996,08/31/2000
* John Molinari, SUNY at Albany
* Standard Grant
* Stephan P. Nelson
* 08/31/2000
* USD 216,108.00

9612485 Bosart The U.S. Weather Research Program (USWRP) is an interagency
activity designed to perform and implement the research necessary to improve the
delivery of weather services to the nation. Under this Program, the National
Science Foundation and the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration are
jointly evaluating and supporting research of high priority to the USWRP. The
objectives of this research are to understand the mechanisms controlling two
difficult forecasting problems: intensity changes in hurricanes prior to
landfall, and the precipitation they produce after landfall. These two problems
often have a conceptual connection, in that interactions of the hurricane with
middle latitude phenomena (fronts and/or synoptic scale mobile troughs) can
produce sudden intensification of a hurricane prior to landfall, or heavy
precipitation after landfall. It is these middle latitude interactions that will
be the focus of this research. Of particular interest are (i) the processes by
which upper tropospheric troughs interact with hurricanes, with the goal of
describing what determines whether an interaction will intensify or weaken the
hurricane; and (ii) the dynamic and thermodynamic characteristics that control
the amount and distribution of precipitation after landfall. In addition to
increased fundamental understanding of the nature of landfalling hurricanes, a
potential outcome of the work will be an identification of common signatures of
the potential for sudden deepening or localized flooding by tropical cyclones in
time to give adequate warnings. ***