* 9612855
* A Flexible End-to-End Protocol Framework
* CSE,CNS
* 07/01/1997,11/17/1998
* Kenneth Calvert, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Tatsuya Suda
* 11/17/1998
* USD 120,569.00

Support for emerging network applications requires that the basic delivery
service provided by the network infrastructure be augmented with services that
are implemented in the end systems connected to the network. Examples of such
services include: recovery from messages lost in the network; encrypting
transmitted information; verifying that received information was not forged or
modified in transit; adjusting the rate of transmission to available bandwidth;
and attaching identifying information to the transmitted data so that the
receiver can process it even if it arrives out of order. Some of these services
are provided today by protocols that are organized in layers. Although it is a
very useful paradigm for organizing network functionality, research and
experience have identified several problems with layering as it is applied to
end-to-end functions (i.e. those that are implemented in the end systems rather
than the network). In particular, layering causes services to be too coarsely
grouped together, so that applications may have to make use of some services
they don't need in order to get others. (For example, TCP forces an application
that needs congestion control to also accept reliability -- which, if not
needed, just adds unnecessary overhead.) Layering also causes functions to be
implemented in more than one place in the stack, and hides information that
might be useful for improving efficiency. This project aims to develop and
deploy a platform for end-to-end functions that incorporates the lessons learned
about protocol design and implementation over the last several years. The
platform, which is called Tau, is not intended to identify all the functions
that applications may ever require, but rather to streamline the process of
incorporating those functions into systems and applications as they are
identified and developed. The approach involves developing a simple conceptual
framework and a common message format that supports optimization of common
processing paths, while also allowing for extension at a (modest) cost in
efficiency. Tau has three main features. The first is an explicit composition
mechanism (a metaheader) that promotes modularity of function and implementation
but avoids the problems associated with layering. The second is a generic
protocol interface, which allows individual protocol functions to be implemented
separately, then composed efficiently, to provide just the services required by
the application. In developing this feature, the project will contribute new
methods of integrating code for fast execution while preserving modularity at
the source code level. The third feature is a set of protocol functions that can
be extended to include new services in addition to the traditional ones
mentioned above. Information on the Tau Project is available via the World-Wide
Web at http://www.cc.gatech.edu/fac/Ken.Calvert/Tau.html