* 9612846
* Optical WDM Networks with Limited Wavelength                Conversion
* CSE,CNS
* 05/15/1997,04/30/2002
* Galen Sasaki, University of Hawaii
* Continuing Grant
* Admela Jukan
* 04/30/2002
* USD 229,261.00

An important optical network architecture is the wavelength division multiplexed
(WDM) network that supports lightpaths. WDM is basically frequency division
multiplexing in the optical frequency range, where carrier frequencies are
referred to as wavelengths. Lightpaths are end-to end connections made up of
connected WDM channels. A network node is said to have wavelength conversion
capability if it can shift the wavelengths of optical signals. The advantage of
wavelength conversion is that it allows networks to support more ligthpaths, but
its disadvantage is that it can be expensive and/or difficult to implement. This
research will investigate limited wavelength conversion that allows network
nodes to perform some but not all wavelength shifts. Limited conversion means
less complex and costly hardware than full conversion, yet better channel
utilization than no conversion. Network architectures and algorithms will be
studied by initially focusing on special and important network topologies such
as the star and ring, and then eventually covering general network topologies.
These will be analytically evaluated by worst case analysis that leads to
guaranteed performance results, and also by probabilistic methods. More
information on the project can be found at
http://spectra.eng.hawaii.edu/~sasaki/NSF/limited.html