* 9612294
* Probing Far-Infrared Excitations of Surfaces and Thin Films by Optoelectronic Techniques
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/1996,08/31/2000
* Tony Heinz, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Janice M. Hicks
* 08/31/2000
* USD 629,018.00

In this project, part of the Cross-Directorate program for Multidisciplinary
Research in Optical Science and Engineering, Tony Heinz at Columbia University
together with colleagues from several other industrial and government
laboratories will use optoelectronic techniques to probe in the far-infrared
spectral region excitations of molecules and phonons in surfaces and thin films.
These researchers will develop and refine coherent far infrared spectroscopy to
study surface and interface problems and will apply this technique to a wide
range of hitherto intractable measurements of surfaces and thin films. Multiple
reflection and new waveguide geometries will enhance the sensitivity of the
technique for surfaces and thin films, and sum-frequency generation schemes will
mix broadband far infrared radiation with a spectrally narrow visible wavelength
laser pulse. Ultrafast time-resolved measurements will also be exploited in
several studies. Materials systems to be examined include ionic dopants in
polymeric thin films, thin ferroelectric films, and marginal metals. Surfaces
and thin films involve a limited quantity of material, and methods sensitive
enough to study these systems are usually inadequate. This research program will
lead to new techniques for measuring very low energy excitations at the surfaces
of such condensed matter systems using novel optoelectronic methods. A broad
cross section of materials and problems will be examined which have significant
technological relevance and importance.