* 9612255
* Femtosecond Optical Interactions in Glasses
* ENG,ECCS
* 10/01/1996,09/30/2000
* Frank Wise, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Gernot S. Pomrenke
* 09/30/2000
* USD 590,955.00

9612255 Wise A multi-disciplinary investigation of the interactions of
ultrashort light pulses with optical glasses is proposed by a team of scientists
from Cornell University and Corning, Incorporated. The primary goal is to
develop a thorough and systematic understanding of the fast optical
nonlinearities that are the physical basis for a wide variety of optical devices
and systems. Third-order nonlinearities excited by laser pulses consisting of
only a few cycles of the electromagnetic field will be studied in a variety of
experimental glasses. Since glasses are typically Raman-active, the nuclear
contribution to the nonlinear optical response must also be considered. The
absorptive and refractive third-order nonlinearities will be measured with 10-fs
pulses, with the specific goal of isolating the electronic and nuclear
contributions to the nonlinear response. Using the knowledge of individual
processes gained in these studies, the nonlinear and dispersive propagation of
ultrashort pulses in glasses will be investigated theoretically and
experimentally. Experiments will utilize pulse durations ranging from 10 to 200
femtoseconds in a variety of glasses to study the effects of group velocity
dispersion, stimulated Raman scattering, multiphoton absorption, the finite
relaxation time of the electronic nonlinearity, and the breakdown of the slowly-
varying envelope approximation. A secondary theme of the proposed work is the
relation between the local structure of a glass and the relaxation of
vibrational and electronic excitations in the glass. The dephasing of
vibrational modes and the relaxation of electronic impurities excited by short
optical pulses will be studied using both time- and frequency-domain
experiments; in each case the results will be correlated with the local
structure. Graduate students involved in this work will participate in an
innovative education program that includes a multi-disciplinary course
curriculum and assignments to work on t he synthesis and characterization of
glasses at the Corning location for one month each year. This experience will
provide the students with a broad foundation in the optical physics and material
science of glasses as well as giving them substantial exposure to industrial
research. ***