* 9612876
* Mesoscale Modeling of Precipitation in Coastal Regions of   Complex Orography
* GEO,AGS
* 09/01/1996,08/31/2000
* Clifford Mass, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Stephan P. Nelson
* 08/31/2000
* USD 374,453.00

9612876 Mass The U.S. Weather Research Program (USWRP) is an interagency
activity designed to perform and implement the research necessary to improve the
delivery of weather services to the nation. Under this Program, the National
Science Foundation and the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration
(NOAA) are jointly evaluating and supporting weather research of high priority
to the USWRP. The distribution of precipitation along the west coast of North
America is greatly influenced by the orography of the region, resulting in a
complex pattern of enhancement on the windward sides of mountains and
precipitation shadows to their lee. The importance of orographic modulation of
coastal zone precipitation has been highlighted recently by a series of major
flooding events in northern California and the Pacific Northwest that have
resulted in losses in the billions of dollars and several deaths The objective
of this proposal is to evaluate the potential of high-resolution regional
atmospheric models for diagnosing and predicting orographically modulated
precipitation along the mountainous coastal zone of western North America.
Although current operational weather prediction models lack the resolution to
correctly forecast orographic precipitation, a growing collection of regional
model simulations suggests that with sufficient resolution, precipitation can be
predicted realistically in coastal regions of complex terrain. If successful,
high resolution modeling would offer improved precipitation forecasts and
coupling their output to hydrological models could lead to more accurate
prediction of stream flow, river stages, and flooding. This research effort will
evaluate the performance of a high-resolution mesoscale model for a range of
heavy precipitation/flooding events along the orographic west coast of North
America. As part of this evaluation, experiments will be made to determine the
resolution, model physics, and data assimilation methods r equired for producing
the best possible regional model performance for coastal precipitation/flooding
events. The model will be run both in real time to evaluate the long-term
precipitation skill of the model at moderate (~10-15 km) resolution and for a
series of retrospective case studies at very high resolution (down to 1-3 km
horizontal resolution). These case studies will include California and Pacific
Northwest heavy precipitation/flooding events and at least one case for
southeastern Alaska. In addition to evaluating and improving the ability of high
resolution atmospheric models to forecast orographic precipitation, this effort
will also involve interfacing the model's precipitation, temperature, and wind
fields with a watershed hydrological model. Such model coupling has the
potential to greatly improve short- term forecasts of river height and flooding.
Finally, this project will promote active interaction between the University of
Washington scientists and National Weather Service forecasts offices in
California, Oregon, Washington, and Alaska. ***