* 9612398
* Presidential Awards For Excellence In Science, Mathematics and Engineering Mentoring.
* NONE,NONE
* 10/01/1996,09/30/1998
* Carlos Gutierrez, California State University-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Alexandra King
* 09/30/1998
* USD 10,000.00

9612398 Gutierrez Gutierrez is Professor of Chemistry and Director of both the
National Institutes of Health (NIH) Minority Access to Research Careers (MARC)
and the Minority Biomedical Research Support (MBRS) Programs at California State
University at Los Angeles. His accomplishments include: I. Significant impact on
minority student college and university education through his work on NIH funded
projects -- over 180 students mentored by him through these programs or his role
as a faculty participant in other department projects such as the NSF Research
Improvement in Minority Institutions (RIMI) and Research Experiences for
Undergraduates (REU) Programs; II. Significant institutional impact -- the
American Chemical Society (ACS), in great part through his effort, established
the Committee on Minority Affairs in 1993 with Gutierrez serving as its first
chair, which in turn established the ACS Minority Scholars Program, a $5 million
scholarship program for undergraduates; and the establishment of the ACS Award
for Encouraging Disadvantaged Students to Pursue Careers in Chemical Sciences.
-- as Vice Chair of the National Academy of Science Committee on a National
Scholars Program, under contract to NASA, he has articulated persuasively the
responsibility of all faculty, but especially science faculty, to seek out
talented minority students and encourage their academic development very early
in their undergraduate career; and III. Beyond individual students, Gutierrez
has effected an entire cohort of future science professionals.