* 9612404
* Presidential Awards For Excellence In Science, Mathematics  and Engineering Mentoring.
* EHR,ESR
* 10/01/1996,09/30/1998
* Freeman Hrabowski, University of Maryland Baltimore County
* Standard Grant
* Alexandra King
* 09/30/1998
* USD 10,000.00

9612404 Hrabowski Hrabowski is President and Professor of Education at UMBC.
This nomination received three ratings: two Excellents and one Very Good, for an
average rating of Excellent-minus. Hrabowski s accomplishments include founding
the Meyerhoff Scholars Program at UMBC in 1989. The program has: I. Demonstrated
significant outcomes: -- 95% graduation rate in science; -- high grade-point
average: 3.4 for 180 currently enrolled students; and -- 90% matriculation to
graduate and professional schools such as Harvard, M.I.T., Cornell and Johns
Hopkins Universities; I. Provided significant research-related summer
internships in laboratories throughout the U.S. and abroad (e.g., Yale,
Colorado, NIH, A.T.&amp;T Bell Labs, and Silicon Graphics; II. Secured
substantial external support (over $9 million) from numerous federal agencies
and private sources. III. Program replicability and Meyerhoff student
recruitment -- e.g., attracting the interest of M.I.T., U. of Pennsylvania,
Johns Hopkins, Emory, and U. of California at Berkeley. Hrabowski has made
numerous presentations and co-authored numerous publications about the issue of
diversity and received many awards for outstanding achievement in science
education (including NSF, Eli Lily Company, among others).