* 9612624
* Presidential Awards For Excellence In Science, Mathematics  and Engineering Mentoring.
* EDU,ESR
* 10/01/1996,09/30/1998
* Howard Adams, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Wanda Ward
* 09/30/1998
* USD 10,000.00

9612624 Adams Adams is currently Director of the new National Institute on
Mentoring of the National Consortium for Graduate Degrees for Minorities in
Engineering and Science, Inc. (GEM). Prior to that, he served as Executive
Director of GEM. Originally created as an outgrowth of corporate and university
concerns to increase the number of underrepresented ethnic/racial groups who
enter and complete the engineering master s degree, currently GEM operates
programs and conducts activities that address the underrepresentation of ethnic
minorities in engineering, science, and mathematics from precollege to doctorate
levels. Adams accomplishments include: Development of a very successful program
that has assisted a significant number of students in obtaining higher education
degrees in engineering -- developed a program with 69 employers and 78
universities that supports 600 minority graduate students annually;
Demonstration of successful students outcomes -- 1400 master s degree graduates
in engineering, 83 of whom obtained doctoral degrees, an exceptionally number of
minorities obtaining the Ph.D. in engineering; Program replicability by several
other organizations, e.g., the National Physical Science Consortium; Program
documentation in the form of publications -- 10 monographs on mentoring and
related topics; Demonstrated innovation on mentoring -- has expanded work on
mentoring by establishing the National Institute on Mentoring; and Receipt of
awards from organizations such as the American Society for Engineering and the
national Action Council for Minorities in Engineering (NACME) Service Award,
among others.