* 9612298
* Architectural Design Exploration for Real-Time              Embedded Systems
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/1996,08/31/1999
* Xiaobo Hu, Western Michigan University
* Standard Grant
* None
* 08/31/1999
* USD 151,177.00

Advances in both hardware and software design have enabled system designers to
develop large, complex embedded systems. Such systems may contain a mixture of
software programs running on general purpose or special-purpose processors,
high-speed memory systems, and application specific hardware devices. One of the
key tasks in designing these systems is to find a "best" system architecture
including determining the "right" partition between hardware and software
components and selecting the "right" hardware components. The focus of this
project is to develop a viable methodology as well as a set of tools to assist
system designers in this architectural design exploration task. The research
proposed performs design exploration at the system level. At this level, a
system is specified as a collection of task graphs and an implementation is
described by an interconnection of hardware components and an assignment of
processes to the hardware components. Though the problem shares some
similarities with the hardware synthesis problem, many different issues need to
be addressed in order for this approach to be effective. One of the issues is
identifying and estimating appropriate parameters to be included in the
exploration process such that system timing performance can be adequately
predicted. The project emphasizes design exploration for embedded systems with
real-time constraints. Such systems can be found in many applications, such as
navigation and landing control of aircraft, networks and communications.
Attributes that are useful for guiding design exploration will be devised so as
to efficiently analyze the timing behavior of a large number of implementations
with respect to the system timing specifications and hence permit exploration of
a wide range of design options. Other issues including sensitivity analysis and
component reuse will also be addressed. To properly handle conflicting
performance requirements including both functional and non-functional
attributes, an approach based on imprecise value functions from utility theory
will be pursued. Furthermore, the design exploration problem is formulated as a
multi-attribute optimization problem. Techniques from the evolutionary
computation field will be investigated in order to tackle the exponential nature
of the optimization problem.