* 9612244
* Magnetic Resonance Imaging with Laser-Polarized He-3 and    Xe-129 of Biological and Non-Biological Systems Using High  Power Diode Lasers
* ENG,CBET
* 09/15/1996,11/30/2000
* William Happer, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Sohi Rastegar
* 11/30/2000
* USD 929,999.00

9612244 Happer The PIs describe an interdisciplinary program to investigate a
revolutionary new technology employing laser-polarized gases for greatly
enhancing the magnetic resonance images (MRI) of biological cavities such as
lungs and sinuses, as well as nonbiological systems which as voids in ceramics,
etc. This technique was recently used to obtain the first MRI images of the gas
space of a human lung by a collaboration between researchers at Princeton and
Duke Universities. The method uses advances in optical spin polarization made
possible through the understanding of spin exchange interactions between
alkalimetal atoms and noble gas nuclei developed at Princeton. To make this a
practical, low cost and widely applied technique for imaging both biological and
non-biological systems, significant improvements in our understanding of the
physics of optical spin polarization, as well as in the high power laser diodes
necessary to accomplish this task are needed. In this project, researchers at
Princeton and the University of Wisconsin will concentrate on the demonstration
of very high power, low cost, long-lifetime Al-free diode laser arrays with
linewidths sufficiently narrow to efficiently polarize He-3 and Xe-129 for a
wide range of MRI applications. The laser development includes fabrication of
novel MQW structures with improved carrier confinement, as well as distributed
Bragg reflector and external cavity structures to achieve narrow linewidths,
will build on existing strengths at both Princeton and UW-Madison in high power
laser diodes. To improve the MRI technique, the PIs will explore the possibility
of imaging laser polarized gases dissolved in blood and other liquids. Methods
for increasing the efficiency of the spinexchange process, and for accumulating
large quantities of spinpolarized gases will be investigated. ***