* 9612588
* Presidential Awards for Excellence in Science, Mathematics  and Engineering Mentoring
* EHR,ESR
* 10/01/1996,09/30/1998
* Mary Pavone, Dartmouth College
* Standard Grant
* Alexandra King
* 09/30/1998
* USD 10,000.00

9612588 Pavone WISP is a six-year old co-curricular initiative that supplements
women s introduction to college-level mathematics and the sciences by offering
experiences and connections with scientists that are designed to enhance and
reinforce their initial science interests WISP is an impressive program that: I.
Utilizes three basic types of mentoring for young women -- first-year research
internships, linking faculty mentors with students; peer mentoring, using upper
level women science majors as mentors for first year students; and electronic
mentoring, matching undergraduate and graduate women with mentors from industry;
and II. Demonstrated progress and success of students mentored in six years: --
the percentage of women majoring in science has increased from 12% (45 women) in
1990 to 25% (124) in 1995; -- one out of every four science majors were women in
1990; in 1995, four out of every ten (40%) science majors were women; many have
gone on to graduate school; -- 159 science faculty have been involved in
effecting this change; -- approximately 60% of women entering Dartmouth express
an interest in science vs. 40-45% prior to the project; -- participation in all
programs has jumped from approximately 100 to approximately 1,000; -- faculty
have mentored over 446 first-year research interns, 55% of which have declared a
science major at the close of their sophomore year; -- 472 first-year women have
been mentored by upper-class peers in science.