* 9612107
* SGER: Exploratory Study on Aerosol Synthesis of             Nanoparticles (Effect of Electric Fields in Flame Reactors)
* ENG,CBET
* 06/15/1996,11/30/1997
* Sotiris Pratsinis, University of Cincinnati Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Mihail Roco
* 11/30/1997
* USD 53,956.00

ABSTRACT CTS-9612107 The effects of particle charging in synthesis of nanosize
ceramic powders in simple flame aerosol reactors will be investigated. On this
basis, the validity of a predictive model which would indicate the electric
fields can reduce the particle size and narrow the size distribution will be
tested. There are conflicting opinions in aerosol community concerning the
effect of the electrical field on particle size and size distribution. The role
of charging will be tested in premixed flames. Synthesis of oxides of Ti, Si and
Sn will be obtained from their chlorides. The particles will be charged either
by ionic wind in the flame by a corona discharge or by orienting the ions
generated in the flame to external electrodes. The materials to be tested were
selected because of their diverse material properties and their technological
relevance. The proposed concepts may lead to significant improvements in
generation of finer, uniform nanoparticles, eventually with controlled
cristallinity, at large production rates, if the proof-of-concept tests will be
successful. Direct applications of the research are in manufacture of fumed
silica powders and titania for pigments, ceramics, semiconductors and cosmetics