* 9612497
* Temperature-Dependent Constitutive Behavior and             Fractionation of Semi-Solid Slurries
* NONE,NONE
* 01/01/1997,12/31/2000
* Olusegun Ilegbusi, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* Delcie R. Durham
* 12/31/2000
* USD 199,639.00

9612497 Ilegbusi Processing of materials in the semi-solid state has become a
potentially attractive means of producing near net-shape parts. It is often
achieved by controlling the microstructure from segregation prone alloys.
However, there still exists a lack of understanding of the rheology and flow
characteristics of the semi-solid state. The slurries often exhibit
fractionation at mold extension and narrow sections. This phenomenon contributes
to inhomogeneity of constitutive response and consequently produces unacceptable
differential solidification and non-uniform mechanical properties in the
solidified product. The research project addresses these issues by developing
models to study the non-isothermal constitutive relationship for semi-solid
slurries. Two test materials will be investigated: a tin-lead alloy and an
aluminum-copper alloy. These materials will be studied both in the absence and
presence of externally-imposed particulates of silicon carbide and aluminum
oxide. A parallel experiment will be carried out to study the mold-filling
characteristics under a range of operating conditions. This project has a
balance between theory and experiment and could have a practical impact to the
near-net shape engineering in manufacturing.