* 9612430
* Presidential Awards for Excellence in Science, Mathematics and Engineering Mentoring
* NONE,NONE
* 10/01/1996,09/30/1998
* Gail Whitney, Oregon Graduate Institute of Science & Technology
* Standard Grant
* Alexandra King
* 09/30/1998
* USD 10,000.00

9612430 Whitney Established in 1983, Saturday Academy offers seven (7)
precollege, community-based education programs focusing on the sciences,
mathematics, and engineering for 6th-12th grade students. The Academy: I. Has
served an extremely large and diverse population of students -- approximately
38,000 students and teachers, over 50% of the students being women, with
representation of ethnic minority students being above their representation in
that general population (e.g., African-American, Hispanic, Native Americans),
and including students with disabilities; students are served throughout Oregon
and southern Washington through its regional centers; II. Includes teachers as
an integral part of the program -- more than 750,000 hours of instruction
provided; III. Has enlisted 3,400 community professionals to contribute their
facilities, equipment, and expertise in a variety of creative and substantive
ways; IV. Is a model of what cooperation and partnerships can achieve and
provides a remarkable outreach and range of programs; V. Aligned with the Oregon
Education Act for the 21st Century, the Goals 2000, Educate America Act, is a
well-structured and managed operation, with distinct and well-categorized
sectors for middle-schoolers and high-schoolers -- e.g., -- ASE: Apprenticeships
in Science & Engineering -- e.g.,placed 23 9-11 grade high students in research
positions in industry, universities, and government agencies in 1994; --
Contemporary Applied Mathematics (CAM) Summer Institute and Saturday morning
classes, together serving 650 African-American students since inception (funded
by NSF); -- Outreach Initiative --identifies minority and bilingual science and
engineering practitioners to serve as mentors and instructors for Saturday
Academy programs; -- Futuremakers: Inventor/Mentor Program -- an in-school
program for grades 6-9; -- The Annenberg/CPB Math and Science Project; --
Saturday Academy Regional Centers; I. Has secured significant external funding
(NSF, M.J. Murdock Charitable Trust, The Annenberg/CPB Math and Science Project;
Oregon Community Foundation, Tektronix Foundation, Intel Foundation, etc.).