* 9613641
* Quantum Dynamics of Coupled Large Amplitude Intermolecular  Motions in Hydrogen-Bonded and Rare-Gas Heteroclusters
* MPS,CHE
* 01/15/1997,06/30/2000
* Zlatko Bacic, New York University
* Continuing Grant
* Celeste M. Rohlfing
* 06/30/2000
* USD 243,800.00

Professor Zlatko Bacic of New York University is being supported by
theTheoretical and Computational Chemistry program. The project aims to provide
an accurate quantum mechanical description of the large amplitude intermolecular
vibrations and the intermolecular potential energy surfaces of two hydrogen-
bonded clusters, benzene-(H2O)n and (H2O)n, as well as the ultraviolet
photodissociation of H2O in argon clusters and other rare gas matrices. An
efficient quantum 6D method will be developed for the calculation of excited 6D
intermolecular vibrational eigenstates of a broad class of complexes between a
large aromatic molecule (e.g., benzene, naphthalene) and a small polyatomic
molecule such as H2O, NH3. Vibrationally averaged structures and quantum
tunneling dynamics of larger benzene-water clusters will be explored using a
rigid-body quantum Monte Carlo method. A methodology for n-dimensional quantum
calculation of the torsional energy levels and far-infrared spectra of small
(H2O)n (n=3-6) clusters will be developed and extended to other intermolecular
vibrations of the clusters. Bound state calculations of water and deuterated
water clusters will characterize their torsional vibrational dynamics, quantum
number assignments, and vibrationally averaged rotational constants.
Photodissociation of H2O in Ar_nH2O (n=1-12,54) clusters and rare-gas matrices
will be studied to gain an understanding of the mechanisms by which the solvent
modifies the photo-fragmentation dynamics of a polyatomic solute (H2O), relative
to that of the isolated gas-phase molecule. The photodissociation dynamics will
be simulated using classical trajectories, whereas the initial conditions will
be generated from the quantum 6D intermolecular eigenstates of the argon-water
cluster in the ground electronic state. A quantitative understanding of the
properties of, and processes in, water and aqueous solutions ultimately depends
on the detailed knowledge of the water-water, water-solute, and solute-solute
interactions. The quantum calculations of Professor Bacic for benzene-water and
simple water clusters are a tool for the determination of their intermolecular
potential energy surfaces from high-resolution spectroscopic data. These
multidimensional potentials should allow characterization on a molecular level
of liquid water and water-benzene, systems which are of fundamental and
practical importance. In addition, a deeper understanding will be gained of the
intricate dynamical properties of complex hydrogen bonding networks, which shape
the properties of condensed phases and biologically important macromolecules.