* 9613493
* Policy, Norms, and Values in Forest Conservation: Protected Area Buffer Zone Management in Central America
* NONE,NONE
* 01/01/1997,12/31/2000
* Max Pfeffer, Cornell Univ - State: AWDS MADE PRIOR MAY 2010
* Standard Grant
* DEBORAH FRISCH
* 12/31/2000
* USD 402,116.00

Tropical deforestation is a substantial problem of worldwide concern. National
parks have been established by many nations to conserve forests, but their
effectiveness in protecting forests is in doubt due to their limited size. As a
result, forests in adjoining agricultural landscapes are increasingly recognized
as important components of protected area ecosystems. This research focuses on
human forest conservation behaviors that contribute to patterns of forest cover
that enhance the conservation benefits of parks and protected areas. The norms
and values that may motivate forest conservation behavior in economically less
developed countries are changing in important ways. Surprising findings from
recent research indicate that people in poorer countries value the environment
as much as their counterparts in wealthier parts of the world. But does the
growing importance of environmental values lead to improved forest conservation
behavior? Exposure to an expanding array of sometimes conflicting values can
lead to social fragmentation, value conflicts between individuals and
uncertainty about socially appropriate environmental behaviors. This project
will evaluate the role of values in environmental behavior contrasting
experiences in Costa Rica and Honduras. The objectives are: 1) to determine the
sources of environmental norms and values in economically less-developed
settings, focusing on hypotheses posed in recent literature; 2) to specify
relationships between environmental norms and values and forest conservation
behaviors in protected area buffer zones; 3) to evaluate outcomes of self-
reported forest conservation behaviors with objective measures of forest
management and change; 4) to develop policy recommendation on protected area
buffer zone management based on research findings.