* 9613495
* Aggregative and Deliberative Contexts for Valuation: A      Philosophical Contribution to Experimental Research in      Environmental Decision Making
* SBE,SES
* 01/01/1997,12/31/1999
* Mark Sagoff, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Hal R. Arkes
* 12/31/1999
* USD 158,043.00

Socioeconomic research has devoted considerable effort to measuring the value
individuals attach to environmental goods and services that markets fail to
price. The goal of this research has been to elicit the `given` or prior
preferences of individuals and to use those data to guide policy concerned with
maximizing individual and social well-being. A complement to this approach has
emerged from recent philosophical research on democracy and deliberative
processes. From this perspective, the individual, rather than serving simply as
a bearer of prior preferences, joins in a social process in which public values
are constructed. Economists, sociologists, and other social scientists are now
developing new research approaches to determine the extent to which the
valuation of environmental goods can benefit from discursive, information-rich,
and deliberative experimental methods. The project intends to shape and inform
these experimental methods in socioeconomic research by relating them to work in
political theory and philo sophy that emphasizes processes of social learning,
exchange, and identification. The investigators also propose to analyze the
policy relevance of data that emerge from group discourse, deliberation, and
consideration of evidence - - data which may reflect judgments individuals make
not about their own well -being but about the objectives of the community as a
whole.