* 9613458
* NSF/EPA:  Effective Environmental Policy in the Presence of Distorting Taxes
* SBE,SES
* 10/01/1996,09/30/1999
* Dallas Burtraw, Resources For the Future Inc
* Standard Grant
* Hal R. Arkes
* 09/30/1999
* USD 100,000.00

This research investigates the economic cost of policy instruments for
environmental protection in the presence of preexisting distortionary taxes.
Recent literature has identified the potentially significant indirect economic
cost that an environmental tax has when there are preexisting distortionary
taxes in factor markets such as capital and labor. This cost counteracts the
anticipated benefits that might follow from recycling revenue raised by an
environmental tax to reduce preexisting taxes. The insight that motivates this
approach is that environmental policies that do not raise revenues nonetheless
are likely to impose a cost through their interactions with preexisting taxes
just as would an environmental tax. However, regulations forgo the potential
benefit from recycling environmental tax revenues. This research focuses
primarily on the comparison of revenue-raising and nonrevenue-raising
instruments in various settings, and evaluates their economic cost in achieving
a stated environmental goal. This research is supported by complementary funding
by NSF and EPA under the Partnership for Environmental Research. The part to be
funded by NSF focuses on the regulation of a single pollutant in the presence of
preexisting taxes in factor markets. Investigators will use an analytical model
to advance the understanding of the interactions between environmental policy
and the tax system. The theoretical model will be complemented with numerical
models to deal with some more complex interconnections that cannot be determined
unambiguously. The numerical models will consider the costs of existing and
potential policies for reducing air emissions of particular pollutants such as
CO2 and SO2 in the U.S. economy. The second part will be funded by EPA and will
extend the analysis of preexisting distortions in factor markets to consider
preexisting distortions in an industry that is immediately subject to
environmental regulation. Investigators will model the institutional setting of
the U.S. electric utility industry to consider the regulation of multiple
pollutants, other environmental policies special to the industry, and various
forms imperfect competition and market structure that may characterize ongoing
changes in the industry. Initial research on this topic suggests there are
striking and important differences between the economic performance of
alternative instruments when they are evaluated in the context of preexisting
distortionary taxes. The results of this research project should advance the
understanding of the economic cost of environmental regulation, and especially
the design of policies to minimize that cost.