* 9613857
* Asymmetric Synthesis with Boronic Esters
* NONE,NONE
* 12/01/1996,05/31/2000
* Donald Matteson, Washington State University
* Continuing grant
* Kenneth M. Doxsee
* 05/31/2000
* USD 330,000.00

Support is provided by the Organic Synthesis Program to continue Professor
Donald S. Matteson's studies of asymmetric synthesis with boronic esters in the
Department of Chemistry at Washington State University. Professor Matteson will
examine the cyclization of asymmetric boronic esters to obtain chiral
cyclobutanes, providing a new route for the synthesis of natural products,
typified by the boll weevil pheremone, grandisol. Reactions allowing the
conversion of boronic esters to alkyldihaloboranes will be developed, and these
reactions will be modified through intramolecular delivery of nucleophilic
centers to afford new syntheses of nitrogen- and oxygen-containing heterocycles.
Catalytic chirality control in the formation of carbon-carbon bonds will be
assayed, as will reactions resulting in the conversion of carbon-boron bonds to
carbon-nitrogen and carbon-carbon bonds. These studies will open the doors for
the preparation of C2-chiral diamines and the study of retroracemization
reactions, allowing complete conversion of racemic boronic ester substrates to a
single diastereomeric product. Many molecules exist which bear the same
relationship to their mirror image as a right hand bears to a left hand - they
look the same, but they are not identical. Often, one form of a molecule will
display different properties, particularly with regards to biological activity,
than those of its mirror image form, and thus synthetic organic chemists must
devise methods for the preparation of single forms of desired molecules.
Professor Matteson will explore such `asymmetric` syntheses by developing the
chemistry of compounds containing boron, exploiting the unusual chemical
reactivity of such compounds to facilitate the formation of new carbon-carbon
and carbon-nitrogen bonds. He will develop routes to broad classes of compounds,
providing a general foundation on which to build the field of asymmetric
synthesis, and also will highlight the practical utility of the chemistry
through the synthesis of a molecule which may serve as an agent for the control
of boll weevil infestations.