* 9613963
* Solar Flare and Solar Interplanetary Phenomena Investigated with High Energy Charged Particles
* GEO,AGS
* 01/15/1997,12/31/1999
* Roger Pyle, University of Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Paul A. Evenson
* 12/31/1999
* USD 485,000.00

This grant will support both research and continued operations of two neutron
monitors at Climax, Colorado and Haleakala, Hawaii. The research will
investigate the physics of the electrodynamical processes in three dimensions in
the inner heliosphere, with special emphasis on the solar-terrestrial region.
For instance, the PI's neutron monitors have discovered that as the Ulysses
spacecraft travels towards the Sun's polar regions, the recurrent 26-day
modulation continues to be seen to extremely high latitudes, beyond the extent
of the magnetic field and plasma structures (previously thought to control these
variations). The neutron monitors continued their measurements of these same
variations, implying the mechanism for recurrent modulation must be a global,
large-scale phenomenon, extending throughout the inner heliosphere. This
mechanism will be pursued over the next few years. Further, the PI has the
longest running neutron monitor records, covering more than two solar magnetic
cycles. This will enable further exploration of the role of gradient drifts in
the modulation of galactic cosmic rays, which reach the top of the atmosphere.
The PI will continue long-term studies of the apparent bimodal character of
cosmic ray modulation through the next solar minimum. Finally, the PI will
continue support and upgrade of the two neutron monitors.