* 9613679
* Numerical Studies of Thunderstorms Electricity and          Lightning--A Look at the Paradigm
* GEO,AGS
* 06/01/1997,05/31/2001
* John Helsdon, South Dakota School of Mines and Technology
* Continuing grant
* Roddy Rogers
* 05/31/2001
* USD 425,000.00

Helsdon/Abstract The objectives of this research are charge separation process
in the influence of lightning on the electrical structure and development of
thunderclouds, primarily using the 3D storm electrification model. With respect
to charging processes we plan to examine the convective hypothesis, acting
alone, to see if it is capable of producing strong electrification within
storms; continue to investigate noninductive charging processes based on the
most recent laboratory findings; look at the hail/cloud water inductive
mechanism to determine its importance in the electrification during the mature
stage of storms; and examine several mechanisms, including splashing of hail and
supercooled liquid water, to investigate the production of charge structures
that might favor positive cloud-to-ground lightning. We also plan to incorporate
electrical effects on the vertical and horizontal motion of charged hydrometeors
as well as the calculation of detailed hydrometeor charge budgets. With respect
to the lightning scheme, we will develop a more randomized propagation for the
simulated channel, incorporating the electric field due to the channel itself.
We will continue to investigate the termination criterion, with the intent of
solving the problem of channel propagation to ground. Finally, we plan to run
simulations with multiple discharges to determine their influence on the charge
rearrangement during the active lightning phase of storms.