* 9613722
* CONACYT:  Design and Implementation of a Wireless           Communication System using BiCMOS Technologies
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/15/1996,08/31/2000
* Edgar Sanchez-Sinencio, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Continuing Grant
* James W. Mink
* 08/31/2000
* USD 154,842.00

9613722 Sanchez-Sinencio The main goal of this proposal is to identify,
characterize, model, and design algorithms and devices that are essential in
wireless system applications, using a unified approach. This involves a (top-
down) hierarchical design all the way from the system point of view, to the
transistor level implementation. Tradeoffs between system architecture, BiCMOS
circuit implementations, cost, power consumption, and performance at different
levels will be identified. This research will yield important practical results
that form the basis for many wireless communication products, and specifically
those to be used for the upcoming personal communication systems (PCS) and in
communication over the industrial, scientific and medical (ISM) bands. The
tradeoffs in building complete wireless communication products in integrated
circuit form, versus hybrids (with off-chip components) will be a key component
of the proposed research. This work proposed in this proposal encompasses
theory, software simulation, and hardware implementations. The uniqueness of the
approach is based on the coordinated effort of two groups with proven
accomplishments in communications and microelectronics circuits. Heavy
interaction between both faculty members and graduate students from the two
institutions proposing this project is expected. The Texas A&amp;M University
contribution will be in the communication system architectures, multiple-access
techniques (i.e. CDMA, TDMA, etc.), signal processing algorithms, mixers, and
active and passive filters. The INAOE contribution will be mainly in the BiCMOS
circuit design of key building blocks. These blocks include the front-end low
noise amplifier (LNA), power amplifiers, channel encoders/decoders, and
correlators. The feasibility and performance of the proposed designs will be
verified first by software simulation involving tradeoffs, experimental
verification b silicon chip-prototypes of important building blocks, and some
system applications resul ts. A successful conclusion of this proposal research
will lead to practical, unified design methodologies for designing wireless
communication systems, especially those for PCS and unlicensed devices operating
in the ISM bands. Contributions at the system, building block, and hardware
levels and their interrelations are anticipated. This research will have an
important effect on the infrastructure of wireless research and education in our
universities, since a significant number of students are already involved.
Funding for these students will come not only potentially from the support
requested in this proposal, but also from present support, exceeding half a
million dollars, from the College of Engineering and the Department of
Electrical Engineering at Texas A&amp;M University, as well as from Texas
Instruments, over the next three years. The utility and relevance of the
proposed research is based on substantial industrial ties, and strong exchange
of ideas between academia and university. ***