* 9613422
* Back-End Modifications of Portland Cement Plants            to Reduce Emissions of Hazardous Air Pollutant
* ENG,CBET
* 10/01/1996,09/30/2000
* Barry Dellinger, University of Dayton
* Continuing Grant
* Farley Fisher
* 09/30/2000
* USD 330,000.00

Abstract 9613422 Sidhu This proposal focuses on the reduction of hazardous air
pollutants (HAP) such as hydrocarbons, hydrochloric acid, and polychlorinated
dibenzo-p-dioxins and polychlorinated furans (PCDD/F), produced in the
production of Portland cement. Volatilization of organics from the feed stock
during preheating and drying and conditions in the Air Pollution Control (APC)
device and in the transfer ducting zones appear to be primarily responsible for
the formation of these HAPs. Several process modifications such as the thermal
pretreatment of feed stock, elimination of hydrocarbon recycle, temperature
reduction in the preheat off-gas transfer duct, increased oxidation, and
modification of preheater conditions may help reduce and/or prevent this HAP
formation. An experimental program is proposed in order to determine which of
these strategies is most effective and what precise process modifications are
necessary to implement them. A high temperature flow reactor, operating in the
range of 200 to 700 C will be used to study the speciation, partitioning, and
reaction of raw meal hydrocarbons and chlorine in an environment containing
cement kiln feed stock and NOx, O2, and water. This data should enable the
design of specific process modifications to prevent the formation and emission
of HAPs from Portland cement kilns without the addition of control devices.