* 9613708
* GOALI:  Intelligent Decomposition Heuristics for Scheduling Semiconductor Manufacturing Facilities
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/1997,06/30/2001
* Karl Kempf, Purdue Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Janet M. Twomey
* 06/30/2001
* USD 299,497.00

9613708 Uzsoy This GOALI award represents a combined industry-university
research effort geared toward the development of optimization-based approximate
scheduling procedures for complex manufacturing operations. While optimization-
based scheduling approaches for complex manufacturing systems are not new, they
have found relatively little use in practice, primarily because they have
focused on exact solutions to computationally intractable problems. This
research takes a different tack, employing a combination of heuristic
decomposition methods and machine learning to develop effective approximate
scheduling procedures for a general class of job-shops that encompass sequence
dependent setup times, batching, and pipelining. The investigators include a
senior researcher from Intel Corporation, and they will use semiconductor wafer
fabrication facilities and assembly and test facilities as the testbeds for
their research. The complexity of semiconductor manufacturing and the
competitive pressures faced by the industry have made effective manufacturing
management, in particular shop-floor control, essential to a company's survival.
An important part of shop floor control is scheduling the movement of material
through the equipment in the factory to obtain the best possible system
performance. If successful, this work has the potential to reduce variability in
lead times, thus allowing a company the ability to maintain lower floor
inventories, respond rapidly to changing market conditions, and quote accurate
and competitive lead times to their customers. The strong intellectual
involvement of an industrial partner in this research will further ensure its
relevance to practical manufacturing environments.