* 9613799
* DNA Computation on Surfaces
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/1996,08/31/1999
* Max Lagally, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Yechezkel Zalcstein
* 08/31/1999
* USD 899,900.00

(1) This multi-disciplinary project concentrates on developing computation at
the molecular level, via manipulation of DNA strands on surfaces. An
experimental demonstration of DNA-based computation by Adleman(a) has changed
the view of what computation is, (b) offers the potential for unprecedented
computing power at the molecular level, and (c) raises fundamentally new
research problems in chemistry, computer science, and material science. This
project represents a concerted attack on these problems which involves close
collaboration between chemists, material scientists, and computer scientists.(2)
This research will help answer two major questions on DNAcomputation. First,
does computation at the molecular level have the potential to provide computing
power that is orders of magnitude greater than foreseeable extrapolations of
current technology? Second, is this type of computation suited to solving NP-
hard problems (problems that are well beyond the limits of current
technology?(3) The potential for huge computing power rests on the use of DNA
strands to encode information and the manipulation of these strands in a
massively parallel fashion, involving as many as 2^70 (2 to the 70th power)
distinct strands. The premise of this project is that surface-based chemistry is
a critical technology in approaching this scale. With this approach, DNA strands
are immobilized on a surface, thus allowing a much greater degree of control in
chemical processes that manipulate the DNA than is achievable via the test tube
based methodology of Adleman. While surfacebased chemistry is the basis for
recent strides in combinatorial chemistry, this project is the FIRST to fully
exploit surface-based manipulation of DNA strands for the purposes of DNA
computation.(4) Scaling up current surface chemistry to approach the
requirements of DNA-based computation requires high-quality research at the
interface of materials science and chemistry. Improvements in the nanoscale
morph ology and chemical makeup of the surface is key to ensuring that a high
density of information can be obtained and reliable chemical manipulations
performed. Good surface attachment chemistry and control of chemical
``operations'' or enzymatic processes are also extensively developed. This
project should result in significant advances in the state of- the-art in
surface chemistry and should provide a solid basis for predicting the limits of
surfacebased DNA computation.(5) An eventual goal of DNA-based computation is to
perform massivelyparallel searches for optimal solutions of NPhard problems.
However, the differences between DNAbased computation and conventional
technology require that radically new algorithms be developed for this paradigm.
Tempering the potential for unprecedented parallelism (up to 2^70 simultaneous
operations) is extremely slow and errorprone nature of the operations
themselves. Novel strategies for generating and searching solution spaces for
NPhard problems are investigated. These strategies embody sound algorithmic
principles that can be applied to a range of problems. Using a combination of
analysis and simulations, the effectiveness of these strategies are tested on
selected applications. This work provides new ways of attacking NPhard problems
that, while designed for a hypothetical DNA based computer, are valuable for
massively parallel computing paradigms, other than the DNA-based paradigm
studied here.(6) Thus this comprehensive program will provide a deep
understanding of the potential and limitations of DNAbased computation, from
both the chemical and algorithmic viewpoints.***