* 9614743
* ZOOM
* EHR,DRL
* 01/01/1997,12/31/2000
* Kate Taylor, WGBH Educational Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Valentine Kass
* 12/31/2000
* USD 1,600,000.00

9614743 Sullivan WGBH Educational Foundation is producing Season I of Zoom, a
daily half-hour television series for children aged 8 to 11. Zoom, which is
based on the highly successful 1970's series of the same name, features a cast
of seven children who engage in activities and examine ideas submitted by youth
who watch the show. The new Zoom will have an enhanced educational
concentration, an emphasis on science and math activities and projects, and a
comprehensive outreach campaign. A major focus of the series will be to develop
"Habits of Mind" which promote the capacity to think about the same ideas and
evidence in multiple ways; collect, organize, and recognize patterns in data;
identify questions that can be answered through scientific investigations; and
develop skills of estimation, judgment, and data literacy. Season I will have
three over-arching science and math-based themes: Structures, Things That Go,
and Living Things. Each program will include two or three science and math
segments, as well as encouragement to try these activities at home. From time to
time, the cast will provide a "challenge" for viewers by asking them to conduct
an activity as home and send in their results for presentation on a later show.
Field-produced segments will feature children engaged in science or math
projects that they have found particularly fascinating and have done on their
own. The series also will revisit projects or "challenges" over the course of a
season to demonstrate that science is an on-going, evolving endeavor and that
new information may change old assumptions. Zoom outreach activities will
include a Zoom science guide for educators, a World Wide Web Site, museum Zoom
rooms, community partnerships with three national organizations that work with
underserved children. In addition, every viewer who writes, calls an 800 number,
or sends an e-mail will receive a free four-page newsletter with directions
needed to complete activities from the series and to tackle challenge s that the
cast issues to the audience. Kate Taylor will be Executive Producer for the
project. She has been co-executive producer for Where in the World is Carmen
Sandiego? and for Degrassi Junior High. The Science and Math Director will be
Candace Julyan, Senior Project Director at TERC. The Director of Outreach will
be Beth Kirsch who oversees the development and implementation of national
outreach campaigns for WGBH. The staff will work closely with a group of
consultants and advisors with expertise in such areas as science and
mathematics, informal science, outreach, and evaluation.