* 9614938
* Synthesis of Existing High Resolution LTER/Icecolors        Databases to Advance Physical-Bio-Optical Modeling of       Antarctic Primary Production
* GEO,OPP
* 01/15/1997,06/30/1999
* Barbara Prezelin, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Polly A. Penhale
* 06/30/1999
* USD 105,050.00

9614938 Hofmann and Prezelin While primary production of the Southern Ocean is
significant to global ocean carbon flux, large scale estimates of production for
Antarctic waters are extremely uncertain and knowledge of the magnitude of its
variability over a range of time and space scales is sparse. Thus, there is a
need for high resolution databases for the development of regional and seasonal
primary production models. This research will blend components of two existing
high-resolution physical, optical and primary production datasets in a total
model of nested bio-optical and physical biological models with the aim of
predicting patterns and control of primary production in Antarctic coastal
waters. The extensive LTER/Icecolors primary production and physical dynamics
database covers 4 years of Antarctic research at time-series stations in coastal
waters and during several process cruises at defined sites within a mesoscale
grid of the shelf/slope waters west of the Palmer Peninsula. This will allow
testing of predictive hypotheses regarding physical forcing of primary
production in Antarctic coastal waters and will advance bio-optical models
linking spectral light fields, changing UV climatology, phytoplankton community
dynamics and photosynthetic activity over a wide range of time and space scales.
General objectives are to: a) Develop and test bio-optical models of PAR-based
primary production for Antarctic coastal waters, utilizing the LTER mesoscale
data bases collected for different seasons between 1990-1994. b) Blend the LTER
Physical Field Hofmann and Primary Production datasets Prezelin to define and
quantify the effect of mixed-layer dynamics on primary production and
phytoplankton community dynamics in the shelf/slope waters west of the Palmer
Peninsula. c) Utilize LTER primary production data to test the applicability of
a general hypothesis of bio-optical modeling of global primary production to
modeling large scale primary prod uction in the Southern Ocean. d) Hindcast the
impact of solar UV radiation on in situ LTER primary production, utilizing
measured UV climatology data (Booth, NSF UV Monitoring Program, Palmer Station)
and modeled ozone-dependent UV climatology (Dr. Madronich's UV CODE, version
3.2, NCAR) in combination with in situ biological weighting functions (BWFs) and
UV dose-response curves derived from studies of diverse phytoplankton
communities acquired during Icecolors `90 r `93 Although GLOBEC/USJGOFS programs
will largely focus on oceanic waters of the Southern Ocean, a prompt synthesis
of the existing databases will provide insights and advances in physical-bio-
optical models useful to the planning and execution of the other
multidisciplinary programs. Furthermore, important bases will be provided for
comparison and integration between programs as those projects are completed.
Cross-comparison of programs is possible since core measurements are the same as
those used in JGOFS, and the goals of ascertaining the differences between
short-term variability and long-term trends in primary production in diverse
regions of the Southern Ocean are shared.