* 9614385
* Small Displacement Faults in Sand: What Control Do They     Exert on Saturated and Unsaturated Flow and Transport?
* GEO,EAR
* 04/01/1997,03/31/2000
* John Wilson, New Mexico Institute of Mining and Technology
* Continuing Grant
* L. Douglas James
* 03/31/2000
* USD 157,000.00

9614385 Wilson We propose to study the influence of small-displacement faults on
both saturated and unsaturated water flow and chemical transport in poorly
consolidated sandy sediments. Previous work has focused on the influence of
faults on saturated fluid flow in rock, rather than sediments. These studies
cannot be directly applied to flow in sediments because the mechanics of
deformation and resultant structures are different for sediments than for rocks,
and cannot be applied to unsaturated flow because the distribution of
permeability in a given material is different under unsaturated versus saturated
conditions. A complex set of variables controls the influence of faulting on
fluid flow. Given the lack of information about the behavior of faults in
unconsolidated or poorly consolidated sediments, addressing all of the pertinent
variables is beyond the scope of this proposal. We will focus on a small, but
very important, aspect of the problems: how deformation influence saturated and
unsaturated permeability of small-displacement faults in sand, the most common
aquifer material in the southwestern United States. Small-displacement faults
are far more common than the large-displacement faults typically included on
geologic maps. Our preliminary work suggests that faulting in such material will
result in decreased saturated permeability and, for the arid moisture conditions
typical of the region, increased unsaturated permeability, both resulting from
pore-size reduction caused by deformation. Thus in the saturated groundwater
zone faults act as barrier, while in the Vaduz zone they may act as fast paths
that lead chemicals directly to the water table. We will test the following
hypotheses the course of the study: Fault in sand, especially small-displacement
faults, are relatively common features in tectonically active extensional
regions like the Rio Grande Rift. At the porous-media scale, fault-zone
saturated and unsaturated permeability is altered by deformation and d
iagenesis, through grain-size reduction, grain reorientation, and cementation.
We will focus our attention on the first two processes. (The third process will
be the subject of future research.) The altered fault-zone permeability
influences saturated groundwater flow and unsaturated Vaduz zone flow, and the
associated movement of chemicals. The degree influence depends on the
permeability contrast between fault zones and host sands, spatial frequency of
faults. In saturated sandy aquifers these fault zones become barriers to flow
because of reductions in saturated permeability. In the vadose zone fault zones
can become preferred flow paths under the arid conditions typical of the
southwestern US; in wetter conditions they become barriers. We will test these
hypotheses using a combination of geologic and hydrologic analyses. The geology
of several study sites will be mapped at different scales. They will then
determine the permeability and petrographic characteristics of the mapped
hydrogeologic units in both deformed and undeformed materials. This field-based
data will be used to construct numerical models of fault systems in which the
influence of fault properties on flow and transport can be evaluated. We will
also make geochemical measurement of cementation that is diagnostic of past flow
regimes. By addressing the problem with a interdisciplinary approach, using a
variety of techniques at different scales, we hope to determine whether these
faults are significant hydrogeologic features.