* 9614738
* Congo Gorilla Forest
* EDU,DRL
* 02/01/1997,12/31/2000
* Annette Berkovits, Wildlife Conservation Society
* Continuing Grant
* Barry A. Van Deman
* 12/31/2000
* USD 2,487,169.00

9614738 Gwynne The Wildlife Conservation Society will develop "Congo Gorilla
Forest." This will be a 6.5 acre outdoor exhibit that will provide visitors with
a realistic trip through a living Congo Ecosystem, ending in an arms-length
observation of a colony of 30 Lowland Gorillas living in a natural setting. The
science presented in this exhibit is based on much of the seminal research that
has been carried out on the Congo Forest environment by scientists at the Zoo.
During their trip visitors will be able to explore and develop their own
insights into this dynamic ecosystem and at the end will be drawn into difficult
conservation issues. The exhibit will include the Rain Forest Trail, Living
Treasures of the Congo Gallery, Conservation Showcase and Theater, Great Apes
Gallery, and the Conservation Choices Pavilion. In addition there will be a menu
of complementary formal education materials to include parent workshops, teacher
training activities, and instructional materials. Linkages have been made with
the New York Urban Systemic Initiative and the formal education programs will
complement the goals of this systemic initiative. Given the Zoo's location in
the Bronx, given the Zoo's reputation as a leader in wildlife conservation, and
given the Zoo's renewed commitment to quality visitor experience and learning
activities, this exhibit will break new ground in the exhibition of animals and
informal learning activities of visitors. It will have an impact on zoos
throughout the world. They anticipate 750,000 visitors annually for the Congo
Gorilla Forest.