* 9614747
* Analysis of Vesicular Volcanic Rocks Using Computed X-ray   Tomography:  Technical Development and Testing
* GEO,EAR
* 06/15/1997,05/31/2000
* Dork Sahagian, University of New Hampshire
* Standard Grant
* David Lambert
* 05/31/2000
* USD 154,064.00

9614747 Sahagian Computed X-ray Tomography (CXT) has recently emerged as a
particularly useful technique for non-destructive 3-dimensional analysis. We
propose to develop CXT methods to determine vesicular properties of volcanic
rocks, for future application to various geologic problems. A number geological
factors control the final geometry and structure of observed vesicles in
volcanic rocks. We will study the rocks to ultimately gain insights into
volcanic processes and conditions. These include paleoelevation and
paleoatmospheric pressure, vesiculation dynamics, magma and lava flow dynamics
and eruption styles. In addition, the processes which control bubble growth can
be better understood if the volumes, shapes, and other 3-dimensional
characteristics of bubbles can be quantified. There are various methods for
determining 3D characterizations of vesicularity. We propose to quantify 2D
stereological methods so that their applicability to common non-spherical
vesicle shapes can be delineated. The main tasks in the work plan will be to:
Identify and reanalyze bubble size distribution data (from existing plastic
casts); Conduct stereological analysis and CXT on the samples; Develop and apply
software for CXT analysis and visualization; Compare CXT results with
stereological results on the identified suite of samples. The results of the
proposed project should provide useful tools applicable to a variety of
scientific problems facing the petrologic research community.