* 9614929
* Fundamental Study on Binary Blends of Thermotropic          Semiflexible Polyester and Flexible Polyester
* ENG,CBET
* 04/15/1997,03/31/2000
* Chang Han, University of Akron
* Continuing Grant
* Robert M. Wellek
* 03/31/2000
* USD 159,925.00

SUMMARY CTS-9614929 C.D. Han University of Akron A fundamental study is being
conducted on binary blends of main-chain thermotropic semiflexible polyester
(MTSP) and flexible polyester. Emphasis will be placed on developing a method(s)
whereby an enhancement of the mechanical properties of flexible polyesters can
be realized by blending with a MTSP. It is proposed to synthesize a series of
MTSP with lateral substitution, and then prepare binary blends with a
commercially available flexible polyester, poly(butylene terephthalate) (PBT) or
polycarbonate (PC). Using various blends of MTSP and PBT (or PC), which will be
prepared during the course of the proposed study, the investigation will
include: (1) thermal transitions using differential scanning calorimetry (DSC);
(2) equilibrium phase behavior in the nematic region of MTSP using DSC and
polarizing optical microscopy; (3) transient/steady-state shear flow and
oscillatory shear flow behavior in both the isotropic and nematic regions of
MTSP using a cone-and-plate rheometer; (4) the structure in the nematic and
solid states, respectively, using variable-temperatures wide-angle X-ray
diffractometry; and (5) the mechanical properties of fabricated specimens. The
primary objective of the proposed research project is to establish phase
behavior-rheology-morphology-property relationships in binary blends consisting
of a flexible polyester and a main-chain thermotropic semiflexible polyester
(MTSP).