* 9614125
* Diffusion and Growth on Silicon using an Atom Tracker       and Hot STM (Scanning Tunneling Microscope)
* MPS,DMR
* 01/01/1997,12/31/1999
* Eric Ganz, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* LaVerne D. Hess
* 12/31/1999
* USD 270,002.00

9614125 Ganz This research project aims for greater atomic level understanding
of thin film epitaxy of semiconductor materials. New investigations utilizing an
atom tracker are proposed for atomic resolution studies of diffusion at speeds
100 to 1000 times faster than previously possible with tunneling microscopy.
These studies will be incorporated into existing studies by the PI of nucleation
and growth on silicon surfaces using tunneling microscopy at elevated
temperatures. The atom tracker results will be linked to conventional high
resolution room temperature STM images and high temperature STM movie studies to
enhance and quantify understanding of diffusion and growth on the Si(001)
surface. %%% The project is multidisciplinary combining materials physics with
materials synthesis and processing studies including advanced characterization
tools and analysis methods to address forefront research issues in a topical
area of high technological relevance. The research will contribute basic
materials science knowledge at a fundamental level to important aspects of
processing and fabricating electronic/photonic devices and integrated circuitry.
Additionally, the knowledge and understanding gained from this research project
is expected to contribute in a general way to improving the performance of
advanced devices and circuits by providing a fundamental understanding and a
basis for designing and producing improved materials, and materials
combinations. An important feature of the program is the integration of research
and education through the training of students in a fundamentally and
technologically significant area. ***