* 9614105
* Studies in Atmospheric Gas-to-Particle Conversion
* GEO,AGS
* 05/01/1997,12/31/2000
* John Seinfeld, California Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Anne-Marie Schmoltner
* 12/31/2000
* USD 623,339.00

9614105 Seinfeld The goal of this project is to develop a fundamental
understanding of atmospheric nucleation and gas-to-particle conversion processes
via an integrated program of laboratory experiments, field measurements,
nucleation theory, and atmospheric modeling. Smog chamber experiments will be
performed to study the yields of aerosols from the gas-phase photooxidation of
hydrocarbons containing roughly seven or more carbon atoms. Some of the
oxidation products have sufficiently low vapor pressures to partition between
the gas and the condensed phase, forming secondary organic aerosols. Earlier
experiments addressed the oxidation of single hydrocarbons in the presence of
nitrogen oxides; in this project, complex hydrocarbon mixtures will be
investigated. These will be chosen to be representative of the strongly
anthropogenically-influenced continental atmosphere as well as the remote,
largely biogenically-dominated, continental atmosphere. Experiments and modeling
work will be performed in order to better understand binary nucleation of the
sulfuric acid/water system, which is regarded as the most important source of
new particles in the marine boundary layer, the free troposphere, and the
polluted continental atmosphere. The experiments will be conducted in a
photochemical reactor with the goal of measuring the rate of nucleation over a
range of atmospherically relevant relative humidities. In addition, Monte Carlo
simulations of a simple model for ion-induced nucleation will be carried out. A
Differential Mobility Analyzer (DMA) for measuring the size distribution of
small aerosol particles will be developed whose charging system will be based on
a new concept: it will optimize the charging by varying the ion density as the
particle size range is scanned by the DMA. It will be possible to apply larger
charges for the smaller particles and therefore enhance the counting efficiency
for ultrafine particles, allowing detection of particles whose diameter is below
1 nm. Another component of this project is the participation in the North
Atlantic Regional Aerosol Characterization Experiment (ACE-2) which will be
conducted in June and July, 1997, over the subtropical Northeastern Atlantic
Ocean as an international collaborative effort. The main objectives of ACE-2 are
to study the properties of atmospheric aerosols relevant to radiative forcing
and climate using aircraft, ship-board, and ground-based measurements. Through
this grant, the new research aircraft Pelican will be deployed to investigate
aerosol properties and their evolution in time. Measurements of aerosol size
distributions and other parameters will provide information on possible new
particle production and entrainment, processing of anthropogenic aerosol by
clouds over the ocean, and the behavior of cloud condensation nuclei in
different air masses.