* 9614324
* Collaborative Research: Refinement of the Late Permian and  Early Triassic Time Scale through Integrated Ar/Ar and U/Pb Radioisotopic Dating and Magnetostratigraphy
* GEO,EAR
* 05/01/1997,04/30/1998
* Paul Renne, Berkeley Geochronology Center
* Standard Grant
* H. Richard Lane
* 04/30/1998
* USD 42,388.00

9614324 Renne Environmental crises at the end of the Paleozoic are indicated by
evidence for profound marine regression, severe faunal and floral extinctions,
and geochemical and isotopic anomalies. The search for a cause or causes, as
well as establishing genetic links between the observed phenomena, is hindered
by a paucity of reliable geochronologic data. Though the Permian-Triassic (P-T)
boundary is now reasonably well dated, much work remains to test whether the
boundary events were globally isochronous and to establish the time scale of
events before and after the boundary. Whether the extinctions were protracted or
rapid, or occurred in pulses, relies on better calibration of the time scale.
The research proposed herein would provide high-precision Ar/Ar an U/Pb dates
for sanidine and zircon from tephras combined with magnetostratigraphic data,
which would vastly improve the resolution of the time scale. Establishing a
well-calibrated magnetic polarity time scale for the "Illawara" reversals after
the Kiaman Superchron will facilitate global correlations and help obviate
problems arising from faunal provincialism and possible diachronism of
biostratigraphic boundaries. The proposed research would concentrate on
accessible, well-studied sections in the western U.S. (Texas, New Mexico, and
Wyoming) for which many samples and some data have already been obtained.
Additional feasibility studies are proposed, at little or no cost to this
project, which would help determine whether sections in Antarctica, Argentina,
China, and South Africa merit future research towards the goals of this project.