* 9614882
* Thin Film Deposition Using Nanoparticle Beams
* NONE,NONE
* 06/01/1997,05/31/2001
* Frank Urban, Florida International University
* Continuing grant
* K. Linga (KL) Murty
* 05/31/2001
* USD 300,000.00

9614882 Urban The overall objective of this research is to investigate thin film
materials deposited from beams of nanoparticles (clusters), a fraction of which
may be ionized and accelerated to the growing surface. There are three focus
areas: synthesis of intense nanoparticle beams, nucleation and growth of thin
films deposited from nanoparticle beams, and the modeling of both particle
synthesis and subsequent film growth. In the area of synthesis, the objectives
are to explore the limitations of the pure expansion method and build two new
sources, using simple vaporization with gas aggregation and magnetron sputtering
with gas-assisted aggregation. The prime objective in the thin film materials
properties area is to fabricate films and investigate nanophase dependent
properties of materials including magnetic and semiconductor materials. A second
objective is to investigate films in which the nanoparticles are exploited to
influence the film (microstructure, surface roughness, density, stresses, etc.)
without preserving the particles, but rather by taking advantage of super-
thermal condensation and transport properties of the beams of incident
particles. The final focus area improves mathematical models of the nanoparticle
synthesis process and the phenomena occurring as they arrive at the growing
surface. This is carried out using existing molecular dynamics simulations. %%%
This research has a direct impact on materials science, both in the development
of nanophase thin films and in obtaining other novel film microstructures
resulting from the unique transport, nucleation, and film growth mechanisms
connected with nanoparticle depositing beams. ***