* 9614285
* Collaborative Research: Phylogeny of the Triassic-Recent    Nautilaceae (Cephalopoda)
* GEO,EAR
* 03/15/1997,02/28/2001
* W. Bruce Saunders, Bryn Mawr College
* Continuing Grant
* H. Richard Lane
* 02/28/2001
* USD 55,735.00

9614285 Saunders Nautilacean cephalopods include more than a score of genera and
hundreds of named species spanning almost 230 million years (Triassic-Recent).
Their history and phylogeny have been thought to be well understood, and their
systematics have remained relatively unchanged for ~50 years, during which three
tenets have remained unchallenged: 1) nautilaceans were evolutionarily
conservative, showing little morphological change since the end of the Triassic;
2) most genera can be differentiated by only one or two characters; and 3) the
last-evolved member is extant Nautilus, having evolved in the Pleistocene or
Pliocene. In the last decade, however, new information suggests that a radical
re-evaluation of both the phylogenetic interpretation and the classification of
the group are in order. It now appears that post-Jurassic nautilacean species
have been vastly over-slit; new fossil finds show that the genus Nautilus dates
back at least to the middle Cretaceous; recent investigations demonstrate
several new characters that will aid in the cladistic evaluation of the group;
and preliminary phylogenetic analysis of the Nautilaceae stands in marked
contrast to past interpretations. We propose to develop a suite of morphologic
characters that will permit us to undertake cladistic analysis of the group, in
order to develop understanding of evolutionary relationships, and to assess the
validity of named fossil taxa in the light of our understanding of variation and
species-and generic concepts in extant taxa. We will use the presence of shared
derived characters to develop a classification system of the group, based on
evolutionary relationships, rather than morphological similarity. In addition,
we propose to use principal components analysis (PCA) in order to: a) quantify
and to track morphologic variation and diversity through time; b) determine
whether (which) particular shell morphotypes were preferred and the relationship
between theoretical and occupied morphospace over an extremely long time span
(&gt;200 my); and c) assess how these morphologies responded to biotic crisis,
focusing on the terminal Triassic- and Cretaceous extinction events. The results
of our investigation will bear directly on understanding the evolutionary
history of this particular lineage, one of the longest ranging of molluscan
clades, extending from the Recent to the Triassic (~230 million years). The
results will have bearing on the interpretation of macroevolutionary change in
morphologic diversity and richness, and to morphologic responses to biotic
crisis, on a scale of nearly 200 million years.