* 9614155
* Taphonomy of Marsh Foraminiferal Assemblages: Implications  for Rates and Mechanisms of Holocene Sea-Level Rise
* GEO,EAR
* 01/15/1997,12/31/2000
* James Pizzuto, University of Delaware
* Continuing Grant
* H. Richard Lane
* 12/31/2000
* USD 149,999.00

9614155 Martin/Pizzuto Over the last decade, the applied Earth Sciences have
moved from an emphasis on resource exploitation to one of resource conservation
and management. In order for paleontology to fully participate in this "paradigm
shift", the science of taphonomy, which has largely stressed information loss
and stratigraphic disorder, must instead accentuate what can be regained from
the fossil record. Data must be used to reconstruct stratigraphic signals in
order to evaluate natural versus anthropogenic disturbances. Precise
understanding of taphonomic filters bears strongly on the future application of
paleontology and other traditional fields of the Earth sciences to environmental
problems. Marshes provide a fertile proving ground for applied taphonomy. Marsh
environments are extremely susceptible to natural and anthropogenic disturbance,
so they are ideal for distinguishing between natural and anthropogenic change
using historical (pre-anthropogenic) records. Marshes also display exceptional
temporal resolution (low signal attenuation) that approaches or surpasses that
of deep-sea cores, and which makes them ideal for taphonomic modeling.
Nevertheless, differential preservation of marsh foraminiferal assemblages,
which have been used to analyze natural and anthropogenic causes of sea-level
rise, has been largely ignored. By itself, though, differential preservation can
mimic sea-level change when none has actually occurred. We propose to construct
taphonomic-age-environment models that describe shell input, preservation, and
temporal resolution of foraminiferal assemblages in easily accessible intertidal
Holocene marsh facies of the Delaware coast. We will then test our forward
models (taphonomic filters) by using them to reconstruct the same inputs used to
produce the filters. We will further test our models by using them to
reconstruct paleoenvironments of the last ~2 ka preserved in vibracores taken
from nearby sites, and assess the implications for distinguishin g natural
versus anthropogenic sea-level rise. We will use multiple techniques to
constrain sedimentary parameters and the reconstructions based on them. Inputs
and decay rates of tests ("half-lives"), which affect the abundance,
preservation, probability of reworking, and temporal resolution of foraminiferal
assemblages, will be determined by seasonal sampling of selected marsh sites.
Mixed layer thickness (m), sedimentation rate (v), and the bioturbation
coefficient (D) will be estimated using x-rays and radiotracers (7Be, 137Cs,
210Pb, 14C). Field experiments involving artificial conservative (non-decaying)
"impulse" layers of glass beads (analogous to microtektite and volcanic ash
layers of similar deep-sea studies) will assess sedimentary parameters
independently of radiotracers. Temporal resolution will be examined by applying
several quantitative approaches, including graphic correlation, to dispersion
(attenuation or smearing) of bead layers and other datums. Pollens profiles will
control for possible anthropogenic changes (eutrophication due to deforestation
and runoff) in test production and sedimentation. Besides the implications for
the role of paleontology and stratigraphy in the environmental sciences, our
investigation also bears on a number of critical (paleo) environmental issues,
such as: 1) Calculation of the magnitude and rates of Holocene sea-level rise,
their correlation with rates and mechanisms of proposed causal climatic
phenomena, and distinguishing between natural and anthropogenic sea-level
change; 2) Paleoenvironmental resolution in the Holocene below that of available
climate proxies such as the marine oxygen isotope curve; 3) The natural
evolution of wetlands and their management in light of the Holocene
transgression; 4) Precise understanding of taphonomic filters an the integrity,
time-averaging, and temporal resolution of stratigraphic sections, all of which
ultimately bear on such profound paleobiological questions as patterns of
extinction and the record of biodiversity dynamics in the fossil record. Answers
to these questions are crucial to understanding, for example, past (and
therefore current) biodiversity crises, but they are dependent upon very high
temporal resolution. Other modeling efforts have concentrated on deep-sea
assemblages and stable isotopes, but because of the intrinsically high temporal
resolution of march assemblages, our study serves as an excellent starting point
for applying quantitative taphonomic models to more stratigraphically-complex
shelf and slope settings where much of the fossil record has formed.