* 9614091
* Variability in Spore Dispersal and its Role in Kelp         Population Dynamics
* GEO,OCE
* 01/01/1997,12/31/2002
* Peter Raimondi, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Standard Grant
* Phillip R. Taylor
* 12/31/2002
* USD 64,396.00

9614091 RAIMONDI Kelp forests, dominant features of subtidal temperate reefs
worldwide, undergo relatively frequent and unpredictable local extinctions and
recolonizations. This project is a continuation of ongoing investigations of the
causal mechanisms that allow for rapid forest recovery following widespread kelp
loss. The objective of the project is to predict the frequency of occurrence and
relative importance of the physical and biological conditions that promote
extended spore dispersal in giant kelp (Macrocystis pyrifera) and determine: (1)
the role of spore immigration rates in regulating the dynamics of local kelp
populations and (2) the potential for limited dispersal to destabilize
populations by reducing individual fitness. The research approach is to collect
measurements of water motion simultaneously with measurements of spore release
and dispersal from isolated plants over a wide range of physical and biological
conditions. This information will be used to build an individual-based model
that will predict effective spore dispersal within and away from a local
population for varying conditions of water motion, plant fecundity, plant
spacing, spore release, and population size. Predictions from the model will be
tested using an experimental population of adult plants. The model will also be
used to predict the frequency and spatial extent of self-fertilization under
different conditions of water motion, plant fecundity, plant spacing, spore
release, and population size. The effects of self-fertilization on individual
fitness will be experimentally determined for all life stages. The information
obtained from the project will apply generally to dispersal patterns of a large
number of sessile marine organisms that release competent spores or larvae into
nearshore waters. The general significance of this work is that it will provide
much needed insight into the hydrodynamic conditions that promote extended
propagule dispersal and the degree to which propagule immigration influenc es
the dynamics of species perceived to have relatively closed populations.
Additionally, the individual-based approach to this study will provide
information on spore dispersal away from individual plants, which will be used
to evaluate the costs of self-fertilization in giant kelp, a member of a
dominant group of temperate marine algae whose life history and dispersal
characteristics place them at high risk to the adverse effects of self-
fertilization. ***