* 9614704
* Our Dynamic Earth
* EHR,DRL
* 02/01/1997,01/31/2000
* Daniel Appleman, Cranbrook Institute of Science
* Standard Grant
* Orrin Shane
* 01/31/2000
* USD 1,118,697.00

9614704 Appleman The Cranbrook Institute of Science will develop "Our Dynamic
Earth," a 7000 sq. ft. exhibit that will provide visitors with insight and
understanding of the interrelationships of plate tectonics and climate to
prehistoric life. This will make up the earth sciences component in their
renovated and expanded exhibit area. This section will include four related
areas: 1) Plate Tectonics, 2) The Earth's Amazing Climate System, 3) The Earth
Evolving Biosphere, and 4) An Ecological Whodunit. Each area will be anchored by
an "icon" that will serve as a guiding image for that exhibit and will be
supported by a layered interpretation using objects from the collection,
workstations with selected databases, simulated scientific investigations, and
hot-links to related Internet Sites. Numerous interactives will highlight the
use of scientific research tools and methods. A broad menu of complementary
educational activities will accompany the exhibit including take-home activities
for families; teacher enhancement sessions and materials for students, and
experiences for pre- service teachers. Cranbrook is working with the Detroit
Public Schools in their science reform effort supported by an NSF Urban Systemic
Initiative and with the Michigan Department of Education through its NSF
Statewide Systemic Initiative. The exhibit elements will support and reinforce
the systemic reform efforts and will be aligned with the science standards.