* 9614346
* Computational Studies of Transition Metal Bonding and       Reactivity
* MPS,CHE
* 01/01/1997,06/30/2000
* Thomas Cundari, University of Memphis
* Standard Grant
* Margaret A. Cavanaugh
* 06/30/2000
* USD 180,000.00

This award in the Inorganic, Bioinorganic, and Organometallic Chemistry Program
provides support to Dr. Thomas R. Cundari, Chemistry Department, University of
Memphis, for continued development of computational approaches to modeling the
bonding and reactivity of inorganic and organometallic complexes. Molecular
mechanics strategies, which are less computationally intensive, will be applied
to transition metal complexes, particularly to develop a force field to
efficiently and accurately predict geometries. Three specific areas will be
emphasized: methane activation by mercury complexes, multiply bonded transition
metal complexes, and molecular mechanics of biochemical and catalytic
intermediates. The mercury system differs from more usual high- or low-valent
oxidation methods and the electronic details of the activation process are not
well understood. Transition metals that participate in multiple bonding to
heavier main group elements have potential in advanced materials and in
catalysis, and more efficient methods for modeling the chemistry of these
systems will be developed. Describing the electronic properties of molecules
containing transition metals and a large number of atoms is a computational
challenge, and it is particularly difficult to develop effective methods for
modeling their dynamical behavior or reactivity with other molecules. Dr.
Cundari will use new and efficient computational approaches for describing these
molecules and their changes during important catalytic reactions.