* 9614041
* Conference on Optimization in Industry; Palm Coast, FL;     March 23-27, 1997
* ENG,CMMI
* 01/15/1997,12/31/1997
* Ashok Belegundu, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* george hazelrigg
* 12/31/1997
* USD 30,000.00

*** 9614041 Belegundu Mistree This grant provides partial support to conduct a
workshop on the use of optimization in industry, particularly in applications
relating to engineering design. The workshop will bring together engineers,
mathematicians, operations research specialists, and researchers from academe to
discuss current limitations on the applications of optimization and to provide a
research agenda that could help to broaden current applications. The discussion
will also examine other roadblocks to the expanded use of optimization in
industry and propose solutions to overcoming these roadblocks. Representatives
from the aerospace, automotive, civil, chemical, and mechanical disciplines of
engineering will be invited. Competitiveness of manufactured products often
depends on design subtleties that are subject to optimization. Optimization can
enable products to perform better in use, be manufactured at lower cost, and
have improved reliability and lower environmental impact. To date, however,
there has been a disconnect between the academic communities researching new
optimization techniques and the industries that potentially would use them. The
result has been that the applications of optimization techniques in industry has
substantially lagged the development of new methods. This workshop seeks to
bridge this gap and find ways to make current research in the field more
applicable to industry, and to bring industry into the research agenda-setting
process so that future advances are more relevant to the need of industry. ***