* 9614352
* The Development of Computational Methods to Study the       Chemical Structural Evolution of Organic Macromolecules     with Diagenesis
* GEO,EAR
* 01/15/1997,12/31/2000
* George Cody, Carnegie Institution of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Judith Skog
* 12/31/2000
* USD 110,616.00

9614352 Cody Organic Reactions that modify the chemical structure of
biomacromolecules are controlled, in part by the long range topology of the
macromolecule. Understanding the role of macromolecular structure on monomer
scale reactivity has important implications regarding our ability to assess the
probability for preservation of ancient biomacromolecules (e.g. kerogen as a
function of T, P, and fluid composition. The work defined in this proposal sets
out to develop a methodology for computational organic geochemistry. A step-wise
approach is outlined that starts with a statistical mechanical model of
macromolecular topology (the Rotational Isomeric State Model). The rotational
isomeric states are characterized through semi-empirical quantum mechanical
calculations of the inter-segmental rotational energy surface. These
calculations lead to the generation of a large scale, "coarse-grained"
macromolecular model that includes the effects of over 10000, monomers.
Construction of the macromolecular model is constrained by the RIS calculations;
from the initial configuration, using a structure building algorithm, to the
final equilibrium state obtained via Monte-Carlo methods. Two macromolecular
systems are selected as initial problems. These are the diagenesis of lignin, a
principle biomacromolecular component of the xylem tissue of wood, and the
diagenesis of sporopollenin, a particularly resistant biopolymeric component of
plant spores and seeds. The developed computational methods will be applied to
assess the energetic penalties (or gains) of various proposed diagenetic
reaction pathways in the two systems based on consideration of the total energy
of the macromolecular system. The methodology obtained from the work outlined in
this proposal will be exportable to a wide range of problems in organic
geochemistry.