* 9614286
* Analysis of the Significance of Erosional Denudation on the Geometrical and Stratigraphic Evolution of Foreland Basins  and on Strain Partitioning in their Orogens
* NONE,NONE
* 06/01/1997,05/31/1999
* Teresa Jordan, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* H. Richard Lane
* 05/31/1999
* USD 40,000.00

9614286 Jordan Foreland basins have been studied extensively I the last years to
explore the relationships between crustal thickening in the orogen and the
stratigraphic and geometrical response of the adjacent foreland basin. Since
>60% of the total deflection of foreland basins may be due to the sediment load,
temporal and spatial variations in sediment flux due to changing erosional
denudation rates and patterns in the hinterland have a great potential to
significantly affect the geometrical and stratigraphic evolution of foreland
basins. Furthermore, as revealed by critical taper wedge models, variable
erosional denudation rates in the orogen are likely to control strain
partitioning, which in turn affects the geometrical evolution of foreland
basins. We propose to explore the influence of temporal and spatial variations
of erosional denudation rates on the geometrical and stratigraphic evolution of
the Molasse and Bermejo Basins and on strain partitioning in the Alps
(Switzerland) and the Precordillera (Argentina). These systems are ideally
suited to our objectives because of the extensive data available and because
they represent denudation/dispersion end members. The erosional denudation rates
will be compiled from the dense data set of cooling and metamorphic ages in the
Alps, and by restoring the volumes of sediment preserved in the internally
drained Bermejo Basin to their specific source terrains. These data will be
compared with the subsidence histories of the foreland basins determined by
backstripping, which will allow us to recognize the importance of sediment flux
on the evolution of the Molasse and the Bermejo Basins. Similarly, a careful
three dimensional subsidence analysis will allow us to compare the subsidence
patterns of the internally drained Bermejo Basin and the open Molasse Basin.
Comparing and contrasting the subsidence histories, the sediment flux, and
progradation/retreat rates of facies will allow us to critically evaluate
whether unconformities are mo re likely to form in open than in closed basins.
In addition, we propose to explore whether the sensitivity of the basin
stratigraphy to tectonic episodes depends on the location of the principle
sediment source area. The evolution of facies and geometries of the basins will
be visualized by stratigraphic simulation with Strata2.11. Using this software,
we will be able to test whether sediment flux rather than tectonic subsidence
and/or eustatic sea level changes caused the regressions and transgressions in
the Molasse Basin. Furthurmore, applying Strata2.11 to the Molasse and Bermejo
Basins, we can explore the significance of varying sediment flux on the
generation of unconformities in fluvial systems. Comparing the temporal and
spatial variations of erosional denudation rates with strain partitioning in the
orogens will enable us to critically evaluate whether erosion significantly
controlled the sequence of thrust motions as predicted by critical taper wedge
models. We propose to analyze how climate and erodibility of rocks affect the
chronology of thrusting in orogens by contrasting the two denudation end
members.