* 9614858
* Producing and Evaluating Random Access Audio Tours for      Science-Technology Exhibits
* EDU,DRL
* 01/01/1997,12/31/1998
* Alan Friedman, New York Hall of Science
* Standard Grant
* Hyman H. Field
* 12/31/1998
* USD 197,058.00

9614858 Friedman The New York Hall of Science, in collaboration with the
Lawrence Hall of Science, is producing and evaluating an application of recently
available technology, the random-access audio player, which offers the promise
of improving the effectiveness of learning at science-technology center
interactive exhibits. The audio "tours" that are being produced and tested will
have varying degrees of branching and layering appropriate to the nature of each
exhibit unit design. A "highlights" audio tour will be created for the Lawrence
Hall of Science and an audio tour focusing on a single group of light, color,
and vision exhibits will be created for the New York Hall of Science. The audio
tours will be tested with two different categories of audience at each site: the
general public on weekends and schools groups on weekdays. Alan Friedman,
Director of the New York Hall of Science, will be the Principal Investigator.
The Lawrence Hall of Science will be represented by Brooke Smith. The audio
tours will be written and produced by Steve Tokar, the producer of Science Today
a daily radio science program on the CBS radio network. Beverly Serrell,
Director of Serrell &amp; Associates, will conduct the evaluation of the audio
tours at each site.