* 9614040
* Theory of Density Functionals and Pseudopotentials and their Application to Condensed Matter Systems
* MPS,DMR
* 12/01/1996,11/30/2000
* Leonard Kleinman, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* G. Bruce Taggart
* 11/30/2000
* USD 312,000.00

9614040 Kleinman This grant supports theoretical work on a variety of condensed
matter systems incorporating both improved analytical approximations as well
better computational techniques. The physical phenomena under investigation
include: response of Mg lattice parameters to pressure, crack propagation as a
function of applied strain in Si using an almost first-principle calculation of
internal forces and electronic energy levels in a ferro-para-ferro magnetic
sandwich using a highly effective pseudopotential for transition metals
developed earlier by the PI. Finally there is a project to study magnetism in
thin films and at a surface using sophisticated electronic structure
calculations. %%% The research of this senior PI has been for a long time geared
towards improving both the conceptual and computational foundations of
electronic structure calculations. In the current grant the program continues
with special emphasis on magnetism and on the details of failure mechanisms in
metals. All of these projects involve state of the art techniques and attempt to
remove the current disagreements between theory and experiments. How does one
understand the terminal velocity of a crack as it propagates through a metal?
When is a thin film of a transition metal, which is magnetic in bulk, remains
magnetic when put on top of a noble metal as a film? ***