* 9614028
* Latitudinal Variations of Particle Fluxes in the Southern   Ocean: A Bottom Tethered Sediment Trap Array Experiment
* GEO,OPP
* 08/15/1996,07/31/2000
* Robert Collier, Oregon State University
* Continuing grant
* Bernhard Lettau
* 07/31/2000
* USD 647,703.00

96-14028 Dymond This research project is part of the US Joint Global Ocean Flux
Study (JGOFS) Southern Ocean Program aimed at (1) a better understanding of the
fluxes of carbon, both organic and inorganic, in the Southern Ocean, (2)
identifying the physical, ecological and biogeochemical factors and processes
which regulate the magnitude and variability of these fluxes, and (3) placing
these fluxes into the context of the contemporary global carbon cycle. This work
is one of forty-four projects that are collaborating in the Southern Ocean
Experiment, a three-year effort south of the Antarctic Polar Frontal Zone to
track the flow of carbon through its organic and inorganic pathways from the
air-ocean interface through the entire water column into the bottom sediment.
The experiment will make use of the RVIB Nathaniel B. Palmer and the R/V
Thompson. This component, a collaborative study by scientists from the Woods
Hole Oceanographic Institution, Oregon State University, and the New Zealand
Oceanographic Institution, concerns the export of particulate forms of carbon
downward from the upper ocean. The observations will be obtained from an array
of time- series sediment traps, and will be analyzed to quantify export fluxes
from the Subtropical Front to the Ross Sea, over an 18- months period beginning
the early austral summer of 1996. The measurement program will two annual
phytoplankton blooms. The southern ocean provides a unique opportunity to
investigate the processes controlling export flux in contrasting biogeochemical
ocean zones demarcated by oceanic fronts. The temperature changes at the fronts
coincide with gradients in nutrient concentrations and plankton ecology,
resulting in a large latitudinal change in the ratio of calcium to silica taken
up by the phytoplankton communities. This experiment will provide data on how
the biological pump operates in the Southern Ocean and how it could potentially
impact the level of atmospheric c arbon dioxide. The observed export fluxes of
organic carbon, nitrogen, inorganic carbon, biogenic silica and alumina are
central to the goals of the JGOFS program.