* 9614769
* Reconstruction of the Water Column Structure of Jurassic    and Cretaceous Epeiric Seas: Biomarkers and their Carbon    Isotopic Composition
* GEO,EAR
* 02/01/1997,01/31/2001
* Fabien Kenig, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* H. Richard Lane
* 01/31/2001
* USD 171,216.00

9614769 Kenig The goal of the proposal is to reconstruct the water-column
structure of a Jurassic and a Cretaceous epeiric sea using biomarkers and their
isotopic composition. More specifically, our efforts will concentrate on the
reconstruction of the water-column chemistry, and its evolution during the
deposition of two sediment formations, the Oxford Clay (Middle Callovian, UK and
the Greenhorn Formation (Western Interior Seaway, Cenomano-Turonian, USA). We
will use this information to understand paleo-oceanographic conditions at the
onset of water column stratification, biofacies distribution, and organic matter
accumulation in epeiric seas. These results will be used to test the
relationship between biofacies and benthic oxygen level. These results will be
used to further constrain existing paleo-oceanographic circulation models. The
first objective is to determine the geographic extent of intermittent anoxic
events that characterized the accumulation of the organic mater-rich fossil-
laggerstatten of the Lower Oxford Clay. To achieve this, Middle Callovian
sediments with well defined biofacies from Scotland, Central and Southern
England, France, Germany, Switzerland and Poland will be analyzed for their
free, sulphur-bound, and ether-bound hydrocarbon biomarkers. The second
objective is to use the molecular fossil record of thermally immature samples
from the Greenhorn formation to reconstruct the water-column structure of the
Western Interior Seaway during the Cenomanian and Turonian. Three sections will
be investigated in detail for their free, sulphur-bound, and ether-bound
molecular fossils. This analytical procedure will allow us to target the
molecules that are diagnostic for the water-column structure. It will result in
the development of an efficient analytical scheme allowing analysis of the vast
number of samples necessary for precise constraint of the water-column structure
and chemistry of a large geographical area. The third objective will be to
geographicall y extend the water-column reconstruction of the Western Interior
Seaway during the Cenomanian and Turonian. We will use these results to
constrain the computer models of paleo-oceanographic circulation constructed for
the Western Interior Seaway. Comparison of the results obtained from the Middle-
Callovian of Western Europe will enhance our understanding of paleo-
oceanographic circulation in epeiric seas. Based on literature data and our
water-column reconstruction, a model of the paleo-oceanographic circulation for
the Middle Callovian of Western Europe will be proposed.