* 9614148
* Dissertation Research: Cultural and Biological Significance of Indigenous Ethnomedicine in Kalimantan, Indonesia
* SBE,BCS
* 03/01/1997,02/28/1999
* Nina Etkin, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* Stuart Plattner
* 02/28/1999
* USD 12,000.00

This project involves the dissertation research of an anthropology student from
the University of Hawaii. The student will investigate the nature of the
ethnomedical and ethnobotanical knowledge of a traditional community in
Kalimantan, Indonesia. Combining methods from cultural and biological
anthropology and natural science, the student will conduct structured and
unstructured interviews with local indigenous people, collect voucher specimens
of medicinal plants, and do phytochemical analysis of the plants. A major
hypothesis to be tested is that plants with strong chemosensory properties
(bright color, bitter flavor, pungent aroma) will be symbolically interpreted
and favored for medicines. The results will be an in-depth picture of the
indigenous system for using natural forest projects in healing, and will serve
as a valuable case study of a form of knowledge that is in danger of
disappearing along with its tropical forest habitat. The advance in our
knowledge will be useful to local planners in designing culturally appropriate
health services, and will be an additional case available to improve our general
understanding of how to deliver biomedical health services to traditional
peoples with different understandings of health causality and treatment.
Finally, there is always the possibility that a study such as this will discover
a new and valuable drug treatment for disease.