* 9614189
* An Updated Magnetometer Array on the Greenland Ice Cap      (MAGIC-II) to Investigate Multi-Scale Ionospheric Current   Systems
* GEO,OPP
* 04/01/1997,03/31/1999
* Vladimir Papitashvili, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Jane V. Dionne
* 03/31/1999
* USD 150,573.00

This proposal is directed toward the development of a new updated magnetometer
array on the Greenland ice cap (MAGIC-II) and the analysis of the data in
conjunction with other Greenland data and with conjugate Antarctic data. This
project is a cooperative effort between the University of Michigan and the
Danish Meteorological Institute. By way of background, in 1991, an array of
magnetometers (MAGIC) was deployed in central Greenland providing valuable
magnetometer measurements between the Greenland eastern and western coastal
stations. This original MAGIC array of four stations is being closed in a phased
withdrawal during the 1996 and 1997 summer field seasons. The data from the
MAGIC stations in combination with the other Greenland magnetometers have been
critical in resolving the spatial and evolutionary characteristics of various
dynamic ionospheric current systems, including traveling convection vortices,
poleward propagating DPY currents, and the spatial and temporal evolution of the
large scale convection currents. Thus, it is proposed to deploy a new array of
updated equipment in easily accessed locations. The three proposed sites are:
Summit GISP, North GRIP (the new European ice drilling site), and a
meteorological station at the most northern point of Greenland, Kap Morris
Jessup. It is particularly important to continue the MAGIC data collection for
coordinated investigations during the ISTP mission which includes the POLAR and
CLUSTER spacecraft. Unique opportunities for coordinated science with a focus
upon high latitude dynamics will be possible. Continued acquisition of the
Greenland data will also benefit from upcoming missions, such as (RSTED and the
new generation of DMSP spacecraft. The data will contribute as well to the other
richly instrumented ground arrays in both the Arctic and Antarctic. Studies will
focus upon various high latitude electrodynamics phenomena, including high
latitude micropulsations, large scale plasma convection, and the high latitude
io nospheric responses to the IMF and solar wind, as well as to substorms. Also,
high latitude phenomena observed at Thule, Nord, and the proposed new station
Kap Morris Jessup, will be related to nearly "conjugate" locations in the
Antarctic to determine and understand the symmetries and asymmetries of the
polar cap dynamics between the two hemispheres.