* 9614366
* Baseline Studies on In Situ-Produced 14C in Terrestrial     Materials
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/1997,06/30/2000
* A.J. Timothy Jull, University of Arizona
* Continuing Grant
* H. Richard Lane
* 06/30/2000
* USD 218,633.00

9614366 Jull The in situ-produced 14C (in situ 14C) research group at the
University of Arizona, after a number of years developing reliable extraction
techniques and equipment, is now prepared to bring in situ 14C into the
mainstream of cosmogenic nuclide surficial process studies, alongside 10Be,
26Al, 36Cl, 3He, and 21Ne. New extraction and graphitization lines have been
constructed in the last two years which, in concert with improved procedures,
have produced a breakthrough in the isolation of in situ 14C at blank levels of
approximately 1.1 x 106 atoms. Using these systems, quartz separates from a
wave-cut quartzite bench from the well-dated (17.4 + 0.2 cal ky) Bonneville
shoreline of Pleistocene Lake Bonneville, Utah, and from underlying deeply
shielded locations were analyzed recently. Results demonstrate that these new
systems and procedures can effectively isolate the in situ 14C fraction, with a
late Quaternary production rate estimate of 20.4 + 1.7 14C atom/gram/year (sea
level, &gt;60(N)3/4indistinguishable from earlier estimates using older, less
precise techniques. The precision on current measurements will allow measurement
of in situ 14C in quartz after about 500 years of exposure (sea level,
&gt;60(N). Research described in this proposal will continue to lay the
groundwork for using in situ 14C in surficial process studies by (1) further
testing the accuracy of production rate estimates, (2) assessing the variability
of 14C thermal release patterns with varying grain size and quartz type (i.e.,
platonic, volcanic, metamorphic), (3) assessing the feasibility of whole-rock
analyses by comparison to those of quartz separates, (4) independently
estimating attenuation mean free paths for 14C, and (5) empirically testing
theoretical models of production rate variation with altitude and latitude, to a
much greater extent than possible with other currently used cosmogenic nuclides,
by taking advantage of 14C's rapid (~20 ka) attainment of secular equilibrium
and insensitivity to low and moderate (&lt; 1 cm/ka) erosion rates. Samples used
in this study will come from Tabernacle Hill, the Bonneville and Provo
Shorelines and other features of the Lake Bonneville system, and from altitude
and latitude transects in the western U.S., Australia, and Antarctica.