* 9614892
* Impacts of Increased Solar UVB on Antarctic Marine          Heterotrophs
* GEO,OPP
* 09/15/1997,08/31/2000
* Harry Detrich, Northeastern University
* Continuing Grant
* Polly A. Penhale
* 08/31/2000
* USD 189,495.00

*** Malloy 9614892 Recent decreases in stratospheric ozone have resulted in
dramatic increases in the flux of mid-ultraviolet light (UVB) reaching the
earth's surface, especially over Antarctica and, to a lesser extent, in
temperate zones. Ozone depletion is expected to continue well into the next
century, and to worsen at lower latitudes over time. Recent evidence suggests
that present intensities of UVB are sufficient to produce significant impacts on
phytoplankton communities in the Southern Ocean, as well as to negatively impact
tropical marine communities and populations of temperate amphibians. The
abbreviated trophic structure of the Antarctic marine ecosystem places an
increased importance on primary and secondary consumers, especially on many
species of zooplankton which form a critical link between primary production and
top predators such as adult fish, marine mammals and birds. Although these
zooplankton species and other heterotrophs, which include larval and adult fish,
krill, and copepods, are important components of the trophic structure in the
Antarctic ecosystem, there is no information regarding the effects of increased
UVB on natural populations of these organisms. However, laboratory and field
studies on non-polar species suggest that the impact of increased UV on
Antarctic heterotrophs, and therefore on the Antarctic ecosystem, could be
substantial. The proposed research will use established methods: 1) to measure
the vulnerability of Antarctic zooplankton to UVB damage in the field and in the
laboratory; 2) to measure DNA repair rates of Antarctic heterotrophs at ambient
temperatures (-2 to +40C); and 3) to determine the relationship between UVB
exposure and decreases in organismal fitness (measured as RNA:DNA ratios and
transcription rates). The field component of this research is a unique effort to
determine the in situ vulnerability of natural populations of Antarctic
heterotrophs during normal and depleted ozone conditions. Laboratory experiments
will deter mine dose:response (UVB fluence:DNA photoproducts) relationships for
the zooplankton taxa which are most abundant during ozone depletion in order to
determine species-specific vulnerabilities to increased UVB. However, DNA damage
measured in natural populations represents both the net damage added by UVB and
that removed by DNA repair. Therefore, DNA repair rates of several abundant
pelagic heterotrophs will be measured to facilitate a more complete
understanding of the potential vulnerability of each taxa. Photolyase genes from
Antarctic fishes that have already been cloned will be sequenced and the deduced
amino acid sequences will be compared to other photolyase sequences to better
understand the underlying mechanisms of DNA repair at low temperatures. Finally,
the sub-lethal impacts of UVB exposure, and the associated DNA damage, on
fitness will be evaluated by measuring long-term (RNA:DNA ratios) and short-term
(nuclear run-on assays) measures of biochemical condition. Together, these
studies are critical for developing predictive models of the relative impact of
increased UVB on Antarctic marine heterotrophs and for relating ozone depletion
on decreased fitness, survival, and population dynamics of these species. ***