* 9614018
* Formation of Aromatics and Soot in the Combustion of        Chlorinated Hydrocarbon
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/1996,08/31/2000
* Selim Senkan, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing grant
* Farley Fisher
* 08/31/2000
* USD 380,000.00

Abstract Senkan 9614018 The PI proposes to continue and extend his ongoing
research program to include the investigation of trace by-products produced in
the combustion of chlorinated hydrocarbons. He points out the need to better
understand the formation and fate of trace aromatic by-products formed in
incineration processes in order to safely utilize this important technology. In
the experimental program, both premixed laminar flat flames and counter-flow jet
diffusion flames of CH2Cl2, CHCl3, and CCl4 in mixtures with CH4 will be studied
over a wide range of gas compositions, temperatures, and equivalence ratios
characteristic of the operating conditions of incinerators (including failure
modes). In the case of the counter-flow jet diffusion flame experiments, the
effects of gas composition and strain rate on the formation of trace aromatics
will also be investigated. The PI will make use of his previously developed
diagnostic techniques in order to measure and characterize the trace halogenated
aromatics and polycyclic aromatic compounds (PAC) produced. These techniques
will include hot micro-probe sampling using high resolution gas
chromatography/mass spectroscopy (GC/MS), and laser photoionization (LP) time of
flight mass spectroscopy (REMPI/MS). One primary focus of these experiments will
be to further investigate the effects of the presence of soot on the levels of
PAC formed in these flames. A theoretical/analytical effort will also be pursued
in which the development of detailed chemical kinetic mechanisms (DCKMs) as well
as reduced chemical mechanisms describing the formation and destruction of the
trace by-products will be undertaken. These mechanistic results will be combined
with appropriate flame models for comparison with measurements. Dr. Sidney
Benson of the University of Southern California and Dr. Carl Melius of the
Sandia National laboratory will collaborate in the theoretical effort. ***