* 9614585
* Late Pleistocene Paleoclimate Studies in Tibetan Plateau    and Adjacent Areas
* GEO,EAR
* 04/15/1997,12/31/1999
* Teh-Lung Ku, University of Southern California
* Continuing Grant
* H. Richard Lane
* 12/31/1999
* USD 160,000.00

9614585 Ku Late Quaternary paleoenvironmental records contain information on the
natural variability of Earth's past environments and climate. These data are
valuable for understanding mechanisms of past and present climate changes and
for assessing the validity of climate-change predictions. To gain a global
understanding of the climate change process requires assembly and integration of
regional and multidisciplinary evidence. One important region deserves special
attention is Tibetan Plateau and its adjacent areas. Being the highest large
plateau on Earth, Tibetan Plateau has a relatively recent geological history and
has undergone significant uplift since the early Tertiary and into the
Quaternary. Located at mid-latitudes, it has a profound influence on global
climates in that it acts like a "third pole", deflecting the Jet Stream
Westerlies and influencing the position of the Siberian-Mongolian Highs and the
inland penetration of the Indian and East Asian monsoons. Drilled sediment cores
obtained in recent years from the Plateau and adjacent regions by Chinese
scientists provide a rare opportunity for studying the paleoenvironmental
records in that part of the world. As a U.S.-China collaborative project, the
proposed research aims at extracting paleoclimate information in terms of
wet/dry and warm/cold conditions recorded by two of the drill cores, one from
Lake Tianshuihai (35(20'N, 79(30'E) located in the southwestern Tibetan Plateau
at an elevation of 4836m, and the other core from Lake Juyanhai (42(10N,
100(05'E) near the northwest corner of Inner Mongolia at an altitude of 900m.
The cores will be age-dated using radiocarbon and uranium-series isotopes to
establish their late Pleistocene chronologies up to about 230ka. A multi-proxy
approach will be carried out to decipher the lake-level and climate histories of
the two regions, as well as with the paleoclimate record of the Loess Plateau in
northern China. The information gathered will contribute to the understanding of
the late Pleistocene climatic variations in mid-latitude continents and their
possible link to the rapid climatic oscillations (Dansgaard-Oeschger events)
observed in polar ice-cores, and of the influence of atmospheric circulation
(involving winter and summer monsoons and westerlies) on paleoclimates of the
western China.