* 9615736
* Statistical Mechanics of the Liquid State
* MPS,CHE
* 01/01/1997,06/30/2000
* George Stell, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Continuing Grant
* Celeste M. Rohlfing
* 06/30/2000
* USD 366,000.00

George Stell is supported by a grant from the Theoretical and Computational
Chemistry Program to continue his research in the statistical mechanics of
liquids. The research is directed at trying to understand complex fluid
properties in terms of the long and short range interactions between idealized
particles. Variations of the Ornstein-Zernike integral equation method are used
which are validated by Monte Carlo simulations. Special emphasis is placed on
understanding ionic and dipolar fluids as well as fluids that are chemically
associating. The role of ionic association due to strong electrostatic
interactions is being studied with special focus on the effect that ion/ion pair
and ion-pair/ion-pair interactions have on the thermodynamics of phase
separation and on fluid structure near the critical point. This research
provides an important molecular level understanding of the detailed interaction
of molecular species in condensed phases. This level of understanding is
important in the field of chemistry since the large majority of chemical
reactions take place either in aqueous solution or in the liquid phase. A more
thorough understanding of the thermodynamic and transport properties of
condensed phase systems, particularly ionic and polar fluids, will aid in the
design and engineering of efficient chemical engineering processes.