* 9615772
* Collaborative Research:  Assessing the Genetic Potential andPhysiological Controls of N2 Fixation in a N-Limited Estuary
* BIO,IOS
* 10/01/1996,09/30/2000
* Hans Paerl, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Continuing Grant
* Zoe Eppley
* 09/30/2000
* USD 152,989.00

9615772 Paerl Productivity in estuaries is often controlled by nitrogen(N)
availability,even though there is a vast reservoir of gaseous N2 in the
atmosphere. N2 fixation, the conversion of atmospheric N2 into cellular
nitrogen, can occur at high rates in the plankton of freshwater ecosystems, due
to dense blooms of N2 fixing cyanobacteria. These blooms can be toxic and cause
water taste and odor problems. Such blooms are scarce in marine systems, even
those undergoing eutrophication (becoming more productive as a result of
increased nutrient inputs). The contrast between the predominance of N2 fixing
organisms in freshwater and the apparent dearth of N2 fixing organisms in
estuaries and oceans, provides the basis for the proposed research. Estuaries
define the transition from freshwater to the marine environment, and thus
provide a basis for investigating the factors that control N2 fixing blooms in
both freshwater and marine environments. This objective of this research is to
define how N2 fixing organisms are distributed spatially and temporally in the
freshwater, mesohaline and euhaline reaches of the Neuse River estuary. The
conceptual framework developed in this research project will provide a new
perspective for understanding N2 fixation potentials in marine, estuarine and
freshwater environments, which will help to understand when and where nitrogen-
fixing blooms are likely to occur in response to the threat of cultural
eutrophication. A particularly novel aspect of this investigation is that
experimental manipulations will be used to determine how salinity and nutrients
affect the distribution, growth and activity of specific N2 fixing populations
using a molecular biology approach. The results of these experiments will
provide new information on the regulation of productivity and algal bloom-
formation in estuaries, freshwaters, and the marine environment.