* 9615849
* Diagnostic Indicators of Biological Community:              An Experimental Test in McMurdo Sound, Antarctica
* GEO,OPP
* 05/15/1997,04/30/2002
* Charles Peterson, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Continuing Grant
* Jane V. Dionne
* 04/30/2002
* USD 390,752.00

ABSTRACT OPP-96-15849 Communities of benthic invertebrates are widely used to
monitor and evaluate biological impacts of pollution in the marine environment
because their sessile life styles, longevity, functional diversity, well-known
taxonomy and ecological significance render this system an ideal ecological
template on which biological consequences are imprinted. Benthic communities
have been used successfully in environmental assessments for convincing
demonstrations that impacts of pollution are readily detectable at the level of
family and phylum for macrofaunal invertebrates. This ability to detect
pollution impacts at high taxonomic levels appears to be a consequence of
different taxa responding to two classes of benthic communities, organic loading
and toxicity, in opposite ways. This project is designed to test the hypothesis
that indices of abundance and production for individual phyla of macrofauna
and/or meiofauna can be used as independent diagnostics to tease apart the
typically confounded impacts of these two separate classes of marine pollution.
The PIs will test the hypothesis that annelid worms and nematodes are enhanced
by modest organic loading and that arthropods and echinoderms are depressed
preferentially by modest exposure to toxic contaminants (trace metals). The
first hypothesis will be tested near McMurdo Station because of 1) its
relatively constant environment allows experimental work to proceed on the
seafloor without compromise by confounding disturbances; 2) previous benthic
studies at this site have revealed significant confounded patterns of sediment
contamination and benthic community degradation; and 3) low rates of natural
bioremediation in cold polar oceans make study of pollution impacts especially
critical at high latitudes. The first objective will be to establish a field
experiment near McMurdo Station where they will manipulate organic loading and
trace meta l concentration in sediments within colonization trays so as to test
by factorial design (permitting tests of interactions between factors) whether
the separate taxa respond independently to the classes of pollution. Treatments
will also include access of larger mobile predators and time for community
development so as to assess whether biological interactions within the ecosystem
with the diagnostic capability of the indices of pollution stress. Second, the
PIs will complete a rigorous review and meta-analysis of all available data sets
on effects of pollution on marine invertebrate communities to test the
hypothesis using the wealth of pre-existing information from monitoring
discharges, oil spills, and previous experimentation. Results have great
potential to allow the establishment of diagnostic indicators of community
stress that can be used to separate confounded causes of causes of marine
pollution and direct appropriate management responses at McMurdo Station