* 9615822
* Heinrich-Scale Events in Western North America and the      Northeastern Pacific?  Testing Possible Mechanisms
* GEO,AGS
* 09/01/1996,08/31/2001
* Cathy Whitlock, University of Oregon Eugene
* Continuing Grant
* David Verardo
* 08/31/2001
* USD 238,438.00

9615822 Whitlock This award supports a collaborative research effort to test
hypotheses regarding the occurrence of millennial-scale climate fluctuations now
recognized in western North America and the northeastern Pacific Ocean.
Preliminary data from marine sediments off California and Oregon, pollen records
from Pacific Northwest lakes, and glacial records from western North America
reveal climate events that appear to be related to the Heinrich events of the
North Atlantic. This study will test two hypotheses: 1) that climate events
originating in the North Atlantic are transmitted to the North Pacific Ocean and
western North America via thermohaline circulation and its influence on surface
ocean characteristics and circulation of the atmosphere, and 2) that climates of
the North Atlantic, North America, and the northeast Pacific depend jointly on
the elevation of the Laurentide Ice Sheet and its influence on atmospheric
circulation. These hypotheses will be constrained by analyzing the paleoclimate
record in a geographic array of sites in the northeastern Pacific Ocean and in
western North America. Focus of this study will include: constraints on oceanic
upwelling and near-surface advection, deep ocean properties and vegetation on
land, and comparing these data with model output. A significant advance will
come from linking the records from land and sea with a well- constrained
chronology, and with stratigraphic links of pollen and terrigenous sediment in
marine cores.