* 9615976
* SGER:  Development of an Industrial Database on Licensing   Patterns
* SBE,NCSE
* 10/01/1996,03/31/1998
* Albert Link, University of North Carolina Greensboro
* Standard Grant
* John Jankowski
* 03/31/1998
* USD 49,963.00

SRS 96-15976 Link The purpose of this innovative study is to explore the
feasibility of developing a database of quantitative information on the
licensing patterns of U. S. firms. It is expected that this database will
provide the first systematic information across firms and industries on the
propensity to acquire technical knowledge through licensing arrangements rather
than through their R&D or through other external sources. Moreover, licensing
activity appears, based on the limited stylized information available, to be an
important element of the portfolio of sources of technical knowledge that firms
draw upon as a part of their overall innovative strategy. The proposed study
ventures into an important research area, namely understanding and documenting
across industries an element of a firm's portfolio of technical information
previously unexplored. While the broad topic of sources of technical information
is established in the innovation related literature, a new, albeit exploratory,
approach for documenting patterns of licensing activity is being offered. The
proposed procedure uses legal decisions to identify licensing activities and
then matches the parties to those licensing arrangements to patent citations.
The evidence on licensing and patent citations is then used to predict licensing
patterns across industries. The general use of citation counts to explore
technology flows is in its infancy. This study attempts to combine in a novel
way citation counts for patents with evidence about licensing obtained from
legal decisions. If this approach is successful, the investigators will have
begun to fill the conspicuous void in information about the licensing of
technology. ***