* 9615658
* RESEARCH PLANNING GRANT: The Integration of Technical and   Personnel Considerations for Utility Storm Management
* ENG,ECCS
* 03/15/1997,03/15/1999
* Noel Schulz, Michigan Technological University
* Standard Grant
* Saifur Rahman
* 03/15/1999
* USD 28,000.00

9615658 Schulz Electricity has become a vital resource in our everyday lives.
From car factories to business offices to universities to homes, the public
depends on reliable electrical energy. A power delivery system consists of
systems for the transmission and distribution of the electric power from power
plants to customers. Recently there has been renewed interest in the
distribution side of the power delivery system. This interest has stemmed out of
an increased number of outages and reliability problems relating to the
distribution system rather than the transmission system. Current research on
distribution systems involves both planning and operational issues. A overriding
concern is to increase the reliability of the supply of electric energy by
decreasing the time it takes to restore power after an outage occurs. Outage
management involves the identification of the location of outage and taking the
necessary action or actions, such as switching steps or repair, to restore power
as soon as possible to any affected customers. The proposed long term research
project for the Computer Applications in Power System Operations Laboratory
(CAPSOL) at Michigan Technological University involves the integration of
numerical power system analysis, non-numerical power system data, and the
resource base of personnel and equipment to create a comprehensive set of outage
management techniques to optimize restoration efforts during and after a storm
condition. Such research should provide an increased awareness of the contrasts
between normal operations and storm operations and provide increased performance
in utility reliability. The planning grant research activities involve three
components: initial research work and laboratory development, travel, and
proposal creation. Background literature review will be used to identify
published algorithms for outage identification, restoration, and prioritization;
to identify the previous approaches to integration o f intelligent system
techniques to storm management issues; and to highlight the applications where
intelligent system techniques can be either improved or increased in the storm
management process. Research will focus on setting up a complete topological
network analysis package and a power flow program. By combining the knowledge
gained from previous work with utilities and the enhanced resources of the
CAPSOL laboratory, initial storm management algorithms can be developed. The
travel activities will permit interaction with experts in the power engineering
field from utilities, vendors and other universities. The PI also plans to write
proposals to support work on storm management issues seeking federal, state and
industrial research support. ***