* 9615767
* U.S.-India Collaborative Research:  Metastable State        Dynamics of Hard Spheres, Award in U.S. and Indian Currency
* O/D,OISE
* 10/01/1996,09/30/2001
* James Dufty, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Marjorie Lueck
* 09/30/2001
* USD 27,039.00

9615767 Dufty Description: This is a U.S.-India research collaboration entitled
Metastable State Dynamics for Hard Spheres. The project is under the direction
of James W. Dufty, University of Florida and Shankar P. Das, Jawaharlal Nehru
University, New Delhi. The investigators will study the long-standing problem of
describing glass formation and the properties of glasses. Their objectives are
to identify qualitative mechanisms responsible for very slow dynamics and to
develop practical methods for quantitative analysis. They will limit their study
to the idealized hard sphere system in order to take advantage of recent
developments which permit accurate theoretical analyses of the dynamics in both
dense fluid and crystal phases, not available for any other atomic or molecular
systems. These prototype studies will address some of the most basic questions
relevant to glass formation and their properties. Glasses and related composites
play an essential role in the development of new materials in a wide range of
applications. Scope: This collaboration is driven by the research interests of
two highly competent investigators who have worked together on closely related
research for the past six years. The unique approach they have developed for
solving a significant problem has excellent potential for scientific
breakthrough. The support requested is primarily for travel and per diem.
Postdocs and graduate students involved in the program will be supported by
their respective institutions. ***