* 9615940
* First International Conference on Cardiovascular Medicine,  Surgery, Science, and Mechanics, Bethesda, Maryland,        June 6-9, 1997
* ENG,CBET
* 09/15/1996,08/31/1997
* Jafar Vossoughi, University of the District of Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Gilbert B. Devey
* 08/31/1997
* USD 7,500.00

9615940 Vossoughi The "First International Conference on Cardiovascular
Medicine, Surgery, Science, and Mechanics" is to be held at the Hyatt Regency
Hotel, Bethesda, Maryland, June 6-9, 1997. The conference will bring together
physicians, scientists, and biomedical engineers working on various aspects of
cardiovascular related research and practice. An International Advisory
Committee of distinguished investigators from 42 countries will contribute to
the planning of the conference program and the conduct of the meeting. The
meeting is to include both podium and poster presentations. Plenary lectures
will be given by experts on topics of general interest to the multidisciplinary
participants and state-of-the art review papers will be presented by world-class
experts at the start of each session. Of significance to the development of the
field of biomedical engineering is the inclusion in the conference of a student
paper competition with certificates and cash prizes planned. Abstracts of
presentations will be published. Publication of a series "Advances in
Cardiovascular Sciences" is planned following the conference. Conference
presenters will be invited to submit full papers as book chapters. ***