* 9615203
* Phylogenetic and Monographic Studies in the Tribe           Aeschynomeneae: Classification, Character Evolution, and    Biogeography in the Legume Family (Leguminosae)
* BIO,DEB
* 03/01/1997,02/29/2000
* Matthew Lavin, Montana State University
* Standard Grant
* James E. Rodman
* 02/29/2000
* USD 154,044.00

9615203 Lavin The inventory and analysis of plant species, especially in the
tropics, remain current challenges for botanical scientists. Dr. Matt Lavin of
Montana State University is continuing his studies of the large legume family,
focusing on the tribe Aeschynomeneae that includes well known food crops (like
peanut, genus Arachis) and forage crops (like the genus Stylosanthes). A
phylogenetic analysis using both morphological evidence and new molecular
characters from DNA sequencing of nuclear ribosomal genes is proposed to
construct a framework of genealogical relationships for the many genera
currently placed in this papilionoid group, and to test several genera suspected
of belonging within the tribe but currently placed in others. These likely
include Adesmia, a genus of plants that dominate the landscape in drier regions
of the Andean cordillera of Argentina and Chile, and also Dalbergia, the genus
that includes species of valuable rosewood. For five selected genera within the
group, Belairia, Pictetia, Chaetocalyx, Fiebrigiella, and Nissolia, estimated to
encompass 40 or so species collectively, taxonomic monographs will be produced,
to summarize biological knowledge of all the species in these genera, with
accompanying data on habitats, geographic ranges, synonymy of scientific names,
local names and uses, and identification keys. The significance of the study
includes facilitating higher level phylogenetic analyses of the entire legume
family by clarifying phylogenetic relationships among the Aeschynomeneae, which
likely includes about 10% of the papilionoid legumes. Also, traditionally
important taxonomic characters of these legumes, like free stamens and lomented
pods, may be shown to be prone to higher rates of independent (parallel)
evolution and secondary loss than previously thought. More accurate assessment
of species diversity and geographic distribution will be possible for many of
the genera in the tribe, plants of which are common components of neotropical
dry forest s. The species-level monographic studies will provide data for tests
of biogeographic patterns in the history of vegetation changes in Central and
South America and the Caribbean.