* 9615047
* SBIR Phase II:  High Utilization Catalyst for the Direct    Oxidation of Methanol in a Proton Exchange Membrane Fuel    Cell
* TIP,TI
* 04/15/1997,03/31/1999
* Karen Jayne, Physical Sciences Incorporated (PSI)
* Standard Grant
* Cheryl F. Albus
* 03/31/1999
* USD 299,965.00

Jayne 9615047 This Small Business Innovation Research Phase II project addresses
both performance and cost issues associated with developing commercially viable
Direct Methanol Fuel Cells (DMFCs). Specifically, a high utilization, low
catalyst loading membrane-electrode assembly (MEA) for a direct methanol proton
exchange membrane (PEM) fuel cell will be developed. During Phase I, PSI
Technology's (PSIT's) patented electrochemical catalyzation (ECC) technique was
successfully adapted to electrodeposit Pt-Ru alloys with specific composition
and morphology. Methanol oxidation performance for the resultant ECC anode with
a catalyst loading of 2.0 mg/cm2 was shown to be equivalent to the unsupported
Pt-Ru alloy at a loading of 5.0 mg/cm2, which exceeded the goals of the Phase I
program. The Phase II research will encompass both the anode and the cathode of
a DMFC. The cathode work consists of both electrode structure and ECC
optimization. The anode research continues the Phase I work by attempting
additional alterations of the electrode structure and/or increasing the catalyst
loading, both of which could lead to still higher performance. In addition, the
technique developed during Phase I for alloy electrodeposition will be applied
to ternary alloys such as Pt-Ru-WO3, for which recent literature suggests even
higher methanol oxidation activity. Lastly, the Phase II research targets
another high cost component of DMFCs by investigating procedures to prepare the
MEA without using the costly carbon fiber paper backing that is currently
employed. By widening the scope of the research to include optimization of the
cathode and anode, investigation of ternary alloy electrodeposition, and
alternative, less expensive support structures, hindrances to commercializing
the direct methanol PEM fuel cell are more fully addressed. Successful
commercialization of this technology will substantially improve the cost
effectiveness of DMFCs for vehicular applications as well as for stationary
power generation.