* 9615342
* New Approaches to Measuring and Understanding the Effects of Ultraviolet Radiation on Photosynthesis by Antarctic       Phytoplankton
* GEO,OPP
* 07/01/1997,01/31/2001
* Patrick Neale, Smithsonian Institution
* Continuing Grant
* Polly A. Penhale
* 01/31/2001
* USD 259,631.00

Neale 9615342 Increases in ultraviolet-B radiation (UV-B, 280-320) associated
with the Antarctic ozone hole have been shown to inhibit the photosynthesis of
phytoplankton, but the overall effect on water column production is still a
matter of debate and continued investigation. Investigations have also revealed
that even at "normal" levels of Antarctic stratospheric ozone, UV-B and UV-A
(320-400 nm) appear to have strong effects on water column production. The role
of UV in the ecology of phytoplankton primary production has probably been
underappreciated in the past and could be particularly important to the
estimation of primary production in the presence of vertical mixing. This
research focuses on quantifying UV effects on photosynthesis of Antarctic
phytoplankton by defining biological weighting functions for UV-inhibition. In
the past, techniques were developed to describe photosynthesis as a function of
UV and visible irradiance using laboratory cultures. Further experimentation
with natural assemblages from McMurdo Station in Antarctica showed that
biological weighting functions are strongly related to light history. Most
recently, measurements in the open waters of the Southern Ocean confirmed that
there is substantial variability in the susceptibility of phytoplankton
assemblages to UV. It was also discovered that inhibition of photosynthesis in
Antarctic phytoplankton got progressively worse on the time scale of hours, with
no evidence of recovery. Even under benign conditions, losses of photosynthetic
capability persisted unchanged for several hours. This was in contrast with
laboratory cultures and some natural assemblages which quickly attained a
steady- state rate of photosynthesis during exposure to UV, reflecting a balance
between damage and recovery processes. Slow reversal of UV-induced damage has
profound consequences for water-column photosynthesis, especially during
vertical mixing. Results to date have been used to model th e influence of UV,
ozone depletion and vertical mixing on photosynthesis in Antarctic waters. Data
indicate that normal levels of UV can have a significant impact on natural
phytoplankton and that the effects can be exacerbated by ozone depletion as well
as vertical mixing. Critical questions remain poorly resolved, however, and
these are the focus of the present proposal. New theoretical and experimental
approaches will be used to investigate UV responses in both the open waters of
the Weddell-Scotia confluence and coastal waters near Palmer Station. In
particular, measurements will be made of the kinetics of UV inhibition and
recovery on time scales ranging from minutes to days. Variability in biological
weighting functions between will be calculated for pelagic and coastal
phytoplankton in the Southern Ocean. The results will provide absolute estimates
of photosynthesis under in situ, as well as under altered, UV irradiance;
broaden the range of assemblages for which biological weighting functions have
been determined; and clarify how kinetics of inhibition and recovery should be
represented in mixed layer models.