* 9615899
* Dissertation Research: The Reconstruction of Indigenous     Health Systems in a West African Refugee Camp
* SBE,BCS
* 01/15/1997,12/31/1998
* Carolyn Sargent, Southern Methodist University
* Standard Grant
* Stuart Plattner
* 12/31/1998
* USD 11,997.00

This project supports the dissertation research of an anthropology student from
Southern Methodist University, studying the use of traditional medicine in a
refugee camp in Sierra Leone, Africa. The research will study the extent to
which native, traditional healing is available in the camp, and the impact of
such healing on health practices in general and the use of western medicine as
provided by relief agency authorities. In thirteen months of ethnographic
fieldwork in a displaced persons camp, involving a preliminary census, a random
sample of 150 families as well as 20-30 administrators and biomedical camp
personnel and 20 traditional healers, the student will conduct semi-structured
interviews, illness histories, general oral life histories, as well as
participant observation. This data will be supplemented by information from aid
agency documents. This project is important because it will analyze how health
care actually functions in a refugee camp. Since over 45% of the world's 27
million refugees are in Africa, this case study will be important in addressing
how agencies can improve health care by working with, rather than against the
traditional healing systems of the impacted societies. Through addressing the
refugees' own role in constructing their health care systems, the study will
correct the bias of western agencies' assumption that refugee populations are
passive, helpless masses. Thus the knowledge from this project will include the
refugees own understanding of themselves and their situation. This will provide
valuable information for planners to draw upon in designing aid programs. In
addition the project will add to the nation's expertise about this important
region of the world.