* 9615956
* Optimal Management of Analytical Redundancy in              Reconfigurable Control Systems
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/15/1997,08/31/2001
* N. Eva Wu, SUNY at Binghamton
* Continuing Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 08/31/2001
* USD 233,973.00

ECS-9615956 Wu The proposed research is concerned with developing new approaches
to enhancing fault tolerance of reconfigurable control systems through
management of analytical redundancy. The redundancy management involves a
decision, upon the identification of some failures, on whether and how a control
reconfiguration should take place in order to maintain a certain system
performance level. Such a decision is made difficult by the presence of
uncertainties in the system and the exogenous signal models, by the limited
processing/memory capability in carrying out failure detection and
identification (FDI), and by the vagueness in the definition of a failure in the
context of control performance. The underlying issues of the research range from
those defined at subsystems level to those formulated at the overall systems
level. At the level of overall systems, our task involves finding a way of
assessing objectively the reliability that takes into account the likelihood of
failed reconfiguration action. Therefore, there is a need to define and compute
the reconfiguration coverage. A definition for coverage is proposed that takes
the form of a ratio of two nonspecificity measures associated with the estimated
impairment parameter. It links explicitly the reconfiguration coverage to the
available FDI resolution, the chosen control performance threshold, the selected
control settings, and the ranking method used. Therefore, it offers a way to
explore, through numerical and analytical means, the relationship between the
performance of individual subsystem modules and the reliability of the overall
system. At the level of reconfiguration decisions, our task involves forming
strategies for achieving the highest possible reconfiguration coverage by
optimally managing the analytical redundancy in the system. It is proposed that
the decision making amount to ranking the relationships between two classes of
fuzzy sets. One class represents the control performance evaluated for every
control setting, and the other represents the estimated impairment parameter
generated through an FDI scheme. In order to develop algorithms that implement
the strategies, it is necessary to show that these representations are
obtainable and realizable. It is also necessary to carry out a search for a
ranking method that maximizes the coverage, and is simple to execute. At the
level of subsystem modules, our task involves deriving the required FDI
resolution. A definition of FDI resolution is proposed using the nonspecificity
measure of the identified impairment parameter, which has uncovered some
interactions between the control subsystem module and the FDI subsystem module,
in relation to analytical redundancy management. These relationships are to be
further studied and quantified in this research to provide a more refined
guideline for the bottom level design, i.e., the design of control and FDI
subsystem modules. Results to be produced thus far are applicable to control/FDI
designs that are either retrospective or new. New designs under the criteria of
highly integrated consideration can be ventured from this point on. An F-16 like
aircraft model subject to actuator/surface impairment is to be used for the
bottom level design, and also for the verification of the proposed new concepts
through simulation and analysis.