* 9615098
* Workshops in Molecular Evolution 1997-1999, Woods Hole, MA
* BIO,DEB
* 03/01/1997,02/29/2000
* Mitchell Sogin, Marine Biological Laboratory
* Continuing Grant
* James E. Rodman
* 02/29/2000
* USD 240,000.00

9615098 Sogin The Marine Biological Laboratory at Woods Hole, MA, continues to
support a valuable interdisciplinary series of summer workshops in Molecular
Evolution for the years 1997 through 1999. The workshops provide training in
molecular phylogenetics and evolutionary biology and promote collaborative
efforts among molecular, cellular, and developmental biologists, physiologists,
systematists, and theoreticians. Leaders in the fields of Molecular Evolution,
Population and Systematic Biology, Developmental Biology, and Computational
Biology present a lecture series that is integrated with a computer laboratory.
During the first phase of each year's workshop, 60 students will attend a two-
week lecture and laboratory session; in the second phase, up to 15 students will
participate in a one-week special projects session. Topics covered reflect the
expertise of the large staff of lecturers and track pioneering developments in
the field, but usually include the theory of origins of life, phylogenetic
reconstructions from molecular data, macromolecular sequence alignment
techniques, current trends in molecular systematics, evolution of developmental
pathways, and comparative genomics. In the computer laboratory, high-speed
machines running a variety of operating systems are used to test theoretical
concepts described in the lecture series. Guided by authors of phylogenetic
analyses and designers of computer packages for gene sequence comparisons, the
students explore a wide array of analytical techniques for the study of
evolutionary phenomena using molecular data. The opportunity to implement
concepts described in the lecture series using diverse "state of the art"
hardware frees the students from platform restrictions and is a distinguishing
feature of this workshop. The special topics session will allow up to 15
students to work on their individual research data sets under the guidance of
leaders in the field of molecular evolution, including the two project
directors, Drs. Sogin and Davis on. The course is designed for established
investigators, postdoctoral fellows, and graduate students from diverse
biological fields, with attention as well to members of the biometrics community
and faculty from undergraduate institutions.