* 9615533
* Collaborative:  Phylogeny, Character Evolution, and         Diversification of Extant Ferns
* BIO,DEB
* 03/15/1997,02/28/2001
* Kathleen Pryer, Field Museum of Natural History
* Standard Grant
* James E. Rodman
* 02/28/2001
* USD 109,996.00

9615533 Pryer In a three-institution collaboration with colleagues at Utah State
University and at University of California at Berkeley, Dr. Kathleen Pryer of
Chicago's Field Museum of Natural History is amassing a major database of
molecular and morphological characters of representatives of the 30 or so
families of living ferns, in order to construct an overall phylogenetic
framework for ferns. Building upon the impressive results of a 1994 symposium of
fern specialists, with an international team that produced preliminary results
for this effort (published in 1995), Pryer and her colleagues are continuing a
major DNA sequencing project for four genes, two from the chloroplast genome and
two from the nucleus, that hold promise of yielding informative variation for
genealogical analyses. This molecular database in turn is to be supplemented
with traditional anatomical and morphological features drawn from the vegetative
and reproductive parts of the same ferns analyzed for their DNA, features used
standardly in their taxonomic identification and classification. A well-resolved
phylogeny for ferns will facilitate future work on the patterns and sequences of
character evolution in ferns, and on the Cretaceous radiation and
diversification of the major group of ferns, the "polypodiaceous" group. A
phylogenetic framework will provide a foundation for family- and genus-level
taxonomic revisionary research. Using comparative methods, researchers can
explore patterns of association among characters for correlated evolutionary
changes, that may help explain the success or failure (extinction) of various
lineages within the ferns.