* 9615961
* Collaborative Research:  Climate-Fire-Ecosystem Linkages    On Decadal-to-Centennial Time Scales in the Northern Rockies
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/1997,07/31/2001
* Cathy Whitlock, University of Oregon Eugene
* Standard Grant
* Ngoc Linh Lam
* 07/31/2001
* USD 174,672.00

SBR-9715961 Whitlock University of Oregon This three-year, collaborative, multi-
disciplinary research project reconstructs the fire, vegetation, and climate
history of the sub-alpine forests of the Selway-Bitterroot Wilderness Area in
northern Idaho and western Montana over 2,000 years. Its purpose is to examine
the linkages among climate, fire regimes, and vegetation composition at
different temporal and spatial scales. The variation in and interaction of
climate, fire, and vegetation shape the landscape. The processes of interaction
vary according to the temporal and spatial scale of analysis. At century-to-
millennial temporal scales and at landscape-to-regional spatial scales, large
changes in climate determine fire regime and vegetation composition. The
linkages between fire and vegetation at these gross scales is less clear. At
annual-to-decadal temporal scales and at the watershed spatial scale, fire
frequency, size, and severity are determined by climate/weather, vegetation, and
ignition frequency. In these finer scales, the linkages between fire and
vegetation are fairly well developed: vegetation determines fuel availability,
and fires create a landscape pattern that shapes vegetation recovery.
Investigators will derive information on the frequency of past fires from
charcoal and pollen data in lake sediments, tree-ring records, and tree-stand
age information. They will calibrate the lake-sediment and tree-ring records
against historical fire maps, to estimate the spatial extent of fires. The data
will be compiled at the watershed, landscape, and regional scales. They will
develop climate reconstructions from Pinus albicaulis and Larix lyalli tree-
ring-width chronologies for the last 300+ years in each watershed. These
reconstructions should yield an understanding of fire chronology and synoptic
climatic conditions giving rise to prehistoric fires. In the western United
States, whether late-twentieth-century fire regimes reflect a shift in climate,
a product of human activity, or current management practices is a topic of
scientific and public-policy debate. This research should provide data on fire
history, vegetation, and climate, and move toward understanding the temporally
and spatially specific processes of interaction among these elements.