* 9615356
* Molecular Measures of Microbial Community Structure in      Sediment Biogeochemistry
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/1997,10/31/2000
* David Hollander, Northwestern University
* Continuing Grant
* Scott L. Collins
* 10/31/2000
* USD 300,000.00

9615356 Stahl This research will extend studies in microbial ecology of sediment
biogeochemistry in Lake Michigan. The first component of the research will
continue to characterize site conditions which will serve as a comparative data
base for studies at additional sites in this Lake. The PIs will continue to
determine geochemical profiles to use as baseline criteria for relating the
contribution of different microbial populations to organic mineralization via
different respiratory processes. Quantification and identification of
populations using group-specific hybridization probes and comparative rRNA
sequencing will remain the principal organizing framework. This research will
continue to relate individual population abundance to seasonal variation in
sediment processes thought to be governed primarily by changes in organic matter
input. To further understanding of carbon and electron flow in this complex
habitat, the PIs will combine two independent molecular measures, group-specific
DNA probes and lipid biomarkers. This will serve as a critical comparison of
methods, provide independent measures of total active biomass, and serve as a
foundation for subsequent stable isotope measurements. Stable isotope
composition of signature lipid components that can be clearly associated with
well-defined phylogenetic groups will be used to infer the carbon source for
individual groups. Preliminary studies suggest that this will provide very
useful information about the trophic relationships of individual sediment
populations. More standard microbiological methods of enumeration will be used
for comparison. The emphasis will be on anaerobic process, although recent
observations have prompted continued analysis of a novel archaeal population. In
the longer term, these studies should also contribute to establishing the
connections between sediment and water column activities, for example, how
sediment microbial populations may affect or regulate the production of organic
matter in the overlying water .