* 9615291
* Indigenous Craft Production on the Kenya Coast and          Hinterland in the Development of Swahili Polities
* SBE,BCS
* 01/01/1997,12/31/1998
* Chapurukha Kusimba, Field Museum of Natural History
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 12/31/1998
* USD 51,459.00

With National Science Foundation support Dr.Chapurukha Kusimba and his
collaborators will conduct one season of archaeological fieldwork on the Kenya
coast and its immediate hinterland. The group will continue ongoing research at
the site of Mtwapa which is located north of Mombasa. The site covers
approximately eight hectare and contains monumental architecture. Because of its
excellent port, it participated in international trade for many centuries and
ceramic chronology suggests it was inhabited between 1100 and 1750 AD.
Excavation at the site will focus on a series of 2 x 2 meter test exposures at
several middens in order to obtain a broader picture of economic life. Attempts
will be made to locate storage structures and market and workshop localities. In
this way it should be possible to gain insight into both the kinds of objects
produced and the social context in which this took place. In a second phase of
the research the group will survey an area approximately 200 km by 10 km in size
which extends inland from Mtwapa. The exact position of located sites will be
determined by a geographic positioning system and the coordinates recorded on
aerial and topographical maps. Note will be made of size and artifact content
and collections made of ceramics, slag and other artifacts to determine relative
chronology, stylistic similarities to other sites and to document manufacturing
activities. Test excavations will also be conducted. On this basis it will be
possible to determine the relationship between coastal and inland settlements.
Historical documents indicate that a trans Indian Ocean trade can be traced back
almost 2,000 years and archaeological data supports conclusion. The Swahili
polity which developed on the East African coast has traditionally been
interpreted as a result of this trade and largely abstracted from an indigenous
context. Dr. Kusimba wishes to re-examine this question. While such trade
obviously played a role, it appears likely that Swahili coastal cities had
extensive interaction with inland `hinterland` regions and that the growth of
large coastal settlements with monumental architecture may best be explained in
this latter context. It is likely that coastal groups produced products for
exchange with the interior and the planned inland survey and coastal excavation
will provide data to evaluate this proposition. This research is important
because it will shed light on the processes which lead to the rise of complex
societies. While archaeologists know that some states arise solely as the result
of pristine processes, they disagree on what gives rise to 'secondary` states
such as the Swahili example. Some see the rise of these latter entities as the
result of primary state contact which others accord a more prominent role to
local processes. Dr. Kusimba's research focuses on this issue. The project will
produce data of interest to many archaeologists and strengthen scientific ties
between US and Kenyan researchers.