* 9615065
* Ecological Genetics of X-Linked Meiotic Drive
* BIO,DEB
* 02/15/1997,01/31/2000
* John Jaenike, University of Rochester
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Lyons
* 01/31/2000
* USD 165,000.00

9615065 Jaenike Most animal species have a genetic system that keeps the
population half female and half male. Generally, males are XY, and produce half
X sperm, which result in daughters, and half Y sperm, which result in sons. In
many species, some X chromosomes destroy Y sperm, which results in more females
among the progeny of those individuals and in the population. If unchecked by
natural selection, the alleles causing the sex-ratio bias (termed SR) will
increase so that only females are produced, causing the extinction of
populations or even entire species. That certain insect species harbor SR
alleles at moderate frequencies indicates that the advantage in the proportion
of sperm must be opposed by some other form of natural selection. The aim of
this proposal is to test a specific mechanism that can potentially halt the
spread of SR alleles, in the insect Drosophila neotestacea. An increase in the
frequency of SR causes the ratio of females to males to increase, which leads to
an increase in the potential rate of male mating. Because SR males produce only
half as many sperm as do normal males, the increased rate of male mating may
cause the fertility of SR males to decline relative to that of normal males and
eventually halt the spread of SR. This mechanism will be tested in a series of
laboratory and field experiments. An increasing number of insects have been
found to harbor X-chromosome SR alleles that could drive a species extinct.
Because the mechanism to be tested involves a general side-effect of SR genes,
the conclusions drawn from these studies will be applicable to a wide variety of
insects. This study will show how extinction risk is related to the frequency of
the SR alleles and to the density of the species, which is useful for pest
control and for conservation biology. More generally, the results will indicate
the balance between natural selection acting at the levels of genes,
individuals, and populations.