* 9615666
* Collaborative Research: Improved Instrumentation for Arctic Submarine-Based Geophysical Surveys
* GEO,OPP
* 09/01/1996,08/31/1999
* Margo Edwards, University of Hawaii
* Continuing Grant
* Jane V. Dionne
* 08/31/1999
* USD 116,517.00

This work is to develop an improved geophysical instrument package for use on
US Navy nuclear-powered submarines during science cruises to the Arctic Ocean.
The authors plan an integrated data acquisition system that would expand the
current instrument suite to include a swath-bathymetric imaging system, a
"chirp"-type low frequency bottom penetrating sonar and an integrated data
logging and quality control computer system. With specifically adapted
instrumentation the submarine is the only platform for underway marine
geophysical surveys in the high Arctic. The proposed 12 kHz bathymetric imaging
system will acquire co-registered bathymetry and backscatter from the seafloor
across a swath up to 20 km wide. Data from the "chirp" sonar will, under
favorable conditions, define the acoustic stratigraphy of at least the upper 100
m sediment below the seafloor. Transducers for both sonars will be housed in a
single, pod secured beneath the submarine. The combined backscatter, bathymetry,
"chirp" profiles and gravity anomaly data collected over the entire deep Arctic
Ocean will not only provide the basis for solving some of the vexing problems of
Arctic tectonics, it will also provide an essential database for planning future
coring, dredging or deep sea drilling. This instrument package will make the
most of the opportunity generously offered by Navy of operational support for
annual submarine cruises through 1999. Critical design goals include: collection
of high quality data, dockside installation (i.e. without dry-docking), boat to
boat transfer with modest effort and cost; and minimization of returns from the
ice canopy. The proposed development, integration and testing effort is a
complex undertaking, requiring coordination between participating organizations,
user community and the submarine fleet. These submarine cruises will be the only
opportunity to systematically collect this data with a set of optimized
instruments over the entire ocean basin. The combined suite of swath bathymetry
and backscatter imagery, gravity anomaly data, bottom penetrating chirp sonar
and possibly magnetometer data will provide a complete geophysical
characterization of the morphology, recent sedimentology, shallow stratigraphy
and deep structure of the major Arctic Ocean basins. This dataset will
revolutionize our understanding of the tectonic history of the Arctic Ocean and
the surrounding continents and provide essential information for other
disciplines and future scientific exploration of this poorly known region.