* 9615545
* A Manual of the Misumalpan Languages
* NONE,NONE
* 03/01/1997,02/29/2000
* Kenneth Hale, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Catherine N. Ball
* 02/29/2000
* USD 140,562.00

The three living members of the small Misumalpan family represent the majority
of the population still using an indigenous language in Nicaragua, and the
family is well represented north of the Coco River, in Honduras, as well. Thus,
despite its small size Misumalpan is the most important indigenous linguistic
entity in the region popularly termed the Atlantic Coast of Nicaragua. It is
important sociopolitically, since speakers of the two largest languages, Miskitu
(70,000 speakers) and Northern Sumu (8,000), have been strong and effective
proponents of the political, cultural, and economic rights of the indigenous
peoples of the Atlantic Coast, and they have worked successfully to secure a
position of dignity and official status for their languages within the Autonomy
Project of the Nicaraguan government of the 1980's, Speakers of the third much
smaller, Misumalpan language, Ulwa (or Southern Sumu, with approximately 400
speakers), have also been vocal and effective in expressing their right to have
their language documented and to reverse the process of language loss which, if
unchecked, will quickly lead to its disappearance. Ulwa is now confined to
Karawala, a village of 750 people, predominantly Miskitu in linguistic practice,
near the mouth of the Rio Grande de Matagalpa, a dramatic reversal of its
fortune, given that it was the most widespread Misumalpan language in the 17th
century. Although there are great numerical disparities among the languages of
this small family, there is a sense of common interest among the speakers, a
sense that the fate of even the smallest language is relevant in the general
program of promoting the welfare of the indigenous languages and cultures of the
Atlantic Coast. The proposed Manual of Misumalpan Languages is inspired very
largely by the clearly perceived need for a single reference work which brings
these linguistic traditions together for use by the growing number of
Misumalpan-speaking scholars and teachers, as well as other Nicaraguan involved
in various ways with language matters on the Atlantic Coast and a Nicaraguan
public becoming increasingly aware of the country's diverse cultural and
linguistic heritage. In the domain of linguistic scholarships the Misumalpan
family is important for both historical and synchronic research, It is a classic
example of the effects of intense bilingualism, developed since the Miskitu
ascendancy of the 17th century and resulting in large-scale changes making the
languages very close in grammar, while maintaining differences in vocabulary,
This has given rise to a number of theories about the origin of Miskitu which
the present project will attempt to evaluate through careful comparison of
grammatical features and vocabulary. In the realm of grammar, Misumalpan
furnishes us with new data on certain important linguistic processes, including
among many others the expression of possession (e.g., the child's dog), cause
(e.g., 'the wind makes the house shake') the problem of "keeping track" of the
participants in a sequence of events (e.g., who is 'he' in John came in and he
sat down' -- is it John or someone else? Misumalpan makes this clear at all
times). The manual will cover these and the full range of other constructions
and processes which are of central interest to linguists and language learners.
It will contain three parts - Grammar, Lexicon. and History and it will be
prepared for publication in Spanish and English.