* 9615945
* Population Contact and the Spread of the 1918-19 Influenza  Pandemic in the Central Subarctic
* SBE,BCS
* 06/01/1997,05/31/2000
* D. Ann Herring, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Continuing Grant
* Mark L. Weiss
* 05/31/2000
* USD 72,056.00

This research explores factors that influenced the death toll from the 1918
influenza epidemic in several Aboriginal communities in the central Canadian
Subarctic. The project uses the methods of mathematical epidemiology to explore
how human mobility carries diseases from place to place, and also how mobility
and other factors influence mortality within a community, once the disease has
arrived. Specific questions include the effects of seasonal and between-
community differences in aspects of social life, such as travel patterns,
population size and density, responses to the epidemic (e.g., quarantine), and
winter-time settlement structure in conjunction with fur-trapping activities.
The project builds on previous work of the co-investigators on the 1918
influenza epidemic and other infectious disease epidemics in the Americas
(Herring) and on modeling the geographic spread of infectious diseases
(Sattenspiel). It combines strengths in both quantitative methodology and theory
and data-oriented ethnohistorical analysis and will lead to new epidemiological
models that incorporate more realistic structures within which humans interact.
These models can be adapted for studying other diseases in other communities.
The project will enable assessment of the use of mathematical modeling methods
to complement traditional demographic, ethnohistorical, and epidemiological
analyses of historic and contemporary populations.