* 9615868
* The Performance of Customized Molecular Coatings
* NONE,NONE
* 05/15/1997,10/20/1999
* John Quinn, University of Pennsylvania
* Continuing grant
* Robert M. Wellek
* 10/20/1999
* USD 204,575.00

CTS-9615868 Quinn, J./Vanderlick, T.R. U of Penn Project Summary By exploiting
the desire of certain organic molecules to spontaneously organize, it is
possible to design and fabricate customized molecular coatings with unique
architectures. One such coating process is the Langmuir-Blodgett (LB) deposition
technique, a mechanical method used to build multi-layered molecular films.
Another process is "self-assembled monolayer (SAM) formation," a chemical method
based on chemisorption from solution. Over the last decade, substantial effort
has been directed at expanding the sets of film forming molecule and
characterizing the structure of the resultant coatings. On the other hand,
little effort has been spent on evaluating the performance of these customized
molecular coatings in different applications, or their response to changes in
their surroundings. Measuring and understanding the ways in which these organic
coatings interact with their environment is the central focus of this proposal.
Experiments are designed to examine how coatings behave to the presence of
different gases, liquids, and solids with which they come into contact. This
work is divided into two branches. The first centers on the absorption
characteristics of coatings with non-negligible volume (as formed from the LB
method), establishing their performance as "molecular sponges" Here, cues will
be taken from biological membranes to design films with different transport
properties. Also, a novel method (using track-etched mica) will be developed to
measure transport along/within the strata which comprise the LB films. The other
branch of this proposal deals with the performance of nonmolecular films.
Coatings of different molecular design will be fabricated using self-assembled
monolayers derived from two different breeds-the well-known alkane-thiol based
systems and a new class of film forming molecules based on aromatic thiols. The
adhesion of SAMs to various surfaces(including other SAMs) will be investigated,
thus evaluating the performance and reponsiveness of these coatings "molecular
glue." The adsorption characteristics of different coatings will also be
investigated, establishing their performance as "molecular tack-paper." A key
objective of this work is compare the behavior of these different monolayer
forming systems. The studies proposed herein will take advantage of two powerful
tools: the surface forces apparatus to measure the forces of interaction between
surfaces, and the quartz crystal microbalance to measure mass pickup. Although
many groups are currently investigating self-assembled monolayers, the
uniqueness of this approach rests both on techniques employed( in particular the
SFA) and on systems proposed for study(including the new Class of SAMs)