* 9615913
* Dissertation Research: Where people Can Speak: Community Radio and Democratization in Postwar El Salvador
* NONE,NONE
* 02/15/1997,07/31/1998
* June Nash, CUNY City College
* Standard Grant
* Stuart Plattner
* 07/31/1998
* USD 9,000.00

This dissertation research project supports an anthropology student from City
University of New York. The student will investigate how the emergence of
community radio stations in El Salvador, after the fighting has ended,
facilitates the consolidation of democratic culture. By providing access for
social groups previously excluded form public life to represent their interests
in this public forum, the stations can support the development of `civil
society`, meaning the values, norms and social institutions that undergird
democracy. In a region where newspapers and local television are non-existent,
local radio serves as a vehicle for community self-expression. Methods include
intensive interviews and participant observation in four radio stations, in
urban and rural El Salvador. The data to be gathered will include the
organization of the stations, and the identity of local actors involved (and not
involved) in the stations, the nature of the programming offered, the
involvement of listeners both passively and as participants. This research is
important because it will provide information in a little-studied aspect of
democratization in the developing world, how local radio stations shape and are
influenced by local society and culture. This case study will be a basis for
generalizations to promote the construction of civil society in similar less-
developed areas.