* 9615109
* The Role of Adult Male Kin in Venezuelan Rainforest         Children's Survival
* SBE,BCS
* 03/01/1997,12/31/1999
* Stephen Beckerman, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Stuart Plattner
* 12/31/1999
* USD 96,830.00

This project analyzes child survival and health in a tropical forest society of
Amazonian Venezuela. The project will analyze census data collected over 36
years for the Bari tribe to assess the contribution to a child's survival of
`secondary fathers` -- men who had societal-recognized extra-marital affairs
with the child's mother and who are believed to have contributed to the
development of the fetus, and thus have parental rights and obligations.
Preliminary data show that some children's secondary fathers seem to contribute
enough resources to improve their life chances over the survival prospects for
their own siblings; but data also show that some women who never recognize
secondary fathers have children whose survival prospects are equally good The
project will test the hypothesis that a women's adult siblings and fathers can
provide support which ensures her children's survival. This research is
important because it corrects a bias in the theory of human evolution which
stresses the importance of women, specifically grandmothers, to the survival of
children. This research will assess the role of men, including grandfathers, in
a child's survival. Most policy oriented discussion of the importance of male
kin focuses on the father, and presumes that for each child only one father is
recognized. This ethnographic case in which multiple fathers are societal
recognized will show how maternal grandfathers and uncles can substitute for
fathers in major ways. This ethnographic example is important for sorting out
what is constant and panhuman about the male contribution to children, and what
is culturally variable and contingent on environmental circumstances.