* 9615259
* Hydrothermal Activity in Bransfield Strait, Antarctica:     Sample Analysis and Data Reduction
* GEO,OPP
* 03/01/1997,02/28/1998
* Gary Klinkhammer, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Scott Borg
* 02/28/1998
* USD 92,802.00

OPP 9615259 Klinkhammer In the austral summer of 1995 a research team from
Oregon State University conducted a survey of hydrothermal activity in the
Bransfield Strait (cruise NBP9507). The approach was to search the water column
for the types of anomalies in temperature, turbidity, and chemistry that are
known to be indicative of hydrothermal plumes in mid-ocean ridge settings. This
work produced a detailed picture of the hydrography of this area in addition to
locating three active hydrothermal areas in the Central Basin. These are the
first deep ocean hydrothermal sites ever discovered in a polar region. A plume
being discharged to the Strait through the entrance to the sunken caldera at
Deception Island was also discovered. Follow-up research on these discoveries is
important for several reasons: (1) Bransfield is isolated from the system of
mid-ocean ridges and has a relatively short history of rifting (approximately 4
my). So, while the Bransfield straddles the Atlantic and Pacific, vent biota in
the Strait may well have a distinct genealogy. It will not be possible to sample
biota until the water analyses and data interpretation are completed. (2)
Bransfield is a backarc rift system. It is likely that the vent fluids and
mineral deposits associated with venting in this setting are unlike anything
sampled so far. The closest analogy is probably the Okinawa Trough or Lau Basin
where native gold is part of the hydrothermal assemblage. (3) Bransfield is in a
sensitive position as far as world climate and regional productivity.
Preliminary evidence suggests that Deception Island is a significant source of
hydrothermally affected water to the surface waters of the Strait. Consequently,
it as important to quantify this flux and access the biogeochemical impact of
this phenomenon. (4) Bransfield is a rift zone which has little spreading or, if
spreading is occurring, it began in the recent past. On the other hand there is
a definite tectonic fa bric that separates the Strait into three distinct
basins. This situation allows an opportunity to study the impact of tectonic
processes on the emplacement of hydrothermal circulation cells. The success of
the NBP9507 cruise has led to an enormous amount of information on the water
column in the Bransfield, both in terms of the amount of data collected by
instrument packages and in the number of water samples that were taken for
analysis. Over 100 water samples from the Bransfield are available for analysis
for total dissolvable manganese. This award supports research to complete this
analytical program and to analyze the results. These data will provide
information about the nature of hydrothermal activity in the Strait which will
be invaluable in understanding the role of hydrothermal waters in regional
oceanography and for planning future work.