* 9615163
* Phylogenetics of Rodents: Molecular Systematics of the      Suborder Hystricognathi and Related Families
* BIO,DEB
* 02/15/1997,01/31/2002
* Rodney Honeycutt, Texas A&M Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Lyons
* 01/31/2002
* USD 220,310.00

9615163 HONEYCUTT Rodents represent a major component of mammalian diversity
worldwide. They demonstrate considerable variation in morphology, habitat
utilization, behavior, life history strategies, and biogeographic distribution.
At the DNA sequence level, rodents demonstrate faster overall rates of change
than seen for other groups of mammals, and this increase in nucleotide
substitution rate has been linked to differences in generation time and overall
mutation rates. The purpose of this research, to be conducted by Rodney
Honeycutt, is twofold. First, nucleotide sequence data from three nuclear genes
and one mitochondrial gene will be used to investigate relationships among
rodents in the suborder Histricognathi. This suborder encompasses a large subset
of rodent diversity, including a majority of rodent families. Histricognath
rodents occur primarily in Africa and South America, and within South America
they represent an unique part of the mammalian radiation. Second, these
nucleotide sequence data and the resulting gene trees will be used to examine
patterns of change at the molecular level. Some of the patterns to be
investigated pertain to correlation's between heterogeneity in the rate of
nucleotide substitution and several parameters including body size, metabolic
rate, and generation time. In an effort to determine whether or not rodent genes
experience different classes of substitutions relative to other mammals, both
the distribution of nucleotide substitutions throughout each gene and rates of
change in all these genes will be compared to those seen in other non-rodent
mammal groups.