* 9615087
* SGER: The Institutional Life Cycle of the U.S. District     Courts, 1789-1996
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/1996,07/31/1999
* Gary Zuk, Auburn University
* Standard Grant
* Patricia White
* 07/31/1999
* USD 49,997.00

9615087 Gryski The primary objective of this project is to construct a data base
comprised of essential appointment and leaving information for U.S. District
Court judges from 1789-1996. The district bench underwent an explosive growth in
the past three decades, mushrooming from around 250 judgeships in 1960 to more
than 650 today. At the same time retirements from these offices reached record
levels, signaling perhaps a new perspective on lifetime service. Three types of
data will be collected: the legislative history behind the creation of each
court and seat; information on the officeholders and their appointments and
departures, and position histories that will enable us to track each position
and the judges occupying it over time. The centerpiece of the project is
position numbering. Once we establish the succession of occupants to every seat
on each state's district bench, then all other objectives fall into place. The
data will make it feasible to study fundamental questions about the federal
judiciary such as the influence of executive-legislative relations on bench
growth, or the role of senatorial courtesy in the appointment process. The data
will be archived as an electronic multi-user data base, available to the
scholarly community. We will use the data to study: a) the partisan life cycles
of the district bench, and how they are influenced by institutional control of
the other branches; b) the racial and gender diversification of the district
courts, and c) generational changes in seats.