* 9615437
* Cladistics of Orchidaceae and Critical Anther Characters:   Evidence from Molecular, Developmental and Morphological    Investigations
* BIO,DEB
* 01/15/1997,10/31/2000
* John Freudenstein, Kent State University
* Standard Grant
* James E. Rodman
* 10/31/2000
* USD 170,198.00

9615437 Freudenstein The Orchidaceae is the largest family of flowering plants
with an estimated 25,000 species. It exhibits a high degree of diversity in
floral appearance, yet this diversity is the result of change in a comparatively
small number of features. It appears that several characteristics have evolved
repeatedly, leading to similar floral morphologies in unrelated groups. Hence,
although scientists have been working on classifications of the family for
nearly 200 years, there is still a great deal of uncertainty about relationships
within and among the major orchid groups (subfamilies and tribes). This study
examines the relationships of 163 representative genera from across the family,
emphasizing the large and poorly resolved subfamily Epidendroideae, and brings a
fresh perspective to the question of relationships within the family in two
ways: (1) by utilizing DNA sequence data from three genomes (plastid, nuclear,
and mitochondrial) that are presumably not under the same selective forces as
are morphological characters; and (2) by re-evaluating the traditionally
emphasized floral characters with developmental studies of the anther and pollen
structures. Dr. John Freudenstein of Kent State University is collaborating with
Dr. Mark Chase at England's Royal Botanic Gardens-Kew in the first project and
with Dr. Finn Rasmussen at the University of Copenhagen in the second. The
significance of this study is several-fold. It will provide several data sets
for the same set of genera representing the diversity in the family, yielding by
far the maximal amount of information to date on which to build a classification
for the family. Some groups, such as the economically important Vanilla, have
been difficult to place because they share few advanced characters with other
groups; the molecular data will be especially important in understanding their
relationships. The pattern of relationships will form a much-needed framework
for further studies at lower levels in the family, and will make it possible to
address the following questions: How reliable are the traditionally used floral
characters? What are presumed "key" innovations that mark species-rich lineages?
Do different species-rich lineages share the same innovations that were derived
independently, or have they achieved success in different ways? How many times
has epiphytism evolved in the family? In addition to elucidating evolutionary
patterns among orchids, answers to these questions are relevant to studies of
evolution in other plant groups. Also of more general relevance will be the
comparison of patterns among data sets from three genomes at the family level
and the development of mitochondrial DNA sequences as a tool for phylogenetic
studies in flowering plants.