* 9615097
* There Goes the Neighborhood: Complex Interactions Between   Squirrels, Crossbills and Conifers
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/1997,06/30/2000
* Craig Benkman, New Mexico State University
* Standard Grant
* Margaret Palmer
* 06/30/2000
* USD 100,000.00

It has been argued that the complexity of interactions among species in
communities limits the potential for pair-wise coevolution. There are, however,
few studies that have tested specific hypotheses of how other species'
interactions influence coevolution between particular species pairs. Red
squirrels and red crossbills compete for pine seeds. The investigator will test
whether the red squirrels impede the coevolutionary interaction between red
crossbills and pines by examining characteristics of seed and cone morphology of
lodgepole pine where one or both competitors are present (or absent). This
research will extend studies of complex species interactions by determining the
evolutionary significance of indirect interactions. Second, it will distinguish
among several potential explanations for why pair-wise coevolution may be
uncommon. Third, it will distinguish between alternative hypotheses of
coevolution. This study will provide an understanding of the impact of various
seed predators on geographic variation in an important commercial pine species,
lodgepole pine, and will help elucidate the importance of different seed
predators on pine evolution and diversity. Second, it will provide the basis for
understanding why the absence of species from communities can lead to rapid
evolutionary change in the remaining species in these communities. The
implications are that introductions of formerly absent species may result in
increases of the introduced species to the point where they become pests, may
lead to local extinctions of unique species, and may result in the
homogenization of formerly unique communities.