* 9615444
* Mathematical, Computational and Biological Aspects of Vision
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/1996,08/31/2001
* David Mumford, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* Michael Steuerwalt
* 08/31/2001
* USD 390,000.00

Mumford 9615444 The problem of vision can be studied from many points of view:
from an engineering, system-building problem to a problem in biology and
psychology. The investigator seeks to understand vision from the perspective of
Bayesian statistics, as one of modeling and learning the `priors' of visual
signals and of finding algorithms for efficiently sampling the posterior
probability distribution on the unobserved 3D world variables. More
specifically, he constructs a larger, more inclusive, probability model for
vision based on a pyramid architecture that combines low-level texture
segmentation with high-level object recognition. He seeks more effective
algorithms for sampling the posterior or making `near-MAP (maximum a posteriori
probability)' estimates by combining region growing and genetic algorithm ideas.
He also seeks to model the neurophysiology of the primate visual system, using
the insights gained by this statistical analysis. He continues the analysis of
cortical functioning based on single/multiple-cell recordings, especially with
models of cortical areas V1 and M1, based on information multiplexed via
synfire-like chains. The investigator believes that logic-based methods for
solving problems in artificial intelligence are reaching their limits and that
Bayesian statistics is the best tool for modeling how we think. The ability to
see, to transform raw measurements of light in a camera or on the retina into a
symbolic description of the world being seen, is an extremely challenging
problem for these methods. Vision is the perfect test case, especially, for
massively parallel computation because of the huge size of its data. In the last
5 years, the technology for processing the data streams produced by video
cameras in real time has become available and the challenge of building general
purpose computer vision systems may now be within reach. On the theoretical
side, the understanding of human and animal vision systems has complemented the
engineering of artificial vision systems in a remarkable synergy. In
neurophysiology, the possibility of massively parallel neural recordings is now
available and may lead to understanding how mammalian cortex uses parallelism so
successfully. This project seeks to attack the problem of vision from these two
perspectives.