* 9615808
* Mathematical Sciences:  Geometry of Algebraic Cocycles
* NONE,NONE
* 08/15/1996,07/31/1998
* Pawel Gajer, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Ralph M. Krause
* 07/31/1998
* USD 39,000.00

9615808 Gajer This project lies on the interface of algebraic topology,
differential geometry, and algebraic geometry. It is based on the investigator's
recent work, in which he successfully employed some classical constructions of
algebraic topology and differential geometry to reveal the geometric content of
ordinary cohomology as well as smooth and holomorphic Deligne cohomology. The
investigator plans to apply the ideas contained in his previous research on
Deligne cohomology to study the structure of the image and the kernel of the
cycle homomorphism. Some of the deepest and most important problems of
transcendental algebraic geometry concern the cycle homomorphism. The most
celebrated among these is the Hodge conjecture. Except for a few classes of very
special algebraic varieties, codimension one is the only codimension in which
complete cohomological and geometric descriptions of the image and the kernel of
the cycle homomorphism exist. The investigator intends to pursue extensions to
all codimensions of structures playing a central role in the codimension one
case. In particular, he introduces generalized exponential sequences and a new
cohomology theory that is conjecturally dual to Chow groups of algebraic cycles
modulo rational equivalence. The objective of this project is to verify that
conjecture. If this is the case, then the cohomology long exact sequence of the
generalized exponential sequence will induce a complete cohomological
description of the image and the kernel of the cycle homomorphism. Projective
varieties are geometric objects defined by means of polynomial equations. Like
other notions that arise in many important contexts and sound deceptively
simple, for example, the ordinary whole numbers, they possess properties that
are not at all obvious or easy to discover, and over the course of many years,
mathematicians have been led to develop elaborate algebraic machinery for making
computations concerning some of these properties. It is hard to remain in touch
with the geometric meaning of these computations, and this is what has given
rise to the current project. The investigator will attempt to understand a
geometric structure of what are known as algebraic cycles. This will be done by
extending some classical techniques of algebraic topology and differential
geometry to the context of algebraic geometry. One might say that at least this
one corner of algebraic geometry will be reintroduced to its roots. This will be
not only an esthetic triumph, but an aid to intuition and thus to further
discoveries and advances in mathematics and in the disciplines like theoretical
physics that make use of this mathematics. ***