* 9615305
* Evolution of Plant Competitive Performance in Different     Environments:  An Experimental Approach
* BIO,DEB
* 05/01/1997,10/31/2002
* Thomas Miller, Florida State University
* Standard Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 10/31/2002
* USD 260,000.00

9615305 Miller Competition is well known to affect growth and reproduction in
plants. Plants are thought to compete for a number of resources, including
water, nitrogen, and light. Such competition frequently suppresses plants to
less than 5% of their maximum possible growth, but exactly how plants compete is
relatively unknown. We therefore have even less idea of how important
competition has been in plant evolution and how we might expect plants to evolve
when in competition. This study directly follows the evolution of plants grown
under competition for different resources. Populations of wild mustard, Brassica
rapa, will be grown in competition with another species, Raphanus raphanistrum,
for three generations. Each generation, the plants that are "better" competitors
will be chosen to pass on a greater genetic contribution to the next generation
through both seeds and pollen. In this way, lines of plants will be bred to be
better competitors under specific environmental conditions. At the end of the
breeding, the selected lines will be tested to determine whether their
competitive ability did increase and to determine what characteristics of the
plants evolved. Determining how plants evolve in response to a major component
of their environment (competition) is scientifically important in providing
insight into both the evolutionary past and future plants. The results could be
used not only to explain why plants have their present characteristics, but also
to explain aspects of biodiversity by suggesting how groups of plants evolve.
Such information could be of great use to conservation biologists interested in
explaining or predicting where plants may or may not be successful. It also has
agronomic value: virtually all crop plants are grown under significant
competition, and this study could help reveal how crop productivity is related
to the evolution of competitive ability.