* 9616520
* Travel Support for U.S. Scientists in Activities of the     International Union of Geodesy and Geophysics (IUGG) and the International Union of Geological Sciences (IUGS)
* GEO,GEO
* 02/01/1997,05/31/2001
* Eugene Bierly, American Geophysical Union
* Standard Grant
* Louis B. Brown
* 05/31/2001
* USD 188,550.00

As scientific efforts continue to become more global in character, it is
increasingly important that U.S. scientists at early stages of their
professional careers be given the opportunity to participate in and contribute
to major international cooperative activities. For similar reasons, U.S.
scientists should be assisted when they assume leadership positions in the
organizations that facilitate such activities. This award will provide support
to assist early-career scientists to participate in assemblies of six unions of
the International Union of Geodesy and Geophysics (IUGG), and it will support
the work of a U.S. scientists serving as a senior official in the International
Union of Geological Sciences (IUGS). The six IUGG-related meeting for which
support will provided to assist in the participation of early-career U.S.
scientists are: a Scientific Assembly of the International Association of
Geodesy (IAG); the 8th Scientific Assembly of the International Association of
Geomagnetism and Aeronomy (IAGA); the 5th Scientific Assembly of the
International Association of Hydrological Sciences (IAHS); a Joint Assembly of
the International Association of Meteorology and Atmospheric Sciences (IAMAS)
and the International Association for the Physical Sciences of the Ocean
(IAPSO); the 29th General Assembly of the International Association of
Seismology and Physics of the Earth's Interior (IASPEI); and a General Assembly
of the International Association of Volcanology and Chemistry of the Earth's
Interior (IAVCEI). Thoughtful scientific agendas have been developed for all six
of these assemblies, and a selection process has been developed that should
permit an open competition among eligible early-career scientists as well as
fair and timely selection of funding recipients. Through their participation in
these meetings, U.S. scientists will have the opportunity to more effectively
link themselves and their institutions in major international collaborative
activities. Furthermore, U.S. leadership in IUGS activities will be maintained
through the provision of support for some IUGS-related international travel for
Dr. Robin Brett, a senior official of that important international organization.