* 9616350
* Late Adolescents in Transition:  Temperament, Stress, and   Social Support
* SBE,BCS
* 04/01/1997,03/31/1999
* Mary Levitt, Florida International University
* Standard Grant
* Steven Breckler
* 03/31/1999
* USD 35,929.00

Project Description. Based on the Convoy Model of social relations, this study
is designed to assess continuity and change in the individual's network of
relationships across the late adolescent transition. Specific aims are (a) to
assess changes within the adolescent's social network subsequent to leaving high
school, (b) to examine the impact of temperamental adaptability and situational
life stress on the post-transition network, and (c) to link functional changes
in the network to post-transition adjustment. A second wave of data will be
collected from an ethnically diverse sample of 745 students surveyed in 1995,
during their sophomore or senior year of high school. It is proposed that
alterations in the social network will be related specifically to the
transition, that lower adaptability and greater stress will compromise the
supportiveness of the post-transition network, and that network supportiveness
will play a significant role in adjustment. The results will enhance
understanding of social network evolution through developmental time. &&&
Project Justification. The transition from adolescence to adulthood may be the
most difficult period encountered normatively across the life span. Factors
associated with successful navigation of this important passage are the focus of
this research. Follow-up data will be collected from 745 adolescents who were
surveyed initially in 1995, during their sophomore or senior year in high
school. The goals are to map the changes that occur in the adolescent's social
support system subsequent to leaving school and to learn how changes in the
support system affect post-transition adjustment. Adolescents who generally have
greater difficulty adapting to changed circumstances and those with higher
levels of life stress are expected to have less optimal support systems and
poorer adjustment following the transition. This study is unique in its
inclusion of minority students and of `the forgotten half` of students who do
not attend college. The results will enhance our knowledge of the operation of
social support across crucial life transitions.