* 9616361
* RPG: Identity Processes Within Close Relationship Contexts
* SBE,BCS
* 04/01/1997,03/31/1999
* Jennifer Kerpelman, University of North Carolina Greensboro
* Standard Grant
* Steven Breckler
* 03/31/1999
* USD 17,997.00

Project Description. The proposed research will examine the active influence of
close relationship contexts on identity development processes. Identity control
theory provides a useful framework for examining identity microprocesses that
influence the maintenance and change of identity. Inputs to the identity control
system that shape individual identities include self-perceptions and personal
identity standards, as well as the responses of others to the individual's
behavior. Both laboratory and field settings will be used to consider the
measures used to assess identity standards and the other central components of
the identity control system. Research procedures that can best capture the
dynamic nature of identity processes will also be designed. A laboratory
procedure will be used to assess mutual identity shaping processes occurring
within a range of close relationship contexts. Specifically, planned identity
disruptions (i.e., challenges to currently held identity beliefs) will be used
as a means for initiating the identity control processes to be examined. This
examination will promote knowledge about how people contribute to the stability
and change of both their own identities and the identities of their close
relationship partners. A field setting will be used to assess identity
development as individuals and their relationship partners experience
transitions, such as the transition to work/college or the transition to
marriage. Identity processes will be examined at multiple points in time to note
linkages between identified identity processes and the subsequent identity
changes that occur as social role identities are formed and modified. The study
of identity processes in both laboratory and field settings will increase
knowledge about identity development, highlighting the important role that
parents and peers play in the facilitation of an individual's construction of
identity. %%% Project Justification. The proposed research examines how close
relationship partners, such as family members and friends, influence a person's
identity development. The findings from previous research indicate that identity
is formed through interpersonal relationships, and that parents and peers tend
to support individuals' self-conceptions -- both positive and negative.
Laboratory and field settings will be used to consider how identity shaping
processes occur in close relationships, and to determine what outcomes result
from these processes. A laboratory procedure will be used to assess identity
shaping processes occurring within a range of close relationship contexts (such
as parent-adolescent, dating partners, newly married spouses). A field setting
will be used to develop an approach that will make it possible to assess
identity development over time. People will be assessed at multiple points in
time to learn how interactions with others are linked to changes in identity
that occur as people acquire new social roles, such as paid work or marriage.
The study of identity processes in both laboratory and field settings will
increase knowledge about identity development, highlighting the important role
that parents and peers play in the facilitation of a person's construction of
identity. This research will also promote understanding of problems in identity
development processes and may have implications for how interactions within
close relationships can be improved to promote healthy identity development.