* 9616018
* Maintaining Power Quality During Voltage Sags, Using A NovelHigh-Frequency-Link Voltage Regulator
* ENG,ECCS
* 06/01/1997,11/30/1999
* Ned Mohan, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Marija Ilic
* 11/30/1999
* USD 103,957.00

ECS-9616018 Mohan Applications, Voltage sags are the most important power
quality problems facing the process industry. In modern industrial plants using
process-control computers, adjustable-speed drives, robotics, etc., even
momentary voltage sags can upset automated processes, resulting in loss of
product and production time, and requiring cleanup and recalibration to restart
the process. The power quality can be maintained during voltage sags by fast-
acting, solid-state voltage regulators which inject a voltage in series to
compensate for the sag in the phase voltage. Although cheaper than
uninturruptible power supplies complete backup during power outages, the cost of
voltage regulators have limited their application. Objective, The objective of
the proposed research is to investigate a novel voltage regulator based on
highfrequency-isolated cycloconverters which excels in the areas of cost,
efficiency, size and weigh More importantly, this research seeks to establish an
entirely new direction in power electronic converters for larger power and
voltage ratings, where standard modules with a high-frequency link can be
connected in series and parallel, eliminating costly and lossy line-frequency
transformers. These have numerous potential applications in power systems:
reactive power compensation using (STATCOM), active filters, interconnection of
photovoltaic, wind electric, and fuel-cell systems, interconnection of battery
and superconducting energy storage systems, and so on. Method, A novel voltage
regulator with a high-frequency link is proposed. It consists of a single
inverter for all three phases. Each phase has its own high-frequency transformer
and a cycloconverter. For reducing transformer leakage inductances, a co-axial
design and various magnetic core materials such as amorphous alloys and ferrites
will be examined. Potential Benefits, Success of the proposed approach could be
a significant step towards mitigating the deleterious effects of voltage sags.
The su ccess of this research could also lead the way to eliminate line-
frequency transformers in numerous power system applications. Proposed Research
Tasks, It is proposed to analyze and evaluate high-frequency-link based voltage
regulators. Various switching schemes, transformer designs such as co-axial
transformers, and magnetic materials such as amorphous alloys and ferrites will
be examined. A three-phase prototype will be built in the laboratory with a
rating of 7.5 kVA. Its extension to other applications will be evaluated.
Advancement of Knowledge and Technology, Since the proposed combination of the
high frequency link using co-axial, high frequency transformers and new magnetic
materials is novel, new discoveries are entirely possible which will be
beneficial to other applications.