* 9616691
* Expanding Linkages Between Under-Represented Minorities and Careers in Aquatic Sciences-III
* GEO,OCE
* 12/15/1996,11/30/1999
* Benjamin Cuker, Hampton University
* Continuing Grant
* Donald L. Elthon
* 11/30/1999
* USD 327,392.00

9616691 Cuker This project represents a renewal of an ongoing pioneering program
which seeks to increase the number of under- represented minorities electing
careers in aquatic sciences. The program targets minority students, faculty, and
professionals interested in aquatic sciences, as well as majority faculty
working at Historically Minority Colleges and Universities (HMCU's). The program
is run in conjunction with the American Society of Limnology and Oceanography
(ASLO)which provides program participants with free membership to the society
including a subscription to the societies Journal, "Limnology and Oceanography".
Participants apply through a formal process for participation in the program and
those selected are provided with travel and per diem support to participate in
the Annual ASLO meeting and to attend special pre-planning workshops.
Participants are strongly encouraged to present the results of any research
programs they are involved with both in the regular sessions and sessions
specifically organized for them. The present program will cultivate the further
development of past participants and incorporate new cohorts of students into
the process. Since the programs beginnings in 1990, it has supported 222
students and 16 faculty mentors. Through both proven and some novel approaches
this project will strengthen and expand the linkages between minority students
and the aquatic science community. ***