* 9616791
* Phase Transitions in Disordered Polymers and Gels
* NONE,NONE
* 01/01/1998,12/31/2000
* Toyoichi Tanaka, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing grant
* H. Hollis Wickman
* 12/31/2000
* USD 270,000.00

w:\decs\decs97\0formdec.doc Tanaka 9616791 This experimental and theoretical
project is devoted to study of the phases and phase transitions of various
disordered polymers and heteropolymer gels. Disorder in this context includes
disorder of sequences (when several monomer species are polymerized together,
with the sequence of monomers bearing some useful information), disorder of
branches, and topological disorder that is related to knots, links, and
entanglements. In experiment, it is intended to explore the phases and phase
transitions of various disordered polymers as controlled by both parameters such
as temperature, choice of solvent, etc, and also by the preparation conditions,
which control the degree of disorder. It is intended also to examine from the
point of view of design: (i) other types of disordered polymers, including
branched polymers, knots, and ; (ii) realistic degrees of compactness, when
density fluctuations are coupled to freezing and to design, providing for
flower- or micelle-type structures; (iii) realistic types of interactions,
including long-range Coulomb interactions; and (iv) states of partial
equilibrium, important for folding kinetics. In work on gels, the first goal is
to observe the freezing phase transition in a polymer gel. A second goal in this
area is to experimentally realize the idea of sequence design, to allow the
production of gels capable of freezing into a state which exhibits at least
certain elements of the desired conformation. This combined theoretical and
experimental study will shed light on basic physical principles behind phase
transitions of disordered polymers and gels, and will be of great potential
importance for the physics of these fascinating materials, as well as for their
applications in biology, medicine, and technology. %%% This experimental and
theor etical project is devoted to study of a class of materials known as
polymers, which are extremely long molecules composed of repeating chemical
units. The questions of interest relate to the degree of randomness or disorder
in masses of such material, and the conditions under which such material,
originally in a liquid state, can freeze and become rigid. Polymers in some
cases can be thought of as long flexible molecular strings, which, when
dissolved in a liquid solvent, resemble cooked spaghetti in water. This work
will include many other types of polymers, including those in which branches
occur, for example. One of the central questions in this work is to clarify the
conditions, for example, temperature, the type of solvent, and the type of
polymer molecules, which lead to a transition from a liquid to a rigid solid. A
somewhat similar, but irreversible, freezing transition for example occurs when
epoxy glue hardens, but the phenomenon is to be examined in this project in a
very fundamental and broad manner, leading to results which will be of
predictive value for a wide range of polymers and conditions. The utility of the
results of this work may include situations in biology and medicine, as well as
in technology. ***