* 9616887
* Ethnoarchaeology of Marine Foraging
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/1997,06/30/1999
* Eric Smith, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 06/30/1999
* USD 100,000.00

With National Science Foundation support Dr. Eric Smith and his colleagues will
conduct ethnoarchaeological fieldwork among the Meriam, a Melanesian group which
inhabits the three easternmost islands in the Torres Strait, southeast of Papua
New Guinea. The islands are surrounded by broad fringing reefs and deep waters
which are rich in both fish and shellfish. Although now Australian citizens and
increasingly reliant on store bought flour and rice, the Meriam still retain a
significant gathering and fishing component in their diet and devote
considerable effort to gathering shellfish from rocky shore and intertidal
areas. Dr. Smith and his colleagues will study the shellfish gathering
strategies employed. Although the project employs ethnographic techniques to
study present day people, the direct significance of the proposed research is
largely archaeological. Prehistoric coastal populations in many parts of the
world relied heavily on shellfish resources for food and shells are abundant in
many archaeological sites. Through analysis of such materials scientists attempt
to reconstruct the subsistence strategies of the inhabitants and to trace the
effects which prehistoric gatherers had on the landscape. Based for example on
decreasing shell size over time and increasing utilization of smaller species in
some parts of the world, archaeologists have postulated that overexploitation
occurred. However past work by project members among the Meriam has shown that
no simple and clear-cut relationship exists between observed collecting
practices and material remains which are ultimately deposited at camp sites.
Using a powerful body of theory which derives from optimal foraging, the
investigators will follow Meriam foragers and record subsistence behavior. They
will attempt to determine within this theoretical framework why particular
foraging decisions are made and what the material signatures of specific
behaviors are. The research is important for several reasons. It will increase
our understanding of how subsistence decisions are made among technologically
simple foragers. It will also provide scientists with a set of tools and
framework to aid in interpretation of the archaeological record in many parts of
the world.