* 9616453
* The Composition of Verb Meanings
* SBE,BCS
* 02/01/1997,10/22/1999
* Beth Levin, Northwestern University
* Continuing Grant
* Catherine N. Ball
* 10/22/1999
* USD 162,856.00

This proposal outlines a new stage in an ongoing research program being carried
out jointly by the PI and Professor Malka Rappaport Hovav (Bar Ilan University,
Israel). Its long-term aim is the development of a theory of what speakers of a
language know about the verbs of their language that allows them to be used and
understood properly. The PI's previous research, much of it NSF-supported,
revealed that this knowledge is highly structured and that general principles
could allow speakers to determine a verb's grammatical behavior from its
meaning. This earlier research also led to the identification of grammatically-
relevant elements of verb meaning, thus laying the groundwork for the
development of a theory of the composition of verb meanings -- the goal of the
proposed research. Such a theory must make explicit the exact components of verb
meanings, the principles which govern the combination of these components into
formal representations of verb meanings, and the principles that associate these
representations with the appropriate syntactic structures. This project
investigates the composition of verb meaning by combining previous research
results with insights derived from new empirical studies of the syntax-semantics
interface: explorations of regular verbal polysemy. In English certain verbs
show a range of meanings (e.g., sweep can describe an activity as in Terry swept
the floor , removing as in Terry swept the leaves off the walk , or putting as
in Terry swept the leaves into the gutter ); this phenomenon is regular in that
entire semantic classes of verbs show identical patterns of polysemy (e.g., the
surface contact verbs rub and wipe pattern like sweep ). Regular verbal polysemy
has been chosen as the research domain because preliminary studies show it to be
a rich source of insights into verb meaning, yet extensive, systematic
documentation of this phenomenon is still lacking. This project will fill this
gap through several detailed corpus-bas ed case studies of verbal polysemy.
These case studies will require documenting attested types of variations in verb
meaning, uncovering regular patterns of verbal polysemy, and identifying
constraints on possible verbal polysemy. The findings will then be used in the
formulation of an explicit theory of the composition of verb meanings that can
predict the range of meanings that a given verb can exhibit. The proposed
investigations into verbal polysemy will provide a deeper understanding of the
nature of verb meaning. This study is especially timely since in the recent
linguistics literature verbal polysemy, although not well-understood, has
repeatedly been argued to bear on the choice between two competing theoretical
models of verb meaning; the proposed research, by illuminating the nature of the
phonomenon itself, should contribute to the resolution of this controversy.
Since polysemy has proved a vexing problem to lexicographers, computational
linguists, psycholinguists, and researchers in child language acquisition, the
results of this research should also prove valuable to researchers outside the
theoretical linguistics community.