* 9616895
* Mathematical Sciences:  Conference on Finite Fields:        Theory, Applications and Algorithms; August, 1997;          Waterloo, Canada
* MPS,DMS
* 03/15/1997,02/28/1998
* Gary Mullen, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Sidney W. Graham
* 02/28/1998
* USD 7,000.00

9616895 Mullen This award provides support for a conference, "Finite Fields:
Theory, Applications, and Algorithms", to be held at the University of Waterloo
in August 1997. In recent years, there has been a resurgence of research in
finite fields due to the wide variety of applications of various theoretical
aspects of finite fields. Many exciting new theoretical results have been
obtained by a growing number of researchers worldwide, and many new applications
have been discovered. The purpose of this conference is to encourage interaction
among different groups of researchers, both theoretical and applied. The
organizing committee of the meeting consists of R. Mullin, I. Blake, S. Cohen,
G. Mullen, H. Niederreiter, C. Stewart, and S. Vanstone. Funds from this award
will be used to support U.S. graduate students, postdocs, and junior faculty
members who attend the conference. The theory of finite fields can be traced
back to Gauss and Galois. Finite fields have played central roles in research in
number theory and algebraic geometry. In the last few decades, it has become an
indispensable tool in diverse applications in areas such as coding theory and
cryptography. Coding theory enables the error-free transmission of data, and is
used, for example, in compact disks and computer drives. Cryptography is
essential for the secure transmission of data.