* 9616112
* Dissertation Research: Health and Occupational Status       in Reform Era China
* SBE,BCS
* 02/15/1997,01/31/1998
* Mark Nichter, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Stuart Plattner
* 01/31/1998
* USD 9,290.00

This project supports the dissertation research of an anthropology student from
the university of Arizona. The student is examining how Chinese women deal with
anxiety brought on by rapid modernization. Through interviewing a random sample
of 100 women from a diverse set of occupational status in Yunnan province, the
student will test the hypothesis that women with lower socio-economic status
experience more anxiety due to uncertainties about employment security. The role
of gender discrimination will also be analyzed as it affects women of different
social classes. The research will study how these social problems are expressed
through psychological symptoms and complaints, and how these symptoms impel
people to purchase both traditional and western medicines. Methods include
participant observation, formal interviews, the collection of daily health
diaries, life histories, and collection of material from the popular media
dealing with health, psychological and bodily symptoms. This research is
important because like other communist countries undergoing reform, rapid change
has been a source of tension in China. This project will advance our
understanding of the interplay between job security and status and
psychologically-related illnesses. Since rapid development has been shown to
negatively impact on women's status in many developing countries, increased
understanding of the health implications of status differences will be valuable
to planners who are creating programs to ameliorate the problems associated with
development.