* 9616118
* Industry/University Cooperative Research Center for         Nondestructive Evaluation: Request for Phase out Funding
* ENG,EEC
* 04/15/1997,02/28/1998
* Donald Thompson, Iowa State University
* Continuing Grant
* John C. Hurt
* 02/28/1998
* USD 25,000.00

9616118 Thompson This award provides two years of support for the phase down of
the Industry/University Cooperative Research Center at Iowa State University on
Nondestructive Evaluation. The center was started in 1985, and the National
Science Foundation support for these centers must be phased down after that
period support. The objectives of the center are: (1) to pursue industrially
relevant research in nondestructive evaluation problems of interest to the
industrial members, (2) to cooperate with academic units of the university in
promoting numbers of students in both undergraduate and graduate programs, and
(3) to establish a major national focal point for technology transfer in the
area of nondestructive evaluation. The research for the two year period includes
development and evaluation of a library of ultrasonic scattering models for
typical weld flaws; identification of model-based methods for extracting
features inherent weld flaw signals for use in classification and
characterization methods; demonstration of the capability of ultrasonic code for
characterizing and classifying weld defects. The center has 21 supporting
members (18 industrial + 3 government agencies and laboratories). Through the
efforts of the center, a minor in nondestructive evaluation is now offered in
the engineering curriculum at Iowa State University. The educational aspects of
the center, and the impact of the center on education of graduate and
undergraduate students is excellent. The interaction with industry is
outstanding, resulting in a high rate of transfer of important technology to
industry and governmental agencies and laboratories.