* 9616096
* Torres Strait Foraging and Reproductive Strategies
* SBE,BCS
* 07/15/1997,06/30/2001
* Eric Smith, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Stuart Plattner
* 06/30/2001
* USD 194,679.00

This project involves the ethnographic field research of three anthropologists
from the University of Washington in Torres Strait, Australia. The goals are to
study the link between reproductive strategies and subsistence among a tribal
society, the Meriam people, a maritime foraging-horticultural society with
minimal cash involvement. The research will test two models: the childcare
tradeoffs model which proposes that women's reproductive constraints shape their
subsistence strategies, and the social benefits model, which proposes that male
subsistence decisions often sacrifice household provisioning in order to enhance
status by sharing resources widely or demonstrating prowess and risk-taking.
Previous research has suggested that Meriam women choose less productive
resources due to risk aversion rather than childcare constraints, while men
choose less productive resources because of a seeming preference for greater
risk. The methods include generalized participant observation, and detailed
monitoring of the choices of women and men foraging with small children in
marine habitats. Detailed time-allocation, productivity, and exchange records
will be kept. This research is important because it will advance our
understanding of the consequences and causes of sexual division of labor through
the critical examination of some widely-held theories. The results should
illuminate the circumstance which might motivate men to seek a household
provisioning strategy rather than a status enhancing one.