* 9616776
* Collaborative Research: Ice-Core Analysis & Physical        Glaciology of the Galena Creek Rock Glacier, Wyoming
* GEO,EAR
* 04/15/1997,03/31/2001
* Noel Potter, Jr., Dickinson College
* Continuing Grant
* H. Richard Lane
* 03/31/2001
* USD 55,928.00

9616776 Potter We propose a comprehensive study of a rock glacier at Galena
Creek in the Absaroka Mountains, northwestern Wyoming, to determine the
potential of rock glaciers as sources for ice-core paleoclimate records. The
Galena Creek rock glacier is one of the most easily-accessible and well-studied
glaciological techniques to the Galena Creek rock glacier to determine mass
balance, flow characteristics, and internal composition and chemistry. Rock
glaciers are ubiquitous features in arctic and alpine regions, yet they have
been largely ignored by glaciologists, in part because of the widely-held belief
that they are essentially ice-cemented talus. We have demonstrated previously
that the Galena Creek rock glacier contains remnant glacier ice that can be
retrieved by ice-core drilling. Our project draws on the combined expertise of
two glacial-geologists (NP and DC) who have worked extensively with rock
glaciers, an ice-core geochemist (ES), and two glaciologists (WP and NH).
Geophysics work will include drilling of several boreholes (40-60 meters depth)
for deformation measurements, measurement of surface velocities, and retrieval
of ice cores. Ice cores will be analyzed for stable isotopes ((18O and (D),
electrical conductivity, and visual stratigraphy. Expected results of this work
include 1) improved understanding of the climatic context of rock glaciers and
2) evaluation of a new and potentially powerful source of ice-core paleoclimate
data.