* 9616342
* Infants' Individuation of Physical Objects
* SBE,BCS
* 05/01/1997,04/30/2001
* Alan Leslie, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Continuing Grant
* Jasmine Young
* 04/30/2001
* USD 230,754.00

9616342 LESLIE The human brain is sufficiently organized in the first year of
life to support the emergence of higher cognitive functions. One key function is
the recognition of physical objects in a changing environment. Existing research
shows that infants have impressive abilities in this regard. This project will
investigate the development of the cognitive mechanisms underlying this skill.
The approach will draw upon recent advances in understanding mechanisms of
visual attention in adults. A series of experiments will explore how infant
attention picks out and "holds onto" physical objects under a variety of
circumstances. The brain mechanisms underlying such skills are crucial for
learning about the world, for learning verbal labels, and for developing
numeracy. The ability to attend to physical objects requires that objects be
distinguished from one another. One way this can be done is to recognize that
two objects have distinctive features. Another way is simply to note that the
objects simultaneously occupy different locations in space. These simple
solutions do not always work (a) because objects can change the features they
present (e.g., with a change in viewpoint) and (b) because objects can move in
and out of view (e.g., by passing behind an occluder). For organisms that live
in a complex, moving, three dimensional world, such complex changes are the rule
rather than the exception. The problem that this creates for infants as they
track physical objects can be likened to a radar operator who has to track
"objects" on a radar screen. When two blips appear on different locations on the
screen, the operator can register the number and location of the objects and
track them continuously as they move across the screen. However, one of the
blips might move off the edge of the screen and after a short period another
blip might appear. Is this the same object as the one that disappeared? How many
objects should the operator report, two or t hree? The infant brain must
regularly face a similar dilemma because of gaze redirection, occlusions, and so
forth. Physical objects in the world do not have transponders to identify
themselves to the infant brain! Despite this, infants manage to identify and
track physical objects, learn verbal labels for them, and even to enumerate
small sets of objects. This project will investigate how infants first
individuate, then re-identify physical objects that from time to time pass
behind occluders. Experiments will measure how infants allocate their visual
attention to physical objects based on both locational and featural information
and on the integration of the two kinds of information. Experiments will also
determine what limit there may be on how many objects infants can track at any
one time. The results of these studies will reveal properties of early emerging,
and thus basic, brain functions that support learning and general cognitive
development. Longer term, such investigations will bear upon early brain and
cognitive development and education issues as well upon the design of artificial
systems that can behave intelligently in complex environments. ***