* 9616772
* Experimental and Theoretical Investigations of Organic      Reaction Rates and Mechanisms
* NONE,NONE
* 01/01/1997,12/31/1999
* Kendall Houk, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing grant
* Kenneth M. Doxsee
* 12/31/1999
* USD 579,600.00

Dr. Kendall N. Houk, of the Department of Chemistry at the University of
California, Los Angeles, is supported by the Organic Dynamics Program to carry
out experimental and theoretical investigations of organic reaction rates and
mechanisms. Using several levels of theory, but with particular focus on density
functional theory (DFT), Dr. Houk will examine a number of problems of chemical
and biological importance, including the femtosecond dynamics of pericyclic
reactions, the stereoselectivity and isotope effects in vinylcyclopropane-
cyclopentene rearrangements, the dynamics and anomalous activation parameters of
carbene rearrangements, and aromaticity and bond localization in cyclocarbons
and novel non-alternant polycyclic aromatics and anti-aromatics. Studies of the
origins of stereoselectivity in biradical reactions and of the use of DFT to
probe biradical surfaces will also be carried out. Explorations of biological
catalysis and transition structures in enzyme- and antibody-catalyzed reactions
will lead to the development of synthetic enzyme mimics. Theory and experiment
play symbiotic roles in chemistry - experiments lead to new observations,
theoretical work is often required in order to develop an understanding of these
observations, and the resulting theories then often lead to proposals for
additional experimentation in order to test their validity. Professor Houk and
his collaborators will direct theoretical and experimental studies toward the
elucidation of a number of central reaction processes in organic and biological
chemistry, including the complex issue of how enzymes effect chemical
transformations. These studies will lead not only to a fundamental level of
understanding of these important processes, but also to the discovery of new
reaction chemistry predicated on the theoretical findings. The studies of
biological systems, for example, will lead to the development of synthetic
enzyme equivalents, compounds designed and synthesized to effect chosen
molecular transformations in a highly selective manner.