* 9616482
* International Conference on External Possession and Related Noun Incorporation Phenomena, Eugene, OR, Sept. 7-10, 1997
* NONE,NONE
* 02/15/1997,01/31/1999
* Doris Payne, University of Oregon Eugene
* Standard Grant
* Paul G. Chapin
* 01/31/1999
* USD 38,500.00

This international conference brings together expert scholars to investigate a
set of language structures referred to as External Possession and certain Noun
Incorporation phenomena found around the world. These constructions have been
largely relegated to "esoteric idiosyncrasies" of particular languages, but they
in fact challenge most proposed theories of syntax. This is because features of
the sentences involved fail to correspond with supposed features of the verbs
involved in those very sentences. Thus, these constructions constitute limiting
cases for any adequate theory of syntax and natural language. The conference
will include expert scholars in syntax, lexicon, verb structure, semantics, and
psycholinguistics, in an effort to get as holistic and comprehensive a view of
the phenomena as possible. Scholars have been explicitly chosen who we believe
can talk and listen well together across the major theoretical divides in the
field. Additionally, scholars who have explored these constructions in a wide
range of languages (Native North, Central, South American; IndoEuropean
including Romance, Germanic, and Slavic; African including Nilotic, Bantu;
Australian; Cinitic among others), and who can talc about particular data in
depth, will be included. The conference will be held at the University of Oregon
from September 7 through 10, 1997. Following the conference, an edited volume
will disseminate significant findings. This will be the first volume on external
possession phenomena, and will contain substantive articles bearing on
theoretical advances in the understanding of verbal argument structure, syntax,
typology, language processing, and cognition. In bringing together field data on
the one hand, with theoretical and psychological models which do not yet account
for them on the other, the project will help set the stage for new research
agendas in both psycholinguistics and theoretical linguistics.