* 9616559
* Dissertation Research:  Steatite Production on Santa        Catalina Island:  Issues of Specialization
* SBE,BCS
* 11/01/1996,10/31/1998
* Jeanne Arnold, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 10/31/1998
* USD 8,592.00

Under the direction of Dr. Jeanne Arnold, MS Virginia Howard will collect data
for her doctoral dissertation. She will conduct archaeological excavations on
Santa Catalina Island, located off the California coast to gain insight into how
production of steatite vessels developed and changed over time. Steatite is a
soft rock which is relatively easy to shape by simple technological means. It
was a valued object which served a number of purposes in prehistory and was
fashioned into beads and containers. Because prehistoric inhabitants of the
island and adjacent coastal regions lacked pottery, steatite vessels served a
particularly important function. Production of such objects was limited
primarily to Santa Catalina Island because of the high quality raw material
sources located there. Archaeological evidence indicates that production and
trade with the adjacent mainland began as early as 1,100 AD and that the
character of the items produced changed over time. By the late prehistoric
period it appears that production focused on large ceremonial vessels which
indicate the presence of a internally differentiated stratified society. This is
a condition extremely uncommon among hunter and gatherer groups. MS Howard
wishes to understand how production of steatite vessels changed over time and
whether it developed in a way which characterizes early food producing societies
where such activities shifted from individual households into the hands of part
or full time specialists. In past work she has located a number of quarries on
Santa Catalina, developed a tentative chronology of them. On the basis of
preliminary data she has also tried to understand how production changed over
time. However her sample is small and is based almost solely on surface
materials. With National Science Foundation support she will conduct excavations
at a number of quarry sites. This should yield information on chronology and
also provide a sample of associated tools used in manufacture as well as
production debris. With this information MS Howard will reconstruct changing
production technology over time and gain some insight into the social context in
which this occurred. This research is important for several reasons. It will
provide insight into the degree of social complexity obtained by prehistoric
hunters and gatherers. It will provide data of interest to many archaeologists,
increase our understanding of United States prehistory and assist in training a
promising young scientist.