* 9616843
* Microsatellite Analyses of Mammalian Dispersal              and Inbreeding
* BIO,DEB
* 02/15/1997,01/31/2002
* Peter Waser, Purdue Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Elizabeth Lyons
* 01/31/2002
* USD 373,875.00

9616834 WASER The proposed research will develop, test and apply new molecular
genetic techniques to questions of basic and applied importance for animal
populations. The genetic techniques are based on a new form of DNA
fingerprinting using "microsatellites", short, highly-variable components of DNA
common to all animals that can identify parentage as well as the population from
which an individual comes. The study species, the banner-tailed kangaroo rat, is
chosen to take advantage of an extensive long-term data base on birth, death and
migration rates. Field methodology is proven and the species is not currently
endangered. Thus kangaroo rats will be used as a model to answer general
questions; the results are expected to be widely applicable to other mammals.
The goals of the project fall into two categories. First, methodology will be
tested to estimate the rates of movement of animals between isolated small
populations. Rates of movement between fragments of suitable habitat determine
such basic population characteristics as within-population genetic variation and
between-population differentiation. Movement rates also have important applied
consequences related to the conservation of wild populations, since dispersers
can "rescue" declining populations and spread important genetic variation. It
has also been recognized recently that some apparently healthy wild populations
are actually "sinks", maintained only by immigrants from other populations. As
yet, there is no economical way to measure interpopulation dispersal rates or to
determine which populations are the "sources" that are most important to
conserve. Second, the rates and consequences of inbreeding in natural
populations will be determined. Inbreeding is widely believed to be deleterious
in animals as it is in humans, but few data exist on the degree to which wild
animals inbreed, on the mechanisms they might use to avoid it, or on how
deleterious it actually is. Genetic techniques will allow identification of pa
rentage, thus detecting inbreeding when it occurs and comparing the survival
rates of inbred and outbred animals. The results will contribute both to basic
understanding of the conditions under which inbreeding occurs in nature and to
the ability to conserve small populations that are thought to be especially
vulnerable to inbreeding problems.