* 9616312
* Emergency Curation of the Endangered University of Miami Ichthyological Collection at the Florida Museum of Natural  History
* NONE,NONE
* 03/01/1997,07/31/2003
* Carter Gilbert, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Poston Muriel
* 07/31/2003
* USD 168,213.00

9616312 Burgess & Gilbert The collection of fishes from the Tropical Atlantic
Biological Laboratory was divided in 1972 between the collections of the Florida
Museum of Natural History and the University of Miami, the latter institution
chose to divest itself of the collection and the Florida Museum chose to adopt
it, thus reuniting the Tropical Atlantic Biological Laboratory collection. This
award provides supplies and personnel to emergency-curate these specimens to
ensure their longevity. Overall, the process of adoption of this orphaned
collection has been funded by a partnership of institutions and agencies. The
divesting institution (University of Miami) provided support for the transport
of the collection from Miami to Gainesville, the National Biological Service
(now the Biological Resources Division of the USGS) and the State of Florida
provided funding for computer cataloging of the collection, and the Florida
Museum of Natural History has provided funds for leasing storage space for the
collection while new collections space in the Museum itself is being constructed
and renovated. In addition, the Museum has put in place a plan to replace the
current curator of fishes upon his retirement, as well as to hire a collection
manager for the fish collection not only for the duration of this project, but
permanently. The NSF investment in this multi-partnered, leveraged project is
for of student assistance, and in curatorial equipment and supplies. The
objectives of this project are to with newly printed labels that have a Florida
Museum accession number, and completely computer catalog the adopted collection
to a standard equivalent to the existing Florida Museum collections. This work
will be carried out by the student workers and the new collection manager, who
will be supervised by the PI. At the end of the project, the Florida Museum fish
collection, which is currently ranked as the second most important National
Center for ichthyology, may well have achieved International Ce nter status.