* 9616454
* Effective Parenting Practices and the Resilient Social      Competence of Low-Income Preschoolers
* SBE,BCS
* 05/01/1997,04/30/2000
* Cybele Raver, Cornell Univ - State: AWDS MADE PRIOR MAY 2010
* Standard Grant
* Steven Breckler
* 04/30/2000
* USD 215,980.00

Project Summary. Poverty has a strong negative impact on children's
socioemotional development, through the mediating process of acute life stress
and parents' concomitant use of harsh and coercive disciplinary practices.
Although these grave, negative consequences of poverty have been identified, it
is less clear what mechanisms underlie economically disadvantaged parents'
positive socialization of young children's optimal self-regulatory skills. Given
that behavioral problems associated with emotional dysregulation may have their
etiologies early in childhood and that approximately 25% of American children
under the age of 6 live in poverty, it is particularly important to identify
parental efforts that may protect young children from developing these
difficulties. This study tests the relations between positive parenting,
children's development of emotional self-regulation skills, and children's
social competence among 180 low-income families, using a prospective,
longitudinal design. Specifically, parents' positive emotional socialization
practices are hypothesized to be predictive of preschoolers' skills in
effectively regulating their own emotions during delay-of-gratification tasks, 8
months later. Preschoolers' emotion regulation skills, in turn, are hypothesized
to be predictive of concurrent ratings of sociometric status by peers and both
concurrent and longitudinal ratings of competence, externalizing behavior and
internalizing behaviors, by preschool and Kindergarten teachers. In addition,
because recent research suggests that low attentional control and high negative
emotionality influence young children's encounters with parents and peers, the
moderating role of these dimensions of temperament will also be tested. %%%
Project Justification. Children's healthy development is considerably threatened
by poverty: recent research suggests that young children in poverty show greater
social and emotional difficulties than their middle-income counterparts, and
that these difficulties persist throughout the school years. Because
approximately 25% of American children under the age of 6 live at or below the
poverty line, the deleterious consequences of poverty are of particularly
pressing concern. It appears that it is not income itself, but the cumulative
effect of the multiple risks associated with poverty, including harsh and
punitive parenting, that is associated with these grave, negative childhood
outcomes. Yet it is not known what the mechanisms are that underlie
economically-disadvantaged parents' positive socialization of young children's
resilience. In this light, sensitive, nurturant caregiving may represent a wise
investment made by parents facing financial disadvantage. This longitudinal
research aims to take a first step in this direction by mapping out the specific
mechanisms that link 1) positive steps parents take to socialize young
children's regulation of their emotions, 2) preschoolers' skills in effectively
regulating their emotions without adults' help, and 3) preschoolers' social
competence in the classroom.