* 9616686
* MRPG:  Long Term Effects of Residential and School Crowding on Children's Cognitive and Social Development
* SBE,BCS
* 05/15/1997,12/31/1999
* Lorraine Maxwell, Cornell Univ - State: AWDS MADE PRIOR MAY 2010
* Standard Grant
* Steven Breckler
* 12/31/1999
* USD 46,904.00

This is a Research Planning Grant to study the long-term and cumulative effects
of exposure to crowding on children's social and cognitive development. A
considerable body of research has demonstrated the negative consequences of
crowding in the home, in school, and in child care settings. These effects often
carry over from one setting (e.g., the home) to another setting (e.g., school).
However, longitudinal studies have not been done to understand the effects of
children's exposure to crowding in multiple settings over varying periods of
time. This study will include three variables related to crowding: residential
density, school density, and the amount of time (both over a 24-hour period and
number of years) spent in high density settings. New York City public schools
will be the site for this project. Children from low density and high density
homes who attend crowded and uncrowded schools will be included. Children will
be followed for a period of four to five years, and will be assessed on a number
of behavioral and cognitive outcome measures. During the planning period, data
collection instruments will be refined and a Parenting Booklet will be prepared.
This research will contribute to the body of knowledge about how crowding
affects human behavior and development, and may help to identify interventions
that promote healthy social and cognitive development.