* 9616852
* Metallaborane Chemsitry. Synthesis of New Main Group Transition Element Cluster Types
* NONE,NONE
* 04/01/1997,09/30/2000
* Thomas Fehlner, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* John Gilje
* 09/30/2000
* USD 383,000.00

Dr. Thomas P. Fehlner, Department of Chemistry, University of Notre Dame, is
supported by the Inorganic, Bioinorganic, and Organometallic Program of the
Chemistry Division for the synthesis of new clusters containing both main-group
and transition-metal atoms. The project is a three pronged investigation. The
first part will explore the chemistry of chromaborane and related clusters where
electron delocalizion can occur throughout the cluster network. The chemistry of
these compounds will be used to define the reactive sites on the clusters, which
will then be related to the clusters' electronic structure. Second, efficient
synthetic routes, which begin from known monocyclopentadienyl metal complexes,
will be developed for dimetallaboranes containing a wide ranging of metals.
Thirdly, these dimetallaboranes will be used as ligands to low valent metal
fragments in order to form polymetallic species where a transition metal cluster
serves as a complex ligand. The chemistry of the transition metals when combined
with carbon containing substituents is the basis of the vast field of
organometallic chemistry. Research in this area has led to many advances in pure
and applied chemistry. This project aims to open a related area in which
transition metals are combined with units containing boron. Preliminary results
indicate that these `metallaboranes` will possess an extensive chemistry that in
some ways resembles organometallic chemistry, but in other ways is very
different. In this investigation new combinations of boranes and transition
metals will be prepared and their chemistry investigated. The new compounds will
express the unique aspects of their electronic structures in new kinds of
reaction chemistry.