* 9616190
* Collaborative Research:  A Molecular Investigation of       Trade-Offs and Evolutionary Stability in a Simple           Competitive Ecosystem
* BIO,DEB
* 10/15/1996,09/30/2000
* Daniel Dykhuizen, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Mark Courtney
* 09/30/2000
* USD 239,995.00

9616190 Dykhuizen Two competing species, each a winner on a single substitutable
resource, may coexist when both resources are available. Will there be a
sympatric divergence of the two species, each specializing on its preferred
resource, or will one evolve to replace the other? Because mutation is a
stochastic process, many believe that the adaptive divergence of populations is
irreproducible: if the tape of life is rerun, the evolutionary outcome will be
dramatically different. Drs. Dean and Dykhuizen propose to distinguish these
hypotheses experimentally using replicated populations of clonal bacteria.
Because the strains are almost genetically identical, the ecological question of
sympatric speciation becomes congruent with the genetic question of the
evolution of specialization through trade-offs. Part 1 will establish two
strains of E. coli harboring two different lactose operons and competing for two
alternative galactosides. This study will test the prediction, made from a
knowledge of biochemistry (a bottom up approach), that the two strains will
coexist only within a certain range of ratios of the two alternative
galactosides. Part 2 investigates the evolutionary dynamics of coexistence.
Long-term chemostat experiments (a top-down approach) will allow adaptive
mutations to accumulate in each strain. These experiments are designed to
address: 1) whether trade-offs at the molecular level force specialization on
particular resources; and, 2) whether increasing specialization (or increasing
generalization) perturbs the initial equilibrium frequencies or leads to
competitive exclusion (i.e. only one strain wins).