* 9616638
* Mechanisms of Cleaning Organic Films from Solid Substrates  using Aqueous and Organic Solvents
* ENG,CBET
* 04/15/1997,03/31/2000
* Ruben Carbonell, North Carolina State University
* Continuing Grant
* Robert M. Wellek
* 03/31/2000
* USD 180,007.00

ABSTRACT CTS-9616638 C. Grant/ P. Carbonell NC State The main objective of this
work is to obtain fundamental insight into cleaning mechanisms in order to
develop environmentally benign cleaning alternatives. Experiments will yield
kinetic information about the removal of organic films from rotating disks using
aqueous nonionic surfactant solutions in conjunction with organic solvents. Such
kinetic information gives insight into the mechanism of cleaning processes.
Because of the inherent immiscibility of the aqueous and organic phases, it is
possible to partition the contaminant into the organic phase. This enable the
aqueous phase to be recycled, reducing the total volume of cleaning waste
generated. Both phases can bne analyzed to gain further insight to the stability
of the resulting emulsion and the surfactant interactions with the organic
sovent. Prior to work by our group has allowed better understanding of the
mechanism for abietic acid film removal from rotating disks using micellar and
submicellar aqueous nonionic surfactant solutions. From prior work, it was
discovered that cleaning occurs by a three stage process. The first state is
controlled y the solubilization of the organic phase through surfactant
penetration and subsequent mass transfer from the interface to the bulk aqueous
solution. During the first stage, the film absorbs water from the aqueous
solution reducing its viscosity, until drops start to move on the disk surface
under the action of shear forces. These drops aggregate into spiral-shaped
continuous rivulets through which the organic phase flows until it comes off the
disk edge. Such behavior occurs during the second stage of cleaning, which has a
rate of removal appreciably faster than the first stage. The rivulets eventually
break, leading to a third stage with lower removal rates, in which the removal
mechanism is apparently the roll up of organic phase drops under the action of
shear forces. Photographs showing the morphology of the film structure in the
different cleaning stages provide experimental evidence that supports the
described mechanism. A model was derived that relates the empirical observations
of cleaning rates to physical parameters describing solubilizing film
hydrodynamics. The proposed research will investigate the combined rates of
hydrodynamics, dissolution, and partitioning in the removal of two contaminants:
abietic acid and polybutene form different solid substrates(i.e., exopy-glass
laminate, copper, nickel). This work will also study the phase separation
behavior of the contaminated effluent in an effort to recycle the cleaning
solution. Our research will be unique because an organic solvent will be used in
conjunction with an aqueous nonionic surfactant solution allowing for reuse of
the aqueous cleaning solution. The proposed research will be carried out in
collaboration with CORPEX Technologies, Inc. in Research Triangle Park, NC
through the NSF GOALI program. CORPEX Technologies manufactures cleaning
solutions that are combinations of surfactants and organic solvents. Preliminary
experiments conducted at CORPEX Technologies have determined that the addition
of an organic solvent to an aqueous solution will increase the rate of cleaning
when used with surfactants. In addition, once cleaning is complete the organic
solvent can be phase separated from the aqueous solution. The organic
contaiminant (i.e.,grease or oil) partitions into the organic phase, leaving a
very clean aqueous solution. This minimizes waste water generation and produces
only a small amount of organic waste. In prior work exclusively with aqueous
based cleaners, the amount of contaminant removed from the rotating disk was
continuously measured as a function of time in the bulk cleaning solution using
a UV absorbance detector. With the addition of an organic solvent, however, the
cleaning solution becomes turbid. As a result, optical techniques such as UV
absorbance can not be used. To circumvent t his problem, radioactive tracers
will be mixed with the organic contaminant. This contaminant will be spin coated
onto the disk to form a uniform film. During cleaning experiments, an on-line
liquid scintillation analyzer will be employed to continuously detect the amount
of contaminant removed from the disk. The heterogeneous scintillation analyzer
created scintillation by passing the sample over solid beads as opposed to
mixing with a liquid cocktail. The fundamental cleaning information obtained by
this project will assist CORPEX Technologies in its continuing development of
environmentally friendly cleaning solutions. The majority of the experimental
work will be done at NCSU. However, the close proximity to CORPEX will enhance
the technical interaction and enable a rapid transfer of technology from NCSU to
CORPEX.