* 9616797
* Tailored Interfaces with Amphiphilic Polymers
* ENG,CBET
* 09/15/1997,08/31/2001
* Matthew Tirrell, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Robert M. Wellek
* 08/31/2001
* USD 600,000.00

ABSTRACT CTS-9616797 This proposal aims to explore the structure and Properties
of adsorbed layers of block copolymers in which one block is a nonadsorbing
polyelectrolyte and the other block is an adsorbing hydrophobic block. the
objective is to learn how to create layers of polymers on substrates in aqueous
environments that confer useful properties on the solid interfaces. Properties
of interest might include adhesion, friction, particle and cellular deposition,
surface charge, swelling, hydration and hardness. The technological areas that
this work will influence range from aqueous dispersions of particles, as in
printing and coating, to biointerfaces, arising in biomaterials, drug delivery
and biotechnology. The proposed work will be based on the synthesis of several
series of hydrophobically modified polyelectrolytes corresponding to the above
description. The synthesis will be controlled to produce systematic variations
of well-defined molecular weights in each of the blocks, and with a variety of
chemical species enabling controlled changes in segment hydrophilicity, linear
charge density, populations of quenched vs. annealed charge sites, molecular
architecture and chain flexibility to be explored. Careful investigation of the
solution preparation methods and properties is an essential feature of this
work, since we anticipate that the properties of the surface layers can be
strongly affected by the nature and history of the solutions from which they are
prepared. Adsorption of these molecules will be conducted under varying solution
conditions and will be followed in real time by in situ ellipsometry, supported
by exploratory studies of the layers by neutron reflection and related methods.
Properties of these layers, and additional structural information will be
obtained by direct measurement of forces of interaction between the layers using
the surface forces apparatus. Frictional forces between the layers will be
studied via a lateral force measurement attachment t o the surface forces
instrument. At the conclusion of this proposed work, we will have developed a
body of data enabling the predictive design of aqueous interfaces decorated with
polymeric amphiphiles. We will determine how the adsorption of these polymers
depends on molecular structure and solution properties, and, how an adsorbed
layer of a certain molecular weight and chain density behaves with respect to
normal and frictional force interactions. The understanding of these properties
will require an improved knowledge of polyelectrolyte physics, to which this
work will contribute, as well as providing a body of data useful to engineers
involved in the development and processing of soft materials and complex fluids.