* 9616955
* 1997 National Science Foundation Design and Manufacturing   Grantees Conference; Seattle, WA; January 7-11, 1997
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/1996,09/30/1997
* Tony Woo, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* george hazelrigg
* 09/30/1997
* USD 189,048.00

*** 9616955 Woo This award is to conduct the annual National Science Foundation
Design and Manufacturing Grantees Conference. The conference will involve
researchers from the Division of Design, Manufacture and Industrial Innovation,
the Division of Engineering Education and Centers, the Division of Electrical
and Communication Systems and the Mechanics and Materials Program in the
Division of Civil and Mechanical Structures, located within the Directorate for
Engineering, the Division of Information, Robotics and Intelligent Systems,
located within the Directorate for Computer and Information Science and
Engineering and manufacturing related projects in the Division of Materials
Research, located within the Directorate for Mathematical and Physical Sciences.
The conference ensures that the individual researchers are informed about the
ongoing activities of their colleagues. An elimination of duplication of their
efforts may be achieved and a degree of cooperation may result from this
activity. An overall improvement of efficiency of the research activity could be
expected. In addition, the conference program organization allows for ample time
to discuss manufacturing research in detail with the collective research
community at the meeting, with feedback to and input from the National Science
Foundation. Finally personal contacts between the grantees and program directors
in the Divisions should contribute to clarifying many current issues in their
work. The aims of the conference are to enhance communication between
researchers, encourage joint research, promote synergism, and develop networks
for technical interchange. Attendees to the conference gain an early access to
the information disseminated. ***