* 9616392
* The Olympics MPEG-II Traffic Library
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/1996,08/31/1998
* Randal Abler, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Dwight D. Fisher
* 08/31/1998
* USD 44,261.00

This is a Small Grant for Exploratory Research (SGER) to measure, archive and
distribute MPEG II video traffic from the 1996 Summer Olympics. The objective is
to create a library of traffic signatures that can be used by the research
community. Potential uses of this library are in 1) resource management studies
(e.g., scheduling and call-admission control), 2) compression algorithms, and 3)
video storage and retrieval performance. The MPEG-II library will be
supplemented with approximately two hours of Graphics and Visualization traffic
(slightly over one GByte) collected over the Graphics, Visualization and
Usability Center's network on their January 18, 1996 demonstration day. Together
they should add to the networking community's traffic database on emerging
multi-media applications. Recent traffic studies indicate that slowly-decaying
auto-correlation functions and heavy-tailed marginal densities in input traffic
have a significant impact on queue length statistics at a multiplexor. Further,
variable bit-rate video applications have shown to exhibit slowly decaying auto-
correlation functions with Gamma/Pareto marginals. Protocols and systems need to
exist in the environment and need to be built for this environment. Generating
representative workloads is, therefore, an important step towards effective
resource management.