* 9616663
* Two Dimensional Parallel Signaling an Detection Techniques  With Applications To Volume Optical Memories
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/1996,08/31/2000
* Keith Chugg, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Rodger E. Ziemer
* 08/31/2000
* USD 186,761.00

A parallel two-dimensional memory (i.e., one that stores and retrieves 2D pages
(arrays) of digital data) represents a fundamentally different memory
architecture. This 2D parallel architecture has the potential for capacity and
speed performance which is orders of magnitude beyond the expected physical
limits of traditional lD storage architectures. A volume optical memory is a
system which stores data pages within a three dimensional optical medium. These
systems have the potential combination of large storage capacity (&gt; 10^l2
bits/cm^3), high speed random access via massless scanning (&lt;10 ns), and very
large data transfer rates (&gt; 10^10 bits/sec) owing to the 2D
storage/retrieval of data.. Direct application of conventional communication
theoretic techniques to 2D parallel memories is complicated by the truly 2D
nature of the data format. In addition, a volume optical memory implementation
typically results in a storage channel with very complex noise and interference.
Factors contributing to the operating environment include (I) the intensity
transformation and subsequent spatial averaging of the coherent optical signal
as a result of optoelectronic conversion, (ii) non Gaussian noise sources such
as shot and speckle, and (iii) complex data dependent interference sources such
as inter-page crosstalk and space variant intersymbol interference within a
given page. This research program is concerned with signaling, equalization, and
decision schemes as they apply to parallel 2D data channels, with specific
consideration given to coherent (holographic) volume optical memory systems. One
objective of this research program is to develop the theoretical foundation for
signaling and detection in 2D digital communication systems. Another objective
is the application of this theory to develop robust, implementable signaling and
detection techniques for volume optical memory systems. The plan for achieving
these objectives is based on the development of relatively simp le models of the
volume optical memory system to be used for development and analysis of specific
signaling and detection algorithms. Performance bounds for the optimal detection
strategies, as well as efficient algorithms for their realization, will be
sought in the data detection phase of the research. Simple, suboptimal data
detectors which exploit the 2D nature of the data format will also be developed
and their performance characterized relative to that of the optimal detection
rule. The signal design component will be concerned with error correction coding
for use with 2D asymmetric channels, precoding techniques for combating data-
dependent interference within and between pages, pixel profile optimization
using simple optical masks, and novel signaling strategies for non-Gaussian
channels. The third component involves the creation of a sophisticated
simulation engine for the evaluation and refinement of new signaling and
detection methods. This simulation engine will capture the detailed physical
characteristics of volume optical memory systems and will facilitate measuring
the performance and robustness of these novel 2D approaches in a real-world
environment.