* 9616757
* CISE Research Instrumentation: Visually Servoed             Micromanipulation
* CSE,EIA
* 02/01/1997,07/31/1998
* Bradley Nelson, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Rita Rodriguez
* 07/31/1998
* USD 60,017.00

9616757 Nelson, Bradley J. University of Illinois at Chicago CISE Research
Instrumentation: Visually Servoed Micromanipulation The research projects
supported by this award address a potential technology barrier to the commercial
success of MEMS devices by theoretically and experimentally investigating
micropart manipulation of rigid and deformable objects. The equipment provided
by this award, high performance computing hardware for image processing and
computer graphics, microforce sensors, micro positioning devices, and high
resolution optics, are an important part of the following projects: Visually
Servoed Micromanipulators for Automatic Assembly and Packing of MEMS Devices-
Sensor-Based Manipulation of Deformable Objects and Microstructures The first
investigates and develops visually servoed micromanipulators including
development of a real-time task representation defined in terms of geometric
object models of rigid objects, sensor models, and the microphysics of
micromanipulation. The latter investigates and develops a real-time task
representation defined in terms of deformable object models of rigid objects,
sensor models, and the microphysics of micromanipulation. The projects pursue
experimental and theoretical analyses that illuminate the similarities and
differences between sensor-based manipulation in macro and micro domains. The
realization of successful micromanipulation strategies contributes to the
development of automatic assembly machines for assembling and packaging future
MEMS devices that require increasingly complex assembly strategies.