* 9616765
* Defeat Frames and Social Movements
* SBE,SES
* 06/01/1997,11/30/1999
* Kim Voss, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Patricia White
* 11/30/1999
* USD 101,772.00

This is a study of social movements. It is designed to advance our theoretical
and empirical understanding of development and decline by systematically
assessing the impact of cultural elements on collective action. This research
will investigate the impact of one important aspect of movement culture, the
"frame" used to interpret setbacks and defeat. It asks whether the explanations
and interpretations activists give for social movement defeats help to preserve
the commitment, organization, and solidarity of participants. %%% These issues
are explored by examining the British "new union" movement of the late
nineteenth and early twentieth centuries. This movement, which began in the late
1880s, attempted to build a broad-based and politically progressive labor
movement. There were two waves of militancy, one which occurred in the late
1880s and early 1890s, and the other which occurred in the years preceding World
War I. In the first wave, a period of explosive growth and heightened strike
activity was followed by setbacks and defeat. In the second wave, a new burst of
organizing and strike activity culminated in permanent organizational and
political gains. %%% These two waves will be examined to determine whether or
not the "lessons" or narratives that activists constructed to explain strike
failures in the first wave had any effects on the longevity of local unions or
workers' actions in the second wave. Both qualitative and quantitative analysis
will be employed. First, using newspaper accounts and union records, failing
strikes will be examined to find out whether activists interpreted strike
defeats, and if so, what interpretations were used. Second, using event history
methods, data on union longevity will be analyzed to assess whether the use of
defeat frames increased the probability of local union survival. Third, using
strike statistics for the second wave of the new unionism, an analysis of strike
participation rates will be done in order to investigate the effects of defe at
frames on later strike militancy. Fourth, a few communities will be chosen for
more intensive qualitative examination. %%% This research is one of the first
systematic efforts to empirically evaluate the impact of a cultural product
--defeat frames-- on the development of social movements. It is also one of the
few studies to focus on the development and decline of social movements, rather
than on their emergence.