* 9616396
* Collaborative Research on Learning Technologies:            Digital Portfolio Archives in Learning:  Modelling Primary  Content Transformation for Science Education
* CSE,EIA
* 10/01/1996,09/30/1998
* Anthony Maddox, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Stephen Mahaney
* 09/30/1998
* USD 49,945.00

9616396 Gilland-Swetland, Anne University of California - Los Angeles
CISE/EHR/ENG/MPS Collaborative Research on Learning Technologies Program:
Digital Portfolio Archives in Learning: Modeling Primary Content Transformation
for Science Education The University of California, Los Angeles has been awarded
funding in the amount of $49,945 for a 12 month planning grant to develop a
process model that (1) transforms primary sources into digital library content;
(2) allows teachers to build personalized information systems or "Digital
Portfolio Archives" (DPAs) that contain content and associated descriptions
derived from the digital library, together with other relevant materials that
teachers wish to incorporate; (3) enables students to incorporate components of
teachers' DPAs, and (4) facilitates the optional incorporation of these DPAs
back into the digital library, but as a distinct layer of user-created content
distinguished to provenance. Content for the base digital library will be drawn
from the seven archival, manuscript, and museum repositories at UCLA. The
development and testing of the DPA process model builds on the work of, and
feeds into several educational and technological initiatives underway at UCLA,
including cross-disciplinary collaborations with the Smithsonian Institution,
the Los Angeles County Museum of Art, and Special Collections at the UCLA
University Research Library. This planning grant will generate: (1)
generalizable processes for structuring digital libraries and enriching content
descriptions that meet the needs of primary content creators, providers, and
non-traditional users such as teachers and students; (2) knowledge of how
teachers might select primary content and integrate it into classroom activities
if it were digitally accessible; and (3) knowledge of how digitized primary
sources might contribute to the enhancement of students' understanding of, and
engagement in, the health and natural sciences.