* 9616975
* Tree-Ring Data from Subantarctic Forests:  Indices of       Southern Hemisphere Atmosphere-Ocean Climate Variability
* GEO,AGS
* 02/01/1997,07/31/2000
* Edward Cook, Columbia University
* Continuing Grant
* Steven M. Colman
* 07/31/2000
* USD 235,761.00

Abstract ATM-9616975 D'Arrigo, Rosanne Columbia University, Lamont-Doherty Earth
Observatory Title: Tree-Ring Data from Subantarctic Forests: Indices of Southern
Hemisphere Atmosphere-Ocean Climate Variability This award supports the
development of high-resolution, precisely- dated tree-ring chronologies from
data-sparse subantarctic regions, including Tasmania, New Zealand and southern
South America. Such records are essential for development of a network of
Southern Hemisphere paleoclimatic data comparable to that now available for the
Northern Hemisphere. The subantarctic chronologies are utilized in modeling and
reconstruction of indices of temperature and atmosphere-ocean circulation for
the southern extratropical latitudes. The scientific team will 1. develop ring-
width and maximum latewood density chronologies for subantarctic forest sites;
2. extend the paleotemperature records further back in time; 3. produce
chronologies from several tree species; and 4. model and reconstruct temperature
and circulation indices for subantarctic latitudes. The information gleaned from
this project will improve our long-term (centuries to millennia) perspective of
natural and recent (possibly anthropogenic) climatic variability for a region of
the Southern Hemisphere with very sparse instrumental and paleoclimatic data
coverage.