* 9616417
* Observation and Analysis of the Structure of Tornadoes by   Means of High Resolution Data from Mobile Doppler Radars and Photogrammetry
* GEO,AGS
* 04/15/1997,09/30/2000
* Joshua Wurman, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Stephan P. Nelson
* 09/30/2000
* USD 149,878.00

9616417 Wurman The Verification of the Origins of Rotation in Tornadoes
Experiment (VORTEX) was held in the Central U.S. during Springs of 1994 and
1995. The objectives of VORTEX were to further our understanding of
tornadogenesis, tornado dynamics, storm environment relationships, and numerical
prediction of severe tornadic storms. Data was collected from a variety of
sensors including aircraft, ground based surface stations and upper air sites,
and radars. Several of these sensors were stationary, but many were mobile, thus
the scientists were able to intercept and follow a large number of tornadic
storms. Data collected from a mobile 3-cm Doppler radar and video during the
VORTEX and during a smaller scale data collection effort during 1996 will be
used by the Ppincipal Investigator to study the detailed structure of tornado
vortices. The radar data were obtained with unprecedented resolution at
distances ranging from 2 to 12 km for eight separate tornadoes. Two of the radar
data sets were of very large tornadoes at a ranges of about 3 km with resolution
volumes of 60 x 60 x 75 m. One of the data sets is of a large but relatively
mild tornado at 30 x 30 x 75 m resolution. These radar data sets along with
extensive video and photographic footage will be used to document detailed
tornado structures and evolution as depicted from radar reflectivity, Doppler
winds, and photogrammetry. ***