* 9617342
* Magnetic Resonance Imaging and Spectroscopy of              Laser-Polarized Noble Gases for Biomedical, Geophysics and  Materials Science Investigations (Collaborative Research)
* ENG,CBET
* 09/15/1996,08/31/2000
* Mitchell Albert, Brigham & Women's Hospital Inc
* Standard Grant
* Janice M. Jenkins
* 08/31/2000
* USD 516,766.00

9617342 Albert The emerging technology of the magnetic resonance of laser-
polarized noble gases helium and xenon (3He and 129Xe) will be used in a three
year program of biomedical, geophysics, and materials science investigations. A
multi-institutional and multidisciplinary investigation will be conducted
jointly by researchers at the Smithsonian Astrophysical Observatory, Cambridge,
Massachusetts and Brigham and Women's Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts. A
subaward will support materials research at the North Carolina State University,
Raleigh, North Carolina; another will provide support to Boston University for
biomedical engineering studies associated with the project. Potential biomedical
applications include the characterization of lipid membrane integrity (e.g. in
the diagnosis of multiple sclerosis); improved in vivo lung imaging (important
for early tumor detection); and better measurement of blood flow to tissue
(important for stroke and ischemia diagnosis). In geophysics and materials
science, magnetic resonance measurements of laser- polarized noble gas may
improve the understanding of the connectivity of pores in rocks, the structure,
evolution, and theology of foams and emulsions; and the diffusion of gases
through liquid crystalline polymer films. Specific aims of the proposed research
using laser-polarized noble gas magnetic resonance are: I) perform biomedical
studies of noble gas magnetic resonance imaging as a new tool for human disease
diagnosis and research; ii) investigate the connectivity of pores in reservoir
rocks; iii) investigate the structure and evolution of model foams and
emulsions; iv) investigate the rheology of model foams and emulsions under
stress or strain; v) investigate defects in liquid crystalline polymer films;
vi) train graduate and undergraduate students as multidisciplinary researchers;
and, vii) develop a computer-simulation teaching module for use by undergraduate
and high school students to investigate ho w basic principles of physics are
applied to lasers and magnetic resonance to yield serendipitous applications in
biology, medicine, geology, and materials. ***