* 9617465
* CISE Reasearch Instrumentation: A Data-Intensive DistributedComputing System
* CSE,EIA
* 02/15/1997,01/31/1999
* Clement Yu, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Frederica Darema
* 01/31/1999
* USD 120,000.00

9617465 Solworth, Jon A. Lobo, Jorge University of Illinois at Chicago CISE
Research Instrumentation: A Data-Intensive Distributed Computing System As ever
larger data sets--both structured and unstructured--are created and digitized,
new techniques are need to better store, organize, and access this data. This is
challenging since mass storage subsystem performance has increased slowly
relative to processor performance and because data is usually distributed over
computers which communicate using high-speed networks. Hence, new storage
optimization techniques are needed for both performance and availability. This
research instrumentation grant facilitates acquiring a system consisting of
workstations with very large experimental disk and tape capacity, communicating
over very high speed networks to empowered research in the following projects:
-Persistent Object Store System- Dynamically Distributed Replication
Experiments-Picture and Video Retrieval by Contents System-Distributed Database
Processing System Experimental evaluation of realistic data-intensive
applications and systems will thus be enabled. The equipment will be used to
construct a picture and video retrieval by contents application enabling large
video archives to be queried by characteristics. A distributed deductive
database system targeted initially at answering protein data bank queries
enables rule-based data analysis. These applications exist in prototype form and
will now be scaled to realistic sized systems, enabling better understanding of
performance and semantics. Complementing these applications is system research
on constructing large scale object stores and distributed replication of data.
This systems research would enable the construction of higher performance, more
flexible stores while easing the programming burden.