* 9617710
* Private vs. Public Expressions of Prejudice
* SBE,BCS
* 04/15/1997,09/30/1998
* Alan Lambert, Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Steven Breckler
* 09/30/1998
* USD 30,000.00

Project Description. A great deal of research conducted over the past 50 years
has demonstrated that stereotypes can have a powerful influence on peoples'
behavior toward, and memory for, individual group members. In almost all of this
work, however, participants are placed in relatively private settings, such that
their responses are either confidential or completely anonymous. Although such
methodological approaches have been used with considerable success in the
development of precise models of stereotyping, this focus potentially leads to
the development of theoretical models that may not necessarily generalize to
other kinds of judgmental contexts. A central goal of the proposed research is
to articulate the different processes that potentially guide stereotype use,
depending on whether these stereotypes are activated in relatively private vs.
public settings. The proposed research employs a number of methodological tools,
such as response time measures, judgment, and recall. The proposed research also
manipulates judgmental context: participants are informed that their impressions
are confidential (private context), or that they will be discussing their
judgments of the target person with one or more other people (anticipated public
contexts). This program of research is expected yield a greater understanding of
when, why, and how people express or suppress their stereotypes and gain insight
into the automatic and controlled processes that mediate such effects. %%%
Project Justification. Psychologists have long been interested in how members of
privileged, dominant groups (e.g. Whites) use their stereotypes about racial
minorities or other disadvantaged groups (e.g., Blacks) as a basis for reacting
to a single member of the group. Although previous research has generated many
valuable insights, most of this past work has studied stereotyping in relatively
artificial settings. In particular, participants in this research are nearly
always placed in private (anonymous) situations in which other people will not
know how they respond to the minority person. Although such situations have the
advantage of carefully controlling the nature of the judgmental setting, these
kinds of studies are not able to address how people might use their stereotypes
in more `social` (i.e., public) settings. The goal of the present research,
therefore, was to better understand how people go about using their stereotypes
in different ways, depending on the nature of the situational context at the
time of judgment. This program of research is expected to yield greater insights
into when, why, and how people go about using their stereotypes in relatively
naturalistic contexts.