* 9617232
* Metal-Oxide Based Solids and Clusters
* MPS,CHE
* 02/01/1997,01/31/2001
* Jon Zubieta, Syracuse University
* Continuing Grant
* Re-Entered for CGI Processing
* 01/31/2001
* USD 335,000.00

This award in the Inorganic, Bioinorganic, and Organometallic Chemistry Program
continues support for research on synthesis of complex metal oxides by Dr. Jon
Zubieta of the Chemistry Department, Syracuse University. Organic components
will be introduced using hydrothermal methods to form unusual solids of four
general types: microporous solids with zeolite scale cavities; layered mixed-
valence transition metal oxides containing organo-ammonium cations; vanadium and
molybdenum oxophosphates containing covalently-bonded organic ligands; and
vanadium oxides containing coordination complexes. These open-framework and
layered structures will be prepared by low-temperature methods based on the
model of biomineralization. While systematic synthesis of such materials has
been elusive, the long-term goal of this research is to enable `design` of two
classes of metal oxides: layered and zeolitic oxovanadium and oxomolybdenum
phosphates and organophosphonates, and layered and three-dimensional vanadium
oxides and molybdenum oxides. Metal oxide based solid phase compounds are
important in catalysis, sorption, molecular electronics, energy storage, optical
materials, and ceramics. Variations in chemical composition and structure effect
a wide range of properties. New synthetic approaches to introducing organic
groups are expected to result in compounds with an expanded range of properties
by compensating charge, directing structural growth, or connecting functional
groups.