* 9617778
* Workshop on Plant Dispersal and Migration in Response to    Climate Change: An IGBP-GCTE Focus 2 Workshop, October      16-22, 1996, Canberra, Australia
* GEO,OCE
* 10/01/1996,09/30/1997
* Herman Shugart, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* H. Lawrence Clark
* 09/30/1997
* USD 30,000.00

A critical set of issues confronting researchers examining the causes and
consequences of global change is the dynamics through which plants might migrate
in response to changes in climatic and other conditions. Although the general
tendency of plants to migrate is readily evident in the long-term historical
record, more focused studies of the dynamics of plant community change have only
begun to address many important questions. As a result, considerable
uncertainty, contradictory evidence, and divergent opinion exists among
researchers. In order to better coordinate the activities of leading researchers
from many different nations in dealing with this and related topics, the Global
Change and Terrestrial Ecosystems (GCTE) project has been established as a core
project of the International Geosphere-Biosphere Programme (IGBP). CGTE leaders
have identifies four major research foci. One of these areas (Focus 2)
emphasizes Ecosystem Structure, including ecosystem changes like plant
migrations. GCTE leaders have chosen to identify areas of agreement,
disagreement, and uncertainty related to plant dispersal and migration related
to global change by convening a workshop in Batemans Bay, N.S.W., Australia, in
October 1996. In addition to bringing together more than three dozen leading
researchers from ecology and related sciences, the workshop will result in a
major scholarly paper synthesizing the current state of knowledge related to
plant dispersal and migration in response to changing climatic conditions.
Summaries of the major conclusions and recommendations of the workshop also will
be reported in a number of newsletters and posted on the GCTE site on the WWW.
This award will provide support to enable more scientists from the U.S. and
other nations to participate in the workshop. Support for the workshop also is
being provided from other sources, including the Electrical Power Research
Institute (EPRI), the U.S. Forest Service, and local sources in Australia.
Through this award, agencies that participate through the Subcommittee on Global
Change Research in the coordinated management of the U.S. Global Change Research
Program will provide support for this important research activity. The funds for
this award have been provided by NSF and the National Aeronautics and Space
Administration.