* 9617121
* SGER:  Popularizing Neural Processes:  A Project to Place anOptoelectronic Neural System in every Wallet
* ENG,ECCS
* 03/01/1997,02/28/1999
* Bahram Javidi, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* Usha Varshney
* 02/28/1999
* USD 50,000.00

9617121 Javidi Artificial neural networks mimic biological neural systems and
are characterized by massively interconnected processing elements called
neurons. The processing is performed by training and adjusting the strength of
the interconnection between neurons. Neural network systems are ideal for
solving problems that are difficult to describe mathematically. Even though
neural networks hold a great promise for solving complex computational problems,
they have not been utilized extensively in day-to-day applications, and their
application has been limited mainly to military projects. Widespread
commercialization of neural network would greatly benefit the field and would
make available more funds for R&amp;D. Development of a practical, low-cost
optoelectronic neural system that would take advantage of the computational
potential of neural networks would facilitate further commercialization of both
neural network and optoelectronic technology. Recent research has discovered new
hardware and software for an application for face recognition and other
biometrics that is both uniquely suited to exploit the characteristics of neural
processing and has the potential for widespread commercialization. This proposal
aims to develop a compact, low-cost optoelectronic processor to implement a
neural system for face recognition. Face recognition and classification is a
difficult task because the facial appearance is constantly changing due to
different head perspectives, facial expressions, different illuminations, hair
styles, etc. The face recognition problem requires storing a large data base of
facial features to successfully implement the massive interconnection between
the neurons required to classify facial images. The proposed system can use
optical recording materials such as photopolymers to store the large facial data
base for an individual on an ID card, such as a driver's license. For
inspection, a live image of the person carrying the card is displayed on an
optoelectronic device and is compared to the facial features stored in the
photopolymer film on the card. This comparison is performed by an optoelectronic
neural chip which carries out the computation necessary for an accurate
classification. For additional security, the facial features can be optically
encrypted by phase encoding to prevent reproduction of the ID cards by
unauthorized people 5 . One of the advantages of the proposed system is that
using optical materials, large amounts of facial information can be stored on a
relatively small area, fitting easily on the card. Also, the facial information
is read out in parallel by light beams which can perform parallel computation on
large arrays of data, and therefore the recognition can be performed in a short
period of time. Neural algorithms will be developed to provide reliable face
recognition methods. Challenges are in the area of producing very low
probability of error algorithms, low-cost input-output devices to display the
information, and compact optical systems architectures and designs. We propose
to use a nonlinear filter based optoelectronics neural networks associated with
a supervised perception learning algorithm for real-time face recognition. The
first layer is implemented optically using a nonlinear joint transform
correlator (JTC) 2-4 and the second layer is implemented electronically because
of the small number of the hidden layer neurons. The system is trained with a
sequence of input facial images and is able to classify an input face in real-
time. Based on the characteristics of the nonlinear JTC, the proposed system has
the following features: it is easy to implement optically and is robust in terms
of system alignment; the system can be integrated into a low-cost compact
prototype; the system is trained by updating the reference images (weights)in
the input which can be stored in electronic or optical memories and no filters
or holograms need to be produced; using nonlinear transformation in the Fourier
plane, the system is robust to ill umination variations of the input image, has
a good discrimination sensitivity and is robust to noise; and the system is
shift invariant. The processor may use commercially available opto-electronics
devices and can be built as a low cost compact system. Computer simulations and
optical experimental results will be performed to determine the probability of
error of the system in identifying input facial images. By using time
multiplexing of the input image under investigation, we hope that using more
than one input image, the probability of error for classification can be reduced
to zero. ***