* 9617820
* Electronic Dissemination and Support of the Integrated      Public Use Microdata Series
* SBE,SES
* 04/01/1997,03/31/2001
* Steven Ruggles, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Cheryl Eavey
* 03/31/2001
* USD 209,762.00

This award supports electronic dissemination of the Integrated Public Use
Microdata Series (IPUMS). The project is partially funded by NICHD. The IPUMS is
the world's largest public-use demographic database, containing approximately 69
million records for the U.S. census over a period of 140 years. The development
of the World Wide Web (WWW) is transforming the nature of electronic data
dissemination just as the proliferation of fast personal computers and UNIX
workstations has revolutionized data analysis. This project capitalizes on both
of these developments by making the largest and most powerful population
database readily available for analysis on desktop machines. The project is
composed of two complementary elements. The first entails the development of a
data extraction system for use on the WWW. The interactive Java-based extract
system will incorporate a variety of advanced features enabling researchers to
customize their data extracts. The second element of the project involves the
translation of the IPUMS documentation into hypertext format to facilitate
navigation. The system will be designed in coordination with leading data
archives and population centers at the Universities of Michigan and Wisconsin.
The population centers of both of these universities have agreed to support the
extraction system indefinitely. Moreover, these institutions, together with the
Inter-University Consortium for Political and Social Research, will provide
advice on the design and implementation of the system. This project will be a
key multi-disciplinary resource in the research infrastructure of the social
sciences. The significance of the proposed project is not limited to the support
and dissemination of the IPUMS; it can serve as a model for the distribution of
microdata more generally. DÃŸ