* 9617297
* Mineralization of Organic Matter and Dissolution of CaCO3 atthe Deep Sea Floor
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/1997,08/31/2001
* Richard Jahnke, Skidaway Institute of Oceanography
* Continuing grant
* Donald L. Rice
* 08/31/2001
* USD 364,676.00

9617297 Jahnke Knowledge of the factors that control dissolution of CaCO3 and
hence, preservation, is critical to the interpretation of the CaCO3 sedimentary
record and to the prediction of the linkages between sedimentary CaCO3 , ocean
chemistry and processes, and future climates. Recent results indicate that
several aspects of CaCO3 dissolution, especially dissolution driven by the
metabolic production of CO2 in sediment pore waters, are poorly constrained.
This has been demonstrated by: 1. regional variations in the extent of metabolic
dissolution observed in in situ benthic flux chamber incubations, 2. the lack of
significant change in the rate of dissolution calculated from in situ pore water
studies across the saturation horizon, and 3. the presence of aragonite in
surface sediments that are overlain by undersaturated bottom waters. Two of the
three regions, the Cape Verde Plateau, Ontong Java Plateau and Cape Hatteras
continental rise, that have been studied previously will be revisited to further
constrain CaCO3 dissolution mechanisms. Specifically, fine- scale pore water
samples at in situ temperature and pressure will be analyzed for Ca2+ and trace
metals. These results will augment the data sets already obtained for these
regions previously. In addition, in situ benthic flux chamber incubations will
be conducted to: 1. examine whether chamber artifacts have influenced previous
results, 2. determine if fine-scale pore water Ca2+ gradients support present
dissolution models and agree with chamber measurements, 3. examine whether other
acid base reactions are influencing predicted metabolic dissolution rates, 4.
assess variations in the mineralogy and reactivity of the carbonate phases
between the study sites, and 5. determine whether exchange reactions at the
carbonate mineral surface can account for the variations in metabolic
dissolution observed. ***