* 9617321
* CISE Research Instrumentation: Equipment for Real-Time      Interaction with Images
* CSE,EIA
* 01/15/1997,12/31/1998
* Anil Jain, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Frederica Darema
* 12/31/1998
* USD 65,934.00

9617321 Stockman, George C. Jain, Anil K. Michigan State University CISE
Research Instrumentation: Equipment for Real-Time Interaction with Images This
research instrumentation grant enables the purchase of equipment to be used in
the following research projects: -Self Organization for Vision-Based Learning,
Databases and Content-Based Retrieval, Modeling , Tracking, and Interpretation
of Human Faces. Research is being performed in vision-guided robotics, visual
learning, organizing and accessing databases of images and modeling and tracking
human faces. Key elements of the research include - investigation of systematic
methods for automatic learning over multiple tasks including navigation and
object recognition, -organization of imagery for fast access using integrated
features such as shape, texture, and color, and -modeling and storage of objects
for fast recognition and real-time tracking. Advancement in the research
projects depends critically on the new instrumentation which will provide the
capability to interact in real-time with both sensed images from the environment
and images stored in memory. A steerable camera system will be used for
experiments in navigation, hand-eye coordination and tracking of hands and faces
for gesture recognition. RAID disk memory connected to two powerful workstations
will provide for large and fast storage for two simultaneous experiments which
may be storing or searching video images or performing real-time model-based
tracking. We anticipate that our research projects will yield several benefits,
including improved man-machine interaction, better access to image databases,
and better methods for learning automatic recognition procedures needed in many
practical problems.