* 9617754
* NSF/DARPA DDFRP:  Reduced Instruction Design for Solid      Freeform Fabrication
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/15/1997,05/31/2001
* Duane Storti, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* george hazelrigg
* 05/31/2001
* USD 736,289.00

This award supports research to enhance the application and use of solid
freeform fabrication (SFF) through the development of a language for the
separation of the design and fabrication functions. SFF is an emerging
technology that enables the rapid fabrication of a nearly unrestricted range of
geometrically designed parts. This research addresses three topics: (1) the
development of a reduced instruction functional specification language
consisting of a basic voca`ulary for specifying functional performance and
mechanisms for combining primitive elements of this vocabulary to produce
complete system specifications; (2) a synthesis methodology to generate design
descriptions satisfying functional requirements that will bring together the
conception, geometric abstraction, idealization, mesh generation, simulation,
and optimization stages of design in a unified concurrent framework; and (3) an
encapsulated interchange format for the digital interface between design and
fabrication. The successful completion of this research would greatly enhance
the emergence of SFF technologies. These technologies could provide
substantially enhanced capability to designers, particularly by expanding the
range of designs that can be fabricated, and they would significantly reduce the
time to market for new products. These advances would greatly improve the
competitiveness of U.S. industry.