* 9617358
* Experimental Studies of Strategic Sophistication and        Cognition in Normal-Form Games
* SBE,SES
* 03/01/1997,06/30/2001
* Vincent Crawford, University of California-San Diego
* Continuing Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 06/30/2001
* USD 237,089.00

This project investigates the extent to which peoples' behavior in games
reflects their attempts to predict others' decisions by taking their incentives
into account. (These games are interactive decision problems in which each
person's rewards may depend on others' decisions as well as his own, so that a
person's best decision may depend on his predictions of others' decisions.) This
notion, called `strategic sophistication`, is of primary importance in
predicting the outcomes of economic, political, and social interactions. Not
surprisingly, it is also a central issue in theoretical analyses of strategic
behavior. The leading theoretical frameworks treat it very differently:
Noncooperative and cooperative game theory take the degree of strategic
sophistication to be unlimited, while evolutionary game theory and adaptive
learning models take it to be nonexistent or severely limited. The persistence
of such disparate theoretical treatments suggests that questions about strategic
sophistication are unlikely to be resolved by theory alone. Empirical analysis
requires tight control of preferences and information, which seldom occurs
naturally in the field but which can be achieved in laboratory experiments.
Experiments have an additional advantage for studying sophistication, which has
not yet been fully exploited. Sophistication is an aspect of cognition, which
usually must be studied indirectly, by drawing inferences from the model that
best describes observed behavior. However, Camerer, Johnson, and their
collaborators have developed methods to study cognition via subjects'
information search patterns in `extensive-form` games--games in which peoples'
decisions are represented in sequence, as in a decision tree. Their results
suggest that appropriately designed experiments make it possible to study
sophistication more directly. Camerer and Johnson's designs exploit special
features of the extensive-form games they studied, but the Mouselab software
they developed also makes it possible to present games in `normal form` -- as
payoff matrices or tables in which subjects can look up their own and others'
payoffs for the different possible combinations of decisions as frequently as
desired, one at a time. The experiments in this project use Mouselab to study
strategic sophistication in normal-form games. There are close connections
between game-theoretic analyses of behavior in extensive- and normal-form games,
but their cognitive foundations are very different. The different presentation
and processing of payoff information in normal-form games make it possible to
explore aspects of sophistication that do not come into play in extensive- form
games. The main goals are to test noncooperative game theory's cognitive
implications, and to learn whether deviations from them help to predict the
occurrence and nature of deviations from the theory's behavioral implications.
The experiments should yield cognitive insights complementary to those of
Camerer and Johnson, and shed new light on strategic behavior. The proposal
concerns experiments to be designed and conducted in collaboration with Miguel
Costa Gomes, a graduate student at the University of California, San Diego, and
Bruno Broseta of the University of Arizona.