* 9617070
* Dissertation Research:  The Emergence of Prehistoric        Pastoralism in Southern Ethiopia
* NONE,NONE
* 12/15/1996,05/31/1998
* Steven Brandt, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Dennis H. O'Rourke
* 05/31/1998
* USD 11,997.00

Under the direction of Dr. Steven Brandt, Mr. Girma Hundie will collect data for
his doctoral dissertation. In past fieldwork he has located a series of
archaeological sites in the Yabello region of southern Ethiopia and in his NSF
supported project will return to conduct extensive excavation as well as
additional survey. Yabello is located north of the Kenyan border in a transition
zone between the Southern Ethiopian highlands to the North and low-lying East
African plains to the South. Preliminary data suggests that this area served as
an entryway to the South and an understanding of its prehistory may shed
important light on the introduction of both new peoples and new substance
technologies into this latter region. In a series of rock overhangs Mr. Hundie
has recovered from the surface and upper levels of in situ deposits ceramics as
well as faunal remains and worked stone tools which may, based on preliminary
tyupological analysis, span tens of millennia. The walls of one of these
shelters contain rock paintings. Mr. Hundie will conduct test excavations in
several shelters to determine the cultural sequence and depth of deposits. On
this basis he will select one for more extensive excavation. Flotation will be
employed to recover plant remains. Lithics, ceramics and fauna and radiocarbon
samples will also be collected and a geological analysis performed. With these
data it should be possible to trace the changes from a hunting and gathering to
succeeding Neolithic way of life. One can thus determine when domestic animals
first entered the region and the cultural mechanism responsible for this
introduction. Mr. Hundie will also conduct a surface survey to locate early
pastoral material which should provide insight into early pastoralist social
organization. Archaeological data demonstrate that animal domestication occurred
in several centers in the Old World and that livestock such as cows, sheep and
goats spread from these central sources. While it is clear that East Africa did
not constitute one of these areas, domesticates may have been introduced as
early as 6,000 years ago. However the date is not well established and neither
the route nor mechanism known. It is not clear whether people were relatively
sedentary and livestock alone spread from group to group or whether substantial
human and livestock movement occurred together. Through analysis of such
situations archaeologists can gain insight into the principles which underlie
culture change and transmission. Several models have been postulated for East
Africa yet solid data do not exist to verify or refute any of them. Mr. Hundie'
research will address this question. The work will be of interest to many
archaeologists and provide basic data on a little known part of the world. The
project will also assist in training a promising young scientist.