* 9617530
* CISE Research Instrumentation: Three Projects in            Applications and Programming Environments for Cache-        Coherent Distributed Memory Machines
* CSE,EIA
* 01/15/1997,12/31/1998
* Jeremiah Ostriker, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Rita Rodriguez
* 12/31/1998
* USD 185,000.00

96-17530 Singh, Jaswinder Ostriker, Jeremiah P Princeton University CISE
Research Instrumentation: Applications and Programming Environments for Cache-
Coherent Distributed Memory Machines The instrumentation grant will fund a
cache-coherent distributed shared memory multiprocessor. The equipment will be
used for several research projects in computer science and engineering,
including: Parallel Applications and Programming Environments for Computational
Astrophysics. 2. Parallel Applications and Programming Environments for Protein
Structure Determination.3. Parallel Workloads for System Evaluation, and Their
Implications for Software and Hardware Systems. The first interdisciplinary
project is focused on developing parallel algorithms and implementations for
computational cosmology on this new, important class of architectures, and on
developing integrated programming environments-with real user feedback-to
facilitate their use. The environments include programming language extensions,
run-time systems, and performance feedback tools. The second project, a
collaboration with Professors Altman and Levitt at the Stanford University
School of Medicine, has a similar focus in a different application domain. The
last project includes broadening the SPLASH benchmark suites, the most widely
used suite for such systems, into emerging application areas and server
workloads. The method of work will be to develop applications and environments
locally on this machine, and perform production simulations and scalibility
studies on larger machines at NSF supercomputer centers. Local, dedicated access
to the equipment is clearly critical to all aspects of the research.