* 9617799
* Does Banking Structure Matter?  Quantifying the Development and Impact of Universal Banking in the German               Industrialization
* SBE,SES
* 03/15/1997,02/28/2002
* Caroline Fohlin, California Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 02/28/2002
* USD 165,037.00

961799 Fohlin The purpose of this project is to provide new evidence on the role
of universal banks in Germany during the nineteenth and early twentieth
centuries, and, more generally, to shed light on the ability of financial
intermediaries to promote economic growth and development in the modern context.
Economists and historians have long suggested that financial institutions play a
vital role in industrial development, and the German universal banks of the
Kaiserreich (1871-1914) are often singled out as the prime example. These banks
joined short-term commercial lending with long-term investment banking and are
thought to have fostered long-term relationships with the industrial firms they
financed. By combining functions and developing close ties with industrialists,
German banks are thought to have improved the efficiency and strength of
investment and, in turn, to have accelerated industrialization. The hypothesis
underlying this study is that many of the characteristics considered integral to
the German banking paradigm emerged well after the main spurt of industrial
growth and that the corporate finance system taking the German form was neither
sufficient nor even necessary for industrialization. By examining the German
case in detail, and by drawing international and intertemporal comparisons at
each stage, this study promises to yield a wide range of insights into questions
of both modern and historical relevance.