* 9617116
* Dissertation Research:  Tropical Monodominance: A Test of   Mechanisms Which Promote and Maintain the Dominance of      Gilbertiodendron dewevrei
* BIO,DEB
* 05/15/1997,04/30/1999
* Phyllis Coley, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Margaret Palmer
* 04/30/1999
* USD 10,000.00

9717116 Coley Monodominant forests are unusual communities in the lowland
tropics, but their origin and maintenance is not well understood. This study
tests a number of mechanisms that may allow Gilbertiodendron dewevrei to form
monodominant forests in eastern Zaire. The first hypothesis is that
ectomycorrhizae (fungal-plant root symbioses) are important to the origin and
maintenance of these extensive, monodominant forests. Secondly, to test the
hypothesis that Gilbertiodendron competitively excludes other species by
creating an inhospitable environment. This study will determine if mixed-forest
species are unable to establish in the Gilbertiodendron forest because they do
not encounter their appropriate, vesicular-arbuscular mycorrhizal fungi.
Furthermore, a number of other mechanisms will be tested (e.g. deep leaf litter,
shade and low nutrient availability) by which Gilbertiodendron could exclude
mixed-forest species from the monodominant forest. This study will conclusively
test a number of mechanisms for monodominance and provide preliminary tests of
other potential mechanisms. This study is important because an understanding of
monodominant forests is essential to our understanding of the processes
controlling lowland tropical tree diversity. Finally, it appears likely that no
single character will explain monodominance. The proposed multifaceted analysis
should provide the first empirically supported framework for understanding the
origin and maintenance of tropical monodominant forests.