* 9617897
* Acquisition of High Resolution Magnetometer
* GEO,EAR
* 02/15/1997,01/31/2000
* Neil Opdyke, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Russell Kelz
* 01/31/2000
* USD 161,248.00

9617897 Channell This grant provides $161,248 as one-half support of the costs
of acquiring a high resolution cryogenic magnetometer for marine and lacustrine
paleomagnetic investigations of regional and global climate change and studies
of the secular variation of the relative paleointensity of the Earth's
geomagnetic field. Specifically, the University of Florida will acquire a new
generation 2-G Enterprises model 755 u-channel cryogenic magnetometer. This
instrument provides the capability to rapidly measure the magnetic properties of
1.5 m sections of u-channels taken from piston or gravity cores with high-
resolution and high sensitivity using sophisticated DC SQUIDS that afford over
an order of magnitude greater sensitivity than the last generation of machines
equipped with radio frequency (Rf) SQUIDS. In addition, the Model 755 is
equipped with in-line alternating field demagnetization coils and a pulse
magnetizer such that measurement of several magnetic properties of the core can
be conducted in a single operation, eliminating possible positioning errors
during sample transfer to different instruments and allowing long periods of
unattended operation. Paleomagnetic analyses of long records of sediment cores
collected during ODP cruises to the North and South Atlantic will be conducted
in an attempt to better correlate the paleoclimatic signals recorded in these
sediments through both grain size, textural and lithologic variations and to
better understand the secular variability in the Earth's geomagnetic field as
recorded by the relative paleointensity of magnetic minerals within these cores.
The recent decision of ODP to allow u-channel sampling of the archive half of
piston and gravity cores represents a veritable flood of marine sediment samples
waiting to be analyzed and is sure to keep the paleomagnetic community busy for
the foreseeable future. Acquisition of a 2-G Model 755 u-channel magnetometer by
the University of Florida will be only the second of its kind within the United
States (the other is at UC-Davis under the direction of Dr. Ken Verosub) and
thus will represent a valuable regional and national facility for the study of
environmental paleomagnetism. ***