* 9617878
* Acquisition of a Stable Isotope Mass Spectrometer with      Automated Preparation Systems
* GEO,EAR
* 02/15/1997,01/31/1999
* David Hodell, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Russell Kelz
* 01/31/1999
* USD 156,271.00

9617878 Hodell This grant provides $156,271 as partial support of the costs of
acquiring a new continuous flow, stable isotope ratio mass spectrometer (CF-
SIRMS) with an automated carbonate sample preparation and introduction device
("Kiel device"). The new SIRMS will complement an existing but dated VG Prism II
mass spectrometer (circa 1985) and will benefit a large group of faculty at
Florida who utilize stable isotopes in their research and have specific needs
for large sample throughput for studies in paleooceanography, paleolimnology and
paleoclimatology that require large numbers of analyses on small samples (down
to 10 micrograms) from marine and lacustrine sediment cores including, oxygen
isotopic analyses of carbonate microfossils, corals and gastropods as indicators
of paleo water temperatures, stable isotope stratigraphic analysis of ODP cores
and assessment of the viability of the oxygen isotopic records contained in
biogenic silica (diatoms and radiolarians) as an alternate and complimentary
climate proxy to stable isotopic analysis of carbonate microfossils.
Additionally, continuous flow SIRMS will allow measurement of carbon, nitrogen
and sulfur isotopes on a single gas sample enhancing studies utilizing, stable
isotopic analyses of marine invertebrate and vertebrate skeletal material as
proxies of paleoecology, analysis of C/N, del 13-C and del 15- N of organics in
lacustrine sediments as indicators of paleoproductivity and nutrient cycling,
studies of paleodiet based on stable isotopic analyses of bone collagen and
studies of early diagenesis and trophic dynamics utilizing stable isotopes as
tracers of the fate of organic matter. ***