* 9617123
* The Reconstitution of Early Complex Society in Pacific      Guatemala
* SBE,BCS
* 12/15/1996,11/30/1998
* Michael Love, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Continuing Grant
* John Yellen
* 11/30/1998
* USD 141,993.00

With National Science Foundation support, Dr. Michael Love will conduct one
field season of excavation and an additional period of analysis at the
archaeological site of Ujuxte, located near the Pacific coast of Guatemala.
Currently supported NSF investigations indicate that Ujuxte began as a planned
city at approximately 600 BC and grew to reach considerable proportions. Survey
has shown that at its peak, it covered over 4 sq kilometers and dominated a
number of secondary centers which contained smaller copies of its ceremonial
architecture. Through his work, Dr. Love wishes to understand the history of the
site and how its social, economic and political organization developed and
changed over time. To accomplish this goal, Dr. Love and collaborators will
excavate four residential mounds to increase the sample to a sufficient size to
capture the full range of variation. Additional test units will be placed in
mounds already tested to expand ceramic and other material culture collections.
The group will also excavate a central plaza area and test selected non-mound
locations. Through the analysis of the materials collected it will be possible
to reconstruct a social profile, determine the extent of economic
differentiation and determine if a hierarchical form of organization existed.
Early complex societies are now recognized as fragile and subject to cycles of
integration and decomposition. Dr. Love will investigate one such cycle in a
region which has remains of the earliest complex societies presently known for
Mesoamerica. The evolution of those societies has basic importance for the
understanding of Mesoamerican culture history and can shed light on the
mechanisms of the development of complex society. During the Middle Preclassic
period, from ca. 900-600 BC, the region's first large regional polity, centered
on the site of La Blanca, was constituted and collapsed. Soon after that
collapse the nearly site of Ujuxte first developed. Dr. Love's research examines
the transition from the La Blanca polity to that dominated by Ujuxte. It will
compare the two entities in terms of social organization, economic structures
and ideological basis of power. The research seeks to understand the extent to
which the structures of the Ujxute polity recreated those of La Blanca. To the
extent that the structures are distinct, the research will then ask what
conditions enabled Ujuxte to endure and grow where La Blanca did not.