* 9617349
* CISE Research Instrumentation:  A Distributed Biomedical    Computing Laboratory
* CSE,EIA
* 03/01/1997,02/28/1998
* Michael Dillencourt, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Rita Rodriguez
* 02/28/1998
* USD 69,986.00

9617349 Bic, Lubomir, F. Michael Dillencourt University of California, Irvine
CISE Research Instrumentation: A Distributed Biomedical Computing Laboratory
Many important problem areas of biomedical computing have the ability to
generate large volumes of relatively coarse-grain computations and thus can
benefit greatly from a LAN-based network of workstations. This project will
provide such an infrastructure, based on a cluster of Sun workstations, which
will be shared by the following four projects: -Knowledge Discovery in Clinical
Databases-Brain Network Models-Toxicology simulations-Distributed Protein
Structure Prediction. The goal of this project is to discover new knowledge in
clinical databases that will be useful for diagnosis and treatment. It uses
novel machine learning methods that are particularly suited to medical
databases. The second project attempts to understand the functions of specific
brain regions. It will develop parallel versions of neural-net-based algorithms
to solve difficult signal-processing tasks. The third project develops a
distributed simulation environment that supports the construction and
interactive use of simulation models for predicting concentrations of chemicals
(drugs or toxins) in the human body to assess health risks. The last project
will parallelize a novel protein structure prediction algorithm developed by our
research group, and, subsequently, will validate a novel Bayes-optimal
Prediction theory.