* 9617690
* Community Structure and Activity of Ammonia-Oxidizing       Bacteria In Aquatic Environments
* GEO,OCE
* 06/01/1997,09/30/1999
* Bess Ward, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Continuing Grant
* Phillip R. Taylor
* 09/30/1999
* USD 280,000.00

9617690 Ward Nitrifying bacteria play an essential role in the nitrogen cycle
of aquatic and terrestrial environments. Environmental variables such as oxygen
concentration and light intensity, which control nitrification, therefore
ultimately influence the chemical nature and amount of nitrogen available. The
rate and distribution of nitrification in water and sediments can be related to
and predicted from these variables using reaction/diffusion models. However, the
mechanisms by which the influence of environmental variables is translated into
biogeochemical reaction rates depends on the response of individual bacteria to
physiological stimuli. Advances continue to be made in sensitivity and precision
in isotopic methods used to measure transformation rates in the nitrogen cycle.
In parallel, recent advances in molecular ecology make it possible to detect and
partially characterize the genetic diversity of naturally occurring nitrifying
bacterial assemblages. Dr. Ward will investigate the composition and activity of
nitrifying bacterial assemblages in two aquatic environments which differ in the
degree and scale of environmental variability: a pelagic oceanic realm and an
intertidal sediment ecosystem. Species and group-specific PCR amplification,
followed by DGGE screening and sequencing of amplified ribosomal and functional
gene (ammonia-mono-oxygenase, AMO) DNA fragments will be used to 1) describe
qualitatively the composition and activity distributions of nitrifying bacteria
in different environments; 2) determine the physical and temporal scales over
which species composition and AMO activity vary in relation to environmental
variables such as depth (with light and oxygen as important co-variables) and
nutrient distributions; 3) investigate the relationship between species
composition, AMO expression and nitrification rates. These two environments
represent important ones for nitrogen transformations and include a wide range
of environmental variability, so that the relationships among species diversity,
habitat characteristics and biogeochemical transformation rates can be
elucidated.