* 9617591
* SBIR Phase II: System for Digital Elevation Map             Reconstruction from Radarsat Antarctica Data
* TIP,TI
* 08/15/1997,07/31/2000
* Dennis Ghiglia, VEXCEL CORPORATION
* Standard Grant
* Ritchie B. Coryell
* 07/31/2000
* USD 389,320.00

*** 9617591 Curlander Radarsat is a Canadian satellite carrying a synthetic
aperture radar (SAR) sensor that is capable of mapping the Antarctic continent
in stereo using multiple passes. SAR data are commercially available and can be
downlinked to a network of ground receiving stations including the NSF operated
McMurdo Station. Before SAR imagery can be effectively used by scientists,
corrections must be made for geometric distortions (orthorectification), which
require a digital elevation map (DEM). However, for most of the continent
current topographic data have relatively low accuracy and resolution. DEM data
will considerably improve maps produced by the NASA-funded Radarsat Antarctic
Mapping Project (RAMP), a mosaicking and orthorectification package to be used
by scientists at Ohio State University's Byrd Polar Research Center (BPRC). In
addition to providing rectified imagery, higher resolution DEMs will also
provide geologists and glacioloqists an important new means to assess questions
about Antarctica's qeodynamic and ice dynamic processes. Phase II will develop a
system for automatically deriving detailed surface topography and orthorectified
images from a Radarsat SAR stereo pair and its ancillary data. A Unix
development platform will be used, and the system will be validated. The new
technology is expected to have commercial applications in radar stereo
processing software for mapping projects worldwide. Additional business
potential is seen in processing services to users of Radarsat and other radar
data and in small scale receiving stations for processing satellite radar data
at university and other research laboratories.