* 9617541
* CISE Research Instrumentation: A High-Performance Network   for Distributed Computation and Visualization
* CSE,EIA
* 01/15/1997,12/31/1999
* Arden Ruttan, Kent State University
* Standard Grant
* Frederica Darema
* 12/31/1999
* USD 135,000.00

9617541 Farrell, Paul A Ruttan, Arden G Kent State University CISE Research
Instrumentation: A High Performance Network for Distributed Computation and
Visualization The instrumentation grant enables the purchase of a high
bandwidth, low latency Fibre Channel network connecting high performance to be
used in the following research projects: - Path Following, Visualization and
Steering of Liquid Crystal Calculations - Distributed Operating Systems Research
- Large Scalable Parallel Quantum Monte Carlo The equipment will support several
research projects, involving work in distributed large scale scientific
computation, computational steering and visualization, together with work on
distributed operating systems. In addition to the research projects themselves,
it is planned to compare the effectiveness of the algorithms and methods on
Fibre Channel to that on an ATM network. The project on path following,
visualization and steering of liquid crystal calculations involves the
development of efficient algorithms to solve large scale liquid crystal problems
in a distributed network environment and the tools to visualize and steer the
resulting calculations. The project on large scalable parallel quantum Monte
Carlo methods involves investigation of communication and load balancing in
highly scalable implementations of electronic structure calculations. The
algorithms and performance will be compared on high-bandwidth networks and
parallel machines. The project on distributed operating systems is designed to
enable the effective use of ensembles of workstations. This involves
microkernel-based operating systems for networks of heterogeneous machines and
heterogeneous distributed scheduling systems for WANs and LANs.