* 9617455
* Development of a Pogo-Mode Thermal Blanket for Bare Rock    Heat Flow Measurements
* GEO,OCE
* 12/15/1996,05/31/1998
* Harlan Johnson, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* H. Lawrence Clark
* 05/31/1998
* USD 50,000.00

9617455 Johnson This Small Grants for Exploratory Research (SGER) project will
undertake to build an instrument capable of measuring heat flow in the
unsedimented, neo-volcanic regions of the sea floor. The new heat flow
instrument will be deployable from a surface ship, and have the capability of
transferring thermal flux data to the ship in real time. Heat flow measurements
at bare rock exposures near mid-ocean ridge spreading centers have been shown to
be possible using a submersible, but these single-data-point measurements are
difficult to interpret, due to the variability caused by sub-surface circulation
of hydrothermal fluid. The dense spatial coverage of heat flow data possible
using the proposed surface-ship deployable tool would allow us to move beyond
isolated single measurements. With a number of closely- spaced heat flow
stations at a ridge axis, it would be possible to identify zones of diffuse
fluid upwelling, make quantitative estimates of the total heat of crustal
formation in these areas, and determine how this energy is partitioned between
convection and conduction. While there is uncertainty associated with the
development of a heat flow blanket that is 'surface-ship deployable', the
potential benefit of being able to answer these long-standing scientific
questions is substantial.