* 9617360
* CISE Research Instrumentation: Computational Techniques for Distributed Process Engineering
* CSE,EIA
* 02/01/1997,01/31/1998
* Arthur Westerberg, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Rita Rodriguez
* 01/31/1998
* USD 46,578.00

9617360 Erik Ydstie Carnegie Mellon University CISE Research Instrumentation:
Computational Techniques for Distributed Process Engineering The grant supports
equipment to enable research in the following projects: -Modeling and Large
Scale Simulation, - Discrete and Nonlinear Optimization, - Process Control and
Production Scheduling,- Synthesis and Verification of High Integrity Control
Systems and Operating Procedures, -Information Systems and Distributed Data. The
chemical manufacturing industry in the US is facing the challenge of integrating
process design and operation to respond to changes in technology, increased
global pressures, new regulation and safety constraints. CMU has developed
expertise and decision support systems that answer to a number such problems.
This research focuses on integrating the areas outlined. Models for efficient
information storage and retrieval in large scale design problems are developed
to enable more efficient methods for optimization and sequencing. Theory and
computational tools will also be developed for exploring trade-off issues
between design and control. The long term goal is to advance integrated
strategies for decision support systems and efficient methods for coordinating
symbolic and numerical computation for process design and operation in
distributed computer networks.