* 9617030
* Molecular Architecture Effects on Self-Ordering,            Self-Assembled Poly(ethylene oxide) and Copoly(ethylene     oxide) Systems
* MPS,DMR
* 03/01/1997,02/28/2002
* Stephen Z. Cheng, University of Akron
* Continuing Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 02/28/2002
* USD 408,000.00

Cheng 9617030 This grant is funded to study the effect of molecular architecture
on the self-ordering and self-assembly mechanisms in a series of well defined
crystalline poly(ethylene oxide)s (PEOs) and their diblock copolymers having
novel molecular and supra-molecular structures. In particular, molecular
architecture can be controlled by synthesizing different molecular shapes and
conformations. The two-arm PEOs provide an opportunity to study the defect
effect at the center of the chain molecules compared with linear PEOs having
twice the molecular length of each arm, while three- and four-arm star-PEOs
serve as model compounds for study of the molecular shape dependence on the
self- ordering and self-assembly process. Furthermore, it is interesting to
study transition behaviors and morphological changes for two-arm PEOs having
different linkage positions at the coupling agents. This research can be
extended to the investigation of supra-molecular structural dependence on the
process via diblock copolymers containing crystallizable PEO components. %%% It
is believed that these studies of controlled molecular architecture in both the
star-PEOs and diblock copolymers will provide significant new experimental
evidence for achieving further understanding in the research are of polymer
crystallization.