* 9617157
* Testing Theories of International Cooperation in Regional   Conflicts 1990 - 1996
* SBE,SES
* 01/15/1997,12/31/1998
* Joshua Goldstein, American University
* Standard Grant
* Frank P. Scioli  Jr.
* 12/31/1998
* USD 70,007.00

This project test theories of international cooperation and reciprocity, drawn
from neoliberal institutionalism, against the major cases of regional conflict
in the post-Cold War era. Neoliberal theories emerged in the subfield of
international political economy, therefore their extension to international
security affairs is an important test. Yet such efforts in the past focused
primarily on Cold War great power relations, while today the international
security subfield has taken a much greater interest in questions of regional
conflicts and great-power management of such conflicts. This investigation tests
whether neoliberal theories of cooperation apply to the behaviors and outcomes
found in contemporary regional conflicts. Time series statistical methods are
used to test hypotheses about patterns of response among the various actors in
regional conflicts (including great powers). Such theoretical constructs as
reciprocity, bullying, and triangular response translate into statistical tests
on time series representing the fluctuating levels of cooperation/conflict among
the different actors. These time series are constructed by machine-coding the
Reuters World Service to create events data for each regional conflict. Analysis
of the first conflict - - Bosnia - - has already been completed by the
investigator. The data construction methods produced time series of cooperation-
conflict levels that appear to capture the main phases and events in the war;
and the statistical analysis found several significant hypothesized
relationships including bilateral reciprocity and triangular `bullying.` This
investigation should enhance our understanding of the topic and create a useful
dataset for other scholars.