* 9617579
* CISE Research Instrumentation: Modeling and Image Analysis  of Biofilm Systems
* CSE,EIA
* 02/15/1997,01/31/1998
* Martin Hamilton, Montana State University
* Standard Grant
* Rita Rodriguez
* 01/31/1998
* USD 24,069.00

CDA-96-17579 Hamilton, Martin A..Harkin, Gary J. Montana State University -
Bozeman CISE Research Instrumentation: Modeling and Image Analysis of Biofilm
Systems The instrumentation grant will support a high-powered workstation
requested for use in modeling and image analyses of biofilm processes. A biofilm
is a gelatinous mass, consisting of microbes and the slime they secrete,
attached to a substratum. Many natural and engineered systems involving liquids
are profoundly influenced by biofilms. Observations of biofilms are mainly via
digitized images from sophisticated microscopes and surface science instruments.
It is important to quantify the images and to model biofilm processes. The
requested workstation is necessary to support three interrelated, complex
computational projects: analyzing biofilm images, simulating transport phenomena
in biofilms, and constructing a 3-dimensional cellular automata model of biofilm
development. Quantitative image analysis is required to estimate parameters for
fundamental biological and physico- chemical mechanisms. Many biofilms contain
channels that provide a rudimentary circulatory system around cell clusters. Any
realistic model of nutrient concentration profiles and associated microbial
growth in the biofilm must account for advective transport in the channels, as
well as diffusion. A 3-dimensional model is required to represent key processes
such as interactions among microbes, interactions of microbes with the
environment, and microbial attachment to and detachment from the biofilm.
Cellular automata modeling is the most feasible initial strategy for
constructing a plausible 3-dimensional model.