* 9617375
* CISE Research Instrumentation: High Performance Computing   and Application Laboratory
* CSE,EIA
* 01/15/1997,12/31/1997
* Prasant Mohapatra, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Rita Rodriguez
* 12/31/1997
* USD 36,000.00

9617375 Mohapatra, Prasant Sapatnekar, Sachin S. Iowa State University CISE
Research Instrumentation: High Performance Computing and Application Laboratory
This research instrumentation grant enables the Department of Electrical and
Computer Engineering at Iowa State University to purchase equipment for
developing a high-performance computing and applications laboratory dedicated to
supporting research in computer and information science and engineering. The
facility will be used for the following research projects funded by the CISE
division of the NSF: - Integrated Processor Management Schemes for Parallel
Computers, - Utilizing Idle/Spare Capacity Efficiently on a Network of
Workstations, - Hardware Multicast Routing Technique for Scalable Parallel
Computers, - Design Optimizations for High-Performance Circuits, - Optimizing
Synthesis for Periodic Real-Time Applications. The investigators propose to
acquire eight workstations and integrate them with the four existing ones
(purchased through prior NSF and other funding) to build a cluster of twelve
workstations. These workstations will be connected through a high-speed ethernet
backbone. The time-consuming simulations that are required for the listed
projects can be parallelized and run efficiently on the workstation cluster.
Currently, the Computer Engineering program at Iowa State University does not
have a computing laboratory dedicated to support graduate research activities.
The University and the Department are highly supportive of building such a
facility and are committed to the development of the computer engineering
research program.