* 9617078
* SGER: Williams Syndrome and Music Cognition
* SBE,BCS
* 11/15/1996,12/31/1998
* Howard Lenhoff, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Jasmine Young
* 12/31/1998
* USD 41,193.00

9617078 LENHOFF A group of mentally disabled people having the condition called
Williams syndrome may offer clues to the complex steps by which the brain
processes musical information in a distinctive manner. Although people born with
Williams syndrome are like the majority of mentally disabled people in being
weak in most cognitive processes, such as in arithmetic and in solving simple
problems, many with the syndrome have enhanced language skills and uncanny
musical abilities. To date, however, most of the observations of their musical
abilities come from reports of teachers and parents. Hence, one of the goals of
this research is to document and measure those abilities in order to help
researchers get at an understanding of how the brain is able to handle music
information, such as recognizing pitch, learning melodies and lyrics, keeping
rhythm, and retaining such information for periods of years. People with
Williams syndrome constitute a unique population, each lacking a piece of the
same chromosome and sharing many behavioral traits. Among those shared traits
appear to be the way they hear and process musical information. Mounting
anecdotal evidence regarding the innate musical abilities of those with Williams
syndrome is becoming quite compelling: (1) While Williams children are thought
to have short attention spans, their attention span for listening to and
participating in musical activities appears to be surprisingly long. (2)
Although most can not read musical notation, many have absolute and relative
pitch. (3) A number have uncanny rhythm, being able to learn complex drum beats,
such as 7/4, in a short session. (4) Many are able to retain complex music (some
in a variety of languages), including both the words of many verses of long
ballads and the melodies, for periods of years. (5) Those who learn and sing in
foreign languages have near-perfect accents. (6) Experienced Williams musicians
have a facility with harmony. (7) A n umber can improvise and compose lyrics
with great facility. (8) Virtually all lack stage fright, which often plagues
professionally trained musicians. More recently, the part of the brain, the
planum temporale, shown to be enlarged in professional musicians with perfect
pitch, was also shown to be enlarged in a random population of Williams people.
Another goal of this project, thus, is to determine if there is a link between
that part of the brain and the processing of musical information. The mechanism
by which the brain processes musical information is one of life's great
mysteries. Studies of music in Williams people, in whom musical abilities are
not generally confounded with any general cognitive capabilities, may offer
clues to understanding those mysteries of musical cognition in the general
population. ***