* 9618497
* Computational and Experimental Characterization of          Homogeneous Catalysts
* MPS,CHE
* 05/01/1997,08/31/2000
* Clark Landis, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Katharine Covert
* 08/31/2000
* USD 281,000.00

With funding from the Inorganic, Bioinorganic and Organometallic Chemistry
program, Professor Clark Landis of the University of Wisconsin, Madison will
undertake the development of new computational and experimental tools for
elucidation of solution structures of organometallic molecules. Valence bond,
molecular mechanics and ensemble calculations will be used to model transition-
metal catalysts and their reaction pathways. 2D NMR studies will be used to
correlate the theoretical models with the structures and reactivities of the
molecules in solution. New methods for the determination of structures of
transition metal organometallic molecules in solution will be studied. The
computational methods developed will allow for the determination of structures
using molecular mechanics methods that are specifically tailored to include
parameters for transition metals. While such calculations are widely used for
small organic molecules and proteins, the inclusion of transition metals
requires the development of new parameters to describe the force fields around
the metal atoms. Consequently, these calculations are still emerging in their
ability to computationally model the structures of organometallic molecules.
Algorithms derived from this work will be made readily accessible to other
researchers, who are expected to use them to understand catalytic activity and
shape interactions involving transition metal ions.