* 9618741
* Minneapolis and St. Paul Area Merging to Achieve Standards  Project (MASP)2
* EDU,DRL
* 04/01/1997,05/31/2006
* Craig Vana, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Paola Sztajn
* 05/31/2006
* USD 4,613,296.00

ESI 9618741 Thomas Post Minneapolis and St. Paul Area Merging to Achieve
Standards Project (MASP)2 Twenty-four Minneapolis/St. Paul metropolitan area
K-12 school districts, acting in a comprehensive collaboration, will participate
in this project. By the year 2002, five hundred teachers, representing all or
nearly all grade 7-12 mathematics teachers in these districts, will be teaching
a standards based curriculum to very diverse populations of students. This
project will create a critical mass and an infrastructure for the development of
a systemic implementation in all schools by all teachers in the Greater
Minneapolis/St. Paul area and beyond. This project operationally defines
"implementing a Standards Based Curriculum" as teaching one (or more) of the new
NSF middle or high school curriculum projects or newer curricula packages which
have direct and verifiable linkages to the National Council of Teachers of
Mathematics Curriculum &amp; Evaluation Standards for School Mathematics,
Professional Standards for Teaching Mathematics, Assessment Standards for School
Mathematics and other supporting documents. The project will provide for a
variety of ongoing teacher support structures, and, for multiple time-frames
within which teacher teams can implement Standards Based Curricula. Those who
will, from the beginning, fully implement such a curriculum, will attend a two-
week intensive summer workshop on both content and pedagogy related to the new
curricula followed by academic year staff development and mentoring at Saturday
or after school workshops. A reduced level of mentoring during the second year
will complete the set of sponsored professional development activities. A
parallel set of workshops will prepare other teachers to select and implement
portions of a Standards Based Curricula and prepare to move to the full
implementation stage in succeeding years of (MASP)2. Each teacher will receive
at least 130 hours of professional development activity. The project will work w
ith districts to assist in the identification and selection of curriculum
materials and to train and support mentors through cognitive coaching and
leadership workshops. These mentor/leaders will be the core of the ongoing
implementation of curricula in partner school districts. A major goal of this
project is to develop and implement a replicable model for large scale selection
and implementation of major curriculum reform. The model is based on long-term,
purposeful and planned professional development for each 7-12 participating
mathematics teacher, and on the development of long-range, skilled leadership
teams in every school.