* 9618111
* Individual and Firm Heterogeneity in Labor Markets:  Studies of Matched Employee-Employer Data
* SBE,SES
* 03/15/1997,02/28/2002
* John Abowd, National Bureau of Economic Research Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 02/28/2002
* USD 243,361.00

The investigator has developed statistical methods and data sources that permit
investigation of the relative importance of individual and firm heterogeneity in
observed labor market outcomes. These methods do not assume, as virtually all
previous research has, that the person effects and the firm effects are
uncorrelated. Using data from France in research supported collaboratively by
NSF and the French National Statistical Institute, the investigator has shown
that person effects are much more important in determining wage outcomes than
are firm effects, but that these two effects are reasonably correlated. The
investigator has assembled American data from four sources that can now be used
to estimate versions of the person-effect/firm-effect models applied to French
data. Because of the nature of the American data, the models must be somewhat
modified but the essential character of the analysis-the possibility of
correlation between separately identifiable person and firm effects-is
preserved. The investigator has also been sponsored by the Bureau of Labor
Statistics (BLS ) and by funding under a previous NSF grant to create an
employer-link file for the National Longitudinal Survey of Youth (NLSY) 1979
Cohort. This employer-link file contains the identification numbers required to
link external information about the employer to the basic NLSY 1979 data for the
years 1986-1994. The investigator has access to these data as a part of a
confidentiality agreement with the BLS, and other users of the NLSY will be able
to obtain the data from the Bureau's Longitudinal Data Programs. The
investigator will extend and modify his basic statistical models that permit him
to analyze wage, employment and other labor market outcomes measured on the NLSY
using the employer link file and the associated information on the employer. The
other data sources available to the investigator include matched employer-
employee managerial data developed by the Center for Advanced Human Resource
Studies at Cornell University. These data include wage outcomes, contingent pay
and a large number of performance measures on the firms. Data files developed
from matched Current Population Surveys that include limited employer
information and from the Worker-Establishment Characteristics Database used in
the investigator's current research will also be available.