* 9618789
* Electron States and Transport in Amorphous Semiconductors
* NONE,NONE
* 04/01/1997,03/31/2001
* David Drabold, Ohio University
* Continuing grant
* G. Bruce Taggart
* 03/31/2001
* USD 174,000.00

9618789 Drabold This grant is to support research on the electronic properties
of amorphous silicon and related materials. Using well proven electronic
structure techniques, supplemented by the thermal molecular dynamics
simulations, the plans are to study: (1) the microscopic structure of midgap as
well as band-tail states and the effect of phonons, (2) the nature of electron
localization in a three dimension model containing several thousand atoms, (3)
the effects of doping of Boron and Phosphorus in hydrogenated amorphous silicon,
using density functional molecular dynamics on large cells (4) the AC and also
estimates of DC conductivity for intrinsic and doped systems, using Kubo
formula, followed by comparisons to experiments. These calculations are also
expected to lead to advancements in computational algorithms using local basis
approaches, i.e. those designed specifically for semiconductors and insulators.
%%% This grant, to a young PI, is to support research on the electronic
properties of amorphous silicon and related materials. The research uses state
of the art techniques to conduct complex, microscopic calculations for the
energies of electrons and also the resistance. The latter can be calculated for
both an applied DC field and an applied AC field. The project also includes
temperature effects. The benefits of this project are to a detailed
understanding of the microscopic properties of doped and disordered
semiconductors, used in a multitude of devices, as well as to some insight in to
possible ways to improve the algorithms for these calculations. ***