* 9618935
* Ontogenetic Examinations of Frequency-Dependent Synaptic    Plasticity in the Hippocampal Dentate Gyrus
* ENG,CBET
* 09/15/1997,04/30/2001
* Joseph Bronzino, Trinity College
* Standard Grant
* Gilbert B. Devey
* 04/30/2001
* USD 205,640.00

9618935 Bronzino This research is designed to test the hypothesis that there are
significant changes, during early postnatal development, in synaptic plasticity
in a specific neuronal circuit, the perforant path/dentate granule synapse, in
the hippocampal formation, a structure intimately involved in learning and
memory. Recently, it has been shown that hippocampal circuit responses to
afferent input vary depending upon the frequency and pattern of the input.
Specifically, the response to certain patterns of hippocampal afferent inputs
may result in either enhancement (long-term potentiation), or a diminishment
(long-term depression) of the hippocampal synaptic response. The major goal of
this research is to apply recently developed surgical and recording techniques
to quantify the development of frequency-dependent responses of the perforant
path/dentate granule cell synapse in preweaning, freely moving male and female
rats. In this research, evoked field potential analyses will be used to evaluate
changes in both synaptic activation and cellular discharge. This work will
attempt to quantify changes in frequency-dependent synaptic function during an
early period of development. This research could provide information on the
functional development of a neural network known to be involved in cognitive
processes including spatial learning, memory and mapping. ***