* 9618137
* An Evaluation of the Consequences of Persistent Small-Scale Biological Structure on Upper Ocean Trophic Processes
* GEO,OCE
* 05/15/1997,04/30/2001
* Barry Sherr, Oregon State University
* Continuing grant
* Phillip R. Taylor
* 04/30/2001
* USD 314,339.00

Observations with recently developed microstructure instrumentation indicate
that what had previously been described as small scale biological patchiness may
not be due to stochastic fluctuations in biological structure, but may be
undersampled observations of persistent, small scale structure. Persistent, sub
1-meter structure in the upper ocean poses serious problems for the
interpretation of data from finescale and mesoscale observational programs. It
is likely that such sampling programs are underestimating the in situ rate
processes associated with sub 1-meter structure, as well as the abundance and
distributional patterns of biological and chemical properties. The common
occurrence of thin layers and the temporal/spatial coherence of these layers
compel us to evaluate their role in upper ocean processes. Therefore, the
overall objectives of this project are to evaluate the contribution of these
sub-1-meter features to upper ocean trophic dynamics through direct measurements
of nutrient concentration, particulate matter, autotrophic production, and
heterotrophic processes, and to undertake a detailed study of the occurrence,
persistence, and composition of thin biological layers in the ocean. In
addition, our unique high resolution biological and physical sampling system
will permit us to investigate the mechanisms of layer formation, persistence and
erasure. We will determine the distribution and temporal coherence of thin
layers of plankton biomass within the euphoric zone over extended time periods
and characterize the composition of biological thin layers using bio optical and
bio acoustical sensors as well as via discrete sampling of individual thin
layers. We will also assess autotrophic and heterotrophic rate processes inside
and outside of persistent small scale features and map the areal extent of
coherent thin layers. We will also quantify the association of thin layers with
local physical processes, specifically stratification, small scale shear, and
turbulent mixing, as well as the large scale velocity field and the frequency
and amplitude of internal waves. Finally, we will investigate the association of
thin layers with local surface forcing conditions and evaluate the contribution
of biological rates occurring within layers to total water column processes.
This data set will provide a unique opportunity to evaluate, quantitatively, the
role of persistent small scale structure in oceanic planktonic food webs.
Without a clear evaluation of these processes, estimates of biological rates
obtained with conventional sampling approaches will be biased. +n ±i ?n ¼f S u m
m a r y I n f o r m a t i o n ( ++++++++++++ 8 Û ++++++++++++ ++++++++++++
++++++++++++ + _ Ûª? ÑOh ª' +'ª?0 Ý + Õ $ H l + ¢ ? D h +
R:\WWUSER\TEMPLATE\NORMAL.DOT =l James William Ammerman Joanne MCcreary @ =-vÞ ?
@ -+Y+ª) @ dP¹ ? } } @ ¶+ª Microsoft Word 6.0 10 Õªe =- e P ? P < < < < < < < f
f f f f f p f ÷ 1 z z z z z z z z ( = = f T s ; ÷ < z z z z z ÷ z < < z z z z z
z < z < z P X < < < < z z + z