* 9618369
* Archaeological Investigation of Craft Production in Early   Medieval Morocco
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/1997,01/31/2001
* Nancy Benco, George Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Mark L. Weiss
* 01/31/2001
* USD 131,342.00

With National Science Foundation support Dr. Nancy Benco will conduct
archaeological excavation at the Moroccan site of al-Basra and also undertake a
survey of the surrounding regions. Historical records indicate that al-Basra was
established around 800 AD, possibly on the site of a Late Roman-Berber
settlement. Built as part of the Islamic empire established by the Idrisid
dynasty, it reached city size, was destroyed ca 979 AD, was rebuilt in the late
tenth century to serve as a commercial center and it maintained that role until
about the twelfth century. Brief descriptions by Arab geographers indicate that
the city produced large quantities of flax (and possibly linen cloth) which was
transported across the Mediterranean. Based on many seasons of fieldwork by
Benco and others, extensive information on the spatial organization of al-Basra
is available. In this current two-year research project Dr. Benco will focus on
the production, distribution and consumption of crafted goods. Abundant
historical and ethnographic information will be integrated with archaeological
data. She will focus on open-area horizontal excavations in three functionally
distinct parts of the city: an artisans' zone with known ceramic and
metallurgical production facilities; a residential zone with early Islamic
houses and interior courtyards; and an administrative area with elite
residential structures and a possible mine. Topographic mapping and magnetometer
survey work will be completed in the first season. A regional survey, which
builds on a preliminary reconnaissance conducted in 1994 will entail a
systematic investigation for sites. Test excavations will be conducted in a
small number of these. Archaeologists realize that control of craft production
in early states served political as well as economic functions and worked to
enhance elite power. However such great emphasis has been placed on this, it is
often forgotten that much manufacturing took place in domestic contexts and
cannot be understood from such a limited perspective. Dr. Benco will examine
production and distribution to determine its broadest societal role. The site of
al-Basra and its hinterland is well suited to this goal. The city served as an
important administrative-commercial-manufacturing center where ceramic goods,
metal objects and flax were produced. The archaeologically accessible 30 hectare
site contains well-preserved architecture and abundant artifacts in two to three
meters of well stratified deposits. This research is also important because
North African Islamic sites are rarely examined from an anthropological
perspective. Through her extensive interaction with Moroccan students and
archaeologists Dr. Benco will help to introduce a powerful set of techniques and
approaches.