* 9618619
* Collaborative Research:  On Aggregate Effects and           Equilibrium Selection of Public Policies
* SBE,SES
* 06/01/1997,05/31/2001
* Rodolfo Manuelli, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 05/31/2001
* USD 187,526.00

9618619 Manuelli This project renews research on the aggregate effects and
equilibrium selection of public policies begun under a previous NSF award. The
first part of the project examines the relationship between the structure of
information, i.e., differences in the information acquired by buyers and
sellers, and the effect of monetary policy variability on economic performance.
This new dimension of monetary policy is shown to have important and predictable
effects. This work is extended to dynamic settings with production and inventory
decisions. Preliminary results suggest that existing models of the welfare costs
of inflation will substantially underestimate its costs when variability is
high. The second part examines how collective decision making mechanisms fare in
terms of policy choice. It explores the implications for the data of alternative
models of endogenous policy choice. The project develops a new general framework
for the analysis of dynamic policy choice in settings with sequential voting.
This framework is used to study the conditions under which the nature of
distributive problems (income distribution, skill distribution, distribution of
industry specific human capital) can prevent the adoption of efficient policies.