* 9618039
* NSF/DARPA DDFRP:  A Rapid Tooling Testbed for Injection     Molding
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/1997,08/31/2001
* Thomas Kurfess, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* george hazelrigg
* 08/31/2001
* USD 1,349,320.00

The problem to be addressed in this research is how to quickly produce
injection molded prototype parts in polymer, ceramic, or metal materials, given
that design and fabrication activities may be performed by distributed
participants. A Rapid Tooling TestBed will be developed to utilize solid
freeform fabrication technologies (e.g., Stereolithography and Selective Laser
Sintering) in converting a part's design representation into molded parts. In
support of this idea, the key question to be investigated is: How early in the
product realization process, and under what conditions, can design be separated
safely from manufacture? This question will be investigated from the
manufacturing viewpoint by developing a distributed testbed for rapid tooling
(injection molds) and experimenting with different product realization processes
for injection molds and molded components. Four main research thrusts define the
project's activities: Development of a Fabrication Process Compiler to translate
product design descriptions into fabrication process plans; SFF Characterization
to encode process characteristics for use in the Compiler; Injection Molding to
provide polymer and powder (ceramics and metals) molding rules and facilities;
and Distributed Computing to provide the computational environment for
distributed design and fabrication. If successful, the testbed will enable the
fabrication of nearly production-representative components in a variety of
polymer, ceramic, and metal materials within three days of submitting a product
model. This represents over a fifty percent time reduction from typical industry
practice, along with a significant increase in the parts' mechanical and
material properties. This goal will be achieved through a reconceptualization of
typical design-manufacturing processes that makes use of distributed
participants. The distributed computing technologies to be developed will enable
separation of design and fabrication activities by embodying tested product
realization practices that ensure smooth transitions between these activities.
Additionally, smooth technology transfer and dissemination will be achieved due
to close collaborations with industry partners and active participation in
education programs.