* 9618651
* Collaborative Project:Analysis of Pattern Formation in      Drosophila by Importance Sampling on Parallel Processors
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/1997,07/31/2000
* John Reinitz, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 07/31/2000
* USD 75,000.00

Reinitz 9618651 The investigator with Yuefan Deng of SUNY Stony Brook and their
colleagues study large scale optimization methods applied to problems concerning
gene networks and pattern formation in the fruit fly Drosophila. These
optimization problems arise in a method known as "gene circuits", which was
developed by one of the principal investigators and his coworkers. The essence
of this method is the numerical inversion of a set of nonlinear ordinary
differential equations by least squares fits of the trajectories of the
equations to gene expression data obtained by fluorescence microscopy. In the
past, these fits were performed by simulated annealing on serial computers using
the Metropolis algorithm under the control of the Lam cooling schedule. They are
computationally intensive, and the range of problems that can be considered was
limited by the speed of available serial processors. The investigators are
developing new computational methods for the solution of these problems on
parallel processors. Importance sampling is the most efficient, or the most
important, ingredient of an algorithm in treating complex continuum optimization
problems such as the pattern formation analysis undertaken here. Simulated
annealing is one method for importance sampling; the investigators are
developing a general method for parallel simulated annealing on nonseparable
problems. Other importance sampling methods are derived from methods that make
use of the continuum properties of the problem at hand, such as Newton's method.
The investigators develop a family of parallel importance sampling methods and
then synergistically combine them. This family of methods includes genetic
algorithms, continuum methods, a Lagrangian reformulation of the fitting
problem, and simulated annealing. Networks of interacting genes lie at the heart
of the problems that will face biologists and biotechnologists in the twenty
first century. Processes ranging from embryonic d evelopment to cell division
and cell death are controlled by networks of genes. In order to understand how
these networks work, it is necessary to understand their internal "wiring
diagrams". In particular, it is important to know how genes turn each other on
and off. Modern molecular biology allows investigators to see which genes are on
or off at a given moment, but in order to understand the "wiring" between genes,
it is necessary to analyze changes in gene activity over time and analyze them
by computer. The method of analysis can be reduced to an "optimization" problem,
in which the smallest value of a complicated function is sought. In this
project, the investigators are finding new ways to solve optimization problems
on large scale parallel high-performance computers. Particular emphasis is
placed on parallel methods for simulated annealing, an exceptionally powerful
optimization method. This research is important to many areas beyond gene
networks. Simulated annealing and related methods are used in structural biology
and other biotechnology areas related to drug discovery. It is also used in the
design of integrated circuits. These and other areas are likely to benefit from
this work. Funding for the project is provided by the program of Computational
Mathematics and the Office of Multidisciplinary Activities in MPS and by the
Developmental Biology program in BIO.