* 9618067
* Elemental and Isotopic Composition of Trapped Gases in the  Huascaran and Sajama Ice Cores from South America
* GEO,AGS
* 03/01/1997,02/29/2000
* Todd Sowers, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Steven M. Colman
* 02/29/2000
* USD 174,873.00

Abstract ATM-9618067 Sowers, Todd Pennsylvania State University Title: Element
and Isotopic Composition of Trapped Gases in the Huascaran and Sajama Ice Cores
from South America A set of very exciting climate records extending into the
last glacial period have been developed from the Huascaran ice core from the
Peruvian Cordillera. The isotopic temperature record from this core demonstrated
that, during the last glacial period, temperatures at Huascaran were colder than
today, supporting various other lines of evidence that the tropics were indeed
colder during the last glacial period. These findings are consistent with ice
core records from Greenland and Antarctica which extend into the last glacial
period. The high degree of covariation between all these records during the
Glacier termination argues that there are strong teleconnections between these
sites which are probably responding to the same (or similar) forcing functions.
This award supports measurements of the elements and isotopic composition of the
trapped gases in the Huascaran ice core. These records will provide definitive
evidence for the existence of glacial-age ice at Huascaran. The gas records will
refine the timescale for the Huascaran core to within 500 years of that ascribed
to the GISP II ice core from central Greenland. The gas records will also allow
the transfer of the Huascaran climate records into a "common temporal
framework." In addition, leads and lags between all these climate records and
many other records covering the last deglaciation can be investigated. The
ultimate goal in this research is to gain insight into the mechanisms which
caused the Earth to move out of the last glacial period by establishing the
sequence of events which led to the deglaciation. Placing the tropical climate
events from Huascaran in this sequence will help decipher the nature of the
forcing mechanisms responsible for the last termination.