* 9618854
* STIMULATE:  Synergistic Multimodal Communication in         Collaborative Multiuser Environments
* CSE,IIS
* 03/01/1997,08/31/2000
* Grigore Burdea, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Continuing Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 08/31/2000
* USD 778,440.00

The sensory modalities of sight, sound and touch are employed in combination to
research a new dimension in human-machine communication. These expanded
interface capabilities build on technologies established in related work, and
are implemented at multiple user stations in a networked Distributed System for
Collaborative Information Processing and Learning (DISCIPLE). The system
provides object-oriented groupware running on Internet protocols as well as on
an Asynchronous Transfer Mode intracampus network. Intelligent agents at each
user location fuse the multimodal information inputs and decide actions to be
taken in the collaborative environment. Established technologies for region-of-
interest sensing, image understanding, face recognition and visual gesture are
applied for interaction in the sight domain. Automatic speech and speaker
recognition, speech synthesis, and distant-talking autodirective microphone
arrays support the sound dimension. Gesture detection, position sensing, force
feedback gloves and multitasking tactile software are employed for touch
communication. The DISCIPLE environment of multiple collaborating users provides
a comprehensive test bed for quantifying human interface designs, and for
measuring the synergies that can be won from combinations of simultaneous
multimodal communication. Results of this research will significantly broaden
the utility of distributed networked computing for human users.