* 9618161
* Transition Metal Metallacycles: Synthesis via Remote Intramolecular C-H Bond Activation and Utility in Main-GroupHeterocyclic Synthesis
* NONE,NONE
* 05/01/1997,04/30/2002
* David Tyler, University of Oregon Eugene
* Standard Grant
* Kenneth M. Doxsee
* 04/30/2002
* USD 270,000.00

Dr. David R. Tyler, Department of Chemistry, University of Oregon is supported
by the Synthetic Organic Chemistry Program of the Chemistry Division for the
development of metallacycles for the synthesis main group heterocycles by remote
intramolecular C-H bond activation. A series of early transition metal vinyl
complexes that present one or more sites for intramolecular C-H activation and
that always include at least one site that is accessible for gamma-activation
will be prepared. The chemo- and regio- selectivity of the C-H activation
reactions by these complexes will be determined. Through systematic variation in
the placement and nature of the substituents on the vinyl group and the nature
of the transition metal, an understanding of the steric and electronic factors
favoring remote activation will be developed. The resulting information will be
used to assist in the rational preparation of metallacyclic complexes,
particularly metallacyclobutenes bearing substituent patterns unavailable
through the use of existing synthetic procedures. There metallacyclic complexes
will be exploited, with primary focus on the development of catalytic uses of
the complexes in the formation of heterocyclic compounds. Transition metals are
often used to effect the preparation of important organic chemicals. This
project aims at developing new methods to prepare a variety of heretofore
difficult to obtain species. These `heterocyclic` compounds have great
laboratory, industrial, and biological significance. In addition, this project
will explore the activation of carbon-hydrogen bonds that are remote from a
transition metal. This phase of the investigation will provide fundamental
information on how organic compounds can be activated by transition metals.