* 9618668
* SGER: Comparing Assessments of National Position in Key Science and Technology Fields
* NONE,NONE
* 10/01/1996,12/31/1997
* Mary Ellen Mogee, Mogee Research and Analysis Associates
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer S. Bond
* 12/31/1997
* USD 34,550.00

9618668 Mogee The proposed project addresses the question of the replicability
of assessments of relative national position in science and technology (S&T) by
comparing recent foreign and U. S. forecasting reports to see whether
assessments of the relative standing of countries in key S&T fields are
consistent across the studies. Particular attention will be paid to whether
other countries are reaching the same assessments of U. S. relative position in
key S&T fields as reached by U. S. study efforts. This approach takes advantage
of studies that have already been done, conducted by different people and using
a variety of methods. The research is expected to result in a better
understanding of the comparability of recent national technology forecasting and
assessment reports, the consistency of their assessments of national
technological positions, and how these assessments compare with a quantitative
indicator based on international patent data. Of particular interest from a
science and engineering indicators perspective will be a comparison of the
critical S&T fields identified in the reports of different nations, a comparison
of the relative position of the U. S. key fields as assessed by different
countries, and a comparison of this ranking with a ranking based on
international patent data. This information will increase understanding of the
quality of the assessments and the confidence that can be placed in them. ***