* 9618828
* Frustrated Technocrats:  A Social History of Engineering in the G.D.R., 1949-89
* SBE,SES
* 06/01/1997,05/31/1999
* Dolores Augustine, Saint John's University
* Standard Grant
* Michael M. Sokal
* 05/31/1999
* USD 53,878.00

The aim of this project is to write a history of the engineering profession in
the German Democratic Republic (GDR). The investigation focuses on the
professional ethos and social identities of East German engineers, as well as on
the ways in which the state remolded the engineering profession after 1949 and
used it to pursue its own technological and economic goals. Though revolutionary
changes took place in the engineering profession after 1949, the professional
ethos of many GDR engineers was still framed by a memory of what the engineering
profession had been up to 1945 and what it still was in West Germany. Drawing on
archival materials, interviews, and sociological studies conducted in the GDR,
the study will examine five main themes: (1) the recruitment, education and
deployment of engineers; (2) professional concerns, such as earnings,
professional power, career placement, and on-the-job training; (3) the actual
work experience of engineers, particularly in research and development; (4) the
relationship between the engineer and the Socialist Unity Party; (5) the social
ties, status, and family life of engineers. Throughout, the analysis will be
informed by an awareness that, despite official efforts to ensure equality for
women, those of working-class origins, and young people, that such
characteristics continued to be important determinants of power, authority, and
status.