* 9618582
* GOALI:  Interfacial Chemistry Analysis of Wastepaper        Deinking by Atomic Force Microscopy
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/1997,08/31/2001
* Jan Miller, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Thomas W. Chapman
* 08/31/2001
* USD 313,900.00

Abstract Proposal No.: CTS-9618582 Proposal Type: GOALI Principal Investigator:
Jan D. Miller Affiliation: University of Utah This grant is awarded through the
Separations and Purification Program sub-element of the Interfacial, Transport
and Separations Program of the Chemical and Transport Systems Division. The
principal investigator is Jan D. Miller of the University of Utah. The research
will be carried out by the University of Utah in collaboration with Shell
Chemical Company. The objective of the proposed program is to adapt atomic force
microscopy (AFM) to the determination of interparticle forces between
particulate suspended in wastepaper deinking systems.(wastepaper pulping and
deinking flotation systems). Importantly, the results from such research will
establish the aqueous solution chemistry for effective deinking of wastepaper,
particularly laser-printed and xerographic wastepaper's. On this basis, it is
expected that a simple reliable and relatively inexpensive flotation technology
can be developed. Technology development for the deinking of wastepaper,
particularly laser-printed and photocopied office waste, has become an important
environmental and process issue for the paper recycling industry. The
development of a novel, inexpensive, and more efficient process for utilization
of waste paper from modern printing processes is needed. Such development will
be facilitated by fundamental surface chemistry research to establish a basis
for technology innovation.