* 9618648
* Collaborative Research:  The Economics of Expertise
* SBE,SES
* 03/01/1997,02/29/2000
* John Morgan, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 02/29/2000
* USD 86,192.00

The diverse range of problems faced by decision makers almost precludes the
possibility of their possessing the expertise needed to make informed judgements
in all areas. As a result, the power to make decisions is often divorced from
the relevant specialized knowledge. It is the `division of labor` between
decision makers and experts that is the focus of this research. Specifically,
its goal is to analyze the strategic interplay between a single decision maker
and a number of experts from whom he might choose to seek advice. Employing
tools from the economics of information and game theory, the project will
undertake a theoretical analysis of a model broad enough to be consistent with a
variety of institutional settings. Of particular concern are situations in which
the decision maker is able to consult multiple experts and, thus, is the
recipient of multiple, sometimes conflicting, pieces of advice. Moreover, this
advice is not given by completely disinterested parties: the experts may have
interests which, even if not at odds with, are not coincident with those of the
decision maker. The latter's task is then to aggregate the information received
in such an environment effectively. Three broad sets of issues will be
addressed. The first concerns the tradeoff between expertise and loyalty, the
latter determining how closely an expert's interests are aligned with those of
the decision maker. Some questions addressed are: How should a decision maker
integrate the opinions of experts who are equally proficient but have differing
loyalties? Is it possible to get the experts to disclose more information by
playing one off against the other? Should the advice of `inferior` experts
necessarily be ignored? How many experts should be consulted? The second relates
to the twin issues of compensation and delegation. How should experts be
compensated for their advice? Can optimal compensation schemes lead to full
disclosure? When should a decision maker delegate the authority to make
decisions to an expert? The third part of the project will explore some wider
implications of the research summarized above to the general question of
information elicitation from imperfectly informed agents. The fact that the
decision maker cannot credibly commit to a course of action, a mechanism,
distinguishes this problem from that traditionally considered in mechanism
design theory. In particular, contrary to the lessons of the traditional theory,
achieving full-disclosure and first-best outcomes is difficult.