* 9618771
* III - V Nitride Surfaces and Interfaces: Atomic and         Electronic Properties
* MPS,DMR
* 05/01/1997,04/30/2001
* Antoine Kahn, Princeton University
* Continuing Grant
* LaVerne D. Hess
* 04/30/2001
* USD 353,310.00

9618771 Kahn This project addresses fundamental surface and interface issues in
III-V nitrides, including the formation of metal-nitride barriers and
heterojunctions, and the band offsets and electronic state density at these
junctions. The approach is to link information obtained from a wide range of
surface spectroscopy and microscopy techniques to electrical measurements on
device-like structures. Both n- and p-doped GaN, AlN, AlGaN and In GaN layers
grown by MOCVD will be used in the study. %%% The project addresses basic
research issues in a topical area of materials science having high technological
relevance, compact and efficient light sources in the blue-green spectral
region. The research will contribute basic materials science knowledge at a
fundamental level to important aspects of electronic/photonic devices.
Additionally, the fundamental knowledge and understanding gained from the
research is expected to contribute to improving the performance of advanced
devices and circuits by providing a fundamental understanding and a basis for
designing and producing improved materials, and materials combinations. An
important feature of the program is the integration of research and education
through the training of students in a fundamentally and technologically
significant area. ***