* 9618702
* Joint Evolution of Behavioral and Morphological             Plasticity in Multiple Predation Regimes
* BIO,DEB
* 03/01/1997,02/28/1999
* Andrew Sih, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Mark Courtney
* 02/28/1999
* USD 184,000.00

9618702 SIH Predator-prey interactions play a central role in ecology and
evolution. This proposal extends the existing understanding of predator-prey
interactions in two important ways: 1) Most studies of prey responses to
predators focus on one of several types of prey responses - e.g., antipredator
behavior, or morphological defenses against predators, or chemical defenses.
Prey, however, often show a suite of potentially inter-dependent antipredator
responses. For example, prey that are well defended morphologically (e.g., that
have a thick shell or spines) might show relatively little behavioral response
to predators, while prey that are morphologically vulnerable might show a strong
tendency to hide from predators. That is, the optimal prey behavior might depend
on prey morphology and the cost of having an ineffective prey morphology can be
mediated by compensatory behavior. Surprisingly few experiments have addressed
the joint evolution of multiple prey responses to predators. 2) Similarly, most
experimental studies of predator impacts on prey examine the effects of one
predator on prey. In nature, however, most prey face multiple predators. The
appropriate response to one predator might actually increase risk from another
predator. Surprisingly little is known about how prey balance the conflicting
selection pressures generated by multiple predators. This proposal will address
the joint evolution of behavioral and morphological responses to multiple
predators. The focal prey (a common, abundant snail) is a model organism for
this study because: 1) it is known to show both behavioral and morphological
responses to not just the predators, but also to chemical cues from both
predators, and 2) it can be reared rapidly in huge numbers in the laboratory.