* 9618782
* Symposium on Epitaxial Oxide Thin Films, 1997 Materials     Research Society Spring Meeting, March 31 - April 4, 1997,  San Francisco, California
* MPS,DMR
* 01/15/1997,12/31/1997
* Robert Pachavis, Materials Research Society
* Standard Grant
* LaVerne D. Hess
* 12/31/1997
* USD 2,515.00

9618782 Pachavis A symposium will be held March 31 - April 4, 1997 on Epitaxial
Oxide Thin Films covering the understanding and control of epitaxial synthesis,
processing, and characterization with respect to fundamental issues such as
microstructural evolution in epitaxy, physical properties of epitaxial oxide
thin films, and how these issues relate to device applications.. The aim of the
symposium is to provide a vehicle through which groups of scientists working on
a set of diverse materials science phenomena can discuss and interact on common
scientific themes involving similar materials. NSF funds will be used to support
participation by graduate students and young faculty. There will be an
opportunity to assess the field, and to establish ties between universities,
research institutions, and industry. It is expected that top scientists in the
field will attend, and that the symposium will provide an effective forum to
discuss and delineate critical scientific issues in the rapidly developing
research areas involving colossal magneto-resistive(CMR) materials, especially
in epitaxial form, the relationships between CMR and defect structure, and
similar relationships in other materials/device areas such as ferroelectric
memories, nonlinear optical waveguides, microwave electronics, and magnetic
oxide thin films. %%% An evaluation of the progress and status of Epitaxial
Oxide Thin Films and related materials processing and characterization issues,
especially critical materials and device related research areas, and the
relationship of materials research to device fabrication along with current
assessments of the most important developments in this field will be of great
value to the understanding and enhanced utilization of materials in computing,
data processing, and communications. ***