* 9618731
* STIMULATE:  A Hierarchical Framework for Speech Recognition and Understanding
* CSE,IIS
* 03/01/1997,02/28/2001
* Victor Zue, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 02/28/2001
* USD 710,543.00

The majority of current computer speech recognition systems model the speech
signal with homogeneous observation frames, represent words by a string of
phonemes, and rely heavily on statistical word-based language models to decode
the underlying word sequence. This project aims to investigate an alternative
approach that incorporates many more levels of linguistic information into a
parsimonious hierarchical framework for speech recognition and understanding.
This approach will provide new perspectives on incorporating constraints from
the distinctive feature, phonetic, phonological, syllabic, morphological,
lexical, syntactic, and semantic levels into a probabilistic framework for
speech recognition and understanding. Structure sharing of sub-word levels
across words will allow for the generalization of phonological effects across
similar environments and increased flexibility for dynamic vocabularies and
language models. Structure sharing should also produce a more efficient search
with a smaller number of parameters. The proposed hierarchical framework also
has the potential of serving as a recognition kernel, with the speech signal as
input and a set of morpho-phonological units as output. This kernel would have a
finite inventory of units for a given language, whose internals will be
vocabulary and task independent. To ensure that the proposed framework is
language independent, its utility will also be investigated for languages other
than English.