* 9618223
* The Math Forum
* EHR,DRL
* 03/15/1997,02/29/2000
* Eugene Klotz, Swarthmore College
* Continuing Grant
* Nora Sabelli
* 02/29/2000
* USD 2,922,166.00

- 9618223 Klotz The Intemet offers great opportunities for improving mathematics
education. It addresses the need for education that will be responsive to
individual needs and make accessible a wide range of resources and supporting
relationships. Teachers seek access to a wealth of strategies, activities, and
interesting mathematics, together with a community of peers, mentors and
professionals. We expect students to find support for mastering fundamental
mathematics and pursuing rich investigations through a network that reaches well
beyond their local resources and experience. In order to cultivate such
opportunities the Math Forum will implement a full-scale version of our virtual
center for mathematics education. Over the next three years we will concentrate
our efforts on the application, scaling, and dissemination of what we're
learning about the use of Internet communications to integrate three key
activities: 1) community-building across the many groups involved in math
education, 2) user construction, assessment, and organization of materials and
projects, and 3) online educational mentoring and facilitation. The results of
t,his project can serve as a template for other fields. The strength of the Math
Forum is its focus on using Internet tools to create an active community and a
deep, well-organized resource center. Substantive materials are generated from
the interactions of students, teachers, mathematicians, concerned parents, and
teacher educators. The success of interactive projects such as Ask Dr. Math and
the Geometry Problem of the Week has resulted in services that can be applied to
other areas. Through our collaborations with teacher enhancement projects we
have begun to develop processes for turning professional development experiences
into online courses and training resources. Each week the Math Forum Web site is
visited by thousands of teachers and students who want to integrate Internet
math education materials into their teaching and study. There are many
curriculum and teacher enhancement projects needing support for distributing
their materials and innovations to teachers and students. These projects can
benefit from our experience with Internet math education, our software tools,
and our support in making the transition to the Internet. Through enhancements
to the Forum Web site, users will benefit from the extensive contributions of
materials and the new participants these projects will bring to the online
community. Additionally, participants will have opportunities to shape and
contribute to online programs. We will focus our work on leveraging the activity
of a carefully selected group of existing math education projects that wish to
develop an Internet presence. In this way, we can work formally with a number of
projects while maintaining the Forum's focus on technology transfer and
consulting. Our partners have been carefully selected to represent the range of
contexts necessary to explore the viability of the three above-named activities.
They include curriculum and software publishers, summer mathematics programs,
teacher assessment, systemic initiatives in networking and school reform, pre-
service teacher education, interactive Internet services, teacher and student
mentoring projects, and professional organizations covering all grade levels and
encompassing many different socioeconomic and cultural communities. Over the
course of the three years we will build a consortium to assume management of the
Forum upon completion of the grant. We have also incorporated mechanisms to
shift responsibility for mature projects to existing institutions or self-
sustaining, fee-based services. A careful and detailed evaluation process has
been designed in keeping with the scale of this project. We will have a direct
effect on thousands of educators and support millions of dollars in activity
each year. The evaluation will provide information used to optimize the impact
of this effort and to document transitions in user and institutional partner pa
rticipation. We will learn much about tile viability of a virtual center as an
agent of reform and a facilitator of community. ***