* 9618626
* An Investigation of Photosynthetic Carbon Isotope           Fractionation in the Ocean
* GEO,OCE
* 03/01/1997,08/31/2001
* Greg Rau, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Continuing Grant
* Donald L. Rice
* 08/31/2001
* USD 165,000.00

OCE-9618626 ABSTRACT OCE-9618626 The isotopic composition of organic carbon in
marine organic matter in the modern ocean and in the sedimentary record has been
an object of study for a number of years. Variations in the carbon-13/carbon-12
ratio have variously been interpreted as arising from changes (or differences)
in temperature, the amount of dissolved carbon dioxide in seawater, growth rate
and productivity of phytoplankton, among other possibilities. The phenomenon is
not only a major feature of present-day ocean chemistry but, moreover, may be of
use for understanding historical variations in global carbon dioxide through
isotopic studies of the sedimentary record. In this study the principal
investigator will conduct a series of laboratory experiments and field
comparisons to test the strength of a mathematical model for carbon isotope
fractionation resulting from uptake by phytoplankton. In collaboration with
colleagues at the Alfred Wegener Institut in Bremerhaven, Germany, and the
Monterey Bay Aquarium Research Institute, he will study the effects of several
processes on carbon isotope fractionation by phytoplankton species. If
successful, this work could lead to a new predictive tool for understanding the
carbon isotope chemistry of the present-day ocean and perhaps provide a key to
understanding paleoclimate through analysis of marine sediment cores.