* 9619713
* Adding Domain Knowledge to Inductive Learning Methods for   Classifying Texts
* CSE,IIS
* 09/15/1997,08/31/2001
* Kevin Ashley, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Maria Zemankova
* 08/31/2001
* USD 162,825.00

The research focuses on improving current methods for learning to classify texts
by incorporating knowledge from an expert domain model. The goal is
automatically to classify the texts of legal opinions in terms of the factors
that apply to the cases described. Factors -- stereotypical fact patterns
tending to strengthen or weaken the underlying legal claims in a case, and their
relations to legal issues -- are a kind of expert domain knowledge useful in
legal argumentation. The program takes as inputs the raw texts of legal opinions
and assigns as outputs the applicable factors. The program's training instances
are drawn from a corpus of legal opinions whose textual descriptions of cases
have been represented manually in terms of factors. The problem is hard because
the language of the opinions is complex; the mere fact that an opinion discusses
factors does not necessarily imply that those factors actually apply to the
case. Starting with several existing inductive and statistical learning
algorithms, this research assesses whether adding four different kinds of domain
knowledge improves the algorithms' performance: (1) domain knowledge about
factors and the legal issues to which they relate; (2) general information about
the structure of legal opinions; (3) information about the statutes quoted in an
opinion; (4) information about those cases cited in an opinion whose factors are
known. The work also explores (a) how to combine inductive and analytical
techniques to deal with small numbers of training instances and (b) how best to
combine successful inductive, statistical, and knowledge-based methods. Using
domain knowledge to guide automatic text classification integrates information
retrieval, machine learning and AI knowledge-representation techniques, will
help scale up case-based reasoning systems, and alleviate the problem of
assessing the relevance of texts in increasingly large on-line databases.