* 9619066
* Bay Area Schools for Excellence in Education
* NONE,NONE
* 05/01/1997,08/31/2003
* Bess Stephens, Palo Alto Unified School District
* Continuing grant
* Carole Stearns
* 08/31/2003
* USD 5,358,364.00

9619066 Hustler The Bay Area Schools for Excellence in Education (BASEE) is a
partnership between Hewlett-Packard Company and eight school districts in
California's Silicon Valley (Cupertino Union School District, Los Altos School
District, Menlo Park School District, Mountain View School District, Palo Alto
Unified School District, Redwood City School District, Santa Clara Unified
School District and Whisman School Districts). Together the districts include 74
elementary schools, over 1900 teachers and 44,000 students in a geographic
region that includes much of the Mid-Peninsula region of the San Francisco Bay
Area. The districts began working together in 1992 to launch district-wide kit-
based hands-on elementary science programs. The BASEE collaborative offers
science training to teachers via three different strands. Strand I introduces
teachers to the science kits and is designed for new teachers and those new to
the curriculum; Strand II provides ongoing professional development for teachers
ready to focus on content background connected with effective teaching
strategies. Strand III provides leadership opportunity for those wishing to
solidify their science background while sharing their expertise at school sites.
There is a separate strand for administrators that supports their supervision of
science teaching and helps them create a vision for science in their schools.
The collaborative has created a variety of offerings to meet the various time
needs of teachers. There are summer institutes, evening programs during the
school year, grade level meetings and district staff development days. Prior to
attending these sessions, each teacher has the opportunity to assess his/her own
needs in the area of science with connections to math and technology. Some of
those needs are met by BASEE programs, while others are funded with dollars
directed to the schools for site decision-making. Substantial in-kind support
from HP and the participating districts augments the NSF grant. Addi tional
monetary support has been pledged over the five year period from three local
foundations: the William and Flora Hewlett Foundation, the David and Lucile
Packard Foundation and the Noyce Foundation. The partnership also draws on the
rich resource of scientists, engineers and other volunteers from the local
community, HP employees and others, such as members of the local chapter of
American Women in Science.