* 9619294
* Multidisciplinary Education using Curriculum Re-Engineering,Industry Partnership and Simulation Technology (MERIT 2000)
* ENG,ECCS
* 05/01/1997,04/30/2001
* Ali Abur, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* James Momoh
* 04/30/2001
* USD 215,000.00

ECS-9619294 Kezunovic The changes in the utility and related manufacturing
industry, as well as consulting and engineering services have been driven by
continuing de-regulation and increasing competition. A new paradigm of operation
where the customer becomes the focus is being established. This approach not
only redefines who the customer is. but what the customer wants and what are the
options in achieving the goals of satisfying the customer. An obvious
consequence of this process is a need for a new profile of an engineer that can
fit the new paradigm. There is a wide consensus that the existing power
engineering education does not offer the required solution. As a result, the
aaademia needs to "produce" an engineer with a new profile. This strategy was
pursued at the proposal preparation stage and will be continued throughout the
project with a very clear goal to make the creation of the new education concept
a joint effort between "producers" and "consumers" of the power engineers for
the 21'st century. The research approach will be to assemble inputs from the
industry advisors reflecting the industry needs, make an assessment of the
existing simulation technology, identify multidisciplinary issues to be included
in the re-engineered curriculum, and identify the methodology and experimental
examples for classroom and laboratory teaching. An important contribution of
this proposal will be incorporation of the new simulation technology into the
teaching process to enhance student's analytical and practical skills. In
addition, the simulation tools will be used to make the teaching of the
traditional power engineering topics more efficient and compressed so that the
new multidisciplinary topics can be added to the curriculum. This proposal is
primarily focused on the undergraduate education with an addition emphasis on
high school education. The graduate and continuine education will be considered
as well.