* 9619514
* Parallel Jacobi Methods for Large Control Problems
* CSE,CCF
* 02/15/1997,01/31/2000
* Niloufer Mackey, Western Michigan University
* Standard Grant
* S. Kamal Abdali
* 01/31/2000
* USD 53,270.00

The aim of this project is the development and implementation of parallelizable
numerical methods for solving matrix Riccati equations that arise from large
control problems. One effective and widely used approach to their solution is
via the computation of the stable invariant subspace of an associated
Hamiltonian matrix. Existing methods have one or more drawbacks: limited
parallelizability, lack of structure-preservation, numerical instability, or
slow convergence. In this project, new Jacobi type algorithms for Hamiltonian
and other structured eigenproblems will be developed. Existing structure-
preserving Jacobi algorithms suffer from poor convergence: they use 2x2
symplectic-rotations, which limit the positions on the off-diagonal that can be
targeted for annihilation. By exploiting the correspondence between 4x4 matrices
and the tensor square of the quaternion algebra, this proposal studies ways to
overcome this restriction, and develop structure-preserving algorithms that have
better convergence properties, while retaining numerical stability and
parallelizability. The algorithms developed will be evaluated for speed and
stability in serial and parallel settings. Improved parallel algorithms will
enable scientists and engineers to solve larger control problems with greater
accuracy. ***