* 9619444
* The Haystack Observatory as an REU Site for Astronomy and   Atmospheric Science
* MPS,AST
* 04/01/1997,03/31/2002
* Robert Phillips, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing grant
* Eileen D. Friel
* 03/31/2002
* USD 509,680.00

Abstract Salah et al The Massachusetts Institute of Technology will host eight
students annually at its Haystack Observatory to provide research experiences
for undergraduates. The Haystack Observatory is a multi-disciplinary research
center dedicated to radio astronomical research, using its 37-m diameter
telescope. The facility is also used for studies of the earth's upper atmosphere
by taking advantage of its 46-meter and 67-meter high power radars and available
optical facilities. The students will be involved in the acquisition of data
using the instrumentation, carrying out the analysis and interpretation of the
measurements, as well as the development of hardware and software to improve the
capabilities of the facility. Astronomical studies will involve the
characterization of galactic radio emission sources and star formation
investigations. Atmospheric studies will emphasize the effects of geomagnetic
storms on the structure and dynamics of the earth's atmosphere, spectral studies
of periodic variations observed in the upper atmosphere, and radio propagation
effects. Technical projects include the digital design of signal processing
systems, tests of advanced recording heads, and development of realtime control
software. The students will work closely with a staff mentor throughout the
summer, and will prepare a report and presentation on their projects. The
presentations will be given at national conferences, and opportunities will be
provided to continue some of the projects during the academic year. The students
will be exposed to all aspects of the research facility through seminars and
demonstrations at the various unique facilities, and will obtain a thorough
practical experience of scientific research at a facility dedicated to research.