* 9619034
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Memories of Childhood: True versus False Reports
* SBE,SES
* 03/01/1997,02/28/1999
* Gail Goodman, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Patricia White
* 02/28/1999
* USD 14,360.00

Goodman 9619034 The current debate concerning the validity of recovered
memories of childhood sexual abuse has significant theoretical and legal
implications. This research promises to answer several important questions
pertinent to the debate. First, what are the effects of interviewers'
expectancies on adults' true and false reports of childhood events? Second, what
are the effects of guided visualizations combined with high expectancy on
recovering memories of childhood. Third, what distinguishes adults true from
false memories?, What are laypeople's abilities to discriminate between true and
false memories? And, finally, what individual differences are important in the
creation of false reports of childhood events. Two experiments focusing on
expectancy and visualization and their effects on false reports are being
conducted. Community residents and college students serve as participants.
Family members provide information about childhood events and false memories are
created by the investigators. Analyses of variance and correlational methods are
used to analyze the data. The results will provide fundamental information about
reconstructive memory as well as shed light on the current legal controversy
regarding false memory. %%% The current debate concerning the validity of
recovered memories of childhood sexual abuse has significant theoretical and
legal implications. This research promises to answer several important questions
pertinent to the debate. First, what are the effects of interviewers'
expectancies on adults' true and false reports of childhood events? Second, what
are the effects of guided visualizations combined with high expectancy on
recovering memories of childhood. Third, what distinguishes adults true from
false memories?, What are laypeople's abilities to discriminate between true and
false memories? And, finally, what individual differences are important in the
creation of false reports of childhood events. Two experiments focusing on
expectancy and visualization and their effects on false reports are being
conducted. Community residents and college students serve as participants.
Family members provide information about childhood events and false memories are
created by the investigators. Analyses of variance and correlational methods are
used to analyze the data. The results will provide fundamental information about
reconstructive memory as well as shed light on the current legal controversy
regarding false memory. ***