* 9619121
* EPWG:  Guiding Math/Science Talented Girls and Women
* EDU,EES
* 05/01/1997,09/30/2000
* Veronica Burrows, Arizona State University
* Continuing Grant
* Margrete S. Klein
* 09/30/2000
* USD 730,382.00

9619121 Kerr Talented girls and women drop out of advanced math and science
courses more frequently and choose college majors in science, engineering, and
mathematics less often than do boys and men. Native American, African American,
and Hispanic girls are particularly at risk for not achieving their career
goals. The high school counselors, administrators, and math/science educators
are the guidance providers who are the missing links in nationwide efforts to
change practices which discourage math/science talented girls and women. This
project is designed to: (a) teach secondary counselors, administrators and
math/science educators specific research-based techniques for guiding and
encouraging math/science talented girls and women; (b) to increase these
guidance providers' knowledge of and interest in careers in science,
engineering, and mathematics; (c) to expand a successful program for providing
counseling and encouragement to math/science talented at-risk girls; (d) to
involve guidance providers in creating guidance plans and training colleagues in
their own schools and colleges; and (e) to disseminate this information
throughout the counseling, school administration, and math/science education
professions. The techniques taught are based on those developed for the NSF-
sponsored project on career development for talented at-risk girls. For three
years, during the series of one-week summer seminars each year, counselors,
administrators, and science educators in the southwest will be taught the
knowledge and skills for guiding career development of math/science talented
girls. An experimental component will allow participants to work with talented
at-risk girls one-on-one and to experience hands-on science activities together.
Three similar winter seminars will be offered to counselors at the nation's
leading specialized schools for math, science, and technology, as well as
southwest guidance providers. A consulting team and a Handbook for Guiding Girls
and Women will further d isseminate this knowledge throughout the counseling,
school administration, and math/science education professions.