* 9619139
* Increasing the Availability of Materials for the            Professional Development of Science and Mathematics Teachers
* EHR,DRL
* 04/01/1997,03/31/2008
* Iris Weiss, Horizon Research Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Sharon M. Locke
* 03/31/2008
* USD 2,137,021.00

9619139 Weiss As part of its teacher enhancement program, NSF has supported the
development of materials to improve the content knowledge and pedagogical skills
of K-12 science, mathematics, and technology education teachers. The Foundation
has also supported the development of materials designed to support the
implementation of high quality instructional materials. This project is designed
to identify those materials, evaluate them, and make them more available to the
community of staff developers. The specific activities will involve the
following: * Searching for existing teacher enhancement materials, including,
but not limited to, those developed with NSF support; * Describing and
critiquing these materials; * Creating a data base of available materials,
searchable by such characteristics as target grade level range, disciplinary
content, and medium (e.g., videotapes); * Developing and field-testing
dissemination mechanisms such as CD-ROMs or Web sites for the quality materials;
* Describing the gaps in the landscape to assist funders and PIs in targeting
future development efforts to areas of greatest need. The project is being
directed by Dr. Iris Weiss, President of Horizon Research, Inc.; collaborators
include Dr. Anne Butler Kahle of Miami University of Ohio; Dr. Audrey Champagne
of State University of New York at Albany; and Dr. Susan Friel of the University
of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, each supervising a cadre of master teachers,
graduate students, and university faculty in reviewing teacher enhancement
materials. Partner organizations include the American Association for the
Advancement of Science, the American Geological Institute, the Council of State
Science Supervisors, the National Research Council, the National Science
Teachers Association, and the National Council of Teachers of Mathematics.