* 9619859
* Protein-Lipid Interactions
* BIO,MCB
* 10/01/1996,09/30/2000
* H. Stewart Hendrickson, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Kamal Shukla
* 09/30/2000
* USD 269,247.00

9619859 Hendrickson This research will focus on interactions of
phosphatidylinositol-specific phospholipase C (PI-PLC) and sphingomyelinase with
various lipid membrane systems. The major points to be addressed are the
mechanisms of action of these enzymes, substrate specificities, the way in which
the enzymes interact with lipid interfaces, and the nature of activation by the
lipid interface. The kinetics of these enzymes will be studied using
thiophosphate substrate analogs in continuous spectrophotometric assay systems
with mixed-micelles or vesicles of substrate and other phospholipids or
detergents. Kinetics will also be studied with fluorescent-labeled lipids in a
HPLC-based assay. Protein-lipid interactions will be studied by fluorescence
spectroscopy using intrinsic tryptophan or extrinsic substrate-analog probes,
gel filtration, and centrifugation techniques. The micelle and lipid bilayer
vesicle systems used in these studies will be produced under carefully
controlled conditions and will be characterized in order to understand their
specific structures and any changes that may occur as a result of phospholipase
activity. Much enzymology has been done with soluble enzymes and substrates;
however, many enzymes act at membrane interfaces. The significance of this
research lies in understanding the interactions of enzymes with lipid substrates
at an interface. The results of this research will provide new information about
the recognition processes and mechanisms for enzyme binding at an interface, the
activation processes that take place at the interface, how enzyme activity is
regulated, and the mechanism of catalysis.