* 9619583
* Climatic and Vegetational Oscillations During the Last      Glacial-Interglacial Transition in Alaska
* GEO,AGS
* 04/01/1997,11/10/1998
* Feng Sheng Hu, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Herman Zimmerman
* 11/10/1998
* USD 164,928.00

9619583 Hu Evidence is compelling from the circum-North Atlantic and from other
parts of the globe that climatic warming during the last glacial-interglacial
transition (LGIT) was punctuated by short-lived reversals to near-glacial
conditions. In Alaska paleoecological and stable-isotope data from scattered
sites strongly suggest the existence of short-lived climatic events during the
LGIT. This PALE/ARCSS award supports a project to acquire high-temporal
resolution records of vegetation and climate during the LGIT by analyzing a
suite of proxy indicators in sediment cores from lakes across three sub-regions
of Alaska. Vegetational reconstructions will be based on pollen, spore, and
plant-macrofossil records supplemented by carbon-content and magnetic-
susceptibility stratigraphies. The complementary properties of these proxies
will allow the identification of the most plausible paleoenvironmental
scenarios. The results from this project will be used to assess the timing,
geographic extent, character, and magnitude of climatic and vegetational
oscillations during the LGIT in Alaska. As part of the longitudinal
(circumarctic) database from PALE and the latitudinal database form PEP-I,
paleorecords from this project should offer insights into the linkages of North
Pacific high-latitudes to the global climate system and the mechanisms causing
abrupt climatic changes.