* 9619341
* Minneapolis Public Schools Systemic Change in Science       Initiative
* EDU,DRL
* 03/15/1997,02/29/2004
* Lawrence Rudnick, Minneapolis Public Schools
* Continuing Grant
* Carole Stearns
* 02/29/2004
* USD 5,034,214.00

9619341 Hutchinson This 5-year Local Systemic Change project in Minneapolis
proposes to reach approximately 1600 grades K-8 teachers in 62 elementary and 8
middle schools. All teachers will receive a minimum of 100 hours of professional
development in science and 300 leadership teachers will be involved in 240 or
more. The professional development is expected to provide all Minneapolis
teachers with the science content knowledge and instructional skills they will
need to implement the district's new inquiry- and standards-based science
curriculum for grades K-8. Principals and school administrators from the
district's elementary and middle schools will undertake professional development
to enhance their leadership skills in the alignment of science curriculum,
instruction and assessment in their schools. An important goal of all the
proposed project activities is to change the belief systems that have
perpetuated the public perception that science is not for all children. A
coalition of science professionals has been formed that includes Minneapolis
teacher leaders and district administrators, higher education faculty, informal
science educators, and representatives of local corporations and community
organizations. A substantial effort is underway in Minneapolis to recruit
teachers who represent the diverse groups represented in the schools' student
population, which is now 63 percent students of color. Approximately 25 percent
of the new teachers hired in the last five years are from groups traditionally
underrepresented in the sciences. One component of the Minneapolis Local
Systemic Change project will be to develop stronger linkages between the
Minneapolis Public Schools science program leadership and the state's higher
education institutions that train the majority of future Minneapolis teachers,
with the goal of moving preservice teacher training in science closer to the MPS
standards for science curriculum, instruction and assessment. The serv ices of
the district's two science centers that have traditionally provided hands-on
science instructional materials to elementary school teachers will be expanded
to include materials distribution to middle school teachers and science
professional development coordination for the district. Principals and science
leadership teachers at the school sites will determine the scope of services
offered by the centers as part of a "buy-in" plan to be implemented over the
five-year term of the project. Teachers at 8-10 "model schools" will experiment
with various approaches to aligning the science curriculum with best practices
in instruction and assessment. The request is for $5,034,214 with cost share
estimated as $3,454,449.