* 9619596
* High Performance Computing for Large Scale Systems
* CSE,CCF
* 02/15/1997,01/31/1999
* Kyle Gallivan, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* S. Kamal Abdali
* 01/31/1999
* USD 130,000.00

This project investigates high performance algorithms in the areas of model
reduction algorithms for dynamical linear systems, eigenproblem solvers, and
iterative methods for sparse nonsymmetric linear systems with one or multiple
right-hand side vectors. The model reduction work is based on the rational
Lanczos algorithm which performs multipoint moment matching-based model
reduction with automatic point selection from a specified grid. It uses a novel
shifting strategy which exploits a mix of imaginary and real positive scalar
values that provide a multiscale view of the frequency response of the dynamical
system being modeled. The restriction to moment-matched reduced order models
will be relaxed in order to improve the efficiency of the model production. This
will entail the development of new error modeling techniques as well as the
assessment of the effect of the use of iterative methods to approximately solve
the linear systems that occur in each iteration of rational approximation
algorithms. This will also drive the development of new preconditioning and
iterative method strategies. A strategy for point placement (rather than point
selection from a predetermined grid) will be developed and used in order to
improve the accuracy of the reduced order model and to drive a load balancing
strategy for the large grain parallel processing in a multilevel parallelism
implementation. In the work on eigenproblems, technology will be transferred and
adapted from the rational Lanczos domain to Krylov-based eigenproblem solvers.
This includes adapting the model reduction shift strategy to yield a multilevel
approach to locate appropriate sections of the complex plane in which
eigenvalues reside. The choice of spaces used to form the projector will also be
updated via rational Lanczos technology. A Gershgorin disk-based alternative to
Krylov-based approaches will also be studied. The approach is a generalization
and improvement of work by Varga and other s. The methods natural multilevel
parallelism will be analyzed and exploited in an experimental implementation.
The area of nonsymmetric sparse linear system solving via preconditioned
iterative methods supports the advances in the two areas above, and also
contributes to the state-of-the-art in numerical algorithms. Three basic tasks
will be undertaken. The first is to continue work on a robust parallel
preconditioned iterative method-based package for the solution of nonsymmetric
systems. This work will build on earlier efforts on the EN-like family of
methods, partitioned row projection schemes, and an accelerated block Stiefel
iteration adapted to nonsymmetric systems. Preconditioners based on eigenvalue
deflation, incomplete orthogonalization, and modified Krylov methods will be
considered. The second system linear system solving task that will be addressed
is the development and analysis of a family of block EN-like methods for linear
systems with multiple right-hand side vectors encountered in multiple-input-
multiple-output dynamical systems and applications such as electromagnetics.
Finally, the linear system solvers above will be adapted to the situation
encountered in model reduction -- multiple linear systems defined by a matrix
pencil (A,E), and a set of scalar shifts with associated right-hand sides.