* 9619376
* The Influence of Electronic Nonadiabaticity on Competing    Chemical Reaction Pathways
* MPS,CHE
* 04/01/1997,05/31/2001
* Laurie Butler, University of Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Janice M. Hicks
* 05/31/2001
* USD 540,820.00

In this project supported by the Experimental Physical Chemistry Program of the
Chemistry Division, Butler will continue studies of electronically nonadiabatic
chemical reaction pathways. One set of experiments will seek to predict
adiabatic and nonadiabatic reaction channels upon local electronic excitation of
a molecular functional group. As an example, photofragment velocity and angular
distribution measurements from crossed-laser molecular beam photodissociation of
nitric acid together with ab initio calculations will identify all the product
channels of nitric acid resulting from laser excitation. Other molecules to be
examined include nitromethane, methyl nitrate, and nitramide. In another set of
experiments photofragment velocity and angular distribution analysis of the
photodissociation channels of a series of amides will use emission spectroscopy
of dissociating molecules to characterize the shape of the potential energy
surface in the Franck-Condon region. Detailed insight into well-known photo-
induced bond cleavage channels will be obtained. The experimental measurements
in this project combined with calculations will help us understand the
photochemical reactivity of complex molecules. For example, some reactions are
forbidden even though there is enough energy available for them to proceed. This
project will provide a basis by which we can explain some of these unexpected
outcomes