* 9619213
* Alkaloids of Importance in Plant-Insect Interactions
* MPS,CHE
* 05/01/1997,04/30/2001
* Frank Stermitz, Colorado State University
* Continuing Grant
* Kenneth M. Doxsee
* 04/30/2001
* USD 282,000.00

Professor Frank R. Stermitz, of the Department of Chemistry of Colorado State
University, is supported by the Organic Synthesis Program for his studies of
alkaloids of importance in plant-insect interactions. His studies focus on the
isolation, structure, biosynthesis, and insect processing of alkaloids in
conifers (pine, spruce, and fir trees). The structures of an array of
2,6-disubstituted piperidine alkaloids is found in the conifers are being
elucidated by a combination of isolation, mass spectral analysis, and
spectroscopic methods, as well as by synthesis and/or semisynthesis. Plant
feeding experiments with carbon-13 labeled compounds appearing to be plausible
biosynthetic precursors will elucidate details of the synthesis of these
alkaloids. The ability of spruce species to generate trans-disubstituted
piperidines, whereas pine species generate only cis-disubstituted compounds,
will also be explored. Analysis of conifer-feeding beetle, butterfly, and moth
larvae and their excretion products will determine how insects process the
piperidine alkaloids. Finally, extracts of plants displaying activity against
Mycobacterium tuberculosis will be analyzed in order to identify potential anti-
tuberculosis agents. With support from the Organic Synthesis Program, Professor
Frank R. Stermitz, of the Department of Chemistry of Colorado State University,
studies the occurrence in conifers (pine, spruce, and fir trees) of compounds
displaying biological activity. The particular `alkaloids` (naturally occurring
nitrogen-containing compounds) found in these trees are found in similar or
identical forms in an astounding variety of other natural sources, including the
Mexican bean beetle, which synthesizes the alkaloids itself, and poisonous
frogs, which obtain the alkaloids from unknown food sources. Study of both the
plant sources of the alkaloids and the insects which feed upon them is expected
to shed light on a number of important issues, including the way in which
insects circumvent the defensive strategies of plants and possibly use ingested
compounds to deter their own predators. In the course of related studies, plant
extracts were isolated which display activity against the bacillus which causes
tuberculosis. These extracts will be analyzed in order to identify new classes
of compounds with potential therapeutic applications against strains of
tuberculosis resistant to current drug therapies.