* 9619856
* The Back of an Envelope:  An Architecture for Knowledge     Based Design Environment
* CSE,IIS
* 05/01/1997,04/30/2000
* Mark Gross, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 04/30/2000
* USD 323,742.00

People draw diagrams and sketch to explore ideas, understand problems, generate
alternatives, and communicate. However, today's menu and text based human-
computer interfaces do not take advantage of this commonly used modality. The
Back of an Envelope project aims to support freehand drawing as an interface to
knowledge based design tools. It employs advances in gesture recognition,
interpretation of visual languages, and pen based computing, and explores how to
combine these technologies to build drawing interfaces for end user
applications. The Back of an Envelope has three specific objectives: develop a
framework for using freehand drawing to communicate with computer-based design
tools, construct a working prototype that links a drawing interface with design
tools, and assess the prototype's performance in design studios and classroom
settings. The project also aims to elucidate roles that graphical communication
plays in problem-solving and design. The project's significance is that it
expands the range of modalities available to end users, enhancing traditional
text and menu interfaces with freehand drawing. This enables designers to employ
computer aided design tools earlier in a design process, when they are sketching
and making diagrams. Besides computer aided design, the Back of an Envelope
interface framework can be employed in other problem solving applications.