* 9619699
* Linking Undergraduates to Research on the Environment       (L.U.R.E.)
* ENG,EEC
* 07/01/1997,06/30/2004
* Jeannie Darby, University of California-Davis
* Continuing Grant
* Mary Poats
* 06/30/2004
* USD 253,800.00

9619699 Darby ABSTRACT In an ideal academic setting, research should be an
integral part of the undergraduate experience. The individual or small group
efforts that occur in a research setting are a vital complement to the more
passive lecture-based instruction provided in most engineering courses. The
applications and innovations that can be demonstrated through research
experiences can both motivate students to enter and persist in engineering and
help prepare them for either graduate school or professional engineering.
According, the UC Davis Department of Civil and Environmental Engineering
proposes will offer an environmental engineering REU program that includes
recruiting, selecting, educating, retaining and mentoring a total of 40
undergraduate students over a five year period. The program is aimed
particularly at students from D-Q University (a two year community college and
founding member of the American Indian Higher Education Consortium) and women
and underrepresented minorities from UC Davis. The overarching goals of the
proposed project are to: 1) increase the visibility of environmental engineering
as a viable career for Native Americans and 2) develop well rounded and
independent students who can contribute professionally with thoughtful
assessment and innovative solutions. The project begins with a four week summer
session introducing students to the principles of research and includes visits
to campus facilities and research field and laboratory sites, attending seminars
on preparing a research plan and scheduled time with faculty mentors. The
product of this four week session will be a student-faculty formal research
contract for the upcoming academic year. During the academic year, the students
will participate in a structured research seminar series as well as research
group meetings, conduct research according to their research contract, prepare
presentations and progress reports and meet twice weekly with faculty mentors.
The major tangible product of the academic year research will be preparation of
an abstract and paper for spring submission the UC Davis Undergraduate Research
Conference (URC) and the National Undergraduate Research Conference (NCAR). In
addition to the structured research experience, D-Q students will be provided
guidance in course selection and transfer requirements to facilitate their
preparation for transfer to a university with an approved engineering
curriculum. ***