* 9619520
* Intrinsic Stress and Grain Alignment in Diamond Films
* MPS,DMR
* 04/15/1997,03/31/2001
* Brian Sheldon, Brown University
* Continuing Grant
* Lynnette Madsen
* 03/31/2001
* USD 346,206.00

9619520 Sheldon One problem with CVD deposition of diamond on many substrates is
that the intrinsic stresses in the diamond film are larger than the stresses
caused by the film/substrate thermal expansion mismatch, which causes the
diamond film to spall off or the substrate to bow. Post- deposition annealing
does not remove these intrinsic stresses. Recent work by the PI's group has
determined that an intermediate annealing step, after significant grain
impingement, but before a dense film was formed, can minimize intrinsic stress
in the diamond film, and reduce the spallation. The intermediate annealing step
alters the film microstructure in such a way to reduce stress evolution during
subsequent diamond film growth. Preliminary electron microscopy studies (ex situ
SEM and in situ TEM hot-stage experiments) indicate that contacting diamond
grains rotate during annealing. A reasonable explanation for the observed stress
reduction is that grain rotation results in better crystallographic alignment
between adjacent grains. Subsequent growth on top of these grains can then form
more stable grain boundary configurations that are less susceptible to the
relaxation mechanisms that can induce intrinsic tensile stress. The proposed
research would study the fundamentals of this phenomenon in order to optimize
and control stress levels in diamond and other thin films. The research will be
performed by a Focused Research Group consisting of the PI (CVD/thin films), and
2 co-PIs (a transmission electron microscopist/crystallographer and a
physicist/Raman spectroscopist). %%% One problem with CVD deposition of diamond
on many substrates is that the intrinsic stresses in the diamond film are larger
than the stresses caused by the film/substrate thermal expansion mismatch, which
causes the diamond film to spall off or the substrate to bow. Post- deposition
annealing does not remove these intrinsic stresses. Recent work by the PI's
group has determined that an intermediate annealing step, after significant
grain impingement, but before a dense film was formed, can minimize intrinsic
stress in the diamond film, and reduce the spallation. The proposed research
would study the fundamentals of this phenomenon in order to optimize and control
stress levels in diamond and other thin films. The research will be performed by
a Focused Research Group consisting of the PI (CVD/thin films), and 2 co-PIs (a
transmission electron microscopist/crystallographer and a physicist/Raman
spectroscopist). ***