* 9619652
* Engineering Analysis of Biological Systems
* ENG,EEC
* 05/01/1997,04/30/2003
* Robert Smith, Syracuse University
* Continuing Grant
* Esther Bolding
* 04/30/2003
* USD 290,815.00

9619652 Smith ABSTRACT The purpose of this proposal is to strengthen and
solidify the program in undergraduate research in the Department of
Bioengineering and Neuroscience (BEN) of the Syracuse University College of
Engineering and Computer Science. A group of ten students will be invited to
participate in ongoing research at BEN each summer for five years. Research will
involve an engineering analysis of function and structure in living systems, and
in particular two main areas: sensory processing and skeletomuscular
biomechanics. The program will be housed in the Institute for Sensory Research
(ISR), a world class research institute devoted to studies of the sensory
systems of vision, hearing and touch. Work in sensory processing will be carried
out in the research laboratories of ISR, while that in biomechanics will occur
at the nearby Laboratory for Undergraduate Biomechanics at Syracuse University,
and the Orthopedics Laboratory of the SUNY Health Science Center. Particular
projects will involve both animal and human systems and such areas as 1. The
electrical anatomy of the neural plexus in the horseshoe crab eye; 2.
Information processing in the vertebrate retina; 3. Fundamentals of human
stereoscopic vision; 4. Dynamic responses of auditory nerve fibers; 5.
Acquisition and analysis of physiological responses of the human auditory
periphery; 6. Mechanical properties of cervical spine tissues; 7. Replacement
for the interosseous membrane of the human forearm; 8. Calcium flux changes in
bone exposed to low frequency electromagnetic fields; and 9. The design and
development of a swallow monitor. Students will compare analytical approaches
and instrumentation needs in the various areas and seek commonalities and
differences in the variety of methods of engineering analysis of living systems.
They will also participate in an ethics symposium covering such areas as use of
animals and humans in scientific experiments, the ethics of science, and the
challenge of diversity in the engineering community. In this way, it is hoped to
help in the development of bioengineers skilled in both technical areas and the
ability to build a better world ***.