* 9619331
* SGER: Development of Photocurable Degradable Polymers for   Orthopedic Applications
* ENG,CBET
* 12/15/1996,11/30/1998
* Kristi Anseth, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Janice M. Jenkins
* 11/30/1998
* USD 60,000.00

9619331 Anseth The object of the proposed research is to develop a new class of
degradable polymers that is photopolymerizable and exhibits the desired
mechanical properties (particularly as the sample degrades) necessary for
musculoskeletal applications. This work is important in developing new
strategies to restore structural and mechanical function to bone that has been
fractured by traumatic injury, or surgically removed because of disease or tumor
formation. There is a great need for polymeric materials that are safe,
degradable and strong for use in musculoskeletal applications. Development of a
photopolymerizable system may be beneficial for many reasons including fast
curing rates at room temperature, spatial control of the polymerization, and
complete ease of fashioning and flexibility during implantation. These benefits
have led to advanced in dentistry, opthamology, and adhesion prevention, but
currently no orthopedic systems have been designed. Photoinitiation could
greatly simplify the clinical application of orthopedic polymer implants. For
example, in pin applications a viscous, liquid monomer could be introduced into
a pin hole and the system photopolymerized in situ to render a hardened polymer
of the required dimensions. In situ polymerization eliminates the need for
shaping the implant with blades, buffs, and warming instruments. Additionally,
the process provided a faster and better mechanism for replicating complex
shapes and should improve adhesion of the polymer implant to the bone. Bone
fractures are a major health concern in this country. Recent studies of
musculoskeletal conditions in the United States estimate over 2 million
fractures annually which more than 280,000 are hip fractures. Numerous
musculoskeletal applications would benefit from the development of safe, strong,
easily fashioned, and degradable polymers. ***