* 9619320
* A Multimedia Introductory Course in Electric Energy
* ENG,ECCS
* 05/01/1997,04/30/2001
* Leonard Bohmann, Michigan Technological University
* Standard Grant
* Marija Ilic
* 04/30/2001
* USD 229,329.00

ECS-9619320 Bohmann The goal of this project is to revitalize the education of
power engineers by making the student's first exposure to the material new and
exciting, and by making the material more relevant to he changing industry. We
will develop an introductory course in Electric Energy that is updated to
address the needs of all electrical engineers. The course will be exciting for
the students and driven by the needs of industry. It will cover all aspects of
the field of electrical engineering including power systems, energy conversion,
and power electronics. The course will be modular in nature so that it can be
used in a one quarter course, a one semester course, or a full year course.
Consequently, engineering faculty can successfully argue for this course's
inclusion into the core curriculum of any Electrical Engineering Department. The
material will be suitable for sophomore or junior college students and it will
be packaged on a CD-ROM. Updates will be available through the internet. Some of
the highlights of the course are: * The courseware will consist of course notes,
case studies, exercises, simulation programs, and visual demonstrations. * The
material will be arranged to satisfy a variety of student learning styles. *
Recent advances in mathematical education, such as the use of symbolic software
(Maple, Mathematica), will be integrated into the material. During the project,
Michigan Tech's Electrical Engineering Department will use the material for a
two-quarter sequence required for all EE majors. The project team will be lead
by faculty from MTU's Electrical Engineering Department and will include faculty
from Business, Social Sciences, Civil and Environmental Engineering, and
Mechanical Engineering. The project will be guided by an industrial advisory
board of about 12 members, drawn from a wide spectrum of the electric power
industry. This will include electrical equipment manufacturers, utilities,
independent power producers, power mark eters, and consultants. They will have
input into both the content and presentation methods of the course. A two-day
workshop, held in the spring of 1997, will bring together this advisory board
and the Michigan Tech project team. The workshop will develop a detailed outline
of the course as well as discuss the presentation of the material. The advisory
board will also review progress on a periodic basis as we develop the course
material, offering comments and suggestions for improvement.