* 9619024
* EMPOWER Science (Enriching Middle Schools -- Program        Outreach to Widen Educational Opportunities for Rural       Students)
* EHR,DRL
* 03/01/1997,08/31/2000
* David Haase, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Julia Clark
* 08/31/2000
* USD 622,813.00

9619024 Haase This three-year project, sponsored by North Carolina State
University, will enhance 120 teachers of science and technology in the rural
part of the state. Middle school teachers will be recruited from economically
disadvantaged school districts in Eastern North Carolina and will attend a three
week summer intensive institute followed by academic year workshops and a one-
week "refresher course" in the next summer. Participants will be trained in the
use of new computer based technologies to teach physics and chemistry
particularly the use of MBL and CBL in the classroom. In addition, equipment,
which is sometimes cost prohibitive for the schools, will be lent on an as-
needed basis from the University. Also, teachers will be trained to take
advantage of, and submit proposals to the "School Technology Fund" which is
being made available by the state to encourage schools to use computers and
laboratory equipment in the schools. Teachers will be sensitized to the
philosophy and practice of hands-on and inquiry-based learning, learn to address
the needs of a diverse student population and enlist the aid of teacher mentors
(trained from a previous NSF project) who will help in the implementation of the
technology component of the program as well as the new content. A web site will
be developed to enable teachers to discuss with one another and with project
staff issues related to the implementation of these new techniques in the
classroom. The award is being matched by funds equivalent to 36% of the grant.