* 9619924
* Princeton Summer Institute-Research Experience for          Undergraduates in Electrical Engineering
* ENG,EEC
* 02/01/1997,01/31/2003
* Stuart Schwartz, Princeton University
* Continuing Grant
* Mary Poats
* 01/31/2003
* USD 525,807.00

9619924 Schwartz ABSTRACT This project and REU site will provide support for
15-20 undergraduates from all over the country, mainly those having finished
their junior year, to work with 26 faculty members and graduate students in the
Electrical Engineering Department on current research projects within the
department. Selected graduate students will act as co-mentors. Current research
projects are in the areas of: electronic materials and devices; photonics and
optoelectronics; computer engineering; communications; signal/image processing.
In order to expand their exposure and experience, the students will also have
half-day-a-week involvement with our undergraduate semiconductor processing
laboratory, our signal processing laboratory, and a series of informal seminars
on "current" topics in electrical engineering. Ethics and the role of the
technology in society will be introduced in a way so as these social concerns
will not be seen in isolation, but rather, as an important component of ones
professional activities. The goal of the program is to increase the pool of
domestic applicants to graduate study in engineering, and help clarify their
views of the fields of engineering and science. This will be accomplished by
involvement in cutting-edge research and exposure to a variety of areas within
the field of electrical engineering. ***