* 9619458
* Development of an REU Site for Tropical Limnology           Associated With the International Decade of East African    Lakes (IDEAL) Program
* GEO,AGS
* 04/15/1997,03/31/2003
* Andrew Cohen, University of Arizona
* Continuing Grant
* David Verardo
* 03/31/2003
* USD 1,008,401.00

Abstract ATM-9619458 Cohen, Andrew S. University of Arizona Title: Development
of an REU Site for Tropical Limnology Associated With the International Decade
of the Eastern African Lakes (IDEAL) Program This award supports the development
of an REU Site summer program in tropical lake studies for American
undergraduate students. Ten to twelve students will spend six weeks per year
learning the fundamentals of physicochemical, biological and geological
processes in tropical lakes through intensive training and independent research
projects. The Program will be located in Kigoma, Tanzania, on the shores of Lake
Tanganyika, Africa, a world-class natural laboratory for investigating a wide
variety of scientifically significant questions about how tropical lakes work.
This site takes advantage of the faculty's record of research on the lake and
familiarity with local and regional logistics. Additionally the program will
reap unique benefits from a planned association with a simultaneous and
identical program for African undergraduates, to be funded separately by the
United Nations Global Environmental Facility (GEF) program for Lake Tanganyika.
The program will also take advantage of facilities and capital equipment on site
from the GEF program and the Tanzania Fisheries Research Institute, Kigoma
Station. The program faculty collectively span a board range of research
expertise in aquatic biology, physical and chemical limnology, climatology and
geolimnology. All are currently engaged in active research programs on the lake
and will offer students the opportunity to become involved in research on
scientifically significant questions. This program aims to become a central
focus activity for highly motivated students from around the country who are
planning a research career in tropical limnology and paleoclimatology. More
broadly, it is intended to stimulate interest in the importance of tropical lake
studies in understanding global change processes and as an early-warning study
area for understanding freshwater ecologic changes that have not yet occurred in
the U.S. This effort is coordinated through the International Decade for the
East African Lakes (IDEAL).