* 9619035
* Patterns of Climate Change in the Central and Eastern       Sectors of the South Pacific
* GEO,AGS
* 01/01/1997,12/31/1997
* Gerard Wellington, University of Houston
* Standard Grant
* Herman Zimmerman
* 12/31/1997
* USD 37,216.00

Abstract ATM-9619035 Wellington, George M. University of Houston Title: Patterns
of Climate Change in the Central and Eastern Sectors of the South Pacific
Isotopic and chemical tracers within coral aragonite can accurately record
seasonal and interannual changes in environmental parameters such as sea surface
temperature (SST), salinity, rainfall, nutrient availability, and river input.
Corals provide the only means to accurately reconstruct tropical ocean surface
conditions at high temporal resolution. Analysis of satellite-derived monthly
sea surface temperatures show that large scale oceanographic events, such as
ENSO, register a significant signal in the central and eastern South Pacific
region and indicate that corals from the Cook Islands and Easter Islands may be
suitable for reconstructing long-term climate records to: 1) relate interannual
climate variability over a large global scale, 2) identify the frequency and
magnitude of pre-historic ENSO events and, 3) evaluate potential evidence of
anthropogenic influence with respect to observed recent warming of the
troposphere. This SGER award supports a project to collect several multi-century
long cores from massive coral colonies at Cooks and Easter Islands. Initial
stable isotope analyses will be conducted at subannual resolution on the upper
(recent) portion to of the core. By comparing these results with instrumental
SST data we can accurately assess the potential for developing long climatic
time-series reconstructions from these regions.