* 9619939
* Fostering Undergraduate Astronomical Research in the        Southeast:  The SARA REU Program
* MPS,AST
* 04/15/1997,03/31/2002
* J. Scott Shaw, Florida Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Eileen D. Friel
* 03/31/2002
* USD 330,492.00

Abstract Oswalt The Southeastern Association for Research in Astronomy (SARA)
wishes to continue its participation in the NSF Research Experiences for
Undergraduates (REU) program. The REU program run by SARA is unique in that the
host site is not a single institution, but rather a consortium of five
universities in the southeastern U.S., which operates a one meter class
automated telescope at Kitt Peak National Observatory near Tucson , Arizona. The
preparation of students for careers in science and engineering is emphasized
through one-on-one collaborations with faculty who are experienced undergraduate
student research mentors. Over a dozen research projects are offered, ranging
from spectroscopic studies of minor planets, to the determination of the
Galactic disk age from observing white dwarf stars, to target of opportunity
observations of active galactic nuclei. At least 10 REU students annually will
use the SARA Observatory in Arizona during the course of their summer research.
In addition, multi-day workshops will expose each of them to astronomy as
practiced at two to three SARA institutions during their summer internships. At
the conclusion of the summer all students will present a talk and prepare a
paper for publication based on their summer research. Continuing collaboration
with their mentors and the presentation of papers at national meetings after the
summer program is supported. The NSF/REU summer intern program is the core of
SARA's effort to become a new center for undergraduate education and research in
astronomy for the southeastern U.S. Our recruiting effort to attract
undergraduate students will encompass the entire U.S., and will include a strong
commitment to attracting minority applicants, gender equality and student
diversity.