* 9619584
* Design, Implementation and Application of a Framework       for the Formalization of Deductive Systems
* CSE,CCF
* 08/01/1997,10/31/1999
* Frank Pfenning, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Frank D. Anger
* 10/31/1999
* USD 159,994.00

9619584 This project is a renewal of NSF Grant CCR-9303383 with the same title.
Motivated by the tremendous variety of deductive systems of interest in computer
science and logic, general meta-languages for their specification, often
referred to as logical frameworks, have been investigated by the researcher and
others. Work on the previous grant includes the design of the logical framework
LF and the logic programming language Elf based on LF. Extensive case studies
have confirmed the wide range of applicability of the methodology underlying LF
and Elf and also pointed towards certain limitations, which this project will
address. The work includes a language for modular presentation of deductive
systems and meta-programs, and refinements of the framework to permit subtyping,
linearity, and internal equational reasoning. The project will implement these
language refinements, building on current prototypes and the core and module
language implementations for LF and Elf. It will also continue to explore the
use of LF and Elf and their refinements as vehicles for representing proofs of
meta theorems about deductive systems; that is, their use as a meta-logical
framework. A number of case studies under the previous grant indicate the
feasibility of such representations, but more theoretical and implementation
work remains to be done. In longer term plans, the project will increase the
degree of automation of carrying out such proofs, taking advantage of the high
level of abstraction of the representations and the expressive type system of
LF. ***