* 9619440
* Dissertation Research: Social Relationship in Free-Ranging  Adult Red-fronted Brown Lemurs (Eulemur Fulvus Rufus)
* SBE,BCS
* 05/01/1997,04/30/1999
* Kenneth Glander, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Mark L. Weiss
* 04/30/1999
* USD 6,880.00

Prosimian primates exhibit a variety of inter-individual relationships. Some
lemur species live in large multi-male, multi-female groups, and a number of
researchers have suggested that these groups are actually collections of male-
female pairs. This field study of wild red-fronted brown lemurs at Anjamena,
Madagascar will be conducted to record spatial proximity, grooming interactions,
mating strategies, and aggressive interactions among this lemur species. Field
observations on behavior will be augmented by paternity exclusion tests of
offspring born during the study period with DNA testing. This detailed, long-
term project will verify the suggestion that large multi-male, multi-female
groups are composed of discrete male-female pairs. Behavioral data and paternity
determinations will allow testing of the hypothesis that male-female pairing
protects against infanticide in this species. Additionally, hypotheses developed
to explain male-female relationships in baboons will be tested with the data
collected here on lemurs. This permits consideration of lemurs in the broader
context of social relationships across other primate species and thus
facilitates a better understanding of lemur behavior through wider species
comparisons. The study will also test the broader applicability of these
hypotheses across the primate order.