* 9619063
* Instrumentation for Large Scale Neuron Population           Recording
* BIO,DBI
* 07/01/1997,06/30/2001
* Donald Woodward, Wake Forest University School of Medicine
* Continuing grant
* Helen G. Hansma
* 06/30/2001
* USD 600,000.00

The overall goal of this instrument development for Systems Neurophysiology is
to create functional devices to enable recording from very large ensembles of
neuronal spike trains in behaving animals. The plan is to develop and integrate
three tasks to be done in parallel. First, a new fabrication process will be
employed to create thin film silicon recording probes, each with sixteen sites.
The probe shapes and surface recording site properties will be optimized for
long-term chronic recording to match the effectiveness of microwire arrays
previously perfected by the P.I. Different spacing and sizes of surface
recording sites will be patterned on the probe and different recording surfaces
will be tested. A novel technology for fabrication of flexible microcables and
multichip modules will be adapted to lead signals from the recording probes to
external signal processing electronics. A second task is to create a design for
a VLSI microchip to detect and amplify- signals from 16 channels. and multiplex
signals to a single output lead. The chip will also provide switches with
control to apply test/stimulation to a selected input. Later goals will be to
produce a multisite probe with integrated active electronics and to create
multiple probe assemblies. The processes to be developed are exceptionally
favorable for commercial production methods. A low-cost, high-volume commercial
product will be facilited through later participation of the staff at the
Microelectronic Center of North Carolina (MCNC), Research Triangle, NC. A third
task is to assemble a demultiplexer with control hardware/software and an
advanced digital signal processing capability will be added to an existing
workstation to support spike sorting from 256 channels or more. All three tasks
will be done in parallel to incrementally add function to an existing, usable
system. This complex, integrated project is made more feasib le by preliminary
advances supported by NSF and elsewhere over past decade. This project aims to
bring closur,9/to a decade-long development effort of the P.I. and his
associates. The aim was to create and demonstrate the potential large scale
neuron ensemble recording for decoding of information in patterns within
distributed neuronal activity. Multivariate statistical methods have been
applied to process the large volumes of data yielded by the new data acquisition
methods. Recent publications by this group and others on multichannel recordings
have created enthusiasm and momentum toward further advances in multichannel
recording and analysis instrumentation. Advances in this capability are critical
to enable a basic paradigm shift in the study of conceptual issues in the study
of physiological neuronal networks.