* 9619369
* Symposium on Organic Electronic Materials and Devices,      1997 Materials Research Society Meeting,                    March 31 - April 4, 1997, San Francisco, CA
* MPS,DMR
* 01/15/1997,12/31/1997
* Robert Pachavis, Materials Research Society
* Standard Grant
* LaVerne D. Hess
* 12/31/1997
* USD 2,475.00

9619369 Pachavis A symposium will be held March 31 - April 4, 1997 on Organic
Electronic Materials and Devices covering the synthesis, processing, and
characterization of pi-conjugated organic and polymeric materials including
network structures, self-assembled materials, and nanostructures. The symposium
is being held to focus on recent progress in a research area rapidly evolving
toward achievement of better understanding and practical device realization.
Organic electronic and photonic materials have significant projected advantages,
for example, in reduced cost and large area display capability, for a variety of
communication and display device applications. NSF funds will be used to support
participation by graduate students and young faculty. There will be an
opportunity to assess the field, and to establish ties between universities,
research institutions, and industry. It is expected that top scientists in the
field will attend, and that the symposium will provide an effective forum to
discuss and delineate critical scientific issues in this rapidly developing
research area. %%% An evaluation of the progress and status of Organic
Electronic Materials and Devices and related materials processing and
characterization issues, especially critical materials research areas of
synthesis, processing, and the relationship of materials research to device
fabrication along with current assessments of the most important developments in
this field will be of great value to the understanding and enhanced utilization
of organic and polymeric materials in the field of electronics and photonics.
***