* 9619992
* Research Experience for Undergraduates in Mechatronics and  Smart Structures
* ENG,EEC
* 04/01/1997,12/31/2000
* Vittal Rao, Missouri University of Science and Technology
* Continuing grant
* Sue Kemnitzer
* 12/31/2000
* USD 238,441.00

9619992 Rao ABSTRACT The objective of this project is to develop an
interdisciplinary research program in mechatronics and smart structures for the
benefit of undergraduate students. The University of Missouri-Rolla (UMR) has
been quite successful in attracting grants and establishing a state-of-the-art
research facility in these areas. The researchers at UMR are currently
developing a collaborative relationship with the University of Turabo, Puerto
Rico (a minority, undergraduate university) to conduct joint research in the
field of mechatronics and smart structures. The overall goals of the project
being proposed are (i) introduction of mechatronics and smart structures
concepts to junior/senior undergraduate students, (ii) development of an
interdisciplinary educational experience for students working in teams involving
students from different disciplines, (iii) providing a unique opportunity to
minority students from the University of Turabo and other schools to conduct
research in state-of-the-art laboratories, and (iv) involving undergraduate
students with ongoing research programs in areas and technologies of national
importance. To accomplish these objectives, our approach will be to (i) develop
a eight-week summer course on mechatronics and smart structures, (ii) develop
team design projects, (iii) involve graduate students as mentors, and (iv)
provide hands-on experience in the computer-aided design and control of
mechanical systems. The novel feature of this project is the involvement of
minority undergraduate students in the development of a multidisciplinary
research experience. ***