* 9619086
* Reaching Science And Math Education Practictioners With     Research: Multimedia To Inform Teachers
* NONE,NONE
* 01/01/1997,12/31/1997
* Ricardo Nemirovsky, TERC Inc
* Standard Grant
* Nora Sabelli
* 12/31/1997
* USD 48,600.00

9619086 Carraher For educational research to enlighten and lend inspiration to
science and mathematics teaching, it must be accessible, comprehensible, and
engaging. This has been difficult to achieve through printed journals and books.
Teachers and researchers themselves commonly find research publications dry,
unclear, and removed from their personal experience. Recent developments in
computer and video technology promise to greatly facilitate dissemination of
research among educators and researchers. Research "articles" that take
advantage of multimedia capabilities can be produced and read on widely
available computers. Such articles can include, for example, video footage of
students solving problems or discussing issues. The video sequences can be
integrated with hyperlinked transcripts, analyses by experts, remarks by other
viewers, including educators, and links to related topics. The present project
will produce a two research articles that exploit new presentation possibilities
afforded by advances in multimedia. Once completed, they will be made available
on a web site where they can be evaluated by mathematics and science educators
in terms of its comprehensibility, richness, and potential uses. The project
will undertake discussions with researchers, teachers, and commercial publishers
in order to evaluate the viability of creating a multimedia-based journal in
science and math education. In addition it will host at TERC a conference on the
uses of video technology in science and mathematics educational research. ***