* 9619180
* Submarine Profiling of Arctic Properties: Temperature, Salinity and Ice Draft
* NONE,NONE
* 05/15/1997,04/30/1998
* Peter Mikhalevsky, Leidos, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Jane V. Dionne
* 04/30/1998
* USD 65,100.00

Acoustic and physical data collected in the Arctic since 1990 indicates a
strengthening in the front between Atlantic/Pacific waters from near the
Lomonosov Ridge toward the Alpha/Mendeleyev Ridge when compared with data from
the 1970's and 1980's. Despite the key role Arctic processes play in global
climate change our knowledge of Arctic water mass structure is still based on
sparsely sampled measurements. The SCICEX program offers the scientific
community the unique and unprecedented opportunity to use simple under ice,
submarine launched, expendable CTD (U/I SSXCTD) measurements to nearly double
the number of high quality transarctic oceanographic survey sections.
Complementing the submarine CTD data contribution to understanding Arctic
circulation are acoustic measurements of ocean temperature, salinity and ice
roughness which offer the capability to synoptically detect majop ocean
circulation shifts. The Arctic Climate Observations using Underwater Sound
(ACOUS) program will begin recording year round ocean temperature changes, and
sea ice thickness and extent, along fixed acoustic paths in 1997. Submarine
sampling provides accurate local measurements of temperature, salinity and ice
cover, whereas the advantage of basin scale acoustic measurements is synoptic
observation of the basin integrated circulation effects. The Transarctic
Acoustic Propagation (TAP) experiment demonstrated the feasibility of acoustics
as a tool to monitor major movements of fronts. The scientific objectives of
using submarine CTD and ice profile data from SCICEX-97 are to: (1) establish an
historical record of temperature and salinity from the Beaufort Sea to the
Barents Sea to monitor global circulation changes and validate Arctic Ocean
circulation models, (2) use the measured data to 'tune' the ACOUS acoustic
thermometer, and (3) provide temperature, salinity and ice draft measurements
concurrent with acoustic emissions.