* 9619022
* Science K-6:  INVESTIGATING CLASSROOMS
* EHR,DRL
* 02/01/1997,01/31/2000
* Michele Korf, WGBH Educational Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Joyce B. Evans
* 01/31/2000
* USD 1,862,660.00

9619022 Korf The proposal is for WGBH to develop a library of video tapes and
supporting print materials to illustrate the effective application of the
National Science Education Standards in K-6 classrooms. Produced under the
guidance of a National Advisory Board the tapes will feature an open exploration
of what good teachers are doing implementing hands-on, inquiry based
instructional materials such as FOSS, Insights and Science and Technology for
Children (STC). The full "Investigating Classrooms" library will be comprised of
an introductory videotape to orient the viewer to the nature and use of the
collection as a whole, three classroom tapes for each of 4 units covering grades
K-2, 3-4, and 5-6. A taped professional development session to model the use of
the library will allow for inservice training. A tape giving a summary of
significant issues, focusing on the nature and the value of current reform
efforts in the field, will be prepared for use with administrators, parents and
community groups. Companion print materials will include a comprehensive
guidebook which provides an overview, background and analysis. In addition tapes
will be prepared for use with the LSC Core Evaluation. These tapes will cover a
conversation between experts involved in a discussion of ratings of classroom
observations using the instrument designed by Horizon Research. The request is
for $1,601,413.