* 9619991
* Mathematical Sciences:  Undergraduate Program in            Mathematical Biology
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/1997,07/31/1998
* Joseph Paullet, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Lloyd E. Douglas
* 07/31/1998
* USD 30,000.00

Penn State Erie's REU Program in Mathematical Biology will involve
undergraduates in one of the richest and fastest growing fields of mathematics.
It affords the six participants the opportunity to pursue research in one of
several areas of mathematical biology: cancer modeling, pattern formation in
active media, and the modeling of electrically excitable cells. The only
prerequisites are the successful completion of a course in ordinary differential
equations and an interest in biology. Throughout the four-week period of the
program students will work in teams on different aspects of a current research
problem in mathematical biology. The biological underpinnings of the problem
will be discussed in detail during the first week and will motivate the
subsequent mathematical analysis. Mathematical methods introduced during the
program will include phase plane analysis and bifurcation theory. Students will
have access to Pentium computers running the Linux operating system and will
learn the mathematical software package XPP, a powerful tool for phase plane and
bifurcation analysis. Seminars will be given throughout the program by both
faculty and student participants, and the program will culminate with a written
report and presentation by each team on their results. Participation will result
in many benefits to the students. First, they will see the importance and
applicability of mathematics by participating, first hand, in the solution of a
research problem from biology. Second, through team work they will learn the
value of cooperation and the ability to work with, and communicate technical
information to, others. Finally, the experience will give the participants
exposure to the excitement and hard work involved in scientific research, and
will provide motivation for continued study in mathematics or the sciences.