* 9620092
* Making Science Education Count:  Tenure Reform and          Undergraduate Biology Research
* O/D,OIA
* 02/01/1997,01/31/2002
* Randall Richardson, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Sherrie Green
* 01/31/2002
* USD 500,000.00

The University of Arizona has been selected as one of ten recipients of the
National Science Foundation's Recognition Awards for the Integration of Research
and Education. The university has achieved noteworthy success in two aspects of
the integration of research and education: revision of tenure and promotion
guidelines to consider the quality of undergraduate teaching, and creation of an
innovative undergraduate biology program. The university has established a
Science and Engineering Promotion and Tenure Committee which ensures that
education issues are considered on a par with research performance in hiring,
promotion, and tenure decisions. In addition, the university is committed to
infusing research into the undergraduate experience in both lower and upper
divisions, and noteworthy progress is being made in the biology program. A
Biology Learning Center is helping to create innovative courses that use
Internet-based resources. Undergraduate biology majors are engaged in research
with faculty from 35 academic departments. Research results are presented by
students at an annual conference on campus. Selected alumnae of these research
experiences are placed in biomedical research labs overseas. The University of
Arizona's efforts to integrate research and education were designed with
specific outcomes in mind: implement tenure and promotion policy reforms at all
levels and across disciplinary boundaries within the university; increase
significantly the numbers of students participating in biological research on
campus and overseas; expand faculty participation in undergraduate research
projects; and increase student awareness of diverse career opportunities
available to biology majors. The university has documented noteworthy success in
achieving these goals. The university is being awarded $500,000 with the goal of
expanding, documenting, and disseminating its exemplary practices over the
coming three years. Plans for use of the award funds include: conducting
workshops on tenure reform for faculty and administrators from other
institutions; increasing support for student-faculty research projects;
enhancing Web-based resources; and production and dissemination of video and
print materials that document the undergraduate biology program.