* 9620032
* Institutionalization of an Integrated Undergraduate         Curriculum Featuring Active-Inquiry, Research-Based         Instruction and Mentored Research Experiences
* O/D,OIA
* 02/01/1997,01/31/2002
* Brady Deaton, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Sherrie Green
* 01/31/2002
* USD 500,000.00

The University of Missouri has been selected as one of ten recipients of the
National Science Foundation's Recognition Awards for the Integration of Research
and Education. The university has approached the integration of research and
education in a comprehensive and systemic fashion by initiating changes that
integrate research and education in many important areas of campus life. New
discovery-based introductory courses are being implemented to reach all
undergraduates, including non-science majors. Future K-12 teachers are being
prepared to use discovery-based learning methods through -Pedagogy Intensive+
sections of science courses. Residential communities for freshmen are being
established in which interdisciplinary group research is promoted and
reinforced. Persistence of female and minority students is being increased
through engagement in freshman research experiences. A capstone experience is
being established for all students. New support mechanisms are being created to
promote faculty participation. The university's efforts to integrate research
and education were designed with specific outcomes in mind: increasing the
representation of research methods in all courses; increasing student and
faculty participation in mentored research projects; increasing the
representation of female and minority students among science and engineering
graduates; increasing retention rates for all science and engineering students;
improving critical thinking and learning skills among science and engineering
students; and improving the understanding of and appreciation for science and
engineering among all students. The university has achieved noteworthy success
in achieving these important goals. The university is being awarded $500,000
with the goal of expanding, documenting, and disseminating its exemplary
practices over the coming three years. Plans for the use of the award funds
include: continued curriculum development; creation of a research internship-
bridge program with Missouri industry; a longitudinal study of program
participants with an appropriate control group; publication of assessment
results in peer refereed journals; local workshops; and a national conference
with published proceedings.