* 9620040
* Integrating Research & Education: Using High-Speed          Networking to Improve the Learning Environment
* O/D,OIA
* 02/01/1997,10/31/2002
* John Moseley, University of Oregon Eugene
* Standard Grant
* Sherrie Green
* 10/31/2002
* USD 500,000.00

The University of Oregon has been selected as one of ten recipients of the
National Science Foundation's Recognition Awards for the Integration of Research
and Education. The university has developed a campus-wide approach to using
high-speed networks and advanced computer technology for a new generation of
discovery-based classroom learning experiences. The university's initiative
includes development of interactive courseware and on-line data libraries. The
new Java-based interactive computer courseware provides students with -virtual
experiments+ that allow them to manipulate variables and analyze the
experimental data that emerges from a simulation model. The shared data
libraries allow students to explore the data resulting from faculty research.
Participation in these curriculum development efforts are now considered as part
of tenure and promotion decisions. These learning tools -- simulations,
interactive courseware, and access to data from faculty research -- provide
discovery-based learning opportunities to non-science students in large
introductory science survey courses. This approach represents a model for
increasing the level of scientific literacy of the entire undergraduate student
body. The university's efforts to integrate research and education were designed
with specific outcomes in mind: improving student comprehension and performance
on tests; increasing student participation in direct manipulation of data using
analysis programs; increasing engagement and motivation of non-science majors
enrolled in introductory science courses; and engaging faculty in the process of
personalizing their courses by incorporating their research into classroom
explorations. The university is being awarded $500,000 with the goal of
expanding, documenting, and disseminating its exemplary practices over the
coming three years. Plans for the use of the award funds include: regional
workshops on the use of information technology to integrate research and
education; continued development of Java-based interactive courseware;
assessment of the effectiveness of learning using interactive simulations; and
development and publication of CD-ROM materials.