* 9620104
* Science Education for the Twenty-First Century
* O/D,OIA
* 02/01/1997,01/31/2001
* Kumar Patel, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Sherrie Green
* 01/31/2001
* USD 500,000.00

The University of California-Los Angeles (UCLA) has been selected as one of ten
recipients of the National Science Foundation's Recognition Awards for the
Integration of Research and Education. UCLA is using a systemic approach to
integrating research and education in an urban university system with enormous
and diverse student enrollments. UCLA has introduced discovery-based courses
developed by an Office of Instructional Development. New computer-based
interactive multimedia courseware are used in several departments for general
education and lower division courses that reach large numbers of both science
and non-science majors, and for upper division courses for science majors. The
university facilitates one-on-one collaborative research between faculty and
first- or second-year students from underrepresented groups as well as students
from two-year colleges in the area. UCLA's efforts to integrate research and
education were designed with specific outcomes in mind: increasing the numbers
of undergraduate students participating in collaborative research with faculty;
increasing retention and graduation rates for minority students engaged in
research; increasing transfer and persistence rates of two-year college students
engaged in research; and modernizing upper division lab courses in science
departments. The university has documented noteworthy success in achieving these
goals. The university is being awarded $500,000 with the goal of expanding,
documenting, and disseminating its exemplary practices over the coming three
years. Plans for use of the award funds include: creation of a Center for
Student Research in Science, Engineering and Math as an administrative support
system for ongoing initiatives; developing new methods of assessment and
evaluation for discovery-based courses; conducting performance-based evaluation
of students engaged in research-based learning; re-establishing the student
research journal; and supporting dissemination of curriculum innovations by
faculty members.