* 9622819
* The Rankin-Selberg Method, Zeros of Special Functions and   Models of Representations Over Finite Fields
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/1996,06/30/2000
* Daniel Bump, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* Robert Perlis
* 06/30/2000
* USD 202,355.00

This award provides funding for the investigator's continued research into the
Rankin-Selberg method. Much of this work will likely be joint work. The research
will likely shift from the search for new Rankin-Selberg integrals to extracting
more information from existing Rankin-Selberg constructions. An initial problem
will be the nonvanishing of the archimedean local integrals for the symmetric
cube L-functions on GL(2). Friedberg, Hoffstein, and Bump have been exploring
reflection groups coming from double Dirichlet series with automorphic
L-functions on GL(n) and quadratic characters. The corresponding question for
GL(2) and cubic characters will be studied. Other problems on automorphic forms
will be investigated. This research falls into the general mathematical field of
Number Theory. Number theory has its historical roots in the study of the whole
numbers, addressing such questions as those dealing with the divisibility of one
whole number by another. It is among the oldest branches of mathematics and was
pursued for many centuries for purely aesthetic reasons. However, within the
last half century it has become an indispensable tool in diverse applications in
areas such as data transmission and processing, and communication systems.