* 9622931
* Algebraic Cohomolgy and Deformation Theory
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/1996,07/31/2000
* Samuel Schack, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* Tie Luo
* 07/31/2000
* USD 48,663.00

July 2, 199619602105 Jones Description: This proposal requests support for a new
research collaboration in ecological studies entitled "Seasonal Variation in the
Limnology of Subtropical Lakes in Nepal as Controlled by Monsoon Climate." The
PIs are Dr.J.Jones of the University of Missouri (MU) and
Drs.J.McEachern/T.B.Shrestha of the World Conservation Union (IUCN), Kathmandu.
The PIs will conduct a two-year limnological study of warm monomictic and warm
polymictic lakes in Nepal located in differing land-use regimes. Seasonal
variability in trophic state, ionic salinity, nutrient limitation, phytoplankton
composition and biomass, and algal toxins will be measured. The attributes of
cyanobacteria will be related to limnological features to determine seasonal
patterns. This research will advance our understanding of how the monsoon
climate influences lakes and will contribute to the modest data base on lake
seasonality in Nepal. Scope: This project will be conducted under a Momorandum
of Understanding between the MU and the IUCN-Nepal which is leading a national
effort for conservation and management of wetlands. Included is a reconnaissance
survey of water chemistry, fauna and flora, and an electronic database of
wetlands throughout the country. The IUCN will share costs for field
collections, MU will process water samples for data on water quality and algal
toxins. The research findings will be jointly published. *** Pakistan and is the
next step in developing a relationship between scientists who are doing research
in this field. s area of research. ngoing relationship in the exchange of
information foin developing . The International Conference on Non-Accelerator
Particle Physics will convene in Bangalore, India from January 2-9, 1994.
Gaurang B. Yodh, University of California, Irvine and R. Cowsik, Tata Institute
of Fundamental Research and Director, Ind ian Institute of Astrophysics,
Bangalore are the organizers. This conference is dedicated to the discussion of
the fundamental physics that emerges from diverse areas of non-accelerator
particle physics such as: Solar Neutrino Astronomy, Cosmic Rays, Particle
Physics, Neutrino Physics and the Detection of Dark Matter. Substantial progress
has been made in these fields during the past five years and it is widely
thought that definitive answers to several questions of Physics beyond the
Standard Model can now come from Non-Accelerator methods of inquiry. The
conferees will review recent developments in the various aspects of Particle
Physics, their implications in astrophysical situations, experimental detection
of dark matter, theoretical interpretation and empirical and physical models of
the large scale structure of the Universe. Scope: This conference will precede a
major interdisciplinary research program between the Indian Institute of
Astrophysics and the University of California, Irvine. As considerable research
is going on in the US in all fields to be discussed at this conference, it will
be important for the US researchers to present their work to an international
body of some of the most respected scientists from all over the world. ***