* 9622866
* Ergodic Theory and Symbolic Dynamics
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/1996,07/31/2000
* Selim Tuncel, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 07/31/2000
* USD 79,596.00

ABSTRACT: Lind/Tuncel Lind will investigate various aspects of several
dimensional actions, including zeta functions and directional entropies.
Emphasis will be placed on the determination of the expansive sets, how the
dynamics of one component of the expansive set may influence the dynamics in
another, and how finite type assumptions may change the answers. He will further
probe the coincidence entropies of certain actions with the growth rate for
spanning trees of related infinite graphs. He will also pursue a link with
electrical networks suggested by his discovery of a new invariant for Markov
shifts arising from consideration of spanning trees. Tuncel will work on two-
dimensional shifts of finite type. He has observed that certain matrix equations
determine the entropy whenever they have (positive) solutions, and that similar
inequalities give bounds on entropy. He will pursue the characterization of
conjugacy classes for which the equations have solutions, the possibility of
improving the bounds by state-splitting, and the use of the inequalities in
coding algorithms related to holographic data storage. He will also continue his
analysis of Markov chains and their classifications, with emphasis on the
development of dynamical invariants and coding methods for handling near-
boundary constraints. Traditional problems of encoding data have focused on one-
dimensional sequences, such as those found on computer disk drives or (in spiral
form) on compact audio discs. In such situations physical constraints mean that,
for efficient encoding, arbitrary data must be encoded into data subject to
constraints. For instance data on a compact audio disk must have the property
that between consecutive 1's there are at least two, but no more that seven,
0's. Symbolic dynamics provides that mathematical framework for discovering and
investigating methods of encoding that have practical implications. More
recently both industrial and research mathematicians have been studying higher-
dimen sional versions of these problems. Industry is interested, for example, in
holographic data storage where information is spread over a three-dimensional
cube. Research mathematicians have been discovering fascinating new phenomena in
this area, in particular some rich connections with the seemingly unrelated
fields of commutative algebra and algebraic geometry. The investigators will
continue their work with the higher-dimensional theory, with emphasis on ways of
measuring information and a study of periodic structures.