* 9622288
* CRB: Experimentation in Restoration Ecology: The Role of    Habitat Heterogeneity in Stream Ecosystems
* BIO,IOS
* 04/15/1996,03/31/2001
* Marco Colombini, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Kitti Williams
* 03/31/2001
* USD 209,975.00

We propose to identify the physical and biological mechanisms responsible for
restoration of damaged streams. Specifially, we will determine whether an
increase in the diversity of physical habitat types on a streambed promotes
restoration of a stream ecosystem following a perturbation. Further, we will
assess how flooding interacts with habitat diversity to impede or promote
ecosystem recovery following damage. We will physically partition multiple
sections of a stream into paired halves (one control and one restoration
treatment), disturb treatment halves, and then alter the size and complexity of
the streambed substrate in the treatments halves. We will measure physical and
biological responses to the disturbance and to the restoration treatments, and
determine when and how the disturbed sections "recover." Recovery will be
estimated as the similarity between biological diversity and ecosystem function
in control and treatment sections of the stream. This experiment mimics
restoration methods currently used by state and national environmental
management groups. These methods have never been evaluated scientifically to
determine if (and why) they enhance restoration of damaged stream ecosystems.
Our experiment will also test a central ecological question of broad relevance
to environmental science: does increasing physical habitat diversity enhance
species diversity and ecosystem function? ??