* 9622352
* CRB: Restoration of Plants and Mycorrhizae in Mexico        Seasonal Tropical Forest
* BIO,DEB
* 08/15/1996,12/31/1999
* Arturo Gomez-Pompa, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Margaret Palmer
* 12/31/1999
* USD 190,000.00

Dry seasonal tropical forests have received less attention than tropical
rainforests, but they have been destroyed at a greater rate. Less than 10% of
the Mesoamerican seasonal tropical forest remains, so restoration must
supplement conservation for the protection of biodiversity and ecosystem
functioning. Forest restoration experiments will be conducted at two seasonal
tropical sites in Mexico, the Chamela Ecological Reserve and the El Eden
Ecological Reserve, to determine the importance of mycorrhizae for successful
restoration. Native trees inoculated with mycorrhizal fungi will be planted in
disturbed sites at both Reserves. Many types of disturbance deplete the soil of
nutrients and mycorrhizal inoculum, and mycorrhizae are more beneficial in soils
that are low in available nutrients. Inoculating trees with mycorrhizae will
have a greater impact at the El Eden Reserve where soils are poorer in
phosphorus. The principal investigators will use tree species that provide local
people with food, forage and fiber. The experiments will provide new information
on how to reestablish forests that have been devastated by conversion to pasture
and by wildfire. In addition, the investigators will study tree growth and
forest succession, both of which are little understood for these forests.