* 9622700
* Dissertation Research:  Population Biology and Genetics of  the Northern Elephant Seal, Mirounga angustirostris
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/1996,05/31/1998
* Montgomery Slatkin, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Allen Moore
* 05/31/1998
* USD 10,880.00

9622700 Slatkin The Northern Elephant Seal, Mirounga angustirostris, possesses a
unique demographic history among mammals: reduction to near extinction followed
by exponential population growth. This bottleneck was accompanied by a reduction
in genetic variation which has hampered efforts to use genetic markers to study
Elephant Seal population biology. In the research funded by this award,
microsatellite loci characterized by extreme variability and high mutation rates
will be used to overcome this problem. The specific goals of the research are to
study the evolution of microsatellite loci by exploiting the demographic history
of the Northern Elephant Seal, to develop a method for monitoring immune system
variation in the Northern Elephant Seal, and to use microsatellite markers to
study the genetic and social structure of seal populations. Findings will
provide clues as to why a species with so little genetic variation is doing so
well demographically. The markers developed for use in studying Northern
Elephant Seal population and social structure will also serve as tools to
measure migration and mating behavior, two underlying determinants of genetic
diversity. This research represents an early application of methods developed by
genome researchers to the study of a protected natural population with important
conservation implications.