* 9622328
* Engineering Research Equipment: Advanced Automated FinishingSystem
* ENG,CMMI
* 03/15/1996,06/30/1998
* Joseph Duffy, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Ming C. Leu
* 06/30/1998
* USD 53,030.00

9622328 Wiens This research equipment grant supports the purchase of components
and the fabrication of a specialized platform for deburring research. Deburring,
particularly when done manually, is an expensive, time consuming, but necessary,
part of manufacturing precision parts. Particularly for low to mid volume
manufacture, it is an area that is attractive for process automation. However,
the technical problems are following a contour with a small cutter or abrasive
tool, that generate no force when there is no burr and a high force when there
is a burr. The idea that these investigators want to test out with this
equipment is a synthesis of their past separate investigations. One
investigation based on kinematics theory is a smart kinestatic interactive
platform (SKIP), and the other studied mechanisms of burr formation and removal.
Their understanding of these two areas has led them to an innovative solution of
the deburring problem that is an integration of the SKIP concept and a deburring
process model. This equipment award will provide experimental facilities for
research that includes: kinematics and dynamics of micro-manipulators for smart
deburring, edge chamfering and deburring process model based control, and
verification of an automated finishing system. ***