* 9622182
* CRB: Molecular Identification of Threatened Species: Does   Theory Predict the Utility of Nuclear vs. Mitochondrial     Sequences?
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/1996,05/31/1998
* Stephen Palumbi, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* Scott L. Collins
* 05/31/1998
* USD 110,000.00

9622182 Palumbi Most species are comprised on interacting populations, and
describing these interactions are understanding their consequences remains one
of the greatest challenges in conservation biology. To date, metapopulation
modeling and demographic description of interacting populations have been
matched by technical advances in the detection of genetic differences within and
between populations. However, a comprehensive melding of demographic, modeling
and genetic approaches to metapopulations has yet to be achieved. When is an
ecological population identifiable as a genetic population? When do differences
in genetics correctly predict results of metapopulation models? These questions
need to be answered to bring genetic and ecological approaches to
metapopulations together. This research seeks to understand the processes by
which populations become genetically distinct from one another. Such genetic
distinctions are at the heart of recent definitions of evolutionarily
significant units for conservation management which depend on reciprocal
monophyly of populations at some genetic locus. Previously, much attention has
been placed on mitochondrial DNA because these loci become monophyletic rapidly.
However, mtDNA can not be used to parameterize ecological models of population
structure because mtDNA only tracks maternal inheritance patterns. How useful
are nuclear loci in discriminating populations genetically? This depends on the
rate of development of monophyly of nuclear genes compared to mitochondrial
genes. Population genetic theory predicts a simple relationship between these
two rates, but this prediction depends on many assumptions that have never been
tested in any animal system. This conservation biology research will investigate
the development of reciprocal monophyly in mitochondrial and nuclear loci in a
set of defined species of whales and dolphins. This study will have direct
application to the rate at which populations become distinguishable genetically
and ecologically . This is a central questions when dealing with populations of
endangered species. In addition, the genetic markers developed in this research
will have important practical applications for monitoring whale and dolphin
populations.