* 9622936
* An Operator Approach to Problems in Analysis and Probability: Matrix Muckenhoupt Weights, Hankel and Toeplitz Operators, Singular Integrals and the Angle between Past and Future
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/1996,05/31/1999
* Alexander Volberg, Michigan State University
* Continuing Grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 05/31/1999
* USD 121,275.00

Abstract Treil/Volberg DMS-9622963 Treil and Volberg will continue their
research on bases of classical wavelets in vector weighted spaces. They will
consider some classical problems in the theory of Hankel and Toeplitz operators
in spaces of analytic functions, singular integral operators. One goal is the
generalizations of these problems to multi-parameter (vector) setting. Other
problems they will investigate are Sarason's problem about necessary and
sufficient condition for a product of two (unbounded) Toeplitz operators to be
bounded, description of completely regular multivariate stationary Gaussian
processes, two weights inequality for Bergman Projection, and boundedness of a
product of two (big) Hankel operators in the Bergman space. Singular integrals
is one of the main tools analysis brought to applications (signal processing,
market models, prediction theory, etc..). In practice many such problems have a
vector (multi-parameter) nature. The proposed research is based on the approach
targeting exactly the multi-parameter nature of such problems and overcomes the
difficulty stemming from this multi-parameter nature. Among the practical
applications of the research are prediction theory for stationary Gaussian
processes, wavelets (signal processing). The authors strongly feel that the
developed technique can be helpful.