* 9622665
* Engineering Research Equipment:  Virtual Reality to Support Product Design, Virtual Prototyping and Virtual Disassembly
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/15/1996,08/31/1998
* Rajit Gadh, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* george hazelrigg
* 08/31/1998
* USD 81,500.00

9622665 Gadh This award is for the acquisition and development of a Virtual
Reality Studio at the I-CARVE Lab at University of Wisconsin-Madison. This
Virtual Reality set-up consists of a Silicon Graphics Onyx Computer with a
Reality Engine II graphics processor. To this computer attaches a Cyber Glove
for tracking the hand position. Also attached to this computer is a head-mount
display device by Visual Research that supports three dimensional visualization.
The head-mount device carries a 6 degree of freedom head tracker that determines
head position in space. The hardware is supported by software that consists of a
number of virtual reality device interfaces, graphics modules and solid modeling
software programs. The grant also supports a part-time student for maintaining
the Virtual Reality Studio. This equipment will be used for research in three
innovative engineering design application areas: (1) virtual reality for product
design, (2) virtual prototyping, (3) virtual de-manufacturing. The virtual-
reality-for-design research addresses a fundamentally new method for performing
concept-shape design in a virtual reality set-up. This integrates human voice
command control and human hand control as input mechanisms. The virtual
prototyping research involves developing representational frameworks for
defining and extracting information from near-net shape manufactured products so
as to determine the prototypability of such parts in a virtual environment.
Using this research, questions of production and tooling can be addressed in the
virtual environment. Virtual de-manufacturing allows innovative methods for
evaluating product designs for disassembly and recycling--all in the virtual
environment.