* 9622803
* Circle Packing: Discrete Conformal Geometry
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/1996,07/31/1999
* Kenneth Stephenson, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 07/31/1999
* USD 45,188.00

ABSTRACT Proposal: DMS-962280 PI: Stephenson Stephenson proposes to study
fundamental properties of circle packings and the geometric structures they
induce. Circle packings are configurations of circles with prescribed patterns
of tangency. Until recently Stephenson has concentrated on the development of
connections with classical analytic functions, contributing to what is now a
very comprehensive and geometrically faithful "discrete" analytic function
theory. His attention has now turned in other directions --- partly in towards
the geometric foundations and partly out towards applications. The current
proposal concentrates on three main issues: (1) existence and uniqueness of
branched packings on the sphere (equivalently, of branched hyperbolic polyhedra
in the ball); (2) properties of and uses for tailored random walks on circle
packings; and (3) circle induced geometries in combinatoric settings, such as
combinatorial Riemann mapping, Grothendieck dessins, knot projections,
hyperbolic groups, and graph embedding. Of particular note is the effort by the
Stephenson and his collaborators to introduce "inversive distances" into circle
packing. Also, he continues numerical and experimental approaches to
investigating phenomena in circle packing through use of a sophisticated
software package, "test bench". Circle packing is a relatively new topic in
mathematics which involves the study of configurations of circles with specified
patterns of tangency. It seems an odd and artificial topic at first, but turns
out to be surprisingly rich. Without giving technical details, one can say that
in a circle packing the local combinatoric information about contacts between
circles turns into rigid global geometric information on the overall
configuration. The unique value in this approach lies in the fact that these
packings turn out to carry in "discreet" packets much of the key geometric
information normally described via "continuous" equations and formulas. This is
especially important as we move towards the more discrete model of the world
required by computers. Among the important areas of study are analytic and
harmonic function theory -- crucial, for instance, in modeling of fluid flow,
electrical circuits, diffusion processes, and so forth. Results are now being
proven using circle packing which could not be established or were even
unanticipated in the classical theories. Moreover, circle packing gives
opportunities for new results and insights because it permits computer
experimentation. Applications have begun to emerge in diverse areas of
mathematics and in computer science; for instance, circle packings are good for
graph embedding and for various computer visualization tasks, such as 3-D
modeling. And the classical and discrete mathematical theory which underlies
these advances is of importance.