* 9622867
* Mathematical Sciences: Topics in Partial Differential       Equations and Their Applications
* MPS,DMS
* 07/15/1996,05/31/1999
* Xuefeng Wang, Tulane University
* Standard Grant
* Henry Warchall
* 05/31/1999
* USD 39,260.00

9625830 Wang The proposer plans to conduct his research in the following topics:
(i) Convolution models for phase transitions; (ii) Concentration phenomena of
solutions of semilinear elliptic equations; (iii) Qualitative behavior of
solutions to chemotaxis systems. In the first front, effort will be made to
understand the propagation of interfaces, the shape of energy minimizers and the
dynamics of typical solutions. In the second front, of main concern are the
existence and locations of concentration of solutions as a physical parameter
becomes small. In the third front, the effects of various biological and
physical parameters on the solutions of the systems will be studied. %%% The
convolution models arise in the mathematical studies of grain boundaries in
crystalline solids, binary alloys as well as in the study of excitation in
neural networks. The equations in the second front are nonlinear Schr\"odinger
equations of mathematical physics and one arising in the study of chemotaxis of
cells. The chemotaxis systems considered in the third front model the oriented
motion of cells in response to the concentration gradient of chemicals in the
environment, and the research done and proposed here aims at understanding how
the motility and the sensitivity of cells to the chemical affect the size of the
population of cells as well as the way in which cells are distributed in the
long run. The proposed research in all the three parts will help reveal and
understand the important phenomena such as phase seperations, concentration and
blow-up in the related fields of material sciences, biophysics and quantum
mechanics. ***