* 9622966
* Mathematical Sciences:  Behavior of Large Combinatorial     Systems
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/1996,05/31/2000
* Jeffry Kahn, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Continuing Grant
* Robert Perlis
* 05/31/2000
* USD 73,500.00

This award provides funding for a project concerned primarily with long range
behavior of various types of combinatorial systems, especially graphs,
hypergraphs of fixed edge size, and matroids. A common theme is that such
behavior is surprisingly nice in important ways, and that this is often because
there is a substantial amount of approximate independence in appropriate
probability spaces associated with the system in question. The project thus
seeks to understand both properties of said probability spaces and their
consequences for combinatorial problems.The heart of the project is concerned
with asymptotic normality and related issues. Roughly, the investigator seeks to
show that various combinatorially-defined random variables are always
approximately normally distributed in the absence of trivial obstructions to
such behavior. Recent work of the investigator suggests the possibility of such
a phenomenon in some surprisingly general and unstructured situations. It is
hoped that satisfactory answers to some of these questions, involving so-called
"canonical" or "hard-core" distributions, will support new directions in the
development of the powerful probabilistic method of combinatorics, which seeks
to apply probabilistic ideas to resolve non-random combinatorial problems. This
work also opens new possibilities for the interplay between probability and
questions about the relation between integer programming problems and their
associated linear relaxations. We may take asymptotic agreement of integer and
linear optima as a definition of nice "long range behavior" since linear
programming problems are computationally tractable and integer programs are
generally intractable. Then, very roughly, a good solution to the linear version
of a problem gives a "canonical distribution" which can be used to randomly
generate or prove existence of a good solution to the original problem. This
idea is thought to have considerable potential. This research is in t he general
area of Combinatorics. One of the goals of Combinatorics is to find efficient
methods to study how discrete collections of objects can be arranged. The
behavior of discrete systems is extremely important to modern communications.
For example, the design of large networks, such as those occurring in telephone
systems, and the design of algorithms in computer science deal with discrete
sets of objects, and this makes use of combinatorial research.