* 9622126
* CRB: North American Bison as a Model for the Conservation   of Megavertebrate Populations
* BIO,DEB
* 05/01/1996,10/31/1999
* James Derr, Texas A&M Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Scott L. Collins
* 10/31/1999
* USD 120,000.00

9622126 Derr Worldwide, many species of large vertebrates have, or soon will,
encounter population challenges similar to what occurred in the last century
with bison. Many of these species, like bison, are polygynous and now are
limited to highly fragmented and managed ecosystems. This research will
investigate genetic diversity in North American bison populations before and
after the human induced population bottleneck of the last century. In the last
100 years, population sizes have recovered. The primary founders for this
restoration effort have come from only five herds, four from the northern herd,
and one from the southern herd. This research is designed to test the
conservation question that relatively low levels of genetic polymorphisms in
extant populations are a direct result of the 19th Century bottleneck and that
conservation efforts should be directed at maximizing the remaining genetic
variation among herds. To test this hypothesis, polymerase chain reaction and
nucleotide sequencing will be used to examine genetic diversity in both
mitochondrial and nuclear genomes of extant and historical (pre-bottleneck)
populations. Historical population data will be derived from the extensive
fossil materials available. Because conservation and restoration efforts have
proved so successful with bison, they provide an ideal model system to develop
management plans for the genetic effects of population bottlenecks and habitat
fragmentation for other megavertebrate species. This study will have direct
bearing on the ability of populations to regain genetic diversity, and on issues
regarding minimum viable population size of large vertebrates.