* 9622585
* Mathematical Sciences:  Automorphic L-functions and         Interwining Operators
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/1996,11/30/2000
* Freydoon Shahidi, Purdue Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* B. Brent Gordon
* 11/30/2000
* USD 81,000.00

Shahidi In the next three years, the investigator will study the following
problems in Automorphic Forms and Representation Theory. As his first problem,
the investigator wants to show that the poles of the standard intertwining
operators for parabolically induced representations of a quasisplit group over a
local field are among those of certain Langlands L-functions. This will have
important consequences in the theory of Eisenstein series and global liftings.
In particular, he plans to prove a definitive reducibility criterion for
representations induced from irreducible quasi-tempered generic representations
of Levi subgroups of these groups in terms of L-functions. This is a consequence
of another problem to be studied by him which extends a result of Vogan to
p-adic groups. It states that the standard modules whose Langlands quotients are
generic are irreducible. These are parts of a joint project with W. Casselman.
As his second and third problems, he will continue his work on the tempered
spectrum of classical groups (with D. Goldberg) and their residual spectrum
(with H. Kim). He also plans to prove the equality of certain coefficients
defined by two different methods (Rankin-Selberg and Langlands-Shahidi) as well
as the study of different approaches to understanding poles of L-functions using
the second method. He will also try to establish certain identities satisfied by
normalized intertwining operators, extending his results from the tempered case
to the non-tempered ones. Finally, he plans to further study the symmetric cube
L-function of a cusp form on GL(2) and its twists with arbitrary cusp forms with
the hope of better understanding the symmetric cube lift from GL(2) to GL(4).
The research falls in the general mathematical area of the Langlands program.The
Langlands program is part of Number Theory, which is the study of the properties
of the whole numbers and is the oldest branch of mathematics. From the beginning
problems in number theory have furnished a driving forc e in creating new
mathematics in other diverse parts of the discipline. The Langlands program is a
general philosophy that connects number theory with calculus; it embodies the
modern approach to the study of whole numbers. Modern number theory is very
technical and deep, but it has had astonishing applications in areas like
theoretical computer science and coding theory.