* 9622967
* Mathematical Sciences:  Abnormal Minimizers and             Discontinuous Value Functions in Optimal Control
* MPS,DMS
* 06/15/1996,05/31/1999
* Urszula Ledzewicz, Southern Illinois University at Edwardsville
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Lockhart
* 05/31/1999
* USD 65,000.00

9622967 Ledzewicz The project adresses two fundamental approaches to finding the
solution of optimal control problems: 1) finding the optimal processes through
an analysis of the Maximum principle and 2) finding the value-function as a
solution of the Hamilton-Jacobi-Bellman equation. In this project the proposer
investigates new nontrivial optimality conditions for abnormal trajectories and
their role in connection with discontinuities in the value function. Most
existing results for optimality do not apply to abnormal extremals or require
continuity of the value function. The occurence of abnormal processes is related
to the fact the surjectivity condition in the Lyusternik theorem is not
satisfied and as a result the classical nontrivial results cannot be derived.
While mathematically desirable, continuity of the value function relates to
small-time local controllability and need not be satisfied for many control
systems with free terminal time. Abnormal processes which satisfy the Maximum
Principle do so regardless of the objective. Hence if they are really optimal
this strongly hints that in a certain sense they are the only possible
candidates to solve the problem whereas closeby trajectories fail to do so. Thus
optimal abnormal processes somehow correspond to limiting or boundary-like
behaviors of optimal trajectories which strongly correlates them with
discontinuities in the value function. It is expected that the analysis of
discontinuities in the value function coupled with existing theory provides a
solution methodology to the general problem in optimal control. The proposal
consists of two separate but closely related parts. The first part is a
continuation of previous work and addresses further developments of the
proposer's earlier theory of nontrivial optimality conditions for abnormal
processes based on second order approximations. A high-order generalization of
the Lyusternik theorem without surjectivity condition and high -order
approximations to the constraint sets are investigated. Using these results
extended nontrivial first and second order necessary conditions for optimality
of both normal and abnormal problems in optimization and optimal control are
analyzed. A generalization of the proposer's existing results to a nonsmooth
setting coupled with direct approximations in the dual space by means of normal
cones is being pursued. In the second part of the project the proposer
investigates sufficient conditions for the optimality of abnormal trajectories.
In particular, the proposer analyses the role which is played by optimal
abnormal extremals in the construction of a regular synthesis. %%% There are two
fundamental approaches to finding the solution of optimal control problems: 1)
finding the optimal processes through an analysis of the Maximum principle and
2) finding the value-function as a solution of the Hamilton-Jacobi-Bellman
equation. Both of these are in general rather difficult objectives to achieve
and depend on the specifics of the problem under investigation. On the other
hand, judging by the known examples the discontinuities of the value-function
seem to relate rather directly to abnormal processes. Since both abnormal
processes and discontinuities of the value function are indicating the limiting
behaviors of optimal trajectories the proposer expects that there exists a
relation between these two phenomena in general. In this project the proposer
investigates optimal abnormal trajectories in optimal control and their role in
connection with discontinuities in the value function. It is expected that the
analysis of discontinuities in the value function coupled with existing theory
provides a solution methodology to the general problem in optimal control. The
proposal consists of two separate but closely related parts. The first part is a
continuation of previous work and addresses further developments of the
proposer's earlier theory of o ptimlity conditions for abnormal problems based
on second order approximations. Using high-order approximations the proposer
generalizes these results to obtain nontrivial first and second order necessary
conditions for optimality of both normal and abnormal problems in optimization
and optimal control. A generalization of the proposer's existing results to a
nonsmooth setting coupled with direct approximations in the dual space by means
of normal cones is being pursued. In the second part of the project the proposer
investigates sufficient conditions for the optimality of abnormal trajectories.
In particular, the proposer analyses the role which is played by optimal
abnormal extremals in the construction of a regular synthesis, which is an
essential part necessary for the complete solution of the optimal control
problem. ***