* 9622394
* Mathematical Sciences:  The Structure of Algebraic Varieties
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/1996,06/30/1999
* Janos Kollar, University of Utah
* Continuing Grant
* Alvin I. Thaler
* 06/30/1999
* USD 209,641.00

9622394 The principal investigator aims to study log varieties. These can be
thought of as a pair consisting of a variety and a divisor on it. These objects
arise in the study of several questions, for instance minimal model theory,
moduli problems and the birational classification of rationally connected
varieties. To a log variety one can associate various numerical invariants (for
instance discrepancies and selfintersection numbers), and these invariants
exhibit very interesting behaviour. For ordinary varieties these invariants are
integers, but for log varieties they are rational numbers. In many cases not all
rational numbers arise this way, and it is crucial to understand the set of
rational numbers that arise. Even in dimension two this is a hard question,and
the answer has immediate and deep applications to the moduli of surfaces
(Alexeev, Koll\'ar,Mori), birational trasformations of Fano fiber spaces (Corti)
and to diophantine geometry (Hassett). The principal investigator also aims to
further explore recent applications of these and related ideas to the
theoretical aspects of high-performance computing (joint work with Babai et al).
The principal investigator aims to conduct research in the field of algebraic
geometry. Algebraic geometry is one of the oldest parts of mathematics, but one
which has had a revolutionary flowering in the past quarter-century. In its
origin, it treated figures that could be defined in the plane by the simplest
equations, like lines, circles, ellipses. Nowadays the field makes use of
methods not only from algebra and geometry, but from analysis and topology, and
conversely is finding application in those fields as well as in physics,
theoretical computer science, and robotics.