* 9622996
* Mathematical Sciences:  Partial Differential Equations and  Harmonic Analysis for the Sublaplacians
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/1996,07/31/1999
* Guozhen Lu, Wright State University
* Standard Grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 07/31/1999
* USD 58,500.00

Abstract Lu The principal investigator intends to continue to develop the theory
of structural stability for infinite dimensional dynamical systems originating
in science and engineering, which are generated by, for example, parabolic
equations and to study the related problems such as Floquet theory for parabolic
equations, to develop the theory of the persistence of normally hyperbolic
invariant manifolds, the existence of stable and unstable manifolds of the
normally hyperbolic invariant manifolds, and the theory of invariant foliations
for infinite dimensional dynamical systems generated by partial differential
equations. However, the infinite dimensional dynamical systems generated by, for
example, parabolic equations are not reversible and the phase spaces are not
locally compact. This characteristic creates difficulties not encountered in the
study of finite dimensional dynamical systems and new methods need to be
developed to understand the nature of these systems. A theory of structural
stability for scalar reaction-diffusion equations, the Cahn-Hilliard Equation
and Phase-Field System has recently been obtained. Techniques found by the PI in
his previous works will be employed in the current studies. It is expected that
this work will contribute to a better understanding of the dynamics of the
models of physical systems described by partial differential equations.
Mathematical models for the state of an evolving physical system are the subject
of investigation of dynamical systems. The main goal of the study of dynamical
systems is to understand the long term behavior of states in the systems. In
applications, the mathematical models (say differential equations) approximately
describe physical reality. To understand the qualitative properties of a
physical system, one needs to investigate not only the mathematical model but
also the perturbations of the model. One also needs to study how the qualitative
properties of the perturbed models are related to the qualitative properties of
the original model. This is especially important to the numerical computations
for the models. Because of round off error and numerical schemes, the model
studied by the numerical computations actually is a perturbation of the original
model.The theory for dynamical systems has been considered by many
mathematicians and scientists starting with Poincare, Liapunov, and Birkhoff.
One of the fundamental problems in the theory of dynamical systems is the
structural stability of dynamical systems. For a structurally stable system, the
qualitative properties are preserved under small perturbations of the system. To
understand the dynamics of a system, one needs to investigate the existence of
invariant sets, in particular, such as equilibrium points, periodic orbits,
invariant tori, and attractors, to study their structures and to know what
happens in their vicinity (do the nearby solutions approach the invariant set,
or stay nearby, or leave the neighborhood). A fundamental problem is to study
the persistence of invariant manifolds and to study the qualitative properties
of the flow nearby invariant manifolds. The theory of invariant manifolds and
invariant foliations has become a fundamental tool for the study of dynamical
systems.