* 9622411
* Engineering Research Equipment: Tissue and Cellular Engineering Laboratory
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/1996,08/31/1997
* James Moore, Florida International University
* Standard Grant
* H. Frederick Bowman
* 08/31/1997
* USD 29,255.00

9622411 Moore This proposal supports the purchase of tissue and cellular
engineering equipment which will be dedicated to support research in engineering
at Florida International University. The equipment will be used for several
research projects, including in particular a study entitled "Flow and Stretch
Effects on Vascular Endothelial Cells." This project aims to quantitatively
identify how the mechanical environment in arteries affects the formation of
atherosclerosis. The cells that line the inner surfaces of arteries are
subjected to both shear stress from the flow of blood, and the circumferential
stress that results from the radial expansion of the artery during heart
contraction. Previous research has concentrated on either shear stress or radial
expansion, but not both. In this research, cells will be cultured onto the inner
surfaces of tubes which behave mechanically like arteries, then subjected to
realistic mechanical conditions including both shear stress and radial
expansion. The secretion of substances thought to be important in the formation
of atherosclerosis will be measured using modern biological techniques. Other
projects directed by the principal investigator that will benefit from this
equipment include flow studies in the coronary arteries and flow analysis of
vascular stents. Within the PI's department, there are at least five other
projects that will be able to make use of the proposed equipment. ***