* 9622515
* Bridge Structural Identification for Condition Assessment:  Collaborative Research
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/1996,08/31/2000
* Sara Wadia-Fascetti, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* Shih-Chi Liu
* 08/31/2000
* USD 106,496.00

This project focuses on exploring the role of structural identification in
transforming the current semi-empirical practice to a rational knowledge-base,
thereby paving the way for effective and optimum infrastructure designing
operation and management. Fundamental questions pertaining to the use of
structural identification for bridge structures will be answered. The research
will be primarily focused on structural identification in terms of data
processing, quality assurance, damage evaluation, and reliability evaluation.
The experimental and analytical tools that permit meaningful and practical
applications of structural identification are only presently emerging. A test
bridge has already been instrumented which is a 10 year old, 188 ft long, three-
span, two lane, integral abutment, reinforced concrete-deck-on-steel-girders
overpass in the Cincinnati area to provide needed test data. Another bridge is
under construction and is being instrumented with over 350 sensors.
Accelerations, displacements, rotations, strains, temperatures, truck-loads and
environmental conditions will be monitored over the long-term by intelligent
monitoring systems. In addition to active and passive sensors, photogrammetric
image-processing technologies will be used. The structural identification
experiments will include: modal testing by impact, modal testing by multi-input
forced-excitation, geometry-monitoring, traffic-inputs and operating responses,
environmental inputs and ambient responses, static proof-level multiple truck-
loading, etc. A wide variety of structural identification approaches and
analytical tools will be studied.