* 9622965
* Research in Kleinian Groups and Conformal Dynamics
* MPS,DMS
* 06/15/1996,05/31/2000
* Linda Keen, Research Foundation Of The City University Of New York (Lehman)
* Continuing Grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 05/31/2000
* USD 81,000.00

Abstract Keen The proposed research is in three different areas: first,
hyperbolic density in special families of meromorphic functions; second, the
definition of moduli for quasi-conformal deformation spaces of Kleinian groups;
and third, discreteness in a one parameter family of 2-generator Kleinian
groups. i - One of the outstanding problems in conformal dynamical systems is to
prove that, for a given family, the hyperbolic systems are dense. We propose to
extend our result that the functions in the family {f(z,c) = c tan(z)} are dense
to other finite dimensional families of meromorphic functions; in particular, to
families with no critical points and finitely many asymptotic values. ii - We
shall extend our definition of Pleating Coordinates from one and two dimensional
spaces of Kleinian groups to arbitrary spaces of Kleinian groups. The advantage
of pleating coordinates is that they give a direct relation between the geometry
of the hyperbolic 3-manifold determined by the group and complex analytic trace
moduli for the group. iii - We consider a family of two generator subgroups of
PSL(2,C) with one fixed parabolic generator and one parabolic generator
depending on a single complex parameter c. We propose to extend the kind of
analysis we have used in our work on pleating coordinates to find necessary and
sufficient conditions on c for the groups to be discrete. Research is proposed
in three different areas. The first involves extending previous work in the area
of conformal dynamical systems. Such systems arise as models of various
physical, economic and social phenomena. A dynamical system may be described by
a family of functions, f(z,c), depending on two variables. For each fixed value
of c we are interested in the orbits of a given point z; that is, we consider
the set of points z, f(c,z), f(f(c,z)), and so on. If a small change in the
input data, z, changes the orbit only slightly, we say the system is stable, or
predictable. If a small change in z, on the other hand, causes a drastic change
in the orbit, we say the system is chaotic. If the orbits satisfy a certain
technical condition, the system is called hyperbolic. It would seem that
hyperbolic behavior is the norm, but this is often difficult to prove. We have
proved that it is for a special class of functions and propose to extend this
work to a larger class. The second area of research involves studying a class of
3 dimensional objects called hyperbolic 3-manifolds. They are so-called because
they are endowed with a non-Euclidean geometry called a hyperbolic geometry. In
such a geometry the sum of the angles in a triangle is less than a straight
angle. The hyperbolic 3-manifold may be varied so that the geometry changes, but
remains hyperbolic. In previous work, based on careful analysis of examples
generated by sophisticated computer programs, we found a good way to describe
one and two parameter families of hyperbolic 3-manifolds. We propose to extend
this work to families depending on a arbitrary number of parameters. In the
course of our work on 3-manifolds we encountered a class of algebraic objects
called groups. These groups arise in a number of different areas of mathematics
and have been studied by many researchers. There are, however, still a number of
open questions concerning them and for our third area of research we propose to
extend our previous analysis of these groups to answer some of these questions.