* 9622844
* Mathematical Sciences:  Quasiconformal Maps and Nonsmooth   Analysis
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/1996,05/31/2000
* Juha Heinonen, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 05/31/2000
* USD 100,651.00

ABSTRACT Proposal: DMS-9622844 PI: Heinonen The proposal has three parts. Part I
is the most significant. In Part I, Heinonen outlines a program of study of
quasiconformal maps in metric spaces with little smoothness. The goal of the
project, joint with Pekka Koskela, is to systematically develop a theory of
quasiconformal maps on metric spaces that possess certain quantitative bounds on
their mass and geometry. The motivation to develop such a theory comes partly
from geometry and combinatorial group theory, where it is important to
understand quasiconformal maps on boundaries of negatively curved spaces.
Heinonen and Koskela have discovered that the validity of a Poincare type
inequality in a space is practically tantamount to the validity of a working
quasiconformal theory. In Part II, Heinonen proposes problems on the lower
dimensional absolute continuity properties of quasiconformal maps in Euclidean
space. He has established that a quasiconformal map, defined on the unit ball of
Euclidean space of any dimension larger than two, but not equal to four, has
absolutely continuous boundary values if the boundary of the image domain has
tangents almost everywhere with respect to the surface measure. The sharpness of
this result is discussed, as well as the redundancy of the dimensional
restriction. In Part III, Heinonen proposes problems, jointly with Seppo
Rickman, related to the structure of the branch set of a quasiregular map.
Heinonen suggests a way to construct quasiregular maps with complicated branch
set. The proposal presents a shift from analysis to geometry via discrete
methods in the theory of quasiconformal mappings. Here the word "analysis" means
the branch of mathematics that developed out of the Calculus; it is the study of
continuous changes in infinitesimal data, from which one wants to predict global
conclusions. Geometry, perhaps the most fundamental part of all mathematics, is
the study of space, its many forms and varieties, in many possible dimensions.
Discrete methods mean the opposite to continuous, or calculus methods, and
involve more finite, "counting" ideas, such as those done by a computer, albeit
in this work still of analytic and geometric flavor. The concept of
quasiconformality enters the discussion in the most subtle way: it allows the
space and its formation to be singular at times and in places, but not
everywhere and not all the time. There is a certain control in the distortion,
which perhaps looked artificial to mathematicians 40 years ago when the research
first in the field was conducted. Now quasiconformality is a ubiquitous
phenomenon in mathematics. From work in the late seventies we know that every
space that locally looks like a flat space of Euclid has quasiconformal
structure, albeit not a smooth structure in general; and that this is true in
every dimension but four. Nevertheless, also in dimension four, it is
conjectured that there is an infinity of spaces where one cannot do ordinary,
smooth analysis, or calculus, but where one can do quasiconformal, nonsmooth
analysis. The proposal addresses the need to develop more techniques, and more
understanding, of this new calculus.