* 9622259
* Bridge Structural Identification for Condition Assessment   In Collaboration with Northeastern University &amp; Tufts       University
* ENG,CMMI
* 03/01/1997,02/29/2000
* Ahmet Aktan, University of Cincinnati Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Shih-Chi Liu
* 02/29/2000
* USD 171,706.00

9622259 Aktan/Helmicki This is a joint project with Tufts University and
Northeastern University focusing on exploring the role of structural
identification in transforming the current semi- empirical practice to a
rational knowledge-base, thereby paving the way for effective and optimum
infrastructure designing operation and management. Fundamental questions
pertaining to the use of structural identification for bridge structures will be
answered. The research will be primarily focused on structural identification in
terms data processing, quality assurance, damage evaluation, and reliability
evaluation. The experimental and analytical tools that permit meaningful and
practical applications of structural identification are only presently emerging.
A test bridge has already been instrumented which is a 10 year old, 188ft long,
three-span, two lane, integral abutment, reinforced concrete-deck-on-steel-
girders overpass in the Cincinnati area to provide needed test data. Another
bridge is under construction and is being instrumented with over 350 sensors.
Accelerations, displacements, rotations, strains, temperatures, truckloads and
environmental conditions will be monitored over the long-term by intelligent
monitoring systems. In addition to active and passive sensors, photogrammetric
image processing technologies will be used. The structural identification
experiments will include: modal testing by impact, modal testing by multi-imput
forced-excitation, geometry- monitoring, traffic-inputs and operating responses,
environmental inputs and ambient responses, static proof- level multiple truck-
loading, etc. A wide variety of structural identification approaches and
analytical tools will be studied.