* 9622930
* Mathematical Sciences:  Mathematical Modeling of Island     Formation in Strained Semiconductor Films
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/1996,05/31/2000
* Brian Spencer, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Lockhart
* 05/31/2000
* USD 78,432.00

9622930 Spencer The objective of this research is to develop mathematical
models to predict and control morphology development in strained solid films,
which are of great technological importance in semiconductor device
applications. The research project focuses on the consequences of the stress-
driven morphological instability which occurs during film growth. In particular,
the formation of the "island" morphology will be explained in terms of
mathematical models for the morphological instability. The research program
consists of two projects, one focusing on single-component films, the second
focusing on alloy films. In the first project, a "state of the art" model for
the formation of three-dimensional islands will be developed. This model will
include a crucial treatment of the wetting layer between the film and its
underlying substrate. In the second project, a basic model will be developed for
the more complicated problem of morphology development in alloy films, where
composition variations and stress variations are coupled. In both projects the
mathematical models are nonlinear free boundary problems for the shape of the
film. These problems will be analyzed using applied mathematical techniques
which include analytical, asymptotic, and numerical methods. In particular, an
asymptotic description for the island shape will be derived which takes
advantage of the fact that islands generally have a much smaller height than
width. The results of the work will be compared to observations of islands in
strained film systems from both collaborative research projects and published
experimental results. The models will be evaluated to determine the extent to
which they can be used to predict and control morphologies, as well as to
determine future directions for improving mathematical models of strained film
growth as part of a long-term research program. %%% The objective of this
research is to develop mathematical models to predict and control mo rphology
development in strained solid films. Strained solid films are of great
technological importance in semiconductor device applications. The strained
films are grown from a vapor through the deposition of the solid film onto an
underlying substrate of a different material. Because of the bonding of the film
to the substrate, the film is grown in a state of stress. During the growth of
these films, the stresses in the film can lead to the formation of bumps, or
"islands." The presence of these islands has a crucial effect on the electronic
properties of the thin film device, so a knowledge of what controls island
formation enables a better control over the electronic properties of the
strained film device. The objective of this research is to describe island
formation from physically-derived mathematical models of the film growth
process. This mathematical model represents a complementary alternative to
traditional experiment-based research on strained films. The primary benefit of
developing such a model is that it allows one to quickly and easily determine
how the growth of the film is affected by the different material parameters and
process parameters. Thus, the model has three main applications in the
development and production of strained solid films. Firstly, by changing the
parameters in the model, the model can be used as a low-cost way to "experiment"
with different materials and growth configurations. Secondly, the mathematical
model can be used to help engineer materials by determining the necessary
process inputs required to achieve a strained solid film with specified physical
and electronic properties. Finally, the mathematical model can assist in the
determination of optimum and/or acceptable processing conditions for the
manufacture of strained films in industry. ***