* 9622589
* Ordered Arrays of Metals with Polynitrile or                Cyanide Ligands
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/1996,07/31/2000
* Kim Dunbar, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Bragin
* 07/31/2000
* USD 351,001.00

This award in the Inorganic, Bioinorganic, and Organometallic Chemistry Program
provides support for research on synthesis of organonitrile-bridged transition
metal compounds by Dr. Kim R. Dunbar of the Chemistry Department, Michigan State
University. Chain, layered and three-dimensional assemblies will be constructed
and crystallized, and their magnetic and conducting properties determined.
Acetonitrile compounds undergo facile substitution reactions so that a variety
of ligands can be added to moderate properties. Solubility for extended arrays
will be enhanced by varying charge on metal precursors, varying substituents on
organic groups, and varying outer sphere ions present in extended networks.
Compounds will be of two main types. One type of compound will contain
transition metals sigma-bonded to the nitrogen atom lone pairs of polynitrile
acceptors. Species such as tetracyanoethylene (TCNE) will be used. In these
systems, paramagnetic metal centers are assembled into the organic radical
network. The second type of compound consists of transition metal cyanide
complexes reacted to form extended arrays of ferro- or ferrimangnetically
coupled chains or two-dimensional networks. In this research, synthesis of
transition metal nitrile compounds will be controlled so that pure crystals of
one-, two-, or three-dimensional arrays will be formed. The arrays are expected
to exhibit unusual magnetic properties which will be able to be correlated with
structural arrangement. By manipulating the organic groups attached to the
metals, the solubility of the compounds will be controlled in order to build
specific types of molecular arrangements and crystal growth.