* 9622169
* Scanning Probe Microscopy for Materials Research
* MPS,DMR
* 07/15/1996,03/31/2001
* Paul Hansma, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Continuing Grant
* H. Hollis Wickman
* 03/31/2001
* USD 751,435.00

w:\awards\awards96\num.doc 9622169 Hansma This project will advance the state-
of-the-art in Atomic Force Microscopy, AFM, for materials research.
Specifically, work is proposed to design and fabricate new cantilevers down to
the size range of 2 microns wide and 4 microns long together with the new AFMs
that will be required to use them. These new cantilevers will make it possible
to achieve resonant frequencies of over a mega-Hertz for cantilevers gentle
enough to use on a wide range of materials including soft biomaterials. This
will require spring constants of order 0.1 N/m, which can be achieved with
metallic cantilevers of order 50 nm thick. These new cantilevers and AFMs will
be used for imaging the motion of individual protein molecules during the
process of biochemical reaction leading biomaterial products such as RNA. %%%
This project will advance the state-of-the-art in Atomic Force Microscopy, AFM.
Specifically, work is proposed to build the next generation of AFMs and to
demonstrate their advantages for materials research. The United States currently
leads the world in the production of commercial AFMs. This success is based, in
part, on previous NSF support, which lead to prototypes that are the basis of
that current generation of AFMs. The next generation of AFMs will use
cantilevers that are less than one-tenth the size used currently. This grant
will fund work on the development of both these cantilevers and the new AFMs to
use them. These new AFMs will be faster, gentler and have higher resolution than
current AFMs. ***