* 9622479
* RESEARCH EQUIPMENT GRANT: Light Scattering from Fluid       Interfaces with Controlled Tension
* NONE,NONE
* 06/01/1996,05/31/1998
* T. Kyle Vanderlick, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Robert M. Wellek
* 05/31/1998
* USD 19,373.00

9622479 Vanderlick A variety of laser-based optical techniques can be used to
probe the fundamental properties of the oil-water interface (such as
fluctuations), as well as the phase behavior and structure of mono-molecular
films which may be residing there. Technologies which depend on mixtures of oils
and water rely on a deep understanding of these properties and the materials
used to stabilize the interface. The principal investigator recently designed a
film balance to manipulate insoluble monolayers (such as phospholipids) residing
at the interface between oil and water, thereby controlling the tension of the
fluid-fluid interface. This film balance will form the hub of a laser-based
experimental station which implements and takes advantage of different optical
techniques to probe the statics and dynamics of interfaces with controlled
tension. The laser source has already been acquired, and one technique-Brewster
Angle Microscopy-is already on-line. A correlater and the necessary optical
components to set-up a surface dynamic light scattering (SDLS) apparatus will be
acquired with his grant. SDLS provides information on the fluctuations of
interfaces, which can be used to determine interfacial tension as well as film
rheological parameters. The equipment will be used to study the phase behavior
and rheology of lipid and lipid/protein films. ***