* 9622600
*                                                             Invitational Forum on Teacher Preparation for Deans of      Science and Education
* EHR,DUE
* 12/15/1995,05/31/1997
* Jerry Bell, American Association for the Advancement of Science
* Standard Grant
* Terry S. Woodin
* 05/31/1997
* USD 94,587.00

An invitational Forum on Teacher Preparation for Deans of Science and of
Education will be conducted by the American Association for the Advancement of
Science from February 21-23, 1996. Fifty institutional teams (each composed of a
dean of education and a dean of science from major research universities and
comprehensive universities with large teacher preparation programs) will attend
the meeting to consider ways in which collaborations among their academic
divisions and school personnel can better prepare future teachers of K-12
science and mathematics. The purposes of the Forum are (1) to present a summary
of the research results on the teaching and learning of science and mathematics;
(2) to consider exemplary teacher preparation programs that model collaboration
among university science and education departments and local schools or school
districts; (3) to engage the deans in discussion of the issues associated with
the design and implementation of such exemplary programs; and (4) to inform the
deans of opportunities, such as the National Science Foundation's Collaboratives
for Excellence in Teacher Preparation program, to engage in large-scale systemic
projects designed to change significantly teacher preparation programs, on a
state or regional basis, which will serve as comprehensive national models.
Participants will receive background information prior to the meeting. Based
upon discussions and models presented at the Forum, a workbook, including
recommendations for collaborations and the components of model teacher
preparation programs, will be produced and made available to participants and
others interested in improving teacher preparation.