* 9622525
* Cryogenic Electrorheological Fluids
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/1996,11/30/2000
* Robert Zitter, Southern Illinois University at Carbondale
* Continuing Grant
* Alfons Weber
* 11/30/2000
* USD 314,501.00

w:\awards\awards96\*.doc 9622525 Tao This project will investigate a new class
of materials, cryogenic electrorheological (ER) fluids. The research will
determine the effective viscosity, shear stress, response time, column
formation, and structure of these fluids. The program will examine the dynamic
process of field-induced solidification an explore electro- and magneto-
rheological properties of cryogenic ER fluids made of superconducting particles.
The experimental and concurrent theoretical investigation is aimed at addressing
fundamental science of ER fluids: the physical mechanisms and rheological and
electrical properties of ER fluids. If successful, the results will form the
basis for new technology employing cryogenic ER materials. %%%
Electrorheological (ER) fluids are often referred to as intelligent fluids:
Their rheological properties can be rapidly changed by an electric field. Hence,
ER fluids have a wide variety of applications, such as shock absorbers,
suspension systems, and clutches. This project will investigate cryogenic ER
fluids which consist of fine dielectric particles, including superconducting
particles, suspended in liquid nitrogen or liquid helium. The research will
determine physical and a mechanical properties of the cryogenic ER fluids and
dynamic structure formation. The comparison between cryogenic ER fluids and ER
fluids at room temperature will provide significant new information about the
fundamental physics of the ER effect. Moreover, the project may potentially
establish the foundation for a low temperature technology based on ER phenomena
and lead to practical applications in fluids engineering. ***