* 9622497
* The Effects of Chemistry and Microstructure on Deformation  Mechanisms in Titanium-Aluminides
* NONE,NONE
* 03/01/1996,10/31/1999
* Hamish Fraser, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Continuing grant
* Bruce A. MacDonald
* 10/31/1999
* USD 401,248.00

9622497 Fraser This is a study of the role of a number of intrinsic and
extrinsic factors, including chemical and microstructural effects, on the
deformation mechanisms operative in titanium aluminide-based systems. The
objectives of this research are fourfold: (1) one aim is to determine the
anisotropy of the bonding charge densities in titanium aluminide (TiAl) and
assess its influence on deformation processes. Accurate values of the Debye-
Waller factors are determined on standard samples of known compositions using
four-circle x- ray diffraction. Subsequently, low-order structure factors for
TiAl are deduced from which the anisotropy of bonding charge densities are
assessed. The possible influence of the resulting charge densities on
deformation mechanisms are then assessed. (2) the effects of both substitutional
and interstitial solute additions on dislocation mobilities are determined.
Here, experiments are performed on single phase samples of TiAl to develop an
understanding of the interaction between oxygen impurities and dislocations in
TiAl. (3) an assessment of the role of Ti3Al on the deformation behavior and
micro-mechanisms of fracture in TiAl-based systems is made. The deformation
behavior of Ti3Al in lamellar, equiaxed and duplex versions of the
microstructures is determined by post-mortem transmission electron microscopy
(TEM) studies, with particular emphasis being placed on slip transmission
through Ti3Al, and the accumulation of strain at interfaces between TiAl and
Ti3Al. (4) the ability to engineer interface properties in TiAl- based systems
by solute addition, in an analogous manner to that in Ni-base superalloys, is
investigated. %%% The research examines deformation mechanisms in titanium
aluminide alloys, whose practical applications are limited by a lack of
understanding of a number of important factors related to their mechanical
behavior. The effort also contributes to the scientific base for elevated
temperature interme tallic compounds. ***