* 9622609
* Spherical Hydrophilic Polymers:  Synthesis, Characterization and Applications
* MPS,DMR
* 03/15/1996,02/29/2000
* George Newkome, University of South Florida
* Continuing Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 02/29/2000
* USD 330,000.00

9622609 Newkome The overriding theme of this research concerns the investigation
of the preparation, structural aspects, and chemical properties of dendrimers
(cascade macromolecules) that have been internally modified. Pursuant to this
goal is the design and synthesis of application-oriented dendritic building
blocks possessing masked, or inert, transformable functionality to be accessed
for use after dendrimer construction. Project goals include: 1) Construction of
functionally differentiated dendritic building blocks for the site-specific
incorporation of application-oriented functionality into dendrimers. 2)
Construction of dendrimers with compartmentalized moieties capable of forming
connections with other dendrimers. 3) Concommitant (`combinatorial")
construction of multiple, dendritic assemblies (dendritic libraries). 4)
Unimolecular micellar constrained and templated preparation of monodisperse,
small particle, semiconductor crystallites (also described as "quantum dots").
5) Precise arrangement of semiconductor crystallites into three-dimensional
superarrays allowing Q-particle electronic coupling "fine tuning". %%% The
merits of this research rely on the study of the chemistry associated with
physicochemical properties of highly branched, specifically designed,
macromolecules, and the attendant utility inherent in those properties. Results
of this research will expand foundations for understanding of chemical phenomena
occurring within "designer" reaction environments. ***