* 9622683
* Kinetics and Mechanisms of Rapid Reactions in Solution
* MPS,CHE
* 03/15/1996,07/31/1999
* Dale Margerum, Purdue Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Raymond Mackay
* 07/31/1999
* USD 519,000.00

In this accomplishment-based renewal in the Inorganic, Organometallic and
Bioinorganic Chemistry Program, Dr. Margerum will continue mechanistic studies
of non-metal redox reactions with emphasis on rapid reactions between
electrophilic halogen species and nucleophiles with nitrogen, oxygen, sulfur and
halogen donors. The role of halogen-cation transfer mechanisms, the correlation
of reactivities with nucleophilicity, and the effect of acid-base catalysis in
these reactions will be examined. Halogen oxidations of ammonia, hydrazine, and
hydroxylamine, the reaction of chloramine with formaldehyde, reactions between
bromamine and formaldehyde, reactions of N-fluoro electrophilic fluorinating
reagents with inorganic nucleophiles, and reactions of highly reactive
Ni(III)peptide complexes will be studied. The use of a pulsed-accelerated-flow,
position-resolved observation instrument developed in Margerum's laboratories
makes it possible to measure extremely fast reaction rates. In this work Dr.
Margerum will study atom- and ion-transfer reactions which take place more
rapidly than can be measured by conventional methods. The unique instrumentation
developed in the PI's laboratory provides the opportunity to measure these
extremely fast reactions, which have fundamental, environmental and biological
significance.