* 9622322
* PPD Special Proj: "Enabling Students to Undertake the       Challenge of Careers in Engineering and Science in School   (Enabling SUCCESS)"
* EDU,EES
* 05/15/1996,05/31/2000
* NONE NONE, NONE
* Continuing Grant
* Lawrence A. Scadden
* 05/31/2000
* USD 553,289.00

Proposal # HRD-96-22322 Applicant: Louisiana Tech University Principal
Investigator: Paul Hale Title: "Enabling Students to Undertake the Challenge of
Careers in Engineering and Science in School" (Enabling SUCCESS) ABSTRACT The
Biomedical Engineering Department of Louisiana Tech University, through its
Center for Rehabilitation Science and Biomedical Engineering, proposes a three-
year Special Project directed at increasing the awareness of career
opportunities in science, engineering, and mathematics for middle school
students with disabilities. The overall goal of this project is to work with
middle school students, their parents, and their science teachers to increase
the number of students with disabilities that pursue science, engineering, and
mathematics career fields. The specific goals of the project are to: 1)
stimulate student interest in science, engineering, and mathematics; 2) heighten
the awareness among middle school students, their families, and their science
teachers of the opportunities for persons with disabilities in these fields; and
3) provide them with an understanding of the importance of career exploration
and taking appropriate college preparatory courses in high school. Students
often begin to make career preparation decisions in the middle school grades as
they prepare to enter high school where college preparatory electives require
decisions in earlier grades. This is especially true in science and math where a
sequence of courses must be followed from the earliest possible grade level.
Students with disabilities and their parents need to be prepared for these
decisions and to realize that these choices will influence subsequent
educational and career development activities. For students with disabilities,
neglecting fundamental skills may exclude them from the opportunity to enroll or
succeed in SEM curricula when they enter college. Primary components of the
proposed project are: (1) As sistive Technology and Careers in SEM Workshops,
(2) Adapted Classroom and Student Science Kits, (3) Teacher Awareness Seminars,
(4) Study and Career Guidance Mentoring Program, (5) Super Summer of Science
Showcases. A unique feature of this proposal is its focus on middle school
students with disabilities, their parents, and their teachers. For the purposes
of this proposal, middle school grades will include grades six through nine.
Through the mentoring and counseling program, the project will address the
educational transition from late elementary school through high school. The
project would provide training for middle-school teachers in methods of
including students with disabilities in all aspects of classroom and laboratory
learning experiences. Activities designed to stimulate students with
disabilities to explore science projects and courses would be undertaken and
evaluated. Information regarding available assistive technologies that make SEM
activities accessible to students with disabilities would be provided to science
teachers, students, and parents. ***