* 9623248
* Faraday-Stark Optoelectronic Effect
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/15/1996,08/31/1998
* Don Heiman, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Deborah L. Crawford
* 08/31/1998
* USD 130,000.00

9623248 Heiman The aim of this proposal is to investigate a new optoelectronic
effect based on Faraday rotation in quantum well structures. Preliminary work
has demonstrated that an applied voltage can be used to control the degree of
Faraday rotation. This effect is novel in the sense that the degree of rotation
is controlled by an electric field as opposed to a magnetic field. This could
lead to electronic control of light switches and wide bandwidth optical
modulators. Optoelectronic devices based on the Faraday-Stark effect would
require only a low switching voltage (~ volt) and a small dc magnetic field
(&lt; l tesla) supplied by a permanent magnet. Some unique features for optical
modulators include: * high-bandwidth light modulation, &gt;10^10 Hz; * very low
transmission in the off-state, &lt; 10^-5; and &gt; 40 dB modulation depth; *
compatibility with microlithography and waveguides. Initial experiments on the
Faraday-Stark effect were performed on a GaAs quantum well sample grown at UC
Santa Barbara (group of A.C. Gossard). Although this structure was not optimized
for the Faraday-Stark effect, improved structures are being grown in the
Electrical Engineering Department at MIT (group of C. Fonstad). Of particular
importance for room temperature devices are structures made from II-VI magnetic
semiconductor structures. These will be grown in our own MBE machine, which was
fabricated with funding from an NSF Engineering Research Grant and seed funding
from AT&amp;T. A variety of II-VI and III-V material structures will be
investigated using magneto-optical experiments. These results will be helpful in
examining the possibilities for designing devices that operate at wavelengths of
interest. Our ambition is to determine the limitations and optimum conditions
required for optoelectronic light switches, modulators, and electrically-
controlled optical isolators. This research program will provide students with a
broad education in engineering, physics, and materi als science. It also
provides hands-on training in many areas including optics, magnetism,
semiconductors, MBE crystal growth, microfabrication, low-dimensional science,
high-speed electronics, cryogenics, and high-field magnets. Such a broad-based
education is likely to impact on the future employment of both graduate and
undergraduate students. In addition, an education in the field of optics is
exceptionally valuable since that job market usually exceeds the number of
qualified graduates. ***