* 9623288
* Mathematical Sciences:  Smooth Representations of Reductive P-Adic Groups via G-Types
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/1996,07/31/1999
* Lawrence Morris, Clark University
* Standard Grant
* Tie Luo
* 07/31/1999
* USD 49,833.00

Morris 9623288 Admissible representations of reductive groups over local fields
have been the object of study for some time by virtue of the Langlands program
relating them to local and global number theory. Among these representations,
the supercuspidal representations have always played a distinguished role as
building blocks. One way to construct them is via induction from compact open
subgroups, and this has led to the philosophy of studying admissible
representations of a reductive group by restricting them to appropriate compact
open subgroups. Bushnell and Kutzko have applied this philosophy with great
success to the general or special linear groups; this has led them to formalize
it via the very general notion of S-types. This approach has also been
successful in studying the smooth representations of an arbitrary reductive
group that contains a fixed vector under the prounipotent radical of some
parahoric subgroup (the "level zero case"). Finally, preliminary results suggest
this approach can work more generally for other groups. The PI will continue his
investigations in this area, and in particular, he will consider the following
topics: (a) The study of S-types for classical groups; in particular the
classification of the admissible dual of classical groups, (b) Applications of
(a) to the study of the reducibility of generalized principal series of
classical groups and related arithmetic, (c) Further study of problems arising
from the level zero case; in particular, the classification of the level zero
part of the admissible dual in terms of Langlands parameters and applications of
level zero S-types to the study of reducibility and R-groups. The Langlands
program is part of number theory. Number theory is the study of the properties
of the whole numbers and is the oldest branch of mathematics. From the beginning
problems in number theory have furnished a driving force in creating new
mathematics in other diverse parts of the discipline. Th e Langland's program is
a general philosophy that connects number theory with calculus; it embodies the
modern approach to the study of whole numbers. Modern number theory is very
technical and deep, but it has had astonishing applications in areas like
theoretical computer science and coding theory.