* 9623690
* Dissertation Research:  Molecular Evolution, Adaptive       Radiation, and Geographic Diversification in Calochortus    (Liliaceae)
* BIO,DEB
* 06/15/1996,05/31/1998
* Thomas Givnish, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Charles O'Kelly
* 05/31/1998
* USD 10,000.00

9623690 GIVNISH Mariposa lilies and their relatives (Calochortus) comprise one
of the largest and most ecologically diverse plant genera in western North
America. Their flowers are often strikingly beautiful and vary from open, tulip-
like blossoms, to showy nodding globes, to bizarre forms with a dense layer of
hairs over the inner surface of the petals. Most species have narrow, non-
overlapping distributions, in habitats ranging from deserts to chapparal,
coniferous forests, and subalpine meadows. Several species grow on serpentine,
gypsum, or other unusual substrates; many are now close to extinction. Principal
investigators Givnish (supervisor) and Patterson (doctoral candidate) will
evaluate the relationships among Mariposa lilies by extracting chloroplast and
nuclear DNA from previously- and freshly-collected specimens. They plan to
derive a molecular family tree for the plants based on DNA sequences, determine
the amount of agreement between trees based on DNA sequences and those based on
morphological traits, and establish whether species that live in close proximity
to each other are near or distant relatives. They will also assess whether
certain traits have appeared once or more than once in the family history of
Mariposa lilies; for instance, whether lilies that can grow on serpentine soils
are closely related (one appearance of the trait, expressed only in plants
descended from the first to have this ability) or distantly related (multiple
appearances of the trait). Research will focus on two of the three sections of
Calochortus, with collaborators planning to study the remaining section. The
investigations should shed light on the processes underlying the diversity of
one of the WestOs largest - but most rapidly disappearing - groups of plants.