* 9623466
* Dissertation Research:  Gene Flow Within a                  Spatially-Structured Beetle Population
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/1996,06/30/1997
* Kendall Corbin, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Mark Courtney
* 06/30/1997
* USD 4,662.00

9623466 Corbin The effects of habitat destruction are a central concern for the
conservation of natural communities and populations. One aspect of habitat
destruction, fragmentation, is predicted to reduce the size of impacted
populations, decrease the number of populations, and cause populations to become
isolated from one another, genetically. Together, these effects increase the
probability of local and regional extinction. Work funded in this award will
address the effects of habitat fragmentation on the population dynamics of the
prairie beetle (Chrysochus auratus) a resident of prairie fragments in western
Minnesota. The tallgrass prairie ecosystem of the United States has experienced
massive alteration. In Minnesota, less than 0.1% of the original tallgrass
prairie remains, mostly as small isolated preserves. The degree of population
interaction and the overall pattern of movement of individuals among local
populations and prairie fragments will be examined by genetically characterizing
each local population. In so doing, the connectedness of fragmented beetle
populations can be ascertained. These data will indicate the degree to which
local populations function as a single genetic and demographic unit, a primary
conceptual issue in conservation biology. Also, the relative importance of
particular prairie remnants and local populations to the overall population
structure among and within preserves will be examined. Documenting these
patterns and the processes that underlie them is crucial for understanding the
effects of habitat fragmentation and effective management of fragmented habitat.