* 9623287
* Mathematical Sciences: Second Order Elliptic and Parabolic  Differential Equations
* MPS,DMS
* 06/15/1996,09/30/1999
* Mikhail Safonov, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 09/30/1999
* USD 111,702.00

ABSTRACT DMS-9623287 PI: SAFONOV UNIVERSITY OF MINNESOTA The project relates to
important topics in the theory of Second Order Elliptic and Parabolic Partial
Differential Equations, such as properties of solutions of linear equations with
measurable coefficients (the backward Harnack inequality, the estimates for
fundamental solutions, etc.), the problem of uniqueness of blowup solutions to
semilinear elliptic equations, and the problem of regularity of solutions to
fully nonlinear equations. Part 1 of the project deals with the estimates of
solutions of linear equations which do not depend on the smoothness of
coefficients. Special attention is paid to the local boundedness of solutions
and to the behavior of positive solutions which blowup at the boundary.
Uniqueness of such solutions is investigated under minimal assumptions on the
smoothness of coefficients and on the structure of the boundary. In Part 3, the
results on the classical solutions of linear equations are extended to the fully
nonlinear equations satisfying a Dini condition with respect to independent
variables. The estimates of solutions of linear equations with non-smooth
coefficients are associated with certain properties of different processes in
non-homogeneous environment, with many applications to heat-mass transfer,
chemistry, porous media, traffic flow, biology, etc. Such estimates also serve
as a background for the theory of nonlinear equations. The investigation of
blowup solutions of semilinear equations is important in ecology, combustion
theory, chemical and nuclear engineering. Many phenomena in these and other
areas can be treated in terms of a superdiffusion process which describes a
cloud rising as the limit of a system of independent Brownian particles which
die at random times, leaving a random number of offspring. Fully nonlinear
equations are closely related to the theory of optimal control of random
processes where the optimal strategy can e found by solving of appropriate
initial or bou ndary value problem for the corresponding nonlinear equation.
This theory has applications to many physical and economical problems.