* 9623721
* CAREER:  An Integrated Approach to the Study of Inverse     Methods in Electrical Engineering
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/1996,08/31/2000
* Eric Miller, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* John Cozzens
* 08/31/2000
* USD 204,092.00

The objective of this CAREER award is to develop a fully integrated career plan
designed to meet the educational needs of students in the Electrical and
Computer Engineering (ECE) Department of Northeastern University. The underlying
theme behind all aspects of this work is the study of inverse problems, a topic
which is all but absent at the undergraduate level and not often considered even
in the graduate school despite the ubiquity of these problems in many fields of
engineering and the applied sciences. In the area of educations activities, two
projects are envisioned. At the undergraduate level, a capstone design course in
the general area of signal processing is being developed and implemented. At the
graduate level, a course devoted to the study of the theoretical and practical
issues surrounding linear inverse problems is being developed. In the area of
research, we are exploring the use of statistical and multiscale signal
processing methods for solving non-linear electromagnetic inverse scattering
problems. These algorithms will incorporate scattering models based upon a
Green's function formulation of the vector Helholtz equation. A statistically-
based, multi-grid-type algorithm for extracting image and target information
(number of targets, locations, and classifications) is being developed. The
incorporation of detailed, physical models directly into the data processing
algorithms makes these techniques directly applicable to a wide range of
problems including radar signal processing for image formation and target
detection/classification, remote sensing, microwave medical imaging, and
geophysical exploration.