* 9623764
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH:  Offspring-Parent Communication
* BIO,IOS
* 05/01/1996,04/30/1998
* Ronald Hoy, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* None
* 04/30/1998
* USD 3,962.00

Abstract IBN 96-23764 Hoy, Crocroft &amp; Gilbert Offspring-Parent
Communication Within all animal societies, most of an individual s social
interactions are carried out by means of communication. Yet the role of
communication in social behavior remains controversial, in part because it has
been difficult to integrate information about the adaptive significance of
signaling for both senders and receivers within the same system. In the
subsocial treehopper, Umbonia crassicornis, communication between parents and
offspring plays a critical role in their response to predation. Females produce
only a single clutch of young, and thus there is a high overlap of interests
between parent and offspring about the extent of parental investment in
offspring defense. The fitness costs and benefits of signaling are therefore
shared by both senders and receivers. This study will address the benefits of
signaling by quantifying the effectiveness of the parents anti-predatory
response, that is evoked by nymphal signals. The costs of signaling will be
addressed by manipulating female investment in offspring defense, to determine
whether current benefits accrued by evoking parental defense are offset by a
reduction in parental survivorship and potential for future defense. The
proposed research should be of general interest within the fields of animal
communication and social evolution.