* 9623392
* Mathematical Sciences:  "Robust and Sampled Data Control    of Distributed Parameter Systems"
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/1996,06/30/2000
* Richard Rebarber, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Lockhart
* 06/30/2000
* USD 50,193.00

9623392 Rebarber This research will address several important problems
associated with the stabilization of distributed parameter systems. The main
issue concerns the possibility of stabilizing a system in the absence of
complete information about the system. For instance, a feedback control which
stabilizes a system might have unmodeled small time delays in the feedback loop
that adversely affect the stability of the system. It is therefore important to
determine when and how this occurs, and to decide what modifications in the
feedback loop are needed to alleviate the problem. A related issue concerns
systems in which the only data available for use in a control design is a
sampled-data observation of the actual system, or a numerical approximation of
that system. This research will determine when stabilization of an unknown
system is possible based on such limited information. The approach taken is
system theoretic in the sense that results are developed for a large class of
abstract state space systems and frequency domain systems, and then applied to
vibration control problems for specific systems. Many of the problems require
approaches which combine partial differential equation techniques, frequency
domain techniques and state space techniques. %%% One of the principal issues in
the design of stabilizing feedbacks for vibrating systems is that of design of a
feedback control based on incomplete information of the system. An important
paradigm of such a system occurs in structural acoustics. In this problem, sound
waves are present within a cavity, such as an airplane cabin, and part of the
boundary of the cavity is subject to vibrations due, for example, to an aircraft
engine mounted near one of the walls of the cabin. Wall vibrations may either
amplify or attenuate the sound waves, and one of the applications of this
research is to use the wall vibrations to accomplish the latter. Modern
techniques used to accomplish this use piezoceramic patches th at impart bending
moments on the vibrating wall when voltages are applied to them. Numerical
experiments suggest that some of these stabilization schemes may be rendered
ineffective by very small time delays that naturally arise in the feedback loop.
Such delays cannot be precisely determined, so it is important to decide what
modifications in the feedback loop are needed to alleviate the problem. This
project is will address precisely such issue in the general context of
stabilization of infinite- dimensional vibrating systems based on incomplete
information of the system, or based on sampled data. ***