* 9623772
* Dissertation Research:  Spatially Autocorrelated            Environmental Heterogeneity:  Within-Population Effects in  Danthonia spicata
* BIO,DEB
* 06/15/1996,05/31/1999
* Katherine Gross, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Lyons
* 05/31/1999
* USD 9,500.00

9623772 Gross Environments differ in both the level and spatial scale of
heterogeneity in resources. Plants can respond to this variation either by
individually buffering environmental changes without decreasing their
reproductive success or by avoiding exposure to the negative portion of
environmental variation through seed dispersal. If an individual cannot buffer
or avoid deleterious environmental change then its performance will decline.
Research funded by this award will address whether genetic variation exists
within plant populations for either buffering capacity or avoidance of
environmental heterogeneity. The native grass, Danthonia spicata, will be used
as a model system. Field experiments will assess the magnitude and scale of
environmental variation experienced by several grass genotypes and a greenhouse
study will test whether the same genotypes vary in their ability to buffer
variation in one key growth resource, soil nitrogen. Fitness consequences of
differences among individuals in buffering capacity will be tested.
Understanding the ability of species to respond to environmental variation
through joint response of multiple traits should be helpful in predicting how
native plant populations will cope with environmental degradation.