* 9623890
* Processing Chemistry, Solid Solution Inhomogeneity and      Relaxor Behavior
* MPS,DMR
* 06/15/1996,11/30/2000
* Angus Wilkinson, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* David Nelson
* 11/30/2000
* USD 306,100.00

Abstract 9623890 Wilkinson Many solid solution oxides have previously been
prepared using sol-gel techniques. One of the often stated advantages of this
approach is the chemical homogeneity of the end product. However, there is
reason to believe that the products will not be random solid solutions under all
circumstances. The existence of compositional inhomogeneities in solid solution
systems can have important consequences for the properties of the material. In
this research, samples of the ferroelectrics materials will be prepared using
published sol-gel procedures. The products will be examined using a combination
of analytical electron microscopy and solid state NMR. Pair distribution
functions (PDFs) will be calculated from X-ray and/or neutron scattering data.
This approach should provide enough evidence to assess the compositional
homogeneity of individual crystallites within a sample and, hence, the ability
of existing sol-gel chemistry to produce random solid solutions. As sol-gel
chemistry is widely used for preparing oxides any information gained regarding
the techniques ability to produce compositionally random products is relevant to
a large field. Sol-gel chemistry will then be exploited to deliberately prepare
non-random solid solutions of the ferroelectrics. Compositional and/or
structural fluctuations on ~ 5-10 nm lengths scale within ferroelectrics are
known to give rise to relaxor behavior in many systems. It is thought that by
introducing compositional fluctuations into solid solutions that do not normally
display relaxor properties such behavior can be induced. The compositional
homogeneity of the products will be assessed using analytical electron
microscopy and PDFs calculated from X-ray and/or neutron scattering data. These
experiments will be supported by measurements of the materials dielectric
properties as a function of frequency and temperature. This work will aid the
understanding of exactly what is required to produce relaxor beh avior and has
the potential to produce useful new materials. %%% The synthesis of ceramics
using solution processing has been practiced for many years. Such routes have
been the subject of a vast research effort in the last 10 - 15 years due to the
wide spread realization of the benefits offered by this approach. These
potentially include, i) low processing temperatures, ii) thin film and fiber
fabrication, iii) good control over impurity levels in the ceramic and, iv)
chemical homogeneity in the end product. Characteristics such as compositional
homogeneity are clearly important to the properties of some materials. This
research will examine the relationship between processing chemistry, solid
solution inhomogeneity and dielectric properties for some sol-gel produced
ferroelectric solid solutions. A simple strategy is suggested for introducing
controllable amounts of inhomogeneity into the solid solution. By controlling
the level of inhomogeneity in a solid solution ferroelectric it may be possible
to tailor the dielectric properties of the material.