* 9623228
* CAREER:  Robust Control-Oriented Identification:            Theoretical Development and Experimental Validation
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/1996,07/31/2001
* Jie Chen, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 07/31/2001
* USD 209,377.00

9623228 Chen The overall technical approach to be adopted is to merge theory,
simulation, and experimentation, and it draws theoretical concepts and
techniques from the areas of mathematics, control theory, numerical computation,
structural dynamics, and control system implementation. A unique thread in our
theoretical approach is the use of classical analytic function interpolation and
convex optimization techniques which appear to be extremely useful but are yet
to be exploited for system identification. The proposed research, with a
unifying theme on model and computational complexity, focuses on several most
imminent issues that are yet to be addressed but are critical to the advance and
application of robust control-oriented identification techniques, and it aims at
developing accurate, computationally efficient and practically feasible
identification algorithms not previously available. Numerical simulation and
experimental validation involving flexible structures, turbo-machines, and
active magnetic bearings will be performed in laboratory, and in collaboration
with government and industrial organizations. Education and human resource
development constitutes an integrable part in this proposed research. The
principal education objective in this research is to provide students
opportunities to participate in advanced research projects. Through this
rigorous, innovative, and closely guided research program, the students will
acquire and develop knowledge, skills, and methods of scientific inquiry and
technological discovery, hence adequately preparing them for an engineering
career in the future. A carefully coordinated, balanced,and systematic
educational approach through a combination of activities in student advising,
curriculum development, laboratory development, and public services will be
employed to achieve this goal. While graduate students at the Doctoral and the
Masters levels will participate directly in this research, the project will also
benefit Senior undergraduate students through summer research and Senior design
projects generated from this research. ***