* 9623616
* NMR Development Plan for the Chemistry Department at the    University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* MPS,CHE
* 07/15/1996,06/30/2000
* Linda Spremulli, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Joan M. Frye
* 06/30/2000
* USD 836,660.00

This award from the Chemistry Research Instrumentation and Facilities Program
will help the Department of Chemistry at University of North Carolina at Chapel
Hill acquire a modern 500 MHz NMR spectrometer and upgrade an existing Varian
XL-400 MHz and a Bruker MSL- 300WB NMR Spectrometer. This equipment will enhance
research in a number of areas including the following: transition metal catalyst
olefin polymerization; total synthesis of complex natural products;
polymerizations in supercritical fluids; engineering of non-genetic proteins;
development of 2D pulsed field gradient NMR experiments, relationships between
protein structure, stability and function; structure and design of ferroelectric
liquid crystals; synthesis and application of phosphorous-capped metal clusters;
and enantioselective reactions of metal complexes. Nuclear Magnetic Resonance
(NMR) spectroscopy is the most powerful tool available to chemists for the
elucidation of the structure of molecules. It is used to identify unknown
substances, characterize specific arrangements of atoms within molecules, and to
study the dynamics of interactions between molecules in solution. Access to
state-of-the-art NMR spectrometry is essential to chemists who are carrying out
frontier research. The results from these NMR studies are useful in the areas
such as polymers, catalysis, and in biology.