* 9623546
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH:  Evolutionary Origin of Behavioral   Organization:  Constraint or Adaptation?
* BIO,IOS
* 04/15/1996,03/31/1999
* David Crews, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* John A. Byers
* 03/31/1999
* USD 4,062.00

ABSTRACT Proposal: #96-23546 PI: Crews &amp; Rhen Title: Evolutionary origin of
behavioral organization Organization of reproductive and aggressive behaviors by
estradiol (via aromatization of testosterone in mammals) during early
development is well documented in birds and mammals. There is a correlation
between the organized and heterogametic sex in these groups; males are organized
(lose the ability to display female-typical behavior) in mammals, whereas
females are organized (lose the ability to display male-typical behavior) in
birds. The opposite sex retains the capacity to display both female- and male-
typical behavior. A similar correlation is observed in other vertebrates with
genotypic sex determination. Alternate explanations are (1) that a developmental
constraint results in organization of the heterogametic sex, or (2) that there
is a functional relationship between organization and gonochorism. Reptiles with
environmental sex determination do not fit into the constraint paradigm because
they lack a heterogametic sex. In contrast, these species may be organized if
organization is adaptive. In this study, manipulation of embryonic temperature
(and thereby gonadal sex) and adult hormones will be performed to distinguish
among hypotheses about organization. Log-linear, multivariate, and path analyses
will be used to analyze reproductive and aggressive behaviors. Results will (1)
illuminate the proximate cause of behavioral variation in an ESD species, and
(2) for the first time delineate and test alternate hypotheses about the
evolutionary causes of behavioral organization in the context of sex determining
mechanisms.