* 9623920
* CAREER: Research and Education Career Development Plan
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/1996,08/31/2001
* Susan James, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* Janice M. Jenkins
* 08/31/2001
* USD 200,000.00

9623920 James Dr. James' plans for integrating research and education are
presented. The overall objective of her research is to engineer a new polymeric
material for the articulating surfaces of total joint replacement implants which
should decrease the wear and thus increase the longevity of these implants. This
award will support the experimental research and development of novel gradient,
interpenetrating polymer network (IPN) materials with positively charged
surfaces which will have good bearing properties and will attract the
polyanionic lubricating molecules in synovial joint fluid. Ultra high molecular
weight polyethylene (UHMWPE) will be made biomimetic by incorporating cationic
groups, similar to those in articular cartilage, into it. Specifically, an IPN
will be formed at the surface of UHMWPE between crosslinked polylysine (PL) and
UHMWPE by swelling UHMWPE, diffusing PL into it and subsequently crosslinking
the PL. The IPN will have a gradient nature in which the surface regions have a
higher concentration of PL than the interior. Variation of swelling solvents,
solvent temperature, PL oligomer size and crosslinkers will result in IPNs with
different gradient thickness, characteristics and charge densities. In order to
characterize the mechanical and physical properties of the novel materials, the
following tests will be performed: conditioning, surface charge measurement,
measurement of the thickness and gradient characteristics, dimensional changes
from initial thickness, synovial fluid adsorption and tribological
characterization. The results of these tests will determine the most desirable
experimental methods to be used in the preparation of the implant materials for
the cell toxicity, mechanical testing and hip simulator studies. Dr. James tries
to use cooperative learning in the classroom and to integrate undergraduates in
her research program during the academic years and summers. This proposal will
also help support the out reach activities of Dr. James and her students, such
as a snow sled design contest for girls interested in math and science at
regional public elementary schools. ***