* 9623416
* Dissertation Research:  Reduction in Pathogen Virulence and its Effect on Host Demography
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/1996,05/31/1998
* Andrew Jarosz, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Allen Moore
* 05/31/1998
* USD 7,960.00

9623416 Jarosz Pathogen virulence refers to the negative effects of infection on
host fitness. This research investigates the relationship between pathogen
virulence and host plant demography. Theoretical models assume that reductions
in pathogen virulence lead to increases in host population size and density.
Research funded by this award represents one of the first tests of these models
for plant systems. The project will determine whether changes in virulence
actually cause commensurate changes in plant population growth for a system of
economic and aesthetic importance, the American chestnut, Castanea dentata, and
the chestnut blight pathogen, Cryphonectria parasitica. Reductions in pathogen
virulence in this system result from infection of the pathogen by double-
stranded RNA hypoviruses. When the pathogen is attacked by hypoviruses, its host
tree produces wound callus tissue and can survive the infection. At a population
scale, such survival events result in a recovering population. Seedling
recruitment and population growth rates will be compared for recovering, non-
recovering, and disease-free chestnut populations. This work will contribute to
the development of cost effective management strategies for the American
chestnut. If, for example, chestnut population growth rates are most sensitive
to loss of saplings and saplings are most affected by infection, efforts to
protect the American chestnut should be directed at young individuals. More
generally, this study will provide insight into the effect of pathogens on
individuals of different life history stages and on population level demographic
processes.