* 9623156
* Mathematical Sciences: Polynomials and Polynomial           Inequalities
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/1996,05/31/2000
* Tamas Erdelyi, Texas A&M Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 05/31/2000
* USD 64,611.00

ABSTRACT Proposal: DMS-9623156 PI: Erdelyi Polynomials pervade mathematics.
Virtually every branch of mathematics, from algebraic number theory and
algebraic geometry to applied analysis, Fourier analysis, and computer science,
has its corpus of theory arising from the study of polynomials. This project
intends to study polynomial inequalities and their applications in classical
analysis, approximation theory, orthogonal polynomials, and number theory. The
proposed research is about polynomials in a general sense, so it includes
Chebyshev spaces, Markov spaces, Descartes systems, Muntz polynomials, rational
function spaces, as well as polynomials with various constraints such as
restricted zeros, integer coefficients, and nonnegative coefficients in various
bases. The project continues several years of successful work on a variety of
topics and describes various new directions. Polynomials are one of the most
basic concepts of mathematics. Throughout history people have found problems
concerning polynomials especially fascinating. Each of the "three famous
problems" in the "Heroic Age" dealt with zeros of polynomials: squaring the
circle, duplicating the cube, and trisecting an angle. Historically, questions
relating to polynomials, for example, the solution of polynomial equations, gave
rise to some of the most important problems of the day. Besides the natural
intellectual interest in them, polynomials, and in particular extremal problems
involving polynomials, arise not only in almost every field of mathematics, but
also in other sciences, especially in engineering. However, it is often the case
that polynomials related to a practical problem belong to a restricted class.
Depending on the nature of the problem, some additional pieces of information on
the polynomial may be known. For filter design, polynomials with coefficients
from {-1,0,1} are very useful, because, if they are used, then the filter can be
implemented without the use of multiplications; their implementati on requires
only additions and subtractions. This reduces the cost of implementation. The
problem is to find such polynomials which have a "lowpass" behavior on the unit
circle of the complex plane. Roughly, that is, they approximate 1 in a
neighborhood of 1 and approximate 0 in a neighborhood of -1. The project plans
to study extremal properties of polynomials with coefficients from {-1,0,1,
{0,1}, and {-1,1}. Unimodular polynomials (with coefficients that are complex
numbers of modulus 1) are also important in engineering. In some other problems
related to physics, in particular electrostatics, information about the
distribution of the zeros of the polynomial is known. "Gaped" polynomials
(polynomials with a large number of zero coefficients) are used to analyze, for
example, the time-optimal boundary controls for the one-dimensional heat
equation. The proposal intends to explore further applications of polynomial
inequalities as well as to offer a systematic study of naturally arising
questions regarding polynomials subject to various constraints.