* 9623463
* Mathematical Sciences:  "Dynamics of Superconducting        Vortices and Monopoles in Gauge Theories"
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/1996,06/30/1999
* NONE NONE, NONE
* Standard Grant
* Henry Warchall
* 06/30/1999
* USD 60,000.00

9623463 Stuart The aim of this research project is to understand the behavior of
superconducting vortices in the equations of time-dependent superconductivity
(Ginzburg-Landau theory). Also the role of particle-like objects in the Yang-
Mills Higgs equations and other systems will be studied. These equations are
essentially systems of parabolic and hyperbolic type respectively. One of the
aims of the work is to understand how the dynamical properties of the
``particles'' are reflected in the analytical properties of the equations. This
is interesting since the particles represent a genuinely nonlinear effect. The
particle-like objects are solutions which are independent of time and are
characterized by a topological winding number. Reduced descriptions of the
dynamics of these ``particles'' in terms of finite dimensional systems have been
obtained together with rigorous bounds on the validity of the approximations.
These allow an understanding of the forces between the ``particles'' and also
their scattering properties. This in turn leads to an understanding of the
original equations, in particular to conjectures and theorems about the large
time behavior of the solutions. In turn it is to be hoped that a study of the
large time behavior of these equations may be a useful tool in analyzing the
static particle-like solutions themselves. %%% In mathematical descriptions of
the physical world there is a division between ``fields'' and ``particles''. The
former are continuous media in which information propagates in a wave-like
fashion, while the latter are discrete objects. However certain equations which
give a ``field'' description of some physical situation have solutions which are
themselves ``particle-like''. This provides a bridge between the two types of
description. A real world situation in which this occurs is superconductivity:
vortices appear in superconductors as particle-like objects within a continuum
description. They are very important in technological applications of
superconductors because the vortices produce a resistance to passage of current
through the material and hence reduce the efficacy of the material in modern
technology. It is therefore extremely important to be able to understand the
interactions of vortices with each other and with the rest of the material in
order to fully realize the great technological potential of superconducting
materials in high speed computer design, power transmission, modern rail systems
and other areas. ***