* 9623643
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Molecular Phylogeny of the Ericaceae using RNA Polymerase II
* BIO,DEB
* 06/15/1996,05/31/1998
* Benjamin Hall, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Charles O'Kelly
* 05/31/1998
* USD 4,000.00

9623643 HALL Reconstruction of the historical (OphylogeneticO) relationships
among plant groups, through comparative analysis of nuclear and organellar
ribosomal DNA sequences, is an integral part of systematic biology. Researchers
increasingly recognize the need to obtain data from several different DNA
sequences, representing independent genetic loci, because a phylogeny inferred
from any single gene may not accurately recover the relationships among the
organisms under investigation. However, the number of genes known to be both
useful for these investigations and accessible to researchers (quickly and
inexpensively obtainable from a wide range of organisms) is still very small. In
an effort to expand the pool of nuclear genes available for molecular systematic
analyses at lower taxonomic levels, Amy Denton, under the supervision of
Benjamin Hall, will evaluate the phylogenetic utility of sequences within the
RNA polymerase II (RPB) gene. The researchers will first determine if, as
expected, RPB gene sequences are useful for phylogenetic assessments of
flowering plant taxa at the family level and below; they will compare
phylogenies constructed from these sequences to phylogenies of the plant family
Ericaceae (which includes rhododendrons, azaleas and blueberries) derived from
other data. If these results confirm predictions, Denton and Hall will then use
RPB gene sequences to investigate the complex, and poorly understood,
phylogenetic relationships among species of the large, horticulturally valuable
genus Rhododendron.