* 9623592
* Career: Research Plan: Simulation of Surface Waterflow and  Transport in a Parallel Computing Environment               Teaching Plan: Engineering Futures and Engineering Education
* CSE,OAC
* 06/01/1996,12/31/2002
* Randall Kolar, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Xiaodong Zhang
* 12/31/2002
* USD 247,303.00

This project will investigate scalable parallel algorithms for the solution of
the hydrodynamic flow and transport equations. The algorithms studies will be
implemented on a variety of platforms, including clusters of workstations and
massively parallel systems. The mathematical model will be based on the
generalized wave continuity equation for surface elevation, the non-conservative
form of the momentum equations for the velocity field, and the advection-
diffusion equation for transport. Alternative numerical solution techniques,
such as mixed finite element methods, will be investigated. There are five
phases to the research. The first phase will use domain decomposition in
conjunction with an existing hydrodynamic model to achieve parallelism. In the
second phase, parallelism will be realized by exploring new algorithms
specifically designed to take full advantage of parallel hardware, e.g., domain
decomposition techniques. In conjunction with the second phase, a third phase
will expand the codes capabilities by incorporating more physics into the
governing equations. For example, baroclinic terms, which account for driving
forces due to density variations, would be added so that simulations of, say
fresh water/salt water interactions could be modeled. The fourth phase will
rigorously test and validate the model against field data and analytical
solutions. In the fifth phase, the code will be disseminated to users in
academia, consulting, and industry, where it will be used to research topics,
such as freshwater flow requirements in sensitive coastal ecosystems.