* 9623306
* Vortex Dynamics in Organic and High Temperature             Superconductors
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/1996,05/31/2000
* Fulin Zuo, University of Miami
* Continuing Grant
* H. Hollis Wickman
* 05/31/2000
* USD 195,000.00

9623306 Zuo The objective of this proposal is to find the generic features
common to both the layered organic and the high temperature superconductors in
order to better understand the vortex dynamics in these systems. Several
experiments will be performed to this purpose. First, the phenomena of anomalous
magnetization where magnetization increases abnormally with increasing field in
the mixed state will be studied in both organic and the Thallium based cuprates
superconductors where the superconducting transition temperature can be varied.
Second, interlayer transport measurements will be performed to correlate with a
magnetic transparent state observed in the neodymium-cerium based
superconductors as well as the thallium based ones to test the model of the
Josephson decoupling between the superconducting layers. Third, a point contact
technique will be applied to test a model of spontaneous creations of free
vortices due to thermal fluctuations in layered compounds. Fourth, an important
phenomena of quantum interference of moving vortex lattice with a rf
electromagnetic field will be tested in the organic superconductors. The
organics may prove to be an ideal system to establish the quantum interference
picture because of its extremely weak pinning. Current voltage response will be
measured as a function of flux flow velocity and the rf field. Understanding of
the vortex dynamics in the layered superconductors is important for its
industrial applications, it is also interesting in terms of fundamental physics.
%%% Understanding of the magnetic properties in the high temperature
superconductors is critical for applications of these materials as current
carrying devices. It is equally interesting in terms of fundamental physics
involved. The high transition temperature and the layered structure introduce
new features in the behavior of quantum vortices in the mixed state. For
example, the magnetization or critical current in the mixed state incre ases
abnormally with increasing field. Preliminary studies suggest it is due to
dimensional crossover when the quantum vortices changes from 3 dimensional lines
to 2 dimensional pancakes. This proposal aims toward establishing a generic
picture by comparing the high temperature superconductors with a structurally
analogous low temperature organic superconductors. Several key experiments will
be performed to test the models proposed for the layered superconductors. These
include comparative studies of anomalous magnetization in both systems, direct
measurement of coupling between the superconducting layers, detection of
spontaneous generated thermal vortices, and an interference effect between the
quantum vortices and an incident electromagnetic wave. The knowledge gained from
this study will provide better understanding of physics in the mixed state, as
well as novel applications of these materials. ***