* 9623610
* Studies of In Flight Annihilation of High Energy Channeled  Positrons in Single Crystals
* MPS,DMR
* 10/01/1996,09/30/2000
* Jene Golovchenko, Harvard University
* Continuing Grant
* H. Hollis Wickman
* 09/30/2000
* USD 354,546.00

9623610 Golovchenko This experimental condensed matter physics project will
explore experimentally the basic interaction of positrons with crystalline
matter. The main focus will be on the process of in-flight annihilation of
channeled MeV positrons with crystal valence electrons. The annihilation yields
should be proportional to the electron density along the positron path, and
should also be very sensitive to the spin polarization of the electrons. The
experiments are expected to demonstrate that positron channeling can be
developed into a sensitive probe of the electronic and magnetic structures of
crystals on the atomic scale. This is a fundamental research project, but the
results should lead to new instrumentation having broad technological
applications in a range of materials research areas. %%% Positrons and electrons
are antimatter-matter twins, with the consequence that when brought very close
together, they annihilate - converting their energies, of mass and momentum,
into energetic photons called gamma rays. It has recently become possible to
obtain accelerated beams of mono- energetic positrons with sufficient
intensities to develop the annihilation interaction as a sensitive atomic scale
probe of the electronic and magnetic properties of crystals. In this research,
energetic positrons will be focused (channeled) by the atomic potential of a
crystal. The data will provide information about the density of the electrons
that determine the atomic scale electronic and magnetic properties of the
materials. This is a fundamental research project, but the results should lead
to new instrumentation having broad technological applications in a range of
materials research areas. **