* 9623574
* Dissertation Research: Correlations in the Timing of Life   History Stages: Their Origins and Consequences
* BIO,DEB
* 06/15/1996,05/31/1998
* D. Lawrence Venable, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Allen Moore
* 05/31/1998
* USD 4,925.00

9623574 Venable Research funded by this award explores the evolutionary
importance of variation in the timing of resource availability for desert
plants. A prominent feature of desert ecosystems is extreme variability in
moisture and temperature within and among years. The focus of this study is on
annual plants that complete their life cycle in less than one year. The study
system, Plantago insularis, is an important food source for herbivores and
granivores in Sonoran and Mohave Desert communities. The annual life history
promotes the avoidance of intervals of low resource availability via seed
dormancy. For this strategy to be successful, the timing of seed germination and
seed production must be synchronized with yearly weather patterns. Using a
combination of field and greenhouse experiments, the research will test the
genetic basis of variation in germination and flowering times and ascertain the
fitness consequences of these characters. Findings will allow tests of theory on
plant adaptations to variable environments. In addition, environmental and
genetic aspects of the correlation between two developmentally linked traits,
germination time and flowering time, will be resolved. One application of this
knowledge is in the selection and breeding of annual crop species for earlier
flowering times.