* 9623678
* Dissertation Research:  Fitness Trade-Offs for Short-Term   Diapause in Synchaeta pectinata
* BIO,DEB
* 05/15/1996,04/30/1998
* John Gilbert, Dartmouth College
* Standard Grant
* Allen Moore
* 04/30/1998
* USD 6,000.00

9623678 Gilbert The goal of this research is to examine dormancy mechanisms and
costs associated with different dormancy strategies in the rotifer Synchaeta
pectinata, a common member of lake zooplankton communities. For organisms that,
like rotifers, are incapable of migrating from their environment, dormancy is
commonly employed to allow persistence through inhospitable periods. Cues for
entering dormancy (e.g., temperature, food levels, etc.) may often be
unreliable, resulting in substantial fitness costs for organisms that either
enter dormancy too soon or too late. The freshwater lake environments of S.
pectinata are prone to drastic weather-induced changes in basic attributes
including water turbulence, temperature, oxygen , pH, nutrient availability. S.
pectinata produces short-term dormant eggs in response to food limitation. This
strategy is hypothesized to promote survival through short periods of starvation
conditions. Dormant egg production varies widely between clonal lines,
suggesting multiple strategies for dealing with unpredictable conditions.
Research funded by this award will integrate laboratory and field experiments
with computer simulations to compare the success of alternate dormancy
strategies under different environmental conditions. This research will
contribute to our understanding of how the capacity for dormancy can allow
populations to persist in variable or temporally risky environments. As
zooplankton are a key component of freshwater lake ecosystems, understanding the
mechanisms that promote their persistance should enhance the efforts of land use
planners and management agencies to manage for watershed health and integrity.