* 9623684
* Studies of Phonon-Photon and Electron-Photon Interaction via Incoherent Nuclear Resonant Scattering of Synchrotron      Radiation
* MPS,DMR
* 05/15/1996,04/30/2000
* James Mullen, Purdue Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* H. Hollis Wickman
* 04/30/2000
* USD 255,000.00

9623684 Mullen This proposal is intended to develop capabilities for meV
resolution xray optics that can be used to scan the phonon density of states
using the Mossbauer transitions with energies below 30 keV. The technique, which
has so far been applied only to 57Fe, will permit the measurement of the density
of phonon states for europium and dysprosium compounds. We plan to explicitly
carry out such measurements on the high Tc superconductors, as well as
multilayer semiconductors containing europium. Using delayed coincidence
techniques we propose to measure low-angle Compton scattering, to obtain new
information about the Fermi surface of metals. %%% Gamma and x-ray optics is at
the forefront of synchrotron radiation. We propose a new two crystal system of
x-ray optics that should enhance the energy resolution of synchrotron
monochromators by an order of magnitude. This improved technology will make
possible precision density of states measurements of lattice vibrations in
solids and new approaches to determining the electronic properties of
crystalline materials. These techniques will be applied to high temperature
superconductors, superlattice semiconductors structures, and especially to
crystalline materials that can only be fabricated in millimeter sizes where
neutron scattering measurements are not practical. ***