* 9623565
* Dissertation Research:  Involvement of Embryonic            Developmental Processes in Regeneration and Asexual         Reproduction: a Comparative Analysis in Annelids
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/1996,06/30/1998
* Gregory Wray, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Allen Moore
* 06/30/1998
* USD 9,050.00

9623565 Wray Animals vary widely in their ability to regenerate missing body
parts or to reproduce asexually. Some species, such as annelid worms, flatworms,
and sea anemones have remarkable powers of regeneration. For example, certain
annelid worms are able to regenerate a new functional adult body from only a
single segment. The primary goal of this study is to characterize the
involvement of two key developmental genes (engrailed and hunchback) in
regeneration, asexual budding, and embryonic development in several annelid
worms. Key developmental genes, such as homeobox genes, are known to play
important roles in many aspects of embryo development, such as the formation of
the anterior/posterior axis, nervous system development, head formation, and
limb formation. These genes are also expected to be involved in the development
of new tissue during processes such as regeneration and asexual reproduction.
However, little is currently known about the action of these genes during such
processes. In the research funded by this award, genes will be cloned and their
expression studied during all three processes. Characterization of expression
patterns during regeneration and budding will help elucidate the functions of
the genes and show to what extent these genes perform the same role in the
different processes. This research will shed new light on the genetical basis of
developmental processes underlying morphological diversification in animals.
Research on the genetical controls of developmental processes also can
contribute to an understanding of developmental abnormalities and their
treatment in higher organisms.