* 9623741
* Career:  Catalyst-Directed Resource from Waste Polymers
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/1996,08/31/2002
* Linda Broadbelt, Northwestern University
* Continuing Grant
* Glenn L. Schrader
* 08/31/2002
* USD 310,000.00

ABSTRACT CTS-9623741 Catalyst-directed resource recovery is a promising
technology for the conversion of polymeric waste materials into high-valued
products such as fuels and petrochemicals. However, the lack of a comprehensive
knowledge base has limited its application. This research aims at developing a
rigorous, science-based methodology for the recovery of high-valued products
from polymeric waste using both experiment and theory. The experimental program
focuses on the development of novel contacting patterns to enhance the polymer-
catalyst interaction and on the identification of optimal catalyst parameters
that enhance the value of the products afforded. The experimental work is
complemented by a theoretical study exploiting mechanistic modeling and
computational quantum chemistry to provide information about the controlling
reaction fundamentals. Promising strategies for improved recovery of valuable
products from waste polymer have been identified and are investigated through
experiment. The use of ultra-fine particle or homogeneous catalysts and liquid
superacids aims to overcome the inherent diffusional limitations encountered in
a polymer melt penetrating a solid catalyst by exploiting the intrinsic void
volume of the polymer. However, traditional polymer-catalyst contacting patterns
have the advantage of allowing the polymers to be processed in existing
processing units. Therefore, relevant design parameters of heterogeneous
catalysts, i.e., acidity//basicity and structure, are examined. The experimental
work is complemented by a theoretical study aimed at a priori prediction of the
degradation characteristics of a given polymer feedstock and catalyst
formulation. The database amassed from experimental studies provides general
qualitative rules that serve as a starting point for formulating a predictive,
quantitative mechanistic model. In general, the tendency of a polymer toward
particular degradation products has been attributed to three factors: ( 1)
strength of bonds in the polymer backbone, (2) presence of tertiary hydrogens,
and(3) relative strength of substituent bonds. Each of these qualitative rules
is examined quantitatively using an approach combining mechanistic modeling and
computational quantum chemistry. Preliminary work has already been carried out
to demonstrate the application of mechanistic modeling to quantify the tendency
of different polymers to degrade thermally to monomer. An education plan linking
research and teaching has been formulated to teach chemical engineering students
to deal with complex issues in a changing and increasingly entrepreneurial
environment. The core components which comprise this plan are (1) development of
generic manufacturing modules linking theoretical concepts to real world
processes, (2) introduction of computational quantum chemistry into the
undergraduate curriculum for property estimation, and (3) development of
communication skills through individual and team oral and written presentations.
Each of these is a generic component that can be incorporated throughout the
curriculum.