* 9623849
* Career Program:  Co-Adsorption and its Ramifications in     Mixtures of Surfactants and Water-Soluble Polymers
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/1996,06/30/2002
* Robert Tilton, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Continuing Grant
* Robert M. Wellek
* 06/30/2002
* USD 322,725.00

9623849 Tilton This Faculty Early Career Development grant is to establish
innovative and industrially relevant educational and research programs. The
research plan is designed to help provide the molecular level understanding of
adsorption phenomena that is necessary for rationale control of interfacial
properties, which in turn control the macroscopic properties of many complex
fluid formulations. The research focuses on the poorly understood but crucial
effects of competitive and synergistic interactions that occur during co-
adsorption of polymers and small surface active molecules. Adsorption phenomena
are responsible for the success or failure of innumerable complex fluid
formulations in technologies spanning the chemical, materials, pharmaceuticals,
environmental, and biomaterials industries. Currently, most fundamental
adsorption studies consider single component solutions, while industrially
relevant fluids commonly contain a variety of surface active materials with
widely varying molecular weight, solubility, and surface affinity. In these
cases, competitive and synergistic effects between the various species control
the composition and structure of the adsorbed layers that in turn control
macroscopic properties of the fluid and its interactions with surfaces. To
select some examples, co-adsorption phenomena are critical for ink-jet printing
and the appearance of automobile finishes. In the personal care products
business, medicinal lotions and skin and hair treatments depend heavily on co-
adsorption of surfactants and polymers. Stability of food products, separation
processes in pharmaceutical production, and surfactant-enhanced remediation of
toxic waste sites are other major applications. This research is intended to
elevate the understanding of polymer adsorption in industrially relevant
multicomponent systems, and it spans the gap between fundamental studies of
basic co-adsorption mechanisms and the practical consequences of co-adsorption.
Accordingly, one of the proposed projects will be conducted in collaboration
with industrial scientists. Specific projects included investigation of the
effect of co-adsorption on colloidal forces and colloidal stability in
polymer/surfactant mixtures; and a model study of the role of co-adsorption in
surfactant-enhanced remediation of hydrocarbon contaminated soils in the
presence of naturally occurring macromolecules. The educational program will
produce novel learning tools and ways to help students improve their technical
and learning skills, creativity, awareness of scientific advances in chemical
engineering, and a sense of the global workplace. The goals of the educational
program will be met by three initiatives. The principal investigator (P.I.) will
develop creative, self-paced learning tools based on user friendly computer
applications that allow even the most timid students to thoroughly explore
nuances of engineering subjects. The PI will develop a new course and several
new educational lab experiments that incorporate modern research in colloid and
interface science into the curriculum for both undergraduate and graduate
students. Finally, the PI will organize an international exchange program for
advanced graduate students to spend time in leading colloid and interface
science labs around the globe. Visiting students will also be hosted in the PIOs
laboratory. ***