* 9623174
* Mathematical Sciences: Problems in Linear and Nonlinear     Partial Differential Equations
* MPS,DMS
* 07/15/1996,06/30/1999
* David Catlin, Purdue Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 06/30/1999
* USD 91,000.00

Abstract Catlin Catlin will investigate two problems. For the first problem
assume that P is a smooth real differential operator of order two such that at
each point the principal symbol is semi-definite, although the sign of the
symbol is allowed to change from point to point. One can say that P is of finite
type if a related system of first order operators is elliptic. Under these
hypotheses, Catlin wants to prove that P is hypoelliptic. For the second
problem, assume that M is a smooth strictly pseudoconvex CR manifold of
dimension 2n-1 with n greater than 3. Then M can be embedded in n-dimensional
complex Euclidean space. Catlin will study a family of norms in which the
estimates for the Cauchy-Riemann equations are "elliptic" in order to prove a
"sharp" embedding theorem. Many physical phenomena such as vibrations or heat
flow in an object can be expressed in terms of solutions of partial differential
equations. The behavior of these solutions can often be deduced by examining the
coefficients of the equations. This proposal is devoted to a study of how the
solution changes when certain coefficients change from positive to negative, and
also whether the coefficients are irregular. Such equations may be relevant for
physical processes in which either the nature of the problem is qualitatively
different as one passes from one region to another, or in which the object being
modeled has an irregular shape.