* 9623567
* Foam Structure and Rheology
* MPS,DMR
* 10/01/1996,09/30/1999
* Douglas Durian, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing grant
* H. Hollis Wickman
* 09/30/1999
* USD 188,325.00

w:\awards\awards96\*.doc 9623567 Durian This project seeks to elucidate the
nature of the random packing structures of bubbles in liquid-based foams and the
consequences of such structures, their dynamics, and their time evolution, for
the macroscopic rheological behavior. This included efforts in two main areas:
(a) The propagation of light through foams by multiple-scattering and the use of
this generic phenomenon as a structural probe, and (b) The influence of
evolution and shear-induced structural rearrangements on linear shear rheology
and time evolution. Special interest is in determining if a linear regime
exists, if structural rearrangements can play a role equivalent to thermal
fluctuations and hence be assigned a "temperature", and if flow can affect time
evolution. Rheology measurements will be accomplished with a commercial device
and also with a custom Couette-cell which allows simultaneous access for
measurement of the bubble-packing structure and dynamics by multiple light
scattering techniques. The fundamental understanding thus achieved may provide a
framework for more complex systems where dense random packing and irreversible
structural rearrangements dictate macroscopic behavior, such as dense emulsions,
colloidal suspensions, and granular media. %%% Liquid-based foams consist of a
large number of gas bubbles very closely packed together in a small amount of
liquid, as familiar from everyday life. The proposed experiments are designed to
help achieve a fundamental understanding of the important properties of these
materials, namely their stability and flow behavior, in terms of their
microscopic structure and composition. Little is yet known due to the fact that
light is strongly scattered by the bubble interfaces, thus restricting visual
observation of the bubble-packing structure to the surface bubbles. However, we
have re cently developed new experimental techniques which take advantage of
multiple light scattering and which reveal for the first time details of the
packing structure and its behavior. The fundamental understanding achieved
through use of these techniques may enable rational design of foaming-liquid
formulations, foaming techniques, and anti-foaming agents. This could benefit
diverse industries where foams are currently dealt with by trial-and-error:
food, cosmetic, detergent, mining, petroleum, pulp & paper, paint & coating,
textile, leather, polymer, and waste and water remediation. ***