* 9623753
* CAREER:  Employing Flow Analyses in Practical               Program Transformation Environments for                     Mostly-Functional Languages
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/1996,06/30/2000
* J. Michael Ashley, University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Frank D. Anger
* 06/30/2000
* USD 200,000.00

A flow analysis is an automatic tool that collects information about programs.
Flow information is crucial, for without it the correctness of sophisticated
program transformations cannot be verified. Such transformations are important,
because they can transform a program written to solve a problem cleanly into a
new program that, for example, is more efficient and fault tolerant. Ultimately,
flow analysis-justified transformations can boost software reliability and
programmer productivity. Despite their utility, however, existing flow analyses
for mostly-functional languages are impractical for use in production-quality
environments. They have high algorithmic complexity, they can only process
language subsets, and they are accurate only when programs are written in a
certain style. This CAREER project has three goals to address these problems and
incorporate advanced analysis techniques into the undergraduate curriculum. The
first goal is to use a practical flow analysis in a production Scheme compiler
to justify optimizations. The second goal is to use the flow analysis and the
experience gained from its application to develop a program transformation
toolkit for building automatic, flow analysis-based program transformers. The
third goal is to incorporate the results into the undergraduate curriculum so
that students understand what a flow analysis is, how it works, and how it can
be profitably applied. Achieving these goals advances both research and
education. Besides solving the above problems, the research aspect of this
project pursues contributions in the areas of language implementation and
semantics-based program manipulation. In particular, optimizations are being
implemented that can improve the performance of dynamic languages, program
transformation techniques are being developed that allow more realistic programs
to be manipulated. The transformation toolkit developed is expected to provide
the research community with needed infrastructure for experimenting with
transformations. The educational aspect of this CAREER investigation seeks to
improve the undergraduate programming languages curriculum by addressing the
distinction between static and dynamic properties of programs and how static
information can be used to optimize programs. Such an understanding is essential
to undergraduate education as programming languages are playing an increasingly
prominent role in customizable software. ***