* 9623874
* Nonlinear Dynamics in Quantum Wells at Terahertz            Frequencies
* NONE,NONE
* 06/15/1996,03/31/1999
* Mark Sherwin, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Continuing grant
* H. Hollis Wickman
* 03/31/1999
* USD 240,000.00

w:\awards\awards96\*.doc 9623874 Sherwin This project will explore non-
equilibrium and non linear properties of quantum wells at Terahertz frequencies.
The objective is to observe intrinsic optical bistability, period- doubling,
chaos and Rabi oscillations in wide quantum well structures. These effects have
recently been predicted by computer simulations using the Hartree approximation
which have modeled quantum wells containing many electrons and which are subject
to intense Terahertz radiation. The experiments will be performed using the UC
Santa Barbara Free-Electron Laser. Semiconductor structures which are specially
tailored for the quantum chaos experiments will be grown and characterized in
collaboration with collaborators at UC Santa Barbara. %%% In recent years, many
investigators have been struggling to reconcile quantum mechanics with the
existence of chaos in Newtonian dynamics. The field is called 'quantum chaos'.
The traditional approach to 'quantum chaos' is to study the quantum mechanics of
systems whose classical dynamics are chaotic. This project takes a somewhat
different approach and focuses on a search for a purely quantum mechanical
version of chaotic motion. That is, motion that is chaotic, but has no analogue
in classical mechanics. The system to be studied are electrons confined in thin
layers of semiconductor quantum wells, and which are driven by extremely strong
fields which oscillate several trillion times each second. Simulations indicate
that such systems can exhibit a chaotic motion with no classical analogue. The
strong fields are generated by UC Santa Barbara's unique Free-Electron Laser.
The project will initially seek to observe precursors of chaos, called
bifurcations, in which a small change in a parameter (for example, the strength
of the oscillating field) causes a dramatic change in the character of motion. A
bifurcation of immediate interest is so-called "period-doubling", in which the
system's oscillations occur at twice the period of oscillations in the driving
field. Having found such bifurcations, the project will then seek chaotic motion
in a quantum system. ***