* 9623614
* Supplement: CISE Research Infrastructure:  Modeling Complex Physical and Computational Environments
* CSE,CNS
* 09/15/1996,08/31/2003
* William Thompson, University of Utah
* Continuing Grant
* Dwight D. Fisher
* 08/31/2003
* USD 2,242,047.00

9623614 Thompson, William University of Utah CISE Research Infrastructure:
Modeling Complex Physical and Computational Environment This award is for the
creation of a Modeling and Simulation Support Facility, constituting vital
infrastructure for work on end user applications in novel computer
architectures, manufacturing and design, process control, teleoperations, and
medicine; while also serving as a testbed for innovations in machine
architecture, hardware, and software systems. The Modeling Facility will use
state-of-the-art technology to achieve high-bandwidth, low-latency machine-to-
machine communications, resulting in significant computational leverage. The use
of multiple heterogeneous and potentially specialized computers in a tightly
coupled communication environment permits model builders to explore novel
parallel simulation methods that can greatly reduce simulation run times. This
increase in capability permits entirely new classes of critical problems to be
solved. Modern simulations produce large quantities of data, the interpretation
of which may not be immediately apparent. Thus, the second central component of
the Modeling Facility is a large capacity storage management system. Finally,
the Modeling Facility will be equipped with several special purpose devices that
can exploit the communications and data management facilities to tackle large-
scale problems that are currently infeasible in a traditional academic computing
environment.