* 9623120
* Mathematical Sciences: Research in Classical Harmonic       Analysis and Applications to Partial Differential Equations
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/1996,07/31/2000
* Loukas Grafakos, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Continuing Grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 07/31/2000
* USD 69,000.00

Abstract Grafakos The investigator proposes to pursue research in the area of
multilinear singular integral operators and partial differential equations in
connection with Hardy space techniques. His techniques include compensated
compactness methods, atomic decomposition, and estimates for singular integral
operators. The investigator also proposes to obtain sharp estimates for maximal
operators on Euclidean spaces. In particular, he is interested in computing the
operator norm of the Hardy-Littlewood maximal function on different Lebesgue
spaces. This proposal has two parts. In the first part the investigator plans to
use mathematical analysis techniques, (in particular harmonic analysis), to
solve problems in differential equations which naturally arise in the study of
dynamics of fluids or in the study of motions of waves. The researcher believes
that the methods that he proposes to use will give new insight to some problems
that arise in these areas and will strengthen the connection of mathematics with
applications. In the second part, he proposes to work on better quantitative
understanding of averaging operations. The averaging of a function is an
important and useful operation since it regularizes a given set of data by
smoothing out its singularities. The investigator proposes to study how sharply
are certain quantitative properties of functions transferred to their averages.