* 9623273
* Mathematical Sciences:  An Improved Nonlinear               Elastic Membrane Model: Regularizing Using Bending          Stiffness
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/1996,06/30/1999
* Michael Hilgers, Missouri University of Science and Technology
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Lockhart
* 06/30/1999
* USD 40,000.00

9623273 Hilgers The continued exploration of an improved model for nonlinear
highly elastic membranes is being proposed. The point of departure of this
investigation from traditional membrane mechanics is the observation that even
highly flexible membranes exhibit some resistance to a change of curvature. This
is known as bending stiffness and is introduced in the improved model by
including a second order derivative dependence in the strain energy density. The
foundational theory has been previously established. In this proposal, it is
sought to apply the theory to a variety of problems of practical interest with
the goal of understanding how bending stiffness regularizes the behavior of
membranes. The basic theme among these problems is placing a membrane into a
state in which some region is attempting to support a compressive stress. We
anticipate that the membrane will wrinkle. Standard nonlinear membrane theory
fails to describe this behavior. One objective is to find the qualitative nature
of the wrinkles. Another is to understand how the bending stiffness stablizes
wrinkling deformations. Also the comparison of results between the zero and
nonzero bending stiffness membrane responses is of extreme interest as it has
implications for both mathematics and mechanics. Specific examples to be
considered include inflatables which are prone to wrinkle, diaphragms,
inextensible approximations, and vibrations of tense and slack sheets. %%% The
comfort technology has given us often requires engineers to work with thin,
flexible sheets, layers, laminates, and coatings of material. It is problematic
for design engineers that these materials will fold, wrinkle, blister, buckle,
and crease during manufacture or operation thereby reducing their reliability
and quality. Unfortunately, most mathematical models cannot predict this
unwanted behavior, which makes it difficult for engineers to prevent it.
Fortunately, a material model seeking to address these shortcomings was
developed in recent years under funding from the National Science Foundation. It
is the purpose of this current proposal to continue this investigation by using
this model to provide examples detailing the formations of folds and wrinkles in
a wide variety of situations leading to a qualitative and quantitative insight
into these engineering difficulties. The generality of the model permits
application by engineers and material scientists alike to a spectrum of
industrial problems ranging from the blistering of thin coatings to the
wrinkling of biomedical surgical inflatables. Conceivably, the knowledge gained
could impact circuit board manufacture, air bag safety technology, and even
biomechanical cellular membrane questions which arise in health care. ***