* 9623727
* Mathematical Sciences:  "Wave and Heat Processes in         Fractal Boundary Layers".
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/1996,07/31/2000
* Boris Vainberg, University of North Carolina at Charlotte
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Lockhart
* 07/31/2000
* USD 107,908.00

9623727 Molchanov/Vainberg The goal of the proposal is to study the phenomena of
reflection, absorption and scattering by fractal boundaries. Well known
physicist M. Berry formulated three hypotheses about possible physical and
mathematical effects of fractalness: 1) intermittent structure of the scattering
amplitude 2) a slower decay of scattered (coda) waves, 3) existence of a large
number of states in a thin boundary layer which leads to a nonstandard
asymptotic behavior of the spectral function . It turns out that properties of
wave and heat propagation in domains with fractal boundaries depend on
geometrical properties of fractals, and more profound analysis requires, first
of all, classification of fractals. The authors of the proposal singled out
three broad classes of fractals: cabbage type (domain contains a system of flat
cuts accumulated to the outer boundary), bubble type (domain contains a system
of bubbles accumulated to the outer boundary), and web type (with a system of
thin cylinders). There are many natural objects with a similar boundary
structure: the earth lithosphere, boundary layer of polymer materials in the
process of aging, recrystallized or tempered layer of metals, etc. Similar
structures can also be formed artificially to create a material with new
properties. The authors proved that the eigenvalue counting function of the
Dirichlet Laplacian in cabbage type domains has two- term asymptotics with the
order of the second term equal to one half of the Minkowski dimension of the
boundary, i.e. the modified Weyl- Berry hypotheses is valid. They also show that
this hypotheses fails for bubble and web type domains. It is proposed to find
the spectral asymptotics (eigenvalue counting function, theta-function, zeta-
function) for the Dirichlet problem for the Laplacian in bubble and web type
domains, and find geometrical characteristics of the fractal which determine the
second term of the asymptotics. It is proposed to classify the spectru m of the
Neumann Laplacian for cabbage and bubble type domains (determine when the
spectrum is absolutely continuous, dense pure point, discreet) and find
conditions when the Weyl law (existence of the main term of spectral
asymptotics) is valid or the second term of the spectral asymptotics exists. It
is also proposed to find large time behavior of the solutions to exterior mixed
problems for the wave equation in bubble and web type domains, and in particular
, to find large time behavior of the scattered waves. %%% The goal of the
proposal is to study the phenomena of reflection, absorption and scattering of
waves by obstacles with very irregular (fractal) boundaries. It turns out that
properties of wave and heat propagation in domains with very irregular
boundaries depend on geometrical properties of boundaries, and more profound
analysis requires, first of all, geometrical classification of irregularity of
the boundary. The proposers singled out three broad classes of obstacles:
cabbage type (obstacle contains a system of flat cracks accumulated to the outer
boundary), bubble type (obstacle contains a system of bubbles accumulated to the
outer boundary), and web type (with a system of thin cylinders). There are many
natural objects with a similar boundary structure: the earth lithosphere,
boundary layer of polymer materials in the process of aging, recrystallized or
tempered layer of metals, etc. Similar structures can also be formed
artificially to create a material with new properties. It is proposed to find
characteristics of the obstacles (they will be different for cabbage, bubble and
web type obstacles) which determine wave and heat energy reflected, absorbed or
scattered by a thin boundary layer of the obstacle and find long time behavior
of the wave and heat processes. ***