* 9623144
* Mathematical Sciences:  Modeling, Analysis and Control      Of Multilayer Plates
* MPS,DMS
* 07/15/1996,12/31/1999
* Scott Hansen, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Lockhart
* 12/31/1999
* USD 47,429.00

9623144 Hansen This research involves the modeling and analysis of multilayer
plates in which the effects of shear deformation within layers may be important.
Specific examples include laminated plates, constrained layer plates and plates
with surface-mounted actuators. The project will (i) develop new dynamic
multilayer plate models and refine existing ones; (ii) determine the range of
validity of the various models with respect to design parameters in the models;
and (iii) determine how to design controls and stabilizing feedbacks that are
robust with respect to parameter uncertainties in the models. The Reissner-
Mindlin theory of shear-deformable plates is used to obtain an initial model
that allows independent shear deformations in each layer. Lower order
approximate models which are more amenable to computations and simulations will
then be obtained by perturbation techniques. The range of validity of the
various models will be investigated by analyzing the continuity properties of
the solutions of the initial model with respect to the appropriate perturbation
parameters. Once the continuity properties of the solutions of the various
systems are developed, issues of robustness and sensitivity with regard to
parameters and uncertainties will be analyzed. %%% This research involves the
modeling and analysis of multilayer plates in which the effects of shear
deformation within layers may be important. Specific examples include laminated
plates, constrained layer plates and plates with surface-mounted actuators. The
research is applicable to a large class of modeling problems that arise in the
design and control of multilayer composite materials. Such materials are used in
a wide range of applications, from sporting goods to ship hulls, and often need
to be constructed to meet various design criteria, such as optimal strength-to-
mass ratio, or to have certain optimal damping properties. In many applications,
active feedback control will be utilized to enhance the performance of the
material in its intended application. This research will provide a unified,
rigorous, mathematical foundation for the modeling of such materials and their
dynamic properties, and will develop various control-theoretic properties of the
models. Such a theoretical foundation is needed in order to keep pace with the
rapidly increasing speed of sensors and actuators and to take full advantage of
modern manufacturing capabilities. ***