* 9623523
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH:  Population Dynamics and Species     Diversity of Decomposers of Patchy Substrates
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/1996,05/31/1999
* Gregory Mueller, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Margaret Palmer
* 05/31/1999
* USD 10,000.00

9623523 Mueller The objective of this research is to examine the population
dynamics and species diversity of fungi which decompose resources, such as wood,
leaves, or dung, which are distributed in discrete patches. Ecologists have
concluded from models of consumer species (e.g., plants, herbivore, etc.) that
patchiness can allow two species to coexist on a regional scale even if they
cannot coexist on a local scale, but there has been no comparable work with
decomposers. For this study, consumer based models have been altered to make
them applicable to decomposers. The decomposer model predicts that within a
patch the outcome of competition is controlled by (1) initial resource density
of the patch, (2) resource requirements of the decomposer species, (3) the
amount of energy a species needs to reproduce, and (4) the efficiency of the
species at converting resources to stored energy. The outcome of competition
over many patches is controlled by (1) the outcome of within patch competition,
(2) the dispersal ability of the species involved, and (3) the rate of input of
new patches into the environment. It can be inferred from the models that those
factors which promote coexistence of two species will also promote the
coexistence of multiple species and thus increase species diversity. A better
understanding of competition between decomposers has many potential applications
including: (1) developing strategies to fight economically harmful decomposers,
(2) determining how competition affects nutrient cycling, which could
potentially impact agricultural and bioremediation practices, and (3) developing
methods for conserving species diversity.