* 9623540
* Dissertation Research:  Phenotypic Plasticity:              A Quantitative Genetic Evaluation of Costs
* BIO,DEB
* 05/15/1996,04/30/1998
* Edmund Brodie, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Allen Moore
* 04/30/1998
* USD 7,077.00

9623540 BRODIE Phenotypic plasticity describes the process by which a single
genotype may produce different phenotypes, depending on the environment
experienced. The primary goal of this project is to identify and quantify the
genetic and environmental factors that influence phenotypic plasticity.
Specifically, this research will answer the following pivotal questions: (1)
What are the relative roles of genes versus the environment in the plastic
expression of traits? (2) How much do parental behaviors influence phenotypic
plasticity in their offspring? (3) Does phenotypic plasticity impose costs
through tradeoffs with other important traits? These questions will be addressed
using the Asian ladybird beetle, Harmonia axyridis. This beetle is an excellent
candidate for quantitative genetic studies and is ecologically and
agriculturally important as a predator of several crop pests. Before H. axyridis
can be used as a viable agricultural tool against crop pests, however, more
information is needed on how it responds to variation in the environment. This
research directly addresses that gap by determining the genetic, environmental
and evolutionary factors that define the success or failure of newly colonizing
populations of H. axyridis.