* 9624130
* CAREER: Combining Genetic Algorithms with Case-Based Systems
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/1996,08/31/2002
* Sushil Louis, Board of Regents, NSHE, obo University of Nevada, Reno
* Continuing Grant
* William Bainbridge
* 08/31/2002
* USD 219,100.00

The project involves designing systems that combine genetic algorithms with
case-based principles. Broadly speaking, the case-base does what it is best at
-- memory organization; the genetic algorithm handles what it is best at --
adaptation. The resulting combination takes advantage of both paradigms; the
genetic algorithm component delivers robu stness and adaptive learning while the
case-based component speeds up the system. A series of increasingly complex
prototypes in various application areas are used to mark progress. Results from
a simple prototype on open-shop scheduling and re-scheduling, combinational
circuit design, and designing control circuitry for simple robots, indicate th e
feasibility and usefulness of this approach and raise a host of interesting
issues. What cases are useful? How many are needed? How to parallelize the
system and do robust indexing? An electronic repository available over the world
wide web is used to chart progress, disseminate results, and introduce
undergraduate and graduate students, and in dustrial representatives to the
research and development efforts in this project. Combining genetic algorithms
with case-based principles will lead to systems that decrease design cycle time,
increase throughput, speed up product development and thus impact a wide variety
of application areas from engineering design and combinatorial optimization to
computational science problems in the physical and earth sciences.