* 9624592
* Observational Cosmology by Observing Gravitational Lensing
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/1996,05/31/2003
* Gary Bernstein, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Eileen D. Friel
* 05/31/2003
* USD 518,061.00

AST 9624592 Abstract - Bernstein The dark matter which dominates the Universe
does not emit detectable radiation, but does distort images of background
objects by the gravitational deflection of the passing light rays. The research
plan is to measure these "weak gravitational lensing" effects to determine the
true shapes of galaxy clusters and the spectrum of the mass fluctuations in the
present-day Universe. These weak lensing distortions are now being used to
measure the mass distributions of the inner parts of a few rich clusters of
galaxies. The mass profiles of 10 clusters of galaxies will be measured to a
larger radius. This is of great interest since theoretical N-body simulations
show that cluster shapes and profiles are sensitive to the value of the
cosmological density parameter Omega, and to the nature of the dark matter
particles. A particularly interesting case is the weak cluster 0957+561, which
contains a multiply-imaged quasar with known time delay. By mapping the cluster
mass, the modeling of this lens will be improved and an improved value for the
Hubble constant will be obtained. The timely completion of these observations
requires the use of a Charged Coupled Device (CCD) mosaic camera on a telescope
with good seeing. A CCD camera for the Michigan-Dartmouth-MIT (MDM) 2.4m
telescope will be constructed. Weak gravitations lensing in random parts of the
sky has now been tentatively detected. The weak gravitational distortions of
several million field galaxies will be measured, the results from these
measurements will provide unambiguous quantitative measurements of: the strength
of mass fluctuations on 8 Mpc scales, where linear perturbation theory holds and
the fluctuations are directly related to quantum processes in the early
Universe; the slope of the power spectrum in the in smaller regions, which
distinguishes between present rival models of the structure formation; the power
spectrum on &gt;100 kpc scales, where clues to the nature of galaxy formation
and dark matter halos will be found; and the growth rate of these structures
over the last third of the history of the Universe. These measurements are only
feasible if imaging devices with extremely large throughput are used. The Large
Area CCD (LACCD) mosaic camera will be completed and mounted on the Cerro Tololo
Interamerican Observatory (CTIO) 4m telescope in Chile, giving larger throughput
than any other instrument there. Both cameras (at MDM and CTIO) to be completed
under this grant will become facility instruments and made available to other
astronomers. The completed instruments will also be used to enhance the
education of students at the University of Michigan. Ph. D. students will obtain
previously unavailable instrumentation experience, and selected undergraduate
astronomy majors will work with instruments in Michigan and at observatory
sites. The introductory courses for non-science major undergraduates will be
revamped, with an emphasis on improving the students' visualization and problem-
solving abilities by introducing more modern laboratory exercises and improved
classroom demonstrations. The results of this program, and current results by
other Astronomy Department members, will be communicated to high school science
teachers and students throughout the State of Michigan via a monthly full-color
"Image-of-the-Month" club mailing.