* 9624402
* CAREER:  In-process Quality Improvement Methodologies and Implementation in Manufacturing
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/15/1996,08/31/2002
* Jianjun (Jan) Shi, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Janet M. Twomey
* 08/31/2002
* USD 310,000.00

9624402 Shi Most existing quality control techniques are off-line, i.e., they
depend on the occurrence of defects that are removed or reworked to improve the
outgoing quality level. To improve quality during the manufacturing process
involves emphasizing defect prevention rather than defect removal, on-target
production with minimum variance rather than within tolerance, and continuous
improvement rather than acceptable quality. To achieve these goals, this
research develops statistical process control algorithms for multivariate,
correlated processes that are then integrated with on-line automatic process
control algorithms. The central ideas are to develop engineering models and
anticipate fault patterns from product/process knowledge, to apply advanced
statistics to extract features/indices of the process characteristics based on
in-process sensoring, to identify the inherent relationship between the patterns
from the engineering model and the indices obtained from the statistics, and to
use this knowledge in automatic diagnosis, predictive maintenance and automatic
compensation of process changes. Automotive body manufacturing will be used as
the application area of the research. Two new courses are to be developed, and
results from this effort will be incorporated into existing quality control
courses. Manufacturing quality is a significant factor in global market
competition, particularly in the automotive sector, a vital part of our
industrial infrastructure. The variability inherent in equipment status
contributes substantially to poor quality and productivity. This work provides
the technical basis for integrating on-line sensor information with operational
control, and it has the potential to lead to improved equipment maintenance
strategies that result in significant improvements in both product yield and
equipment availability.