* 9624315
* CAREER: Building and Searching Data Structures for          Spatial Environments
* CSE,CCF
* 04/01/1996,03/31/2002
* Nancy Amato, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Continuing Grant
* William Randolph Franklin
* 03/31/2002
* USD 215,000.00

In recent years geometric modeling and simulation techniques have become
essential tools for applications involving physical objects. Although much
progress has been made, there are important applications that cannot be realized
with current technology. Examples include controlling autonomous robots
operating in dynamic situations, training an employee for a dangerous task in a
virtual reality environment, and helping an engineer interactively analyze
design choices using a threedimensional model of a complex product. The general
objective of this research is to design and implement practical algorithms for
such applications. Toward this goal, the applicability of techniques developed
in the field of computational geometry to the following target applications will
be studied: performing robotic path planning and planning manipulation tasks
with contact, and analyzing product designs for manufacturability, assembly, and
disassembly. The research will be performed in collaboration with an ongoing
research effort at Texas A&amp;M in dextrous manipulation and with researchers
at GE R&amp;D analyzing product designs for and maintainability. Two educational
activities will be undertaken. First, mentoring and general support programs
will be initiated for undergraduate and graduate women in the Computer Science
Department at Texas A&amp;M. The goal of these programs is to encourage more
women to pursue graduate studies and careers in computer science and
engineering. Second, group learning methods will be incorporated into
undergraduate and graduate courses in theoretical computer science. The change
from the standard lecture format is motivated by research that has shown that
group learning can increase student interest and help them to understand
concepts more fully. ***