* 9624106
* CAREER: Resource Management in Distributed Multimedia       Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 09/15/1996,08/31/2000
* Jorg Liebeherr, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Tatsuya Suda
* 08/31/2000
* USD 200,000.00

The objective of this proposal is to advance the state-of-the-art of
distributed multimedia systems in both research and education. A novel approach
for managing heterogeneous resources in a shared distributed multimedia network
is presented, called multiclass relative Quality-of Service. The research agenda
concentrates on the exploration od this approach, the design and evaluation of
traffic control algorithms, and their implementation and empirical evaluation in
a testbed network. The education agenda is focused on the use of multimedia
technology to innovate education. The research and education agenda will: 1)
develop new approaches for resource management in distributed multimedia systems
that can operate in a shared network environment. A new service model, called
multi-class relative Quality-of-Service, is proposed. Different from existing
service models for multimedia networks, the proposed service model can satisfy
service requirements of most delay-sensitive multimedia applications, yet can be
realized in the current infrastructure of shared network resources. 2) design
and analyze novel traffic control algorithms for resource management in
multimedia networks with multi-class relative Quality of-Service. The proposed
research includes development and evaluation of flow control methods for
relative Quality-of-Service, approaches to cope with dynamically changing
resource management policies, and new routing algorithms. 3) design, implement,
and experimentally evaluate new protocol mechanisms for resource management in
distributed multimedia systems. By implementing the mechanisms as extensions to
currently used network protocols, existing networks can gradually evolve to an
environment with Quality-of-Service guarantees. 4) gain insight in and evaluate
the use of interactive multimedia for education. An interactive tele-tutoring
tool, already partially realized by the PI, that enables teachers and students
to interact over a campus network, will provide an experimental platform to
study the use of interactive multimedia tools for teaching. 5) contribute to the
establishment of `multimedia' as a main area of an education in computer
science. This includes the development of a project-oriented senior level course
in multimedia systems that uses multimedia classrooms available at the
institution.