* 9624991
* CAREER: Faculty Early Career Development Program
* ENG,CBET
* 08/15/1996,07/31/2001
* Natacha DePaola, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Semahat S. Demir
* 07/31/2001
* USD 210,000.00

DePaola 9624991 This proposal investigates fundamental issues of the effect of
physical stimuli on mammalian cell function and promotes Cellular Engineering
education at undergraduate and graduate levels. The main research objective of
this proposal is to investigate fundamental aspects of mass transport and fluid
mechanics, involved in endothelial cell dysfunction in steady and pulsatile
disturbed flow fields. The localization of atherosclerotic lesions in humans
coincides with the presence of altered blood flows. We hypothesize that the
complex characteristics of these disturbed flows (i.e. variable shear forces,
flow separation, vorticity) regulate cellular and biochemical events close to
the vessel wall, promoting endothelial cell dysfunction and arterial wall
lesions. Endothelial cell cultures will be exposed to well controlled flows,
dynamically similar to those occurring in human arterial bifurcations (preferred
sites for atherosclerotic lesion development). Visualization experiments and
finite element simulations will be used to characterize the flow and to evaluate
fluid forces acting on the cell surface. Flow-induced alterations in endothelial
function, including cell proliferation, cell migration, monolayer permeability,
cytoskeletal fiber reorganization, expression of vascular adhesion molecules,
and distribution of leukocyte adhesion to the endothelial monolayer, will be
evaluated using in situ inrnunocytochemistry, immunofluorescence, time-lapse
video microscopy and epifluorescence microscopy. The physical mechanisms
involved in the modulation of endothelial cell function will be identified and
mathematical models will be constructed to describe the dynamics of endothelial
function and local cell interactions in relation to the flow characteristics.
Cellular Engineering has developed into a highly specialized field of research
to which engineering students have very little exposure in the classroom and
laboratory courses. The main educational objective is to improve the exposure of
engineering students interested in biomechanics and biomaterials to Cellular
Engineering as a discipline of study. This will be accomplished by course and
curriculum development aimed to provide the students with the principles and
tools of cellular engineering, in-class discussion of the state of the art, and
hands-on research experiences. New courses in Cell Biomechanics will be
developed. The senior level Biomechanics and Biomedical Engineering Laboratory
courses will be revised to include cellular aspects and state of the art
cellular mechanics and transport experiments. A module of "numerical
experiments" relevant to cellular engineering will be developed for students to
work in a simulation laboratory. A course on experimental cell biomechanics will
also be developed and undergraduate research opportunities will be available to
provide students with hands-on exposure to research findings. Finally, a journal
club will be organized in order to bring together individuals across campus who
work in problems relevant to cellular engineering within different fields of
expertise . The proposed research activities will contribute to the
identification of the physical mechanisms involved in cell pathobiology, in the
rearchitecturing of the vessel wall surface, and in the cell injury/dysfunction
associated with arterial diseases. Better understanding of the effects of
physiological flows on endothelial cell cultures will facilitate the development
of hybrid vascular grafts (graft performance appears to be highly dependent on
the complex flow environment experienced after implantation). The developed
methods and procedures may prove to be useful to the bioprocess industry, which
relies on the ability of predicting cell behavior and/or manipulating cell
function to manufacture biochemical products. Finally, the evaluation and
quantification of cell function/dysfunction in controlled unsteady disturbed
flows (a mechanical environment similar to that in which endothelial cells
reside in vivo) will advance the state of the art in engineering the cell
environment for cell culture studies. The educational component of this project
is expected to set up the basis for a comprehensive exposure to Cellular
Engineering at undergraduate and graduate levels, It will prepare biomedical
engineers to satisfy the increasing need of the modem bioengineering,
biotechnology and medical industries for individuals who can successfully apply
the principles and methods of engineering to problems in cell and molecular
biology. ***