* 9624099
* CISE Research Infrastructure:  Network of Symmetric         Multiprocessors:  An Infrastructure for Research in Scalable Systems and Applications
* CSE,EIA
* 09/01/1996,08/31/2001
* Richard Lipton, Princeton University
* Continuing Grant
* Rita Rodriguez
* 08/31/2001
* USD 1,533,725.00

9624099 Li, Kai Dobkin, David Princeton University CISE Research Infrastructure:
Network of Symmetric Multiprocessors : An Infrastructure for Research in
Scalable Systems and Applications This award provides support for a research
infrastructure based on commodity PC-based Symmetric MultiProcessor (SMP)
servers, high-speed networks, and customized network interfaces and
communication software. It will enable new research activities, extension of on-
going research activities and will generate synergy among the several research
efforts. Key research areas which will be enabled by the infrastructure include
virtual memory-mapped communication, efficient shared virtual memory, scalable
virtual storage servers, efficient message passing, and performance measurement.
Application areas include scalable DNA computing simulations, parallel fluid
dynamics, particle-based computation in a homogeneous medium and projects in
parallel computational biology. The infrastructure consists primarily of stock
hardware, but in quantity large enough to investigate the viability of building
a large-scale scalable system. The infrastructure will be constructed in three
phases: an initial phase, a building phase, and a large-scale experimental
phase. In the initial phase, four PC-based SMP servers will be connected
together with a custom-designed network. In the building phase, 16 PC based SMP
servers will be connected with a high speed commercial network and a
Myricom/Princeton customized network. In the experimental phase, 32 next
generation PC-based SMP servers will be connected with a commercially available
high-speed network and a Myricom/Princeton customized network. All research
projects will utilize the infrastructure to conduct large-scale experiments.