* 9624254
* Career Program:  Shear-Induced Slippage at Polymer-Solid    Interfaces
* ENG,CBET
* 06/01/1996,05/31/2000
* Lynden Archer, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Continuing Grant
* John F. Foss
* 05/31/2000
* USD 310,000.00

9624254 Archer This career development program combines course development and
mentoring with fundamental studies of shear-induced slippage of polymeric fluids
in simple geometry's. The research focuses on the classic no-slip condition.
Recent studies indicate this condition may not be valid at sufficiently high
shear stresses for polymer melts and solutions and even for some Newtonian
fluids. The research uses optical and spectroscopic methods to study spatial
variations in polymer orientation in the bulk and close to confining walls. The
effects of chain length and polymer strand orientation close to bounding
surfaces will be studied in entangled polymer solutions. In polymer solutions
and melts, the influence of inner-species mixing and stress gradients on small
molecule migration and slip will be determined. Information of this type has
application in polymer processing. The educational component of this program
includes further development of two new courses, Polymer Engineering and Polymer
Dynamics. These courses will be integrated into a new multi-disciplinary
undergraduate polymer engineering program. This is part of a strategy to make
the chemical engineering program more responsive to changing industrial needs. A
special feature of the educational plan is a mentoring program whereby talented
undergraduates are exposed to industrial research problems. Specific plans are
included for training promising underrepresented minority students in basic
research methodology. This plan includes efforts to improve graduation rates and
post graduate enrollment rates for this group of students.