* 9624195
* CAREER:  A Concurrent Design Paradigm for Small Companies
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/15/1996,07/31/2001
* Susan Carlson-Skalak, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Continuing Grant
* george hazelrigg
* 07/31/2001
* USD 310,000.00

9624195 Carlson This Career Award provides support for the development of a
concurrent engineering methodology for small companies and educational
activities to develop skills in team work, design, and product development.
Concurrent engineering has had a significant impact on the quality and
development cycle of products in large corporations. Even though small companies
constitute ninety percent of all manufacturing firms in the United States,
little work has been done to develop a concurrent engineering methodology that
targets their needs. An action research paradigm is used to gather information
through interviews and participation in small company design teams. Based upon
this information, a methodology is proposed and taught to industrial
participants and students. After implementation of the methodology in companies
and the classroom, revisions are made, starting the whole cycle again. This
action research paradigm allows practicing engineers and students to become
partners in the development of a design methodology that uses teams of people to
focus on the life cycle aspects of a product early in the design cycle.
Educational activities include the development of a Technology, Management, and
Policy minor that will be open to students across the university. This minor
will educate students on the development of technologies and products and the
implication of these developments on the nation and the world, and will give the
students an opportunity to work in multi-disciplinary teams on complex problems
dealing with management and development of technologies. These students will be
better prepared to make tough decisions on how to govern and use technology as
the nation faces the issues of global competition, sustainability, and
diminishing resources. This grant is likely to provide improvements in design
within small companies and the education of students about design and
interdisciplinary team work. Similar benefits are expected from a concurrent
methodology de veloped specifically for small companies that can be adopted
without the expense of outside consultants.