* 9624596
* Statistical Mechanics of Thermoreversible Gelation
* MPS,CHE
* 04/01/1996,03/31/2001
* Grzegorz Szamel, Colorado State University
* Continuing Grant
* Celeste M. Rohlfing
* 03/31/2001
* USD 297,000.00

Grzegorz Szamel is supported by a Faculty Early Career Development Award in the
Theoretical and Computational Chemistry Program to develop a theoretical
understanding of thermoreversible polymer gelation and the properties of
thermoreversible gels. The specific problems to be studied are: 1) existence and
properties of a thermodynamic transition underlying the observed gelation
transition; 2) structure of the sol and gel phases; 3) elastic properties of the
gel phase; and 4) viscoelastic properties of the sol and gel phases. The method
to be used is a generalization of a recent statistical mechanical approach to
rubber vulcanization (formation of a permanent polymer network) to the case of
reversible crosslinking. Specifically, a statistical mechanical theory of
chemical association will be used to describe reversible bonding of specific
monomers distributed randomly along polymer chains. A replication approach will
be used to facilitate averaging over the positions of specific monomers.
Finally, an order parameter field (related to frozen density fluctuations) will
be introduced, and an effective free energy functional will be derived. The free
energy functional will be analyzed using methods similar to those used in the
study of the vulcanization transition. The goal of the education plan is to
teach students the value and significance of quantitative reasoning in physical
chemistry, and chemistry in general. In particular, recitation classes will be
introduced into teaching the physical chemistry courses in order to improve
student's ability to solve chemical problems using the relevant mathematical
formalism. Moreover, a new course on mathematical and computational methods for
chemists will be instituted in order to expose students to the applications of
numerical and simulational methods in chemistry. Polymer gels have attracted a
lot of interest because of the wealth of their potential practical applications.
Examples include drug delivery devices, chemical valves and sensors, and
magnetic resonance monitoring agents. Their properties can change drastically in
response to external stimuli such as temperature, electric field, or light.
Szamel's research concentrates on one class of polymer gels, thermoreversible
gels. These gels originate from reversible crosslinking of polymeric systems.
These gels are reversible, i.e. they liquify upon heating, and are regenerated
upon cooling.