* 9624578
* SBIR Phase II: VPIs - Bringing Music & Musicianship to Deaf & Hard of Hearing, Choreographed Dancing Physics Exhibits toScience Museums & Sophisticated Product Animatio
* TIP,TI
* 09/15/1996,02/28/1999
* David Durlach, TECHNO FROLICS
* Standard Grant
* Sara B. Nerlove
* 02/28/1999
* USD 309,943.00

9624578 Durlach This Small Business Innovative Research Phase II project will
focus concurrently on developing Visual Performance Instruments (VPIs) that
enables the Deaf and Hard-of-Hearing to perform in a medium that serves as a
visual analog of music, algorithms to process digitally sampled acoustic music
and cause VPIs to dance in accompaniment, and closely related science museum and
commercial advertising displays that utilize the same underlying hardware and
software control environments. Phase II objectives include: -The creation of a
working prototype for a new VPI called the Tower of Triangles (TOT). TOT is made
out of mirrored triangular columns which function as linear torsional wave-
mediums for small excitation energies and chaotic systems for high-excitation
energies, and may be "played" in real-time via a computer-mediated user
interface. -Adding the ability, in an existing performance artwork constructed
out of iron dust in a computer-controlled electromagnetic field, to dance
automatically in response to music. The Phase II tasks for implementing this
system include the further development of an algorithm for extracting rhythmic
information from music in real-time, and software physics simulations whose
initial conditions and evolution parameters are modified in real-time by data
extracted from the music. -The creation of a set of computer-controlled
turntables which function both as the drive mechanism for the first VPI
mentioned above, and collectively in their own right as a display device to
animate, in sophisticated and complex ways, retail point-of-purchase products
and trade-show exhibit items. Commercial applications of the science/artworks,
VPIs and automatic music response control software include: VPIs for the deaf,
responsive dancing corporate logos for trade-show; retail store, and nightclub
environments; interactive science museum exhibits on wave mediums and chaotic
systems; kinetic signs for commercial use; an interactiv e option for coin-
operated dancing artwork displays.