* 9624878
* Innovations in Giant Planet Evolution Theoretical Models    and Undergraduate Science Literacy
* MPS,AST
* 08/15/1996,07/31/2002
* Mark Marley, New Mexico State University
* Continuing Grant
* Vernon Pankonin
* 07/31/2002
* USD 311,726.00

9624878 Marley New interior, atmosphere, and evolution models of Saturn, Uranus,
and Neptune will be constructed. This will be done in order to address several
important, unanswered questions about these planets. Atmospheric models and
emergent spectra for extrasolar giant planets will also be computed. An
innovative, Monte Carlo based interior modeling technique will be employed to
evaluate the range of Uranus and Neptune models of their interiors that have not
been identified by conventional approaches. These models will then be used to
constrain theoretical models of the evolution of these planets. These models
account for the role of double diffusive convection on internal energy transport
and planetary evolution. In collaboration with Allen Grossman of Lawrence
Livermore National Laboratory, models of Saturn's evolution, which include
helium immiscibility and rainout will be constructed. The modeling of the
evolution of all three planets requires new atmospheric models which will serve
as boundary conditions. Thus, new atmospheric models for the current and past
atmospheres of these planets will be constructed, relying upon the most recent
molecular absorption line databases. These new calculations will replace twenty
year old, but widely used, atmospheric models. The new evolutionary model
calculations, resulting from this work, will make it possible to address
fundamental gaps in our understanding of these planets. Specifically, why is the
luminosity of Saturn so much greater than expected? The separation of hydrogen
from helium in its interior is the preferred explanation, but this hypothesis
has not yet been rigorously modeled. Secondly, why are the heat flows of Uranus
and Neptune so much smaller than expected? The new models will enable one to
constrain the role of composition gradients in their interiors. Such composition
gradients have been offered as an explanation for their low heatflows. The
results of the modeling will also provide a database of thermal emissi on
spectra of evolving giant planets. Such spectra can be compared with
observations of the spectra of extrasolar giant planets, when they are found, to
constrain their age, atmospheric structure, and composition. Scientific literacy
will be improved among New Mexico State University undergraduates. The Principal
Investigator will design, develop, and deliver a new upper division
undergraduate course that stresses important scientific themes, rather than a
single discipline (such as Astronomy). This course will stress student
communication and interaction skills and is expected to provide students with a
broader perspective of the scientific enterprise and its relation to current
scientific and technological concerns. The Principal Investigator will also
experiment, in this and other undergraduate courses, with innovative lecture
approaches. Traditional lectures, even when liberally supplemented by
demonstrations, are certainly not the best way to deliver an introduction to
science for non-majors. Alternative lecture-delivery techniques will be tested
and evaluated. Undergraduate students will participate in the research. New
Mexico State University's (NMSU's) enrollment is 37% minority, yet less than 10%
of the students enrolled in the physical sciences are minority students.
Research opportunities, mentoring, and contact with graduate students will be
provided for the undergraduate students. These activities will make it possible
to provide a supportive environment to encourage minority students to pursue
degrees in the physical sciences at NMSU. The Astronomy Department NMSU is an
emerging, vital department. Within the past few years, the department has added
three tenure track faculty, the new Apache Point 3.5-meter telescope has been
completed, there is growth in the Astronomy Department's solid graduate
applicant pool, and there is a continuing dedication to undergraduate education.