* 9624711
* CAREER:  A Comprehensive Rewriting Framework for            Compilation, Optimization, and Run-Time Environments
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/1996,06/30/2002
* Zena Ariola, University of Oregon Eugene
* Continuing Grant
* Jon S. Rugaber
* 06/30/2002
* USD 205,000.00

This research plan pursues the development of a unifying framework for reasoning
about execution, compilation, and optimization of programs. The goal is to
provide the programmer, compiler writer, and implementor with an abstract
laboratory in which to investigate the interplay among various techniques and to
reason about their correctness and efficiency with respect to both time and
space. Specifically, the aim is to formalize an evaluator, a compiler, an
optimizer, and a parser as a rewriting process. This requires enhancing current
rewriting technology with the ability to deal with graph structures, including
cyclic and disconnected graphs. This is important since graphs are ubiquitous in
a program development system. They occur at the source level, after parsing, in
the intermediate program representation and during program execution. A rigorous
study of graphs is thus fundamental for reasoning about both run-time and
compile-time issues. The rewriting technology will be enhanced further by
associating priorities and conditions to the rules. This will allow us to
directly analyze the impact of different application schemes on efficiency. Both
strict and nonstrict languages will be considered, and also their extensions to
handle state. The development of the abstract framework addressed in this CAREER
research project is also important for educational purposes, since it provides a
simple yet rigorous, basis for introducing students to concepts, practical
issues and, at the same time, to formal reasoning about properties of programs
without having to introduce complex mathematical machinery. A strong, formal
background is important regardless of whether a student is seeking higher
degrees or immediate employment. The proposed research will allow an integration
across the undergraduate language-compilation implementation sequence,
establishing a connection between abstraction and application. Exposure of
students to research is planned through collaborat ions with other institutions
and student exchanges, which can serve to encourage students to consider
advanced education and research careers. This study constitutes a first step
towards providing automatically generated tools, such as optimizing compilers.
Moreover, through use of the results of the proposed research in the classroom,
their value as a tool for introducing and reasoning about language issues can
better be evaluated. ***