* 9624433
* Career:  Catalytic Solutions to Emission Control Problems
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/1996,07/31/2001
* Michael Amiridis, University of South Carolina at Columbia
* Continuing Grant
* Geoffrey Prentice
* 07/31/2001
* USD 345,000.00

ABSTRACT CTS-9624433 The objective of this research is the design of novel
heterogeneous catalysts for emission control applications. In particular, the
research focuses on two applications: the removal of NOx via its selective
catalytic reduction with hydrocarbons (hydrocarbon-SCR) under excess oxygen
("lean") conditions; and the simultaneous removal of nitrogen oxides (NOx) and
chlorinated volatile organic compounds (VOCs). The proposed research uses
kinetic and in-situ spectroscopic characterization techniques. The different
reaction pathways involved in the overall reaction networks, the reactive
intermediates, and the active surface sites are identified. These findings are
correlated with the structural properties of existing catalysts and used to
provide important leads for the design and synthesis of the next generation of
catalytic systems. This research could lead to a novel, hydrothermally stable
hydrocarbon-SCR catalyst that would find commercial use in both mobile and
stationary emission control applications, while a new bifunctional catalyst for
the simultaneous removal of NOx and clilorinated VOCs would find an immediate
use in controlling emissions from municipal and medical waste-incineration units
and a long-term use in controlling emissions from the chlorochemical and the
coating industries. The proposed educational plan includes the development of
new courses at both the undergraduate and graduate levels and the continuous
involvement of undergraduate and graduate students in research. The new courses
include a freshman-level course in chemical manufacturing, a senior-level
elective course in environmental engineering, and a graduate-level course in
heterogeneous catalysis.