* 9624801
* Career:  Modeling and Analysis of Existing and Retrofitted  RC Frames Subjected to Earthquakes
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/15/1996,06/30/2001
* Jose Pincheira, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* John Scalzi
* 06/30/2001
* USD 215,000.00

Seismic rehabilitation of existing buildings has been a significant area of
research during the last decade. However, very little guidance exists for the
evaluation of existing buildings and, other than case studies or qualitative
descriptions, there are no specific recommendations for the design of retrofits.
To this end, the research under this program will focus on the seismic
evaluation and retrofit existing buildings, in particular reinforced concrete
frames. The main objective of this research project is to evaluate current
methodologies for the evaluation of existing reinforced concrete frames and to
develop alternate procedures for the evaluation and design of retrofits. This
objective will be accomplished by conducting analytical studies of selected
reinforced concrete frame buildings representative of existing construction in
regions of low-to-moderate and high seismic risk. The results of the analysis
will be compared with measured response when possible and will be correlated
with current procedures for the evaluation of buildings. Based on these results,
modifications to existing procedures will be proposed and alternate
methodologies will be developed. The investigation will have a direct impact on
the effort sponsored by the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) to
prepare Guidelines for the Seismic Rehabilitation of Buildings (ATC-33). The
research undertaken will be combined with an education component which focus as
on the development of a program in infrastructure rehabilitation cover issues
broader than the seismic rehabilitation alone. Also, a program on new materials
for civil engineering applications being developed. These programs will be
implemented through research, development of new courses, and outreach and
extracurricular activities involving the participation of both undergraduate and
graduate students. This is a FY 96 Career award.