* 9624885
* CAREER:  Robustness Analysis in the Design of Nonlinear     Feedback
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/15/1996,07/31/2000
* Alexandre Megretski, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 07/31/2000
* USD 180,000.00

9624885 Megretski The proposed research will concentrate on rigorous analysis of
special classes of essentially nonlinear feedback design with application in
self-tuning, delta-sigma modulators, anti-reset windup, and computer simulated
locomotion. One major objective of the research is to demonstrate how the local
analysis of robustness can be used in the global analysis of essentially
nonlinear feedback systems, to produce results not matched by any other
approach. Another general objective is to propose new solutions, and analyze the
known "ad-hoc" solution to several well-known nonlinear feedback problems.
Analysis of relay feedback systems. Feedback interconnection of a relay feedback
with a linear time-variant plant will be considered. The situation in which such
interconnection induces self-oscillation (a limit cycle) will be of most
interest. Sufficient conditions for the global stability of such limit cycles
will be derived, and the sensitivity of the oscillations in the presence of
external inputs will be estimated. In particular, analysis of relay-based self-
tunning of PID feedback will be done. Another application will be the analysis
of delta- sigma modulators. In general, this part of the research project is
aimed to compensate for the lack of methods suitable for rigorous analysis of
piecewise linear systems. Feedback control with magnitude and rate constraints.
The problem of control of linear and mildly nonlinear systems with constraints
imposed on control signal rate and magnitude will be considered. The prime
objective will be to improve the speed and efficiency of the control response,
expressed in terms of induced norms and other parameters characterizing the
transient behavior. Another objective is to provide a rigorous basis for a
comparative study of different anti-reset windup designs. Feedback control of
computer animation. This part of the project involves research on the
feasibility of real-time dynamically simulate d computer animation of an open-
loop unstable object. The "object" will be a three-dimensional system on joints,
normally having at any time one or two joint ends touching the ground, and
maintaining stability by changing the angles between the joints in a coordinated
manner. Ultimately, the object will have most of the dynamical features of a
human body, through the initial models will have less degrees of freedom. The
goal is to teach the object to "walk" in the presence of the gravity force. It
is most likely that the stability of the human body motion is ensured by several
feedback loops governed by the autonomic nervous system. However, the actual
control laws defining these feedbacks are not known. The main objective of the
proposed research is to show that, using an advanced nonlinear feedback control
methodology, it is possible to find algorithms for real- time stabilization of
the open-loop locomotion, at least in the case of a simplified model. The
research will also be aimed at studying the algorithms for stabilization of
repetitive open-loop unstable motion. Integrated educational software. The
educational component of the proposal is aimed at the development of an
integrated software package and special methodology for the undergraduate class
in "Systems and signals", to provide a tool for state-of- the-art, learning
based, and practice-oriented education. The system will provide (a) computer-
assisted multimedia-based presentations of course concepts; (b) student self-
training using random generators of drill problems; (c) automatic problem
generation and evaluation programs for official testing; (d) an open
architecture allowing further accumulation of the knowledge. Ultimately, the
proposed development should facilitate a major change in the forms of the
university education. ***