* 9624850
* Laser Control of Molecular Conformation as an Avenue for    Practical Laser Chemistry
* MPS,CHE
* 05/01/1996,04/30/2001
* Brooks Pate, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Janice M. Hicks
* 04/30/2001
* USD 356,624.00

Brooks Pate of the University of Virginia has been awarded a CAREER grant in the
Experimental Physical Chemistry Program to initiate studies of laser control of
molecular conformations for practical laser chemistry. The goal of these
investigations is to selectively populate a single molecular conformational
structure, resulting in an enhanced reaction rate along the desired pathway. In
the two-laser experiment, molecules are first excited to an energy region where
the vibrational states localized around the different conformational minima are
coupled through intramolecular vibrational energy redistribution (IVR). Since
the vibrational frequencies depend on conformation, a second (resonant) laser is
then selected to stimulate emission to a lower state. This lower energy state
lies below the onset energy for IVR, hence the final structure is localized
around the one desired conformation. Little is known about the conformations
that a vibrationally excited molecule can assume, yet reaction rates are
strongly dependent on the conformational structure. These techniques will
provide the first information of this type and hence may lead to truly ground-
breaking results. The educational component of Prof. Pate's CAREER award will
emphasize the development of a physical chemistry course along the lines of a
`research training` course for those students interested in physical chemistry
careers, better utilization of computers in the curriculum, e.g., symbolic math
software for problem manipulations, and incorporation of modern research
instrumentation in the laboratory courses.