* 9624629
* Towards Efficient Search-Based Algorithms for Belief        Updating, Decision Making, and Explanation in Bayesian      Belief Networks
* CSE,IIS
* 06/01/1996,06/30/2001
* Marek Druzdzel, University of Pittsburgh
* Continuing Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 06/30/2001
* USD 227,331.00

Graphical probabilistic models, such as Bayesian belief networks and influence
diagrams, offer an attractive knowledge representation tool for reasoning in
knowledge-based systems. As many practical systems tend to be large, the main
problem faced by this approach is the complexity of probabilistic reasoning,
shown to be worst-case NP-hard both for exact and approximate inference. Since
the complexity proofs are for the worst case, it is important to study the
properties of real models and subsequently to develop algorithms that will
explore these properties. The purpose of this research is to develop efficient
algorithms for approximate belief updating and decision making in very large
probabilistic models. These algorithms explore asymmetries in joint probability
distributions over model variables and search for the most likely states of the
model. Very often a small set of states covers the bulk of the probability
space. The project includes theoretical studies of methods for prediction of
convergence speed and error bounds in search-based algorithms and empirical
verification of the theoretical predictions on practical models. The algorithms
developed in the course of the project are implemented and empirically evaluated
in very large knowledge-based systems. As the complexity of probabilistic
inference in belief networks is one of the main obstacles to wide application of
probabilistic methods in knowledge-based systems, the theoretical results and
the algorithms developed in this project can be expected to have a major impact
on the field.