* 9624391
* Front-End Evaluation:  A Guidebook
* EDU,DRL
* 05/15/1996,06/30/1998
* Wendy Pollock, Association of Science-Technology Centers
* Standard Grant
* Barry A. Van Deman
* 06/30/1998
* USD 49,950.00

9624391 Pollock Under the Small Grants for Exploratory Research Guidelines, the
Association of Science-Technology Centers under the direction of Wendy Pollock
and in cooperation with Lynn Dierking of Science Learning, Inc. will examine the
literature, current methodology, and value of front-end studies in planning
informal learning projects. The project "Front-End Studies: A Guidebook for
Science Museums" will result in a publication available to a broad audience of
practitioners developing informal learning programs. The objective of this work
is to provide a resource that will encourage more extensive and fruitful use of
front-end studies. Dissemination of results and abstracts of front-end study
reports will also be posted on the ASTC Home Page. Research in science learning
makes it clear that it is important for those who provide learning opportunities
to begin with an understanding of what learners know, what they don't know, what
misconceptions they may have, and what they are interested in learning. The more
that the program design team understands about the learner, the stronger the
learning activity. Unfortunately, not all informal educators realize the value
of front-end studies and incorporate them in their program development
protocols. The value of this research is to provide methodological guidance and
research resources, along with clearly developed arguments, for practitioners
interest in improving the conceptualization of the science learning activities.