* 9624721
* CAREER:  Determining Parallel Complexity of Numerical       Computation Problems via Dependency Graphs
* CSE,CCF
* 06/01/1996,07/31/2001
* Eunice Santos, Lehigh University
* Continuing Grant
* William Randolph Franklin
* 07/31/2001
* USD 210,000.00

The research objective of this project is to determine the time complexity of
solving various numerical computation problems on parallel distributed-memory
machines in general by abstracting the common properties of these problems via
dependency graphs. To that effect, two important topics are considered: (1) the
design and analysis of parallel numerical algorithms and (2) the derivation of
lower bounds on complexity. Working within LogP, a recently-introduced model for
parallel computation, parallel complexity will be analyzed by taking into
account three important factors: (i) initial data placement, (ii) communication
scheduling, and (iii) local operations. Algorithms which are efficient on LogP
are portable from one parallel machine to another and will be efficient on any
parallel machine. Initially several different numerical computation problems
will be considered and the parallel complexity for each specific problem will be
determined. The overall results will be used to help extract the important
criteria of dependency graphs and thereby classify numerical computation
problems via these criteria. Furthermore, the parallel complexity for each
classification of numerical computation problems will be determined. The
importance of the results obtained lies in the ability to pinpoint what types of
data placements and communication schedulings are needed in order to achieve
efficient or optimal running times for large classes of numerical problems.
Clearly, this research potentially impacts a wide variety of applications and
computational problems from various domains which are currently difficult to
address. In order to successfully accomplish this research and apply it to these
domains, there must be education and training of people in the parallel and
numerical computing field. To that effect, a program in parallel and numerical
computing will be developed beginning with course preparation at the
undergraduate level and culminating in a research program at the doctoral level.
***