* 9624160
* Career:  Si-Based Alloys an Heterostructures for Improved   Performance
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/1996,07/31/2000
* Paul Berger, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* Usha Varshney
* 07/31/2000
* USD 239,976.00

9624160 Berger This research project will examine and develop the Group IV alloy
system (Si, Ge, C and Sn) studying material properties, fabrication techniques
and electronic and photonic devices unique to the Si1-x-y-zGexCySnz system.
Special attention will be focused on Si1-x-yGexCx alloys due to their inherent
lattice matching ability to Si substrates, but not be limited to these alloys.
Vegard's law predicts that an 8.2 to 1 ratio of Ge to C will be lattice matched
to Si substrates. Among the benefits gained would be development of high
performance Si-compatible heterostructure electronics as well as Si-based alloys
and heterostructures with enhanced optical properties. The project commences
with development of material issues related to these alloys by probing their
optical, electronic and structural properties. Concurrently, the project will
develop processing techniques such as etching and metalization, which could be
unique to this material system. Optimized fabrication techniques will be applied
to manufacture electronic and optoelectronic devices and circuits. High
performance electronic devices such as heterojunction bipolar transistors (HBT)
and modulation-doped field effect transistors (MODFET) would be ideally suited
to the bandgap engineering possible with development of lattice matched
heterstructure on Si substrates. Devices with enhanced photonic properties such
as optical detectors and emitters will also be a primary focus. In addition to
the research plan outlined above, and educational plan will involve four main
thrusts. These four goals will be: 1. to attract women, under-represented
minorities and persons with disabilities to get involved in research at the
undergraduate level in order to promote future teachers from these groups; 2. to
strengthen the undergraduate curriculum on semiconductor materials and devices
by building lab demonstrations and competitive lab resources for the
undergraduate teaching lab; 3. to develop a new M aster's degree in Electrical
Engineering on Interconnect Technology; 4. to build a support structure for the
retention engineering majors. ***