* 9624680
* Observational Tests of Mixing in Low Mass Stars
* MPS,AST
* 05/01/1996,04/30/2001
* Michael Briley, University of Wisconsin-Oshkosh
* Standard Grant
* Eileen D. Friel
* 04/30/2001
* USD 126,611.00

9624680 Briley A program of research in stellar spectroscopy and photometry will
be carried out. The research efforts are specifically targeted at providing
observational constraints on the chemical abundance modifying mechanisms
believed to be operating in evolving low mass stars. The objects to be observed
will include galactic globular cluster stars. These stars are known to vary in
their light-element abundances. Stars which are in evolving members of old open
clusters of stars will also be observed. These types of stars are the among the
brightest stars and are most often observed to obtain data for use in chemical
abundance determinations. An understanding of the processes which alter the
distribution of important elements, such as oxygen and lithium, from their
primordial values is required before conclusions can be drawn regarding the
chemical history of our galaxy. In collaboration with researchers at other
institutions, a series of observational programs will be pursued which will use
some of the most recent techniques in astronomical instrumentation. The programs
include: 1) A study of isotopic carbon and other light element abundances in
cluster stars as probes of deep mixing in the stars and to obtain the
sensitivity of the mixing mechanism to stellar mass and composition. 2) The
determination of the location of the onset of mixing in moderately metal-poor
globular cluster stars. 3) Measurement and analysis of ultaviolet wavelength
Nitrogen Hydride (NH) band strengths among bright globular cluster stars to
directly determine nitrogen abundances (a crucial input required to assess the
role of deep mixing). 4) Placing constraints on the limits of primordial oxygen
variations in the globular clusters through the widths of their color-magnitude
diagrams. The development of collaborative programs with scientists at other
institutions to obtain data, with local reduction and analysis of the data,
benefits not only the resident faculty (by stimulating profess ional growth),
but also benefits the undergraduate students through early exposure to
fundamental research. As a complement to the research projects, a course in
basic astrophysics (stellar atmospheres and interiors) is being developed for
the Physics/Astronomy Department. A series of animations of complex
astrophysical processes will be developed, using current stellar model
atmospheres, as a supplement to the course. The resulting animations will be
developed in the Mpeg format and made available to other teachers over the
Internet. ***