* 9624979
* CAREER:  Integrated Traffic Management Based on             Accurate and Practical Packet Fair Queueing                 Algorithms
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/1996,08/31/2002
* Hui Zhang, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Admela Jukan
* 08/31/2002
* USD 210,000.00

Multiple network services include guaranteed real-time service, predicted real-
time service, and best-effort service. While there has been extensive research
on designing traffic management algorithms for each individual service, it is
unclear how these algorithms can be integrated into one network and how they
will interact with each other. This problem becomes more complex when the
network also needs to support link-sharing, which allows resource sharing among
applications that require different network services but belong to the same
administrative class. The service disciplines at the switching nodes, which
determine the order in which packets are serviced, play a critical role in
controlling the interactions among different traffic streams, different service
classes, and different link sharing classes. The hypothetical Fluid Fair
Queueing (FFQ) discipline, which can serve multiple traffic streams
simultaneously according to pre-specified service shares, provides an ideal
framework to integrate traffic management algorithms for different services and
link sharing. Since FFQ uses an idealized fluid model that cannot be implemented
in the real-world, Packet Fair Queueing (PFQ) algorithms are needed to
approximate its behavior. Previously proposed PFQ algorithms including the most
popular Weighted Fair Queueing all introduce substantial inaccuracy in
approximating FFQ, which significantly affects traffic management and link
sharing algorithms. It is unclear whether accurate PFQ's exist, and if they do,
whether they can be simple enough to be implementable at high speed. The goal of
this research is to demonstrate that accurate and practical PFQ algorithms can
be designed and that they provide the foundation for a framework under which
traffic management algorithms for different services and link sharing can be
supported in an integrated fashion. Aspects treated include (a) the fundamental
tradeoff between complexity and accuracy of PFQ algorithms; (b) issues in
integrating different traffic management algorithms and link-sharing into one
framework and fundamental tradeoffs between accuracy of PFQ algorithms and the
efficiency of link-sharing and traffic management algorithms; (d) admission
control algorithms for providing end-to-end performance guarantees using PFQ
algorithms under not only rate-proportional but also general resource
assignments; e) more flexible real-time services such as renegotiated service
and rate-adaptive service based on PFQ algorithms. The study is conducted via a
combination of analysis, simulation, and implementation. The results of this
work will have a significant impact on the design of integrated traffic
management algorithms in both the Internet and ATM environments.