* 9624617
* CAREER: Coherent Microscopic Imaging and Spectroscopy in    Bioengineering
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/1996,08/31/2000
* Joseph Izatt, Case Western Reserve University
* Continuing Grant
* Leon Esterowitz
* 08/31/2000
* USD 310,000.00

9624617 Izatt This CAREER proposal combines research and educational initiatives
in the field of biomedical engineering. The proposed research program is
directed toward the development of new techniques for sub-surface, optical
tomographic imaging in biological tissues with microscopic resolution. This will
be accomplished by developing advances based on optical coherence tomography, a
novel coherence-domain (interferometric) optical measurement technique derived
from state-of-the-art fiber-optic optical communications technologies. The
proposed research will have applications in biotechnology and minimally invasive
medical diagnostics such as endoscopy and laparoscopy. Several novel concepts
are proposed for increasing the resolution and contrast of coherence-domain
imaging. Optical coherence tomography will be combined with confocal microscopy
in order to perform microscopy with single micron resolution up to several
millimeters deep in intact biological tissues. Novel digital signal processing
algorithms will be developed for improving the resolution of optical coherence
tomography images using deconvolution. A new ultra-broadbandwidth laser source
will be developed to enable combined high-speed and high-resolution optical
coherence tomography imaging. The latter two techniques will be particularly
useful in applications such as minimally invasive medical diagnostics in which
the numerical aperture of the optical imaging system is restricted. Methods are
also proposed for increasing the contrast in coherence-domain optical imaging by
taking advantage of the spectral properties of light scattered from tissues. A
unique system will be developed for acquiring optical coherence tomography
images at two different optical wavelengths simultaneously. This system will
employ a pair of wavelengths in the near-infrared with differential absorption
characteristics in water, and will generate images of tissue hydration. Finally,
unique digital signal processi ng algorithms will be developed for extracting
the depth-resolved backscatter spectrum of tissue samples over limited
wavelength ranges. This last technique constitutes the first description of
simultaneous tomographic optical imaging and depth-resolved backscatter
spectroscopy for the first time, and may find applications in early cancer
diagnosis. Each of the proposed technical advances will be implemented in the
laboratory and tested for improvements in diagnostic potential against current
standard imaging techniques. In addition to the proposed research program, two
educational initiatives will be undertaken. A Case Western Reserve University
(CWRU) graduate Biomedical Engineering course on Optical Sensing and Imaging in
Biomedicine will be developed to address a nationwide need for advances in
teaching techniques and pedagogical materials in this field. A continuing
medical education course on Endoscopic Imaging Technology will be developed in
collaboration with expert endoscopists and offered to practicing physicians. The
latter initiative takes advantage of the principal investigator's unique access
to the medical education environment to provide instruction to physicians in
physical science and engineering principles. By providing educational training
for students and medical professionals, as well as directly supporting
participation of students in the research program, the overall proposal closely
integrates research and teaching aspects of the principal investigator's planned
career development. ***