* 9624716
* The Effect of Hierarchical Cluster Formation on Galaxy      Evolution
* MPS,AST
* 08/01/1996,05/19/1999
* Mark Henriksen, University of North Dakota Main Campus
* Continuing Grant
* J. P. Wright
* 05/19/1999
* USD 250,001.00

Henriksen 9624716 A five-year research and education plan will be carried out.
The goals of the activities are to (1) establish and maintain a research program
which produces a significant contribution to an important and interesting area
of astronomical research, (2) to strengthen educational opportunities in
astronomy at the University of North Dakota, (3) to increase the involvement and
interest of Native Americans in astronomy research and in the University of
North Dakota, (4) to stimulate interest in astronomy research within the
University and within the state of North Dakota. The understanding of galaxy
evolution in clusters of galaxies has posed a persistent challenge to
astronomers for approximately 20 years, beginning with discovery of the Butcher-
Oemler Effect. Photometric and spectroscopic observations of galaxies in
clusters showing this effect have confirmed this observational enigma and
increased our understanding of the problem. The problem stated succinctly is,
"How does the galaxy population in clusters change from being dominated by late-
type spirals at a redshift of z = 0.2 to being dominated by early-type galaxies
in the galaxy population at the present epoch". The recent discovery that
substructure is found in many clusters of galaxies in both the optical and the
X-ray region of he electromagnetic spectrum suggests that galaxies must
experience violent mergers of subclusters as rich clusters are formed. Even well
known rich clusters, such as the Coma cluster of galaxies and the A2256 cluster
of galaxies, are still accreting groups of galaxies so that mergers must be an
ongoing phenomenon in cluster evolution. The study of the evolution of galaxies
in clusters through the analysis of the data from observations of the X-ray
emission from clusters of galaxies with substructure will be carried out.
Simulations of the cluster tidal effect on disk galaxies during mergers and
accretions will be developed and analyzed. The simulations wi ll be formulated
to emphasize predicting observable quantities, such as changes in the galaxy
disk due to star formation, disk deformation, and loss of metals to the
intracluster medium. These quantities will be compared to data obtained at
current ground-based observatories, space-based observatories (ASCA and the
Hubble Space Telescope), and future observatories such as the Advanced X-ray
Astrophysics Facility (AXAF). The analysis of these data will contribute
significantly to our understanding of two important and closely linked areas:
evolution of the intracluster medium and galaxy evolution. Educational
activities to be carried out outside the classroom will include (1) upgrading
and modernizing the curricula in three courses, which are currently severely
underenrolled, when compared to the same courses taught at other Universities,
(2) providing undergraduate and graduate students research opportunities in
astronomy, and (3) providing astrophysics graduate students the opportunity to
gain practical experience in the laboratory working on high energy detector
development. It is a stated future direction of the University of North Dakota
to include more computer-based, interactive learning for students and to
strengthen ties with the Native American community in North Dakota.