* 9624546
* CPMSA:  "STEP 2000-Student Teacher Equity Program 2000"
* EHR,ESR
* 10/01/1996,09/30/2001
* Joe Coto, East Side Union High School District
* Cooperative Agreement
* Kathleen Bergin
* 09/30/2001
* USD 2,187,888.00

"STEP 2000"-Student Teacher Equity Program 2000: The Comprehensive Partnership
between the East Side High School District, ESUHSD, and San Jose State
University, SJSU, will build the capacity of ESUHSD to ensure that all of its
students will take high level math and science courses. By the year 2000, all
minority students, graduating from high school will have completed the Math and
Science components of the California A-F college entrance requirements at a
level of 40%, which is at parity with the average for Santa Clara County. The
project will continue the reform begun by the Equity 2000 project and build upon
The enlarged based of students in the ESUHSD who are completing Algebra by the
9th Grade and who are now eligible to take the higher level college preparatory
math and science courses. New math and science curricula adopted in some schools
to accomplish reform will be achieved at all schools, including the acquisition
of new resources and the necessary teacher training. Student supportive
activities in the form of Saturday Academies, Summer Institutes, Career/Resource
Centers, and Homework Assistance Centers will be expanded during the project
period to provide increased support for math and science learning and to
increase students' knowledge about math, science, engineering and technology
careers. STEP 2000 will train all of the Districts 150 mathematics teachers and
all of the Districts 120 science teachers. STEP 2000 will affect all of the
Districts' Grade 9-12 students, which will reach 24,000 during the Project
period. The underrepresented African American, American Indian and Latino
students, who presently represent 46% of the students, will be especially
affected. At the end of the project period, the number of them that will be
eligible to enter college and pursue math, science, engineering and technology
careers will have doubled from the start of the project. STEP 2000 will
complement and greatly help the other NSF funded programs at San Jose State
University. Specifically, the NSF Alliance for Minority Participation program
and the NSF Collaboratives for Teacher Education Program will now have adequate
numbers of underrepresented math, science and engineering students to recruit
from. ***