* 9624281
* Extended Metal-Metal Interactions: d8 Stabilized            Multiply Bonded Dimers and Oligomeric Pt-Bipyridine         Springs
* MPS,CHE
* 05/01/1996,10/31/2000
* Vincent Catalano, Board of Regents, NSHE, obo University of Nevada, Reno
* Continuing Grant
* Katharine Covert
* 10/31/2000
* USD 312,000.00

Dr. Vincent Catalano, Department of Chemistry, University of Nevada, Reno, is
supported by the Inorganic, Bioinorganic, and Organometallic Program of the
Chemistry Division under a Faculty Early Career Development Award for studies of
extended metal-metal interactions. Multi-metallic complexes will be prepared by
bridging multiply bonded metal-metal dimers to late transition metal complexes
using bidentate or multidentate ligands. The reactivity of these systems with
small molecules such as carbon dioxide will be explored. Also, helical shaped
platinum bipyridine complexes will be prepared by covalently linking multiple
bipyridines through alkene linkages. These complexes have the potential to act
as vapo-, baro-, or solvato-chromic sensors. The educational plan is aimed at
increasing science literacy at all levels of education through simple programs
that can be implemented based on a `think globally-act locally` approach, which
includes tying chemical concepts to topical issues, integration of teaching with
research, and public outreach through chemistry club and science fair
activities. Synthetic systems will be designed in which metal atoms can interact
with one another in extended linear networks. These systems are expected to be
unique in their reactivity and in their physical properties due to the extended
metal-metal interactions. They are of fundamental interest from the standpoint
of understanding metal-metal bonding and through-space interactions, and they
may have applications as sensors and in small molecule activation. The
educational plan focuses on modifications of traditional chemistry courses to
include topical issues and to integrate teaching with research.