* 9624293
* Career Program:  Extensional Rheology of Polymer Solutions  and Melts:  Impact Processing
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/1996,06/30/2001
* Kurt Koelling, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Continuing Grant
* C. F. Chen
* 06/30/2001
* USD 235,000.00

ABSTRACT Proposal Number: 9624293 PI: Koelling This ward is for an integrated
career development plan to educate junior high, senior high, undergraduate, and
graduate students in the field of rheolgical behavior of complex fluids and
conduct research on the extensional rheology of polymers. The research will
involve four different extensional rheometers. These rheometers will be used to
study the extensional properties of polymer solutions over a range a range of
temperatures. This research is focused on determining the properties necessary
to characterize the behavior of viscoelastic fluids. It will address a range of
issues such as what is the molecular conformation and steady-state extensional
viscosity of a polymer undergoing large Henky strains and whether existing
constitutive equations are adequate for describing shear and shear-free material
functions of viscoelastic fluids. This information is of fundamental importance
to many polymer processing operations including fiber spinning, blow molding,
and injection molding and in a variety of other phenomena including turbulent
drag reduction, jet stability, anti-misting and flow through porous media. An
ambitious educational plan has been formulated. Demonstrations will be developed
to introduce students to the relationship between rheology and the behavior of
materials in everyday use. Examples include elasticity of rubber bands,
Weissenberg effects in viscoelastic fluids such as cake batter and scrambled
eggs, die swell with shampoos and yield stresses developed in mayonnaise and
ketchup. The PI plans to work with high school students in developing science
fair projects and also plans to develop an interdisciplinary course and
laboratory experience for both undergraduate and graduate students interested in
the rheology of foods bio-materials, colloids, emulsions, foams, polymer melts,
polymer solutions, elastomers, composites, waxes and metals.