* 9624815
* Reasoning About Program Interactions in the                 Presence of Mobility
* CSE,CCF
* 08/01/1996,07/31/1999
* Catalin Roman, Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Frank D. Anger
* 07/31/1999
* USD 132,270.00

Mobile computing is emerging as an important new paradigm which has the
potential to reshape thinking about distributed computing. Mobility has far-
reaching implications for what designers and users can assume about
communication patterns, resource availability, and application behaviors.
Components move from one location to another, joining or leaving groups of other
components in their vicinity. New distributed algorithms are expected to be
required as the nature of applications shifts with the emergence of this new
kind of computing environment. Formal methods have an important role to play in
the midst of these developments, both in terms of helping the research community
better understand fundamental issues germane to mobile computing and in
providing practical solutions to new design problems. Ad-hoc wireless networks
(AWNs) supporting context-aware applications are studied in this research. Such
networks have practical signifcance for crisis management, communication for
small enterprises, and organization of transient collaborations. The somewhat
extreme characteristics of AWNs provide a challenging testbed for studying
mobile computing. This research examines whether existing models of concurrency
can be extended to mobile computing and thus provide appropriate means for the
specification, design and verification of mobile systems. It also considers
related support system software, such as communication protocols. To accomplish
this, the notion of location must play a more central role in the treatment of
concurrency, even in cases where the ultimate goal is location-transparency. New
forms of modular interaction are investigated in this research. Of particular
interest are techniques to gain the advantages of formal methods without the
costs of developing formal proofs. Design schemas and patterns with desirable
properties are verified once and reused in many applications. ***