* 9624469
* CAREER: Comparing Alternative System Designs Using          Simulation
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/1996,08/31/2002
* Marvin Nakayama, New Jersey Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Ronald L. Rardin
* 08/31/2002
* USD 210,000.00

9624469 Nakayama This project involves the development of asymptotically valid
simulation procedures for comparing the steady-state behavior of a small number
(less than 20) of different systems. Most steady-state comparison results for
simulation assume that the underlying populations are normally distributed, and
that observations from each population are independent and identically
distributed. These assumptions are violated in many practical situations,
particularly in complex dynamic systems, where observations may be highly
correlated and not normally distributed. This research develops simultaneous
confidence intervals for steady-state parameters of stochastic processes under a
much weaker assumption, namely that the underlying stochastic process satisfies
a functional central limit theorem. The research focuses specifically on
developing simultaneous confidence intervals for pairwise comparisons of means,
contrasts, linear combinations of means, multiple comparisons with a control,
and multiple comparisons with the best. A software package will be developed
that incorporates the new techniques developed. The educational component
entails the development of two new courses and simulation and modeling
laboratory. The development of efficient techniques for comparing simulated
systems can have a great impact on a wide spectrum of industrial problems,
including many large-scale problems in manufacturing and telecommunications
where simulation may be the method of choice for analysis and decision-making.