* 9624636
* CAREER: Effects of Cochlear Implants on Auditory Cortex     Plasticity
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/1996,08/31/2001
* Daryl Kipke, Arizona State University
* Continuing Grant
* Kaiming Ye
* 08/31/2001
* USD 253,655.00

9624636 Kipke Cochlear implants are small wires inserted in the inner ear that
can restore limited hearing to some profoundly deaf people. However, our
understanding of the neurological mechanisms by which such implants work is far
from complete. While we know that auditory areas of the cerebral cortex in
adults continually change in response to the sounds that are listened to and to
the onset of partial deafness, comparatively little is known about how these
parts of the brain respond to long-term use of cochlear implants by hearing-
impaired persons. Yet, this adaptation (or plasticity) of the cerebral cortex
most likely plays a critical role in determining the ultimate effectiveness of
the implants, and could provide a key to unlocking the world of sound for more
hearing-disabled people. This project involves novel experiments and the
development of new computer models to investigate the dynamics (extent and rate)
of plasticity in auditory-related areas of the cerebral cortex in response to
long-term electrical stimulation using cochlear implants. Array of hair-sized
wire electrodes are implanted into the cerebral cortex of deafened animals that
have been fitted with a cochlear implant. These electrodes allow monitoring of
local neurological responses as the animals learn to "listen" via their cochlear
implant. These responses are correlated with behavioral performance to gain
insight into the brain's responses elicited by the implants and their functional
significance. Concurrently developed computer models of the relevant brain areas
and of the cochlear implant provide important analytical and visualization tools
for understanding the complex mechanisms involved in cerebral cortex plasticity
driven by the implants. This research is complemented by an education plan in
which a graduate-level student internship is developed with a leading cochlear
implant company. This internship extends beyond the conventional walls of
academia by providing an opport unity for bioengineering students to gain
substantive experience in a high- tech industrial setting. It is a mechanism for
training students in science and engineering to contribute to advances in the
U.S. medical device industry. This project provides critical new insight into
how the brain adapts to long-term use of cochlear implants. A better
understanding of cerebral cortex plasticity may lead to important new advances
in cochlear implant design and patient training procedures. The project also
provides important new opportunities for attracting talented bioengineering
students who are interested in neural prostheses. Together these activities will
ultimately, help increasingly larger numbers of hearing- impaired people regain
the ability to enjoy the sounds of the world. ***