* 9624743
* Antarctic Dry Valley Nematode Communities:  Establishment,  Function and Response to Disturbance
* GEO,OPP
* 01/01/1996,12/31/1998
* Diana Wall, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* Polly A. Penhale
* 12/31/1998
* USD 187,465.00

9624743 Freckman Nematodes, microscopic roundworms, are among the most complex
animals capable of survival in the soils of the Antarctic Dry Valleys. If
dispersal of nematodes to habitats is uniform and unlimited by geographical
constraints, communities of nematodes could potentially establish in all soils
of the Dry Valleys of Antarctica, as they do in other ecosystems studied.
Nematode distribution in the Dry Valleys is patchy. It follows that dispersal
rates are low, or the establishment of nematode communities is governed by the
suitability of potential habitats and the ability of nematodes to survive harsh
environmental conditions. Habitat suitability may be defined by such factors as
carbon availability or salinity. This research project is organized around
central hypotheses that move from individual to ecosystem scales in order to
understand how nematodes disperse, survive, and develop functional communities
in Antarctic Dry Valley soils. The hypotheses are: (1) nematode community
function is more influenced by desiccation than temperature, and (2) habitat
suitability, not dispersal, is the major factor determining establishment and
maintenance of nematode communities in the Dry Valleys. To test these
hypotheses, field work will be conducted to examine the characteristics of
habitats that appear suitable for nematode community growth and establishment by
sampling from a variety of sites, encompassing a wide range of salinities,
moistures, and carbon contents. Stable isotope studies (C and N) will provide
information on sources of C entering soil ecosystems and supporting nematodes.
Dispersal will be examined with traps in the field, and molecular techniques in
the laboratory to investigate the genetic variability that exists between widely
distributed nematodes with similar morphological characteristics. The survival
strategies of nematodes will be examined under field and laboratory conditions
to better understand how these animals are able to p ersist under harsh climatic
conditions. In addition, the soil food web serves as a sensitive indicator of
environmental change, particularly in this ecosystem, where biodiversity is low
and resource allocation is primarily invested in survival. Any knowledge about
the degree of influence of such change, as well as the influence of various
physical and chemical soil characteristics, can ultimately extrapolated to other
environments.