* 9624725
* CAREER:  Control of Nonlinear Constrained and Distributed   Parameter Processes
* ENG,CBET
* 06/15/1996,05/31/2001
* Prodromos Daoutidis, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Maria Burka
* 05/31/2001
* USD 309,500.00

Abstract - Daoutidis - 9624725 A research program is planned to develop new
analysis and controller design methods for nonlinear lumped parameter processes
with input constraints and nonlinear distributed parameter processes. The
motivation is provided by the inherent presence of nonlinearities and spatial
variations in chemical processes, the presence of manipulated input constraints
in all practical control systems, and the lack of rigorous and practical methods
that can deal effectively with these features. The research will provide
fundamental insight on the nature of the control problem for such systems and
will develop concrete control algorithms with well-characterized stability,
performance and robustness properties. It will also study practical
implementation issues and will apply the developed methods to representative
chemical processes. A series of educational activities is also planned,
including improvement and development of undergraduate and graduate chemical
engineering courses, the strengthening of the education and research
infrastructure in control science and engineering at the University of
Minnesota, the implementation of collaborative and cross-disciplinary
activities, the utilization of available resources for improving teaching
effectiveness, and the development of an education initiative for colleges in
the state of Minnesota.