* 9624700
* The Architect's Workload Suite Helping Architects           Understand Software Systems' Impact on Future Computer      Design
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/1996,08/31/2000
* David Nagle, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* None
* 08/31/2000
* USD 210,000.00

Effective computer architecture requires a carefully selected set of workloads
that are representative of the target design's software environment. However, it
is becoming increasingly difficult for computer architects to obtain workloads
that accurately characterize today's complex software systems. The Architect's
Workload Suite (AWS) project seeks to address this problem by developing a
collection of commercial, public domain, and next-generation software systems
that architects can use as a source of representative workloads. Using on-chip
performance counters and custom tools, each workload in the AWS will be
accompanied by Workload Characterization Worksheet that summarizes its
architectural requirements including memory-system, branch-prediction,
instruction-level parallelism, course-grained parallelism, and operating system
support. Workload summaries will allow researchers to carefully screen the AWS
workloads, selecting a set that is appropriate for their work. In addition to
the workload suite, this work is developing several hardware/software analysis
tools. The first, based on Trap-driven simulation, characterizes and evaluates
memory systems. The second, a modified version of DECs ATOm analysis tool,
generates accurate software traces of the entire system's activity, including OS
and application workloads. Together, the workloads, their characterization
worksheets and the tools will help architects determine how best to support
future software systems.