* 9624813
* Electroanalytical Applications of Organically Modified      Sol-Gel Materials
* MPS,CHE
* 04/01/1996,03/31/2001
* Maryanne Collinson, Kansas State University
* Continuing Grant
* Janice M. Hicks
* 03/31/2001
* USD 248,800.00

This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) project, supported in the
Analytical and Surface Chemistry Program, aims to explore and characterize the
formation, properties and applications of organically modified sol-gels. The
unique properties of these hybrid inorganic-organic materials remain to be
exploited fully. The mechanism by which solutes become entrapped in these
materials and the control of this process will be studied. Cyclic voltammetry
(CV) with ultramicroelectrodes will be used to follow local physical and
chemical changes that occur during hydrolysis and condensation of alkoxysilanes
on the surfaces of these materials. CV and electrogenerated chemiluminescence
will be used to characterize the mobility and accessibility of small charged
redox probes entrapped in the sol-gel matrix under processing conditions.
Practical results from this CAREER research project will focus on the
development of permselective coatings for electroanalytical investigations and
the fabrication of electrochemiluminscent sensors. Professor Collinson will
combine these research thrusts with an educational plan that includes the
development of a course in scientific ethics for both undergraduate and graduate
students. A major revision of the laboratory component of an undergraduate
course in chemical analysis is also planned. Student interest is to be
cultivated by also employing more creative and realistic samples for analysis in
this course with particular attention to forensic and environmental
applications. The development of a fundamental understanding of the
characteristics of the sol-gel matrix as an environment in which to do chemistry
is an important objective of this CAREER research proposal. In the long term
being able to tailor these matrices to a particular application using
organically modified silicates will have strategic impact. The xerogels that are
produced upon drying of sol-gels have interesting properties in their own right
which could lead to useful applications in electronic, magnetic, optical
materials and derived products. Professor Collinson's aim to introduce formally
contemporary issues in scientific ethics and scientific conduct is timely, and
this course will enable the students at Kansas State University to more clearly
understand this topic.