* 9624161
* New Techniques and Applications for Solid-State NMR Studies of Heterogenous Catalysis
* MPS,CHE
* 03/15/1996,02/28/2001
* Eric Munson, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Janice M. Hicks
* 02/28/2001
* USD 355,750.00

This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) project, supported in the
Analytical and Surface Chemistry Program, seeks to develop four new techniques
with which to study solid surfaces that serve to catalyze reactions. Professor
Munson will develop an in situ flow magic-angle spinning (MAS) solid state
nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) spectrometer probe. Two dimensional pulse
strategies will also be developed to follow chemical species during catalytic
reactions. Spin-polarized xenon will be used to study low to medium surface
areas catalysts where sensitivity is a problem and a large volume MAS probe will
be constructed to increase the allowed sample size by at least an order of
magnitude. During the tenure of this four-year continuing grant, Professor
Munson and his students at the University of Minnesota will apply these new
techniques to the study of partial oxidation catalysis reactions that
incorporate functional groups such as epoxides, aldehydes and carboxylic acids
into products. Olefin metathesis reactions that break carbon-carbon double bonds
with the formation of two new carbon-carbon double bonds will also be studied
during this CAREER research project. Professor Munson's educational plan
involves exciting students at the high school, undergraduate and graduate level
about topics in chemistry. An NMR spectrometer has already been built at the
University of Minnesota that will be available for loan to local undergraduate
institutions in order to help create excitement about the field of chemistry.
Incorporation of multimedia materials for use in the classroom at each of these
levels is also planned. The field of heterogeneous catalysis is extremely
important to the future vitality of the scientific enterprise as the need to do
chemistry under lower energy consuming conditions and to minimize the
environmental impact of chemical synthesis becomes more critical. Through the
planned work of Professor Munson's CAREER research project, a concerted effort
will be directed to problems of this type. This activity will be enriching for
the students involved in doing this science and it will provide exciting
examples to students elsewhere about the power of the chemical sciences.