* 9624724
* CAREER:  Adsorption, Transport and Catalysis of Organic     Compounds in Water-Saturated Microporous Materials
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/1996,06/30/2001
* James Farrell, University of Arizona
* Continuing Grant
* Thomas W. Chapman
* 06/30/2001
* USD 263,333.00

CTS - 9624724 James Farrell University of Arizona ABSTRACT The project deals
with adsorption and transport phenomena in water-saturated microporous
materials. The mechanisms controlling the release of hydrophobic contaminants
from aquifer sediments will be investigated using both model solids and acquifer
sediments. The research will focus on exploring the potential for capillary
phase separation (CPS) of a hydrophobic solute within previously water-filled
pores of molecular dimensions. The solute-filled micropores may contribute to
both adsorption/desorption hysteresis and the desorption resistant fraction.
Synthetic zeolites will be used as model sorbents to determine the effects of
surface type, pore size, solute hydrophobicity and solute concentration.
Temperature programmed desorption experiments and NMR measurements are planned.
The research may lead to improved techniques for catalytic destruction of
chemical pollutants from manufacturing processes and recovery of organic
compounds from aqueous and high humidity vapor streams. The educational plan
includes both chemical and environmental engineering students. It focuses on the
use of case studies, relevant software packages and research experience for
undergraduates.