* 9624172
* CAREER: Computer Graphics Techniques for Modeling and       Rendering Weathered Materials
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/1996,04/30/2001
* Julie Dorsey, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* William Randolph Franklin
* 04/30/2001
* USD 225,000.00

Research Component Photorealistic image synthesis is an important problem for
such diverse fields as architecture, lighting and industrial design, scientific
visualization, simulation systems, entertainment, and advertising. An important
component that has been missing from image synthesis is the effect of
weathering. Existing models of materials in computer graphics assume that the
materials are in pristine condition. This research program will focus on the
development of computer graphics techniques for modeling and rendering weathered
materials. The research will proceed along four lines. The first part of the
program involves the development of comprehensive material models; and emphasis
will be placed on models that can capture the changing appearance of a given
material over time. The second part of the program will entail the development
of new high-level representations for complex surfaces. The third aspect of the
program includes creation of techniques simulating the effects of the
environment in both batch and interactive modes. The final stage involves
developing techniques to render weathered materials. Educational Component The
pursuit of an integrated collection of educational initiatives is an important
goal. The education plan proposes the development of interactive pedagogical
aids to augment traditional classroom teaching, adaptive hypertext environments
for on-line student assistance, and interactive challenge- response tools for
student evaluation and certification. Advanced courses in computer graphics are
being developed using these tools. Mentoring and training of new researchers
will integrate the research and educational activities. The principal
investigator's track record of interdisciplinary work, combining expertise in
architecture and computer science, will facilitate the work. ***