* 9624279
* CAREER:  An Approach of Ordinal Comparison to the Design    and Optimization of Discrete Event Dynamic Systems
* ENG,ECCS
* 07/15/1996,06/30/2001
* Liyi Dai, Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 06/30/2001
* USD 247,500.00

9624279 Dai Research Plan Discrete event dynamic systems represent many
important engineering systems such as communications networks, computer
networks, manufacturing systems, and transportation systems. This project is
motivated by the need for effective performance analysis, optimization, and
design of such systems. There are two integrated major research thrust we
propose to pursue: (A) Characterization and investigation of mechanism of
ordinal comparison. Recent research as demonstrated that ordinal comparison, or
comparing relative orders of performances of different designs, converges very
fast despite possible presence of large estimation errors. The indicator process
turns out surprisingly to be a fundamental concept with several important
implications. Based on the notion of indicator processes, the ordinal comparison
converges exponentially fast in many important situations. The indicator process
also provides useful insight on the dynamical behavior of ordinal comparison. In
this project, we shall further investigate dynamic properties of the indicator
process and its impact on optimization, design, and simulation of discrete event
dynamic systems. (B) A new ordinal approach to optimization and design of
discrete event dynamic systems. Discrete event dynamic systems are complex,
stochastic, and nonlinear. System design has to cope with difficulties such as
complex structure, slow convergence of performance value estimates, and large
discrete search space. We shall (i) investigate simulation planning for
efficient comparison; (ii) establish new optimization and control algorithms
utilizing the fast convergence of ordinal comparison. These algorithms can
allocate quickly good designs with minimal budget. Education Plan: The PI has
(a) opened a new course in manufacturing systems which draws students from
business school and local industry; (b) introduced computer into classroom; (c)
mentored students. In this project, the PI will: (1) develop a software for his
manufacturing systems course; (2) further refine a computer program he has
written for a course on matrix algebra; (3) establish a partnership with local
industry in undergraduate and graduate education. ***