* 9625816
* CISE Postdoctoral Research Associate:  Approximation of     Complex Geometries and Data Reduction with NURBS;  ES       Postdoctoral Associate Anshuman Razdan
* CSE,EIA
* 06/15/1996,05/31/1998
* Gerald Farin, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Stephen Mahaney
* 05/31/1998
* USD 46,200.00

9625816 Farin, Gerald E Arizona State University CISE Postdoctoral Research
Associate: Approximation of Complex Geometries and Data Reduction with NURBS
This award supports associate Anshuman Razdan. At a high level, this research
aims to develop a methodology for the computer representation of complex objects
such as bone surfaces. Anthropologists and bio-medical engineers are restricted
for lack of mathematical structure of data that can be analyzed, an example
being the surfaces of bones. Computer Aided Geometric Design (CAGD) techniques
will be applied to convert this unstructured data into a structured form. Dense
point cloud data will be used to describe the discretized surfaces as a smooth
parametric NURB (Non Uniform Rational B Spline) surface(s). Data reduction
techniques will be developed to reduce the amount of data required to describe
the surface(s). 3D tools will be developed to facilitate interrogation and
analysis of these surfaces, to quantify measures such as curvature. The research
will collaborate with a physical anthropologist at the new inter-disciplinary
facility on campus, called PRISM. The surface models will also generate the STL
(stereolithography format) files for 3D hard copy outputs on rapid prototyping
machines. These can be used as tactile models for research into human morphology
and the teaching of comparative anatomy and bio-engineering courses.