* 9625756
* CISE Postdoctoral Program:  Robust Haptic Display of        Dynamical Virtual Environments
* CSE,EIA
* 03/15/1996,02/28/1998
* J. Edward Colgate, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Rita Rodriguez
* 02/28/1998
* USD 46,191.00

9625756 Colgate, James E. Northwestern University CISE Postdoctoral Program:
Robust Haptic Display of Dynamical Virtual Environments This award supports
associate Brent R. Gillespie. To provide for direct interaction and to more
effectively immerse their users, the designers of virtual environments now have
the option to render objects for the haptic (touch) senses, thanks to the new
and flourishing field of haptic interface technology. At present, however, the
fidelity of haptic display is limited. Restrictions must be placed on the
mechanical impedance of the virtual object or exceptional computational power
must be demanded of the interface controller lest sustained or even unstable
vibrations arise between user and virtual object. This postdoctoral research
aims to remove these obstacles by developing simulation and control methods
which guarantee the absence of unstable vibrations and other non-physical
interactive behaviors. The research begins by noting that the destabilizing
effects of sampled-data and computational delays can be fully compensated out if
the entire coupled dynamical system is modeled, including the human limb. On-
line system identification of the coupled human limb is integrated into the
controller design to allow for active behavior on the part of the human.
Concurrent theoretical treatments and hardware/software development efforts are
employed to extend the methods to dynamical objects and objects which are
subject to changes in kinematic constraint. ***