* 9625173
* Supervisory Control for Stabilization of a Class of         Nonlinear Systems
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/1996,08/31/2000
* Nathaniel McClamroch, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 08/31/2000
* USD 184,978.00

9625173 McClamroch This proposal describes a plan for research on stabilization
of an equilibrium solution of an important class of nonlinear control systems.
Although supervisory or logic-based switched feedback controllers have been
studied in a variety of contexts, our interest is to exploit them to achieve
closed loop stabilization when alternative smooth feedback stabilization
approaches are either not available or do not provide the required performance.
We plan to study stabilization of a special but important class of nonlinear
control systems, that include nonholonomic control systems and related nonlinear
control systems as a subclass, using supervisory control. Our motivation arises
from the fact that nonholonomic control systems are well known not to be
asymptotically stabilizable using smooth (time invariant) feedback. Fundamental
research questions are posed whose solution should provide important new
insights into nonlinear stabilization and control using supervisory control
feedback. The proposed theoretical research will be carried out in connection
with a parallel study of applications of supervisory feedback control, primarily
to classes of underactuated mechanical systems. The outcomes of the proposed
research should contribute to the synthesis of classical nonlinear control
methodology and intelligent control methodology. ***