* 9625064
* CAREER:  On Equipping Virtual Path-Based ATM Networks       with Fault-Tolerant and Real-Time QoS Capabilities
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/1996,08/31/2000
* Jennifer Hou, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Standard Grant
* Karen R. Sollins
* 08/31/2000
* USD 205,000.00

The primary objective of the research is to establish a unified framework for
addressing timeliness and dependability requirements for ATM networks. Central
to the proposed research is the virtual path/virtual circuit (VP/VC) concept in
ATM networks. Based on the VP/VC concept, this project considers how to 1) equip
ATM networks with fault tolerant capability by designing a fast restoration
mechanism; and 2) provide ATM network users with the real-time QoS guarantees by
devising a VC route selection scheme. In the context of designing a fast
restoration mechanism, work will focus on 1) selecting at system initialization,
for each primary VP, a backup VP (to which the traffic on the primary VP will be
switched upon node/link failure) and 2) dynamically relocating routes for
second-generation backup VPs or backup VPs that traverse the failed node/link
upon failure. In the context of establishing VCs with real-time QoS requirements
through a variable number of VPs, work will focus on 1) establishing a formal
basis for testing, for each selected VC route (i.e., a sequence of Vps) if there
is sufficient bandwidth on each VP on the route to meet the user-specified end-
to-end delay requirements; and 2) elaborating on possible approaches to
identifying a VC route which traverses a minimum number of VPs among all
possible routes with sufficient bandwidth. All the component schemes proposed
will be coherently incorporated into the VP layer of the ATM traffic control
architecture. In conjunction with the research, the PI will incorporate the
research and software implementation into teaching.