* 9625984
* Curve Estimation Models for High-dimensional, Multivariate, and Discontinuous Data
* NONE,NONE
* 07/01/1996,06/30/1999
* Hans-Georg Mueller, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Joseph M. Rosenblatt
* 06/30/1999
* USD 105,250.00

Mueller In this research, statistical models which contain parametric, smooth
and discontinuous components are developed and applied to problems which involve
high-dimensional regression, samples of curves as observations, or change-points
and jump discontinuities. These models are motivated by scientific problems
including the longitudinal analysis of samples of cohorts of subjects, the
analysis of spatial incidence data describing the spread of diseases, and the
growth of children, where discontinuities may occur. This also includes models
which incorporate the influence of covariates on a sample of response curves,
and the construction of models with discontinuous elements in the context of
segmentation of DNA sequences and of edge detection in image analysis. Methods
for fitting the models are devised, which typically involve complex iterative
algorithms using smoothing techniques, generalized linear models and estimating
equations as building blocks. The properties of these methods are analyzed and
they are applied to data pertaining to the scientific problems. This research
contributes to the solution of major scientific problems by providing innovative
statistical methods. One such problem is the mortality of the older segments of
a population and what one can say about the aging process based on animal
models, with potential impact on social security and health care in the 21st
century. Sophisticated methods are needed in order to extract and combine the
information on the observed survival of the individuals from many cohorts.
Another problem is to describe and analyze the spatial spread of AIDS and of
other epidemics as time passes. A third problem is the segmentation of DNA
sequences which then may allow for association of the segments with biological
functions. These and related problems can be put into the framework of the new
statistical models which are developed in this research. The application of
these models allows to gain important new insight s into fundamental scientific
aspects of these complex problems.