* 9625613
* Nonlinear Optimization
* CSE,CCF
* 08/01/1996,07/31/1998
* Jorge Nocedal, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* S. Kamal Abdali
* 07/31/1998
* USD 135,951.00

Three research projects in nonlinear optimization will be undertaken; they range
from theoretical studies of constrained optimization algorithms to the
development of a network-based optimization system capable of solving problems
automatically over the Internet. The first project is devoted to the design of
limited memory approaches for large-scale nonlinear programming. Limited memory
methods have proved to be quite useful for solving many classes of large
unconstrained problems, but their economy and simplicity have not been fully
exploited in the nonlinearly constrained case. The basic guiding principle in
this work is to employ only algorithms with modest computational requirements
and to represent limited memory matrices in compact form, so that the overall
cost of the iteration is only a fraction of that required by the standard
Sequential Quadratic Programming iteration. The new algorithms will allow the
user to choose between direct and iterative methods for solving the linear
subproblems arising in the iteration. The second project is devoted to the
design and analysis of interior-point methods for nonlinearly constrained (non-
convex) optimization problems. This is a long term research effort that first
aims at identifying the crucial ingredients of the algorithms, such as the
choice of model, the function, and the numerical techniques for solving the
(ill-conditioned) subproblems. The new methods will be formulated in a trust
region framework, which allows a uniform treatment of the convex and non-convex
cases. The research will be guided by a combination of numerical testing and
convergence analysis. An Internet-based optimization system called NEOS has
recently been developed by a group of investigators at Northwestern and Argonne.
One of the objectives of NEOS is to allow users to solve optimization problems
remotely and with minimal effort using modern web browsers. The third project in
this proposal considers extending the capabilities of NEOS so that it can
interact with modern modeling languages. A new constrained optimization server
will also be developed. ***