* 9625607
* GEM: Substorm Physics in the GEM Geospace General Circulation Model: Linking a Tail-Dynamics Module with the Rice Convection Model
* NONE,NONE
* 08/15/1996,07/31/1999
* Joachim Birn, Department of Energy Albuquerque Operations Office
* Interagency Agreement
* Kile B. Baker
* 07/31/1999
* USD 150,000.00

This is a three-year research program to investigate the nature of a newly
discovered ionospheric source for ion energization and transport. The topic of
ion energization is one of paramount importance in magnetospheric physics
because ions carry the bulk of the particle energy and thereby play a central
role in the molding of that environment. The proposed program directly addresses
one of the most puzzling problems of ion energization - that is, how are heavy
(O+) ions accelerated at low altitudes in the ionosphere and transported upward
in large numbers to the magnetosphere? This question is crucial because (1) the
abundance of O+ ions found throughout the magnetosphere requires some means by
which large fluxes of thermal ions are transported upward from the ionosphere,
and (2) thermal-ions upflows (TIU) and transversely accelerated ions (TAI) have
been observed at altitudes as low as 400 km in the ionosphere. Other
observations have demonstrated the existence of at least one class of TIU events
that is characterized by the absence of ion frictional heating and the presence
of elevated electron temperature, features that cannot be easily explained by
known mechansims. These findings indicate that the process responsible for the
transport of large fluxes of terrestrial ions to the magnetosphere has not yet
been identified. We have recently described a new, ion energization source
Tsunoda and Kagan, 1995 that appears to be the missing mechanism. The new source
consists of Lorentz-type forces that arise because of the presence of a
perturbation magnetic field, for example, that associated with a large-scale
field-aligned current system. This perturbation magnetic field acts together
with a latituinal pressure gradient or current (directed orthogonal to one
another and transverse to B ) to produce a Lorentz-type force in a direction
parallel or antiparallel to B . As described by Tsunoda and Kagan 1995 , and in
this proposal, this mechanism is capable o f accounting for the class of TIU
events that occur without ion heating. More exciting however, is the likelihood
that these field-aligned Lorentz forces can account for a number of related but
stil puzzling observations including (1) TIUs produced by ion heating, (2) the
transport of molecular ions into the magnetosphere, (3) the triggering of the
ion-cyclotron and ion- acoustic instabilities, (4) the transverse acceleration
of ions by electrostatic ion-cyclotron waves, (5) the development of ion-
acoustic turbulence and anomalous resistivity, and (6) elevated electron
temperatures in upward field-aligned current regions. Given the potential of
field-aligned Lorentz forces for explaining a variety of ion-acceleration-
related phenomena, an investigation of a larger database of incoherent scatter
radar data will be undertaken of determine if the observations support the
predictions of this novel theory.