* 9625307
* Career Program:  New Approaches of Holographic Particle     Velocimetry for Studying Turbulence
* ENG,CBET
* 06/15/1996,08/31/1999
* Hui Meng, Kansas State University
* Continuing Grant
* Mihail Roco
* 08/31/1999
* USD 333,100.00

ABSTRACT CTS-9625307 The research focuses on the development of Holographic
Particle Velocimetry (HPV). The understanding of turbulence phenomena is
currently hampered by the lack of capability to obtain time-resolved full-field
instantaneous three-dimensional (3-D) flow velocity and vortiaity field data.
Holographic Particle Velocimetry is highly promising to provide this capability.
Current approaches to HPV focus on the solution of one immediate problem (the
holographic images vs. speckle noise) and the system configuration are becoming
increasingly more complex and user-friendly. The major bottleneck in the HPV
technique, is the huge quantity of data processing, that has not been seriously
addressed. The proposed HPV approach uses two new ideas: (1) band-pass" In-line
Recording Off-axis Viewing" holography, which provides both excellent signal-to-
noise performance and geometric and operational simplicity, especially in the
pulsed-laser hologram recording process, and (2) hybrid optical-digital
processing system, characterized by image compression of the order of 1011
achieved by massively parallel optical correlation, offering a potential for
substantial reduction of data processing speed. Besides involving undergraduate
students in HPV research, it is planned to introduce optics to Mechanical
Engineering curriculum including an instructional optics laboratory and senior
design projects. New learning methodologies using interactive multimedia will be
developed for a Fluid Mechanics course.