* 9625358
* Implementation Techniques for Parallel Logic Programming:   Systematic Development of Parallel Prolog Engines
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/1996,08/31/1999
* Gopal Gupta, New Mexico State University
* Standard Grant
* Frank D. Anger
* 08/31/1999
* USD 99,992.00

An important property of logic programming languages, such as Prolog, is that
their declarative semantics is largely independent of the order of execution of
different operations in the program. The different operations can also be
performed in parallel. As a result, it is possible to exploit substantial
parallelism from Prolog programs, written for sequential machines, without
making any modifications to them. There are various forms of implicit
parallelism found in Prolog programs: or-parallelism, independent and-
parallelism, dependent and-parallelism, stream and-parallelism, data or-
parallelism, data and- parallelism. Research so far has only focused on
exploiting a single form of parallelism. This project's objective is to parallel
implementation techniques that will allow one to extend a high performance
sequential Prolog system to exploit the various forms of parallelism
simultaneously. The focus of this project is upon self-contained parallel
implementation techniques that are simple and that will allow addition of the
various forms of parallelism to an existing sequential Prolog system in a
systematic and incremental way. The techniques to be developed here will be
tested and demonstrated for efficacy by incorporating them in the SICStus
sequential Prolog engine. Relevant tools for compile-time analysis will also be
developed. General runtime optimization techniques for reducing the parallel
implementation overhead will also be researched. ***