* 9625301
* A Workshop to Enhance Minority Participation in Research    on Transgenic Plants, April 20 - 22, 1996, in Tuskegee,     Alabama
* BIO,IOS
* 02/15/1996,01/31/1997
* James Henderson, Tuskegee University
* Standard Grant
* Machi F. Dilworth
* 01/31/1997
* USD 30,000.00

9625301 Prakash New discoveries and developments in genetic engineering are
contributing radically to our knowledge of plants and providing us with powerful
tools to develop crops with high productivity. Biotechnology is expected to
contribute substantially to the U.S. economy. However, ethnic minorities are
highly underrepresented in this area of science. This award supports a workshop
at Tuskegee University (April 20-22, 1996) on transgenic plant research that
will provide a forum for students and faculty from minority institutions to
learn first-hand about the latest research findings from leading scientists in
plant molecular biology. The goal is to promote research activity in plant
molecular biology at minority institutions and provide an opportunity for
students and faculty to interact and network with established plant molecular
biologists. The speakers will talk on the application of transgenic plants to
study fundamental biology in such areas as plant disease and pest resistance,
stress tolerance, improvement of food quality and for the production of novel
compounds such as biodegradable plastics and vaccines. We will also have
speakers on ecological, regulatory, ethical, commercial and international
aspects of transgenic plants. Administrators from minority institutions and
federal funding agencies will be invited to participate in a panel discussion on
research funding opportunities for minority institutions and identify strategies
to promote minority participation in plant molecular biology research at both
majority and minority institutions.