* 9625124
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:  The Origins of Ethnic      Inequality among Jews in Israel
* SBE,SES
* 05/15/1996,11/30/1996
* Michael Hout, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Patricia White
* 11/30/1996
* USD 6,988.00

9625124 Hout This Dissertation Improvement research examines the emergence of
ethnic inequality among Jewish men who immigrated to Israel during the first ten
years of statehood (1948-1958). Israel is unique because it was formed through
massive, concentrated immigration form a variety of countries. Despite
significant heterogeneity in educational and occupational attainments among
these immigrants, a bifurcated social structure emerged, such that Middle
Eastern and North African Jews tended to be lower in both occupational status
and control of economic and political resources than European Jews. Using
Israel's 1961 census, this research will compare occupation prior to immigration
with occupation after immigration. Specifically, the research will investigate
the effects of ethnicity, class and a number of practical and cultural resources
that enables an individual to translate prior occupational attainment into
occupational attainment in Israel. Using secondary historical materials,
scholarly and media publications on Israel's ethnic gap, and Zionist writings,
the investigator will examine the group-level processes that account for the
role of ethnicity in Israel's occupational attainment system. This research will
increase our theoretical and practical knowledge of the importance of ethnicity
to individual opportunity, the utility of specific individual-level resources in
combating ethnic discrimination, the relative roles of class and ethnicity in
shaping macro-level ethnic inequality, and the level of conscious strategy
present in ethnic competition for socially valued objects. ****