* 9625755
* Postdoc: Planning and Scheduling as Constraint Satisfaction Investigating Fundamental Similarities and Differences
* CSE,EIA
* 03/15/1996,02/28/1998
* Matthew Ginsberg, University of Oregon Eugene
* Standard Grant
* John Cherniavsky
* 02/28/1998
* USD 46,200.00

9625755 Ginsberg, Matthew L. University of Oregon, Eugene Postdoc: Planning and
Scheduling as Constraint Satisfaction Investigating Fundamental Similarities and
Differences This award supports CES Associate David Joslin. Although planning
and scheduling are closely related fields, the latter has enjoyed far greater
success in recent years. Research in the field of scheduling has benefited
greatly from treating scheduling problems as constraint satisfaction problems
(CSPs); the application of CSP techniques to planning has been more limited, and
has tended to be ad hoc. The Descartes algorithm, introduced by Joslin in 1995,
has demonstrated that planning problems can be transformed into dynamic CSPs,
allowing CSP techniques to be applied uniformly to all decisions. The CSP
formulation also makes it possible to leverage successful scheduling algorithms
in the solution of planning problems. The focus of this research is on
understanding when and why CSP-based scheduling techniques are (or are not)
effective when applied to planning problems. In the first phase, an efficient
scheduling algorithm is integrated with the Descartes planning algorithm. The
resulting hybrid system is experimentally evaluated on both planning and
scheduling problems. In the second phase, differences between planning and
scheduling are characterized in terms of a common CSP representation, and these
differences are exploited to improve the performance of the planning system. ***