* 9625905
* Development of Eddy Current Spectroscopy:  A Contactless    Technique to Characterize Semiconductors
* MPS,DMR
* 09/15/1996,08/31/2000
* Winston Chan, University of Iowa
* Continuing Grant
* None
* 08/31/2000
* USD 242,335.00

9625905 Chan This award provides support for development of a novel method of
eddy cement spectroscopy. The sheet resistance of a film is the product of the
sheet carrier density and the carrier mobility , each of physical and
technological interest. The standard eddy current measurement can determine the
sheet resistance of a conducting film without contacting it, but this
measurement does not give information about the carrier density or carrier
mobility separately. Buy taking this technique to a regime of microscopic
sampling area, the sheet resistance will fluctuate because of carrier Brownian
motion in and out of the sampling area. The carrier density and the carrier
mobility can be separately determined by analyzing the amplitude and the time
dependence of these fluctuations. A magnetic field is not needed for the
measurement, so carriers confined to quantum wires can still be measured. The
eddy current spectroscopy (ECS) technique requires a microfabricated coil to be
placed near the sample. A method where the coil and sample together act as an
amplitude modulator that impresses the resistance fluctuations onto a radio
frequency carrier is described. The amplitude modulated radio frequency signal
can then be analyzed by a spectrum analyzer. %%% The ECS technique has many
features that can significantly advance electrical characterization of
electronic materials in either a research or a manufacturing environment. These
features include: It is a noncontact and a nondestructive technique, so sample
preparations is unnecessary; it only requires that a coil be near the sample,
leaving room for other probes, electrical properties then can be spatially
correlated with other properties of the sample; it intrinsically measures a
small area, so high resolution mobility and carrier density maps can be
obtained; it is sensitive to the microstructure of the sample, and can help
elucidate microstructures; and it does not require any bulky component, such as
a large magnet, and can potentially be desktop size. ***