* 9625664
* Solvent-Initiated Photochemistry of Transition              Metal Complexes
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/1996,07/31/2000
* Patrick Hoggard, Santa Clara University
* Standard Grant
* Katharine Covert
* 07/31/2000
* USD 150,000.00

Dr. Patrick Hoggard, Department of Chemistry, Santa Clara University, is
supported by the Inorganic, Bioinorganic, and Organometallic Program of the
Chemistry Division to perform studies of radical chain reactions in solution
which are initiated through the absorption of light by the solvent.
Specifically, he will determine whether the initial oxidizing agent in
chloroform solvent-initiated reactions is a peroxy radical or a hydroperoxide.
Reactions in which the metal-based quantum yield increases with decreasing
irradiation wavelength will be explored using osmium, molybdenum and palladium
di- and tri-nuclear species in chlorinated solvents. Ruthenium bipyridine
reactions will be probed under conditions where oxygen is not limiting in an
attempt to discover photoreversible, temperature-hypersensitive systems.
Examples of potential applications of these phenomena include systems that
periodically change composition under irradiation, `smart` glasses that darken
under irradiation above a given temperature, and photocatalytic systems for the
destruction of halogenated hydrocarbons in water. The absorption of light energy
is commonly used to initiate chemical reactions. When these reactions take place
in chlorinated solvents, there is some ambiguity as to whether the reactants
themselves absorb the energy, or whether the solvent molecules absorb the energy
first and then transfer it to the reactants. This is an important mechanistic
question because of the potential applications which can result from a clear
understanding of these processes and the corresponding ability to manipulate
them. Dr. Hoggard will examine a series of metal complex substrates with
differing reduction potentials and search for new solvent-initiated
photoreactions. He will also pursue photocatalysis studies of chlorohydrocarbon
degradation in aqueous media as well as reactions which are hypersensitive to
temperature. These types of photoreactions can have high quantum yields, and may
have implications for the degradation of environmentally recalcitrant
chlorinated hydrocarbons.