* 9625959
* A Software Support System for Parallel Processing in        Multiprocessor Clusters
* CSE,CCF
* 06/15/1996,07/31/1997
* Phyllis Crandall, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* None
* 07/31/1997
* USD 18,000.00

This effort is funded as a Research Planning Grant (RPG). The availability of
shared-memory, multiprocessor workstation clusters offers the opportunity for
the simultaneous application of shared memory and distributed memory parallel
processing techniques to a single problem. However, software systems that
facilitate this dual-level parallel processing paradigm and allow the
programmer, compiler, and run-time system to make the best use of the
computational power offered by this platform are not yet available. The long-
term goal of this research is threefold: (1) to provide a software system that
furnishes advice regarding the partitioning methods and cluster configuration
expected to yield the best performance, (2) to develop a communication library
that handles both shared and distributed memory communications with a single
syntax, and (3) to incorporate both the advisory system and the communication
library into a data-parallel compiler that transparently handles interprocessor
communication. During the research planning phase, which is being supported by
this grant award, four initial steps toward the long-term research goals will be
accomplished. (a) The computation and communication characteristics of the
multiprocessor cluster will be characterized. (b) Mathematical models of
performance of applications that exhibit stencil data dependencies will be
developed. (c) The advisory system will be designed and implemented with the
initial mathematical models. (d) The current body of research on shared memory
and distributed memory communication libraries and data-parallel compilers will
be surveyed to determine the best approach for developing the dual-level
communication library and incorporating the library into existing compilers. ***