* 9625977
* Development of Bragg-Fresnel Optics for Hard X-Ray          Microfocusing and Microscopy
* MPS,DMR
* 07/15/1996,06/30/2000
* Cyrus Safinya, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Continuing Grant
* None
* 06/30/2000
* USD 303,000.00

9625977 Safinya This award provides support for a comprehensive research program
to develop x-ray microbeam diffraction and direct imaging techniques based on
Bragg-Fresnel optics (BFO). The objectives of the development effort are: 1.) to
develop high quality Bragg-Fresnel optics by employing the state of the art
nanofabrication technologies, with an ultimate goal of producing Bragg-Fresnel
lenses (BFL) with 50 nm resolution and efficiencies 40%; 2.) to develop
experimental methods for effectively utilizing BFL's in a broad array of x-ray
characterization methods, including high resolution x- ray scattering and
diffraction, and nanostructure characterization of electronic materials; and 3.)
to develop nanometer resolution hard x-ray amplitude and phase contrast
microscopy methods in the energy range of 8 keV - 100 keV. The utilization of
BFO-based microfocusing diffractive optics with third generation synchrotron
sources (the Advanced Photon Source (APS) with high brilliance and coherence,
will significantly enhance our ability to probe the mesoscale structures of
complex materials and biological systems. %%% Research projects benefiting from
this new instrumentation covers broad areas in complex materials and biological
systems, including structural characterization and direct microscopic imaging
with hard x-rays of biomolecular materials, micron sized protein crystals,
complex fluids, and nanostructures. ***