* 9625735
* Modeling Catalysis and Transport in Nanoporous Catalysts
* MPS,CHE
* 02/01/1996,01/31/1998
* Scott Auerbach, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Francis J. Wodarczyk
* 01/31/1998
* USD 40,000.00

Amherst This starter grant award to the University of Massachusetts at Amherst
will support the research of Professor Scott M. Auerbach. The theme of the
research is catalysis and transport in molecular sieves. The present studies
focus on aluminosilicates that are microporous (zeolites), as well as those that
are mesoporous (for example, MCM-41). Study of the chemical dynamics of zeolite
acid proton transport and hydrocarbon reactivity is advanced by new methods in
classical and quantum reaction rate theory. Chemically selective catalysis and
transport is modelled by adjusting the electrostatic and steric properties of
the framework, compensating ions, and sorbates. Also examined is how
derivatizing MCM-41 can have different effects on polar and nonpolar diffusants.
The research models selectivity in trapping and storing fluorocarbons in
zeolites, addressing how halogen substituent effects control diffusion in
micropores. This research will advance understanding of the properties of
microporous and mesoporous materials useful for solving important technological
problems. Zeolites are used for separating chemical mixtures, as environmentally
safe detergents, and as catalysts in petroleum cracking. Mesoporous sieves show
promise for separating biomolecules and may be useful for making optical
electronic materials with substantial quantum confinement.