* 9625040
* Career: Stratified Volume Holographic Optical Elements for  Volume Holographic Data Storage
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/1996,07/31/2001
* Gregory Nordin, University of Alabama in Huntsville
* Continuing Grant
* Filbert J. Bartoli
* 07/31/2001
* USD 310,000.00

9625040 Nordin There is a growing need for high capacity, rapid access data
storage systems for applications such as video-on-demand, multimedia, large
scale databases, and storage of huge sensor-derived data sets. As has been
widely recognized, volume holographic storage concepts offer the potential of
achieving such large data storage capacities in an extremely dense format with
rapid data access times. However, holographic materials issues continue to pose
challenges for the practical realization volume holographic data storage
systems. A key aspect of this situation is the lack of suitable thick (-1 cm)
permanent holographic media for read only and write-once-read-many (WORM)
systems. Such media are a critical requirement for many potential applications
in which dynamic storage is not needed. The primary goal of the research plan in
this proposal is to solve this problem by developing a method whereby currently
available thin-film holographic media with otherwise attractive properties can
be used in applications such as volume holographic data storage that require
thick holographic media. Specifically, stratified volume holographic optical
elements (SVHOE's) composed of thin holographic layers interleaved with
optically homogeneous buffer layers to form thick (~1 cm) structures will be
developed to emulate the properties of conventional bulk holographic media.
Previous studies of SVHOE's indicate the presence of a periodic angular
sensitivity, which is unsuitable for volume holographic data storage in which
the Bragg effect is used to minimize crosstalk between superimposed pages of
recorded information. We will investigate removing this periodic angular
sensitivity by modifying the SVHOE structure in two ways; first, with random
buffer layer thicknesses and, second, with thicker holographic layers that
themselves operate in the Bragg diffraction regime. Critical issues to be
addressed include: (1) generalization of SVHOE diffraction models and analysis
to the case of highly multiplexed gratings, (2) development of models of SVHOE
diffraction behavior for random buffer thicknesses and thick holographic layers,
(3) experimental verification of the predictions of such models, (4)
determination of the fundamental and practical limits of SVHOE data storage
capacity, and (5) determination of optical crosstalk and bit error rate
performance both theoretically and experimentally. The outcome of the proposed
work will be a thorough exploration of SVHOE diffraction properties and how such
structures can be configured and used for holographic data storage systems. The
education plan proposed herein is composed of three elements. The first is a new
interdisciplinary graduate course for both computer engineering and optics
students on the use of optics and photonics in electronic digital parallel
computing. It will be taught by a computer engineer and an optical scientist,
and will include both optics and parallel computing topics. The intent is to
provide optics and computer engineering students with a broad enough background
that they can investigate in a highly practical manner the potential of
enhancing electronic digital computers through the employment of optical devices
and subsystems. The second element of the education plan is the development of a
one credit hour enrichment laboratory for undergraduate students on 3-D
displays. During a six-week summer term, students will be exposed to a wide
range of 3-D display topics, from basic concepts to state-of-the-art research
and development work. They will personally explore the effects of various 3-D
visual cues with special hardware available at UAH, and they will make their own
holograms. The third element is a K-12 outreach program targeted at high school
and elementary school students. High school students will be involved in a one
day hands-on holographic display seminar as part of UAH's Introduction of
Minorities to Engineering and Technology program. In addition, a series of
science and engineering topics will be developed for a half-day elementary
school presentation that will include many demonstrations and examples and one
or two short projects. The aim of the presentation will be to encourage
inquisitiveness and curiosity about physical phenomena, and to provide a sense
of the purpose of science and engineering activity. All of these educational
activities will involve the use of optics for practical applications, which is
also the basic thrust of the research project. ***