* 9625691
* Carbon Fiber Reinforced Concrete As An Intrinsically Smart  Concrete for Damage and Strain Sensing During Dynamic       Loading
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/15/1996,06/30/2001
* Deborah Chung, SUNY at Buffalo
* Continuing Grant
* Alison Flatau
* 06/30/2001
* USD 329,923.00

Smart concrete has a potential to provide non-destructive damage assessment
capability, which is important for the timely repair, safety and long-term
durability of critical civil infrastructure systems. Moreover, real-time strain
monitoring is needed for control of structures. In contrast to concrete rendered
smart extrinsically by the use of embedded or attached sensors, this project is
focused on concrete that is intrinsically smart. This intrinsically smart
concrete is concrete containing as little as 0.2 vol.% short carbon fibers. It
is much less expensive per unit sensing volume than concrete with embedded
sensors, and sensitive to permanent damage as well as reversible deformation. In
this research, technical issues will be addressed in order to characterize this
new smart structure material for applications in critical segments of
structures. These issues include (1) effect of the degree of damage (controlled
by the stress amplitude) on the electrical response, (2) effect of the strain
rate, (3) extension from compressive, tensile and flexural loading to torsional
loading, (4) dependence of the electrical response on the direction of
resistance measurement, (5) extensive testing for statistical analysis of the
electrical response, (6) effect of steel reinforcement on the electrical
response, (7) multiple electrical signal monitoring during steel reinforced
concrete beam and column testing, (8) extension from multiple signal monitoring
to two-dimensional mapping by reisistivity tomography, and (9) applications in
critical sections of infrastructural systems. In addition to providing the smart
behavior, the addition of carbon fibers to concrete also serves to increase the
flexural strength, toughness and freeze-thaw durability, and to decrease the
drying shrinkage and electrical contact resistivity (when in contact with
metals, as encountered in electrical probing). An interdisciplinary team of
researchers will participate in this program of study; including a materials
scientist (PI) and a structural engineer. This is a an award under the 5th year
initiative on structural control research.