* 9625787
* Mathematical Sciences:  Approximation in Stochastic         Programming and Other Variational Problems
* NONE,NONE
* 07/01/1996,12/31/1999
* Roger Wets, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Florian Potra
* 12/31/1999
* USD 86,500.00

9625787 Wets The unifying theme of this project is the convergence, in
particular the epi- convergence, of integral functions as they arise in
stochastic optimization, but also in other variational problems: optimal control
problems, the calculus of variations, mathematical statistics, etc.. The main
reason for concentrating on approximation questions is that although much is
known about the properties of integral functionals and much progress has been
made in the design of efficient and reliable optimization routines for finite
dimensional linear and nonlinear optimization problems, the use of these
routines to solve infinite dimensional problems has been hampered by serious
shortcomings in what we know about the approximation of infinite dimensional
optimization problems, in particular by finite optimization problems. Stochastic
optimization models provide tools that support decision making under
uncertainty. These are ``decision'' problems whose data is only known in a
statistical sense, i.e., there is uncertainty about the values to assign to some
of the parameters of the problem, and at best one might have some statistical
information about these parameters. Typical stochastic optimization problems
are: the choice of a flexible manufacturing plan when the demand is not known
with certainty, asset/liability management problems, policy setting for
pollution controls that are affected by atmospheric conditions, the design of
structures (such as bridges, skyscrapers) that are going to be subjected to
(randomly distributed) seismic shocks, etc.. Mathematically, stochastic
optimization problems are very difficult to solve because one must, in one way
or another, take into account all possible outcomes of these random parameters.
That is why the design of an approximation theory for such problems is
essential, and that is what is at the core of this project.