* 9625186
* Collaborative Research: Population Responses of             Neotropical-Nearctic Migrant Birds to Human-Impacted        Habitats in the Winter Grounds
* BIO,DEB
* 09/15/1996,08/31/2000
* Richard Holmes, Dartmouth College
* Standard Grant
* Mark Courtney
* 08/31/2000
* USD 97,378.00

The specific causes of population declines of migratory birds are poorly
understood. A major hypothesis to explain the declines is human-caused habitat
conversion and loss in the tropical wintering grounds of the migratory birds.
The objective of this research is to assess the ecological health of migrant
land birds in human-modified versus natural habitats in Jamaica, West Indies.
This island includes mangroves and Caribbean tropical dry forest, and human-
modified habitats of citrus and coffee orchards, grazed second-growth scrub, and
the ecologically complex rural residential areas. Within each habitat the
investigators will quantify (1) abundance of resident and migratory birds, (2)
overwinter survival of selected migratory species, (3) indicators of bird
condition for the selected species, and (4) seasonal patterns of food resource
availability capable of supporting the observed bird populations. These data
coupled with experimental manipulations of resource abundance will allow the
investigators to test alternative hypotheses explaining the ecological bases for
the individual and population responses to these different habitats. The results
of this research will be immediately applicable to conservation of animal
populations by indicating which human activities are most compatible with
maintenance of biotic resources in tropical Caribbean countries. The effects of
habitat-specific land-use on avian consumers and their food resources is
critically needed for the development of ecologically sound and effective
wildlife-conservation recommendations.