* 9625497
* Chiral Interferometry and Density Functional Theory of      Magnetic Responses
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/1996,06/30/2001
* Robert Harris, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing grant
* Celeste M. Rohlfing
* 06/30/2001
* USD 209,100.00

Professor Robert Harris of the University of California, Berkeley is being
supported by a grant from the Theoretical and Computational Chemistry Program to
continue his research in two distinct areas. The first deals with the existence
of superpositions of handed molecules, while the second deals with magnetic
responses in molecules. A basic consequence of quantum mechanics is the
existence of superpositions of handed molecules. Until recently there were no
suggestions as to how to prepare these fundamentally quantum objects. Harris has
very recently advanced an elementary theory of how the superpositions may be
prepared, and their coherence assessed. One purpose of the proposed research is
to generalize both the idea of these coherences and construct more realistic and
varied ways of preparing and measuring them. Given their production in a variety
of conditions, it is proposed to investigate the behavior of these
superpositions. In particular, the PI will examine how they collide with other
systems, as well as how their coherence degrades in condensed matter. Finally,
rotational coherences which are chiral will also be investigated. The second
area involves magnetic responses in molecular systems which historically
involves calculating diamagnetic and paramagnetic contributions separately. A
recently proposed magnetic field density functional theory emphasizes that
density functional theory allows, in principle, a gauge invariant theory to be
automatically constructed. In addition, all responses are universal functionals
of the electron density in the absence of magnetic fields. Calculations of
magnetic responses will be carried out. In addition, a theory of changes in
electron density due to distant groups and their relation to magnetic responses,
will be constructed. The first aspect of this work deals with the existence of
superpositions of handed molecules, which arrises as a basic consequence of
quantum mechanics. Until recently there were no suggestions as to how to prepare
these fundamentally quantum objects. The PI and his colleague J.Cina, have very
recently advanced an elementary theory of how the superpositions may be
prepared, and their coherence assessed. In work to be carried out, a detailed
theory will be constructed for real molecules so that experiments may be carried
out. A second purpose is to see how the excited state photochemistry, which is a
consequence of the superpositions, differs from that of ordinary handed
molecules and mixtures of those molecules. The second aspect of this work deals
with Nuclear Magnetic Resonance. (NMR) is used to determine the structure of a
variety of molecules and more complex systems such as proteins and RNA. The
assessment of these structures is based on the variation of the NMR parameters
of the system with changes in geometry and environment. The research proposed is
based on a new method by the PI for calculating in a systematic way the NMR
parameters. The method is based on the electron density of the system, and how
it changes with geometry and environs. This way of looking at NMR parameters has
no precedent and should be useful in the construction of the electron density
itself.