* 9625782
* Mathematical Sciences:  Diffusion Processes and Related     Topics
* NONE,NONE
* 07/01/1996,06/30/2001
* Daniel Stroock, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing grant
* K Crank
* 06/30/2001
* USD 135,000.00

9625782 Stroock ABSTRACT The principal investigator intends to continue his
research into the applications of integration on path spaces to various
problems. In the past, he helped develop techniques which lead to the derivation
of formulae for solutions to certain partial differential equations in terms of
integrals over an appropriate path space. He then used these formulae to obtain
quite refined estimates on the solutions represented. More recently, he has been
trying to use related methods to gain insight into differential geometric
problems suggested by recent physical considerations. In particular, he hopes to
learn how to construct and analyze diffusions on spaces of loops in a Riemannian
manifold. In the Newtonian picture of the world, physical objects were thought
to follow definite paths, and the goal of physics was to predict the path that a
particular object would follow. In the quantum mechanical picture, physical
objects are no longer thought to be so constrained. Instead, they are thought to
governed by physical laws which can, at best, predict the probability of their
following a particular path. The Newtonian and quantum picture are reconciled by
the fact that, with overwhelming probability, a massive object will follow a
path which is close to the one predicted by Newtonian physics. On the other
hand, when dealing with very small objects, the Newtonian prediction can be
quite far off, and one can only make predictions by averaging over spaces of
paths. For this reason, it becomes important to understand how to average over
paths. The mathematical theory of averaging over various path spaces has been
one of the central themes of mathematics in this century. Its applications are
numerous and are not restricted to physics. Indeed, over the past two decades,
very sophisticated path-space models are the basis on which commodities and
financial instruments of all sorts have been priced. Averaging over path spaces
is the central theme of the research proposed in this project.