* 9625965
* Acquisition and Development of X-Ray Instrumentation for the Study of Nanostructured Materials and Thin Films
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/1996,02/28/1999
* Luz Martinez-Miranda, University of Maryland, College Park
* Continuing Grant
* None
* 02/28/1999
* USD 112,550.00

9625965 Martinez-Miranda The properties of very thin films often deviate from
the bulk due to confinement and surface energy effects. The deviation from bulk
properties depends on parameters such as film thickness, strain and processing
conditions and these variations can depend on the depth within the film. Many
advances in thin film processes are the result of advances in the techniques
used to characterize these materials. The development of high intensity x-ray
sources has made possible in-house studies of aggregate samples, quasi- ordered
materials, very small samples and thin films. Currently in the Materials and
Nuclear Engineering Department at the University of Maryland there are a range
of problems being studied which depend on the characterization of structure in
the nanometer size scale. This award provides support for the purchase of an 18
kW rotating anode x-ray source and the construction of a small angle x-ray
scattering (SAXS) diffractometer. The two ports on the rotating anode source
would be used for the small angle diffractometer and for a thin film four circle
diffractometer already available in the Department. This equipment will allow us
to perform small angle analysis of thin film and bulk morphology in the size
range of 1-100 nm and in-plane and depth profile analysis of thin films. %%% The
on-going research problems which can be addressed immediately by the use of the
four circle diffractometer would include: thin films of liquid crystals,
semiconducting multilayers, films of metal aggregates and disordered clusters,
polymer nanofoam dielectric films, and reactive polymer blend interfaces. In
addition to many of the systems listed above, the SAXS system could be used
immediately to solve current research problems in area of: structure of metal
aggregates and clusters, structure of highly branched dendrimer molecules and
characterization of reactive polymer blends. All of these research areas are
current projects in the Dep artment where the application of x-ray scattering
techniques would have a dramatic and substantial impact on solving outstanding
structural characterization and application problems in the fields of electronic
devices, optical display devices and polymer blends. ***