* 9625653
* Doctoral Dissertation:  Fitness Consequences and Individual Strategies of Natal Dispersal
* NONE,NONE
* 05/01/1996,10/31/1998
* Hugh Dingle, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* None
* 10/31/1998
* USD 10,000.00

ABSTRACT Dingle & Baker IBN 96-25653 Fitness Consequences and Individual
Strategies of Natal Dispersion Although movement behavior profoundly influences
the persistence and genetic structure of populations, and the spread of
favorable mutations, invading species, and parasites, it has been studied less
than other behaviors and life history traits. Animals must balance costs of
movement with potential benefits, and their strategies may be affected both by
genetic and ecological factors, and the algorithms used to evaluate habitat.
Dispersal in the desert isopod, Hemilepistus reaumuri will be studied. The
simplicity and manipulability of this semelparous isopod s life cycle make it
uniquely suited for study of movement. The costs of dispersal in the field, as
well as habitat selection and learning will be measured. These measurements will
be integrated in a dynamic model of natal dispersal to understand how dispersal
costs and habitat quality affect dispersal strategies and decisions, and how
decisions can change with time and individual condition. Dispersal costs will be
measured in terms of a) survival as a function of distance or time dispersed, b)
time lost to growth or mate attraction, and c) condition in terms of lost energy
or water and its effect on survival and lifetime reproductive success.
Comparisons of the success of naturally chosen breeding burrow sites and
experimentally imposed random sites will be made; the effects of past
experiences of habitat quality and its variability on selectivity and dispersal
distance will also be examined.