* 9625200
* CAREER:  An Unified Approach to Planning and Control of     Sheet Metal Assembly and Joining Processes
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/15/1996,07/31/2002
* S. Jack Hu, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Jian Cao
* 07/31/2002
* USD 310,000.00

9625200 Hu This CAREER award is to develop methods that reduce variation in
sheet metal assembly and joining, and an educational plan of curriculum and
laboratory development. The technical approach to minimize variations in sheet
metal assembly will: (1) develop a generic simulation model of the sheet metal
assembly process that takes into account compliance of the sheet, (2) model the
resistance welding process so its effects can be included, and (3) develop a
robust design criterion that can assess the quality of sheet metal assembly
processes. The educational plan will team the investigator and his colleagues as
they develop a unique curriculum for both traditional and non-traditional
students on automotive assembly engineering. Mentoring and outreach to
underrepresented minorities, both through industrial projects and in
collaboration with Focus: Hope in Detroit, will be complemented by the
development of a laboratory for assembly and joining that will be used for
teaching and research. The success of this project will generate new knowledge
and methodologies that produce higher quality sheet metal assemblies. This will
impact industries such as automotive, aerospace, furniture and appliances,
making their products more competitive because of improved quality and lower
cost.