* 9625437
* The Kinetics and Photochemistry of Tropospheric HOx Cycling
* GEO,AGS
* 08/15/1996,07/31/2000
* Anthony Hynes, University of Miami
* Continuing Grant
* Anne-Marie Schmoltner
* 07/31/2000
* USD 352,695.00

9625437 Hynes This project has three components that relate to the tropospheric
cycling of the hydroxyl radical, the most important oxidant in the troposphere.
The first project involves laboratory measurements of the quantum yield for
production of singlet oxygen atoms in ozone photolysis at long wavelengths
(295-350 nm). In the atmosphere, these singlet oxygen atoms react with water
vapor to form hydroxyl. In the laboratory, the singlet oxygen atoms will be
monitored directly via Resonance Enhanced Multiphoton Ionization (REMPI) or
indirectly through Laser-Induced Fluorescence (LIF) of hydroxyl radicals and by
monitoring the appearance of triplet (ground state) oxygen atoms via 2-photon
LIF. These types of measurements are needed in order to accurately model
hydroxyl radical production in the atmosphere under all conditions. The second
component addresses the kinetics and photochemistry of the hydroperoxyl radical.
Many of its reactions appear to proceed via complex mechanisms and several
display complex pressure and water vapor dependencies. Because of the
difficulties involved with high pressure kinetic studies of this radical, its
kinetic database is limited. The photofragment-LIF technique will be used for
kinetic studies of the reactions of hydroperoxyl with nitric oxide, nitrogen
dioxide, and carbonyl compounds. Temperature and pressure dependencies will be
determined under realistic atmospheric conditions. The extension of this
technique to the study of radical-radical reactions, in particular the reactions
of hydroperoxyl with peroxy species, will be investigated. The third component
addresses the kinetics and mechanism of the reaction of hydroxyl radical with
isoprene. Isoprene is a significant sink for hydroxyl in clean and moderately
polluted environments and the oxidation appears to proceed via the formation of
an addition complex. These complexes can further react with molecular oxygen,
ozone, nitrogen dioxide, or nitric oxide, and the effective rates and
temperature depen dencies of the reactions can be a complex function of gas
composition and pressure. The pulsed laser photolysis-pulsed laser induced
fluorescence technique will be used to perform direct kinetic and mechanistic
studies of this reaction under realistic conditions of atmospheric composition
and temperature. ***