* 9625852
* Acquisition of a MicroIndentation Machine for an SEM        (Scanning Electron Microscope)
* MPS,DMR
* 07/15/1996,06/30/1999
* Steven Nutt, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Guebre Tessema
* 06/30/1999
* USD 75,234.00

9625852 Nutt This micro-indentation machine will be used for measurements of
interface properties in composite materials, as well as a broad range of
applications in materials research requiring measurements of mechanical
properties with high spatial resolution. The newly developed instrument mounts
to an existing scanning electron microscope (SEM) and capitalizes on the
inherent capabilities of the SEM without compromising conventional functions. A
unique feature of the instrument is the capability to perform measurements at
high temperatures (1000oC) with high spatial resolution and load sensitivity,
while directly observing the indentation and failure. %%% The equipment will be
used in studies of interfacial phenomena occurring in composite materials,
including measurements of interface properties and the effects of fiber
coatings, mechanical and thermal history, residual stress state, and test
temperature. A broad range of applications are planned that include studies of
hardness in ultra-fine-grained (UFG) metals, interlayer adhesion in components
produced by layered object manufacturing (LOM), and the behavior of
nanostructured materials and membranes. The capability of performing mechanical
tests with high spatial resolution and load sensitivity at temperatures up to
(1000oC) is unprecedented and will lead to increased understanding of the
behavior of interfaces and fine-grained structures, as well as localized
phenomena occurring at high- temperature. ***