* 9625604
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:  A Culture Clash of Gender  Relations in the Global Economy:  Women, Men and Work in a  U.S. High-Tech Corporation in India
* SBE,SES
* 06/01/1996,05/31/1997
* Szonja Szelenyi, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Patricia White
* 05/31/1997
* USD 7,500.00

9625604 Szelenyi This doctoral dissertation improvement project investigates
gender relations in a high-tech U.S. multinational corporation in New Delhi,
India. Some researchers argue that through the process of transferring
operations overseas there is a convergence of work structures (i.e.,
corporations exports their labor policies along with their capital and
techncology) while others argue that there is a divergence process (i.e.,
organizations are embedded in the social environments in which they are
situated). Multinational corporations hire millions of female workers throughout
the world and these workers have become an integral issue in the construction of
work relations in the global economy. This research will examine the issue of
gender relations in the global workplace by first outlining the patterns of
gender division of labor that exist in the cultural ideologies of the U.S. and
India. Second, it examines the following specific questions: What happens during
the confrontation of gender regimes when an American corporation sets up
operations in India?, Which country's gender regime prevails and how is it
formalized in the workplace? and What processes contribute to its formalization?
In-depth interviews, observation and document analysis will be conducted to
assess the cultural character of the gender division of labor in this
multinational corporation as evidenced by gender segregation of jobs, social
interaction, physical and temporal mobility and ideologies governing cross-
gender interaction of male and female workers. ***