* 9625789
* Acquisition of a Dilution Refrigerator System for Materials Research at the "KGB" Group at Stanford University
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/1996,07/31/1997
* Malcolm Beasley, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* None
* 07/31/1997
* USD 163,700.00

9625789 Kapitulnik This award provides support for a dilution refrigerator
system to be used in a series of experiments involving new materials and model
systems where low temperatures and moderate to high magnetic field are
essential. %%% Research Examples include (A) Works in the general field of low-
temperature condensed matter physics with an emphasis on applied
superconductivity, advanced superconducting materials, devices and structures,
the application of tunneling phenomena, and the use of vapor-deposited
artificial structures as model systems for fundamental studies such as the
physics of reduced dimensional systems. The facility will be used to study
tunneling through correlated electron systems and the vortex state in layered
superconductors. (B) Works in the fields of superconductivity, oxide materials,
layered materials, magnetism, disordered systems and other condensed matter
problems. The new facility, and in particular the combination of high field and
low temperatures, will open new possibilities in pursuing the following
projects: (i) Magnetic phase diagram of high-Tc superconductors; (ii) Magnetic
phase diagram of quasi 2-D layered superconductors made of low-Tc materials;
(iii) Specific heat of the vortex lattice in artificially fabricated layered
superconductors; (iv) Magnetic field anisotropy of the specific heat of cuprate
and other oxide superconductors; (v) The superconductor-insulator transition in
two-dimensions and layered superconductors. ***