* 9626197
* Chaotic Systems:  Reliability of Simulations and            Interpretation of Data
* MPS,DMS
* 07/15/1996,06/30/1999
* Timothy Sauer, George Mason University
* Standard Grant
* Michael Steuerwalt
* 06/30/1999
* USD 55,955.00

9626197 Sauer This research focuses on computational aspects of chaotic
dynamics, with emphasis on questions that have implications across the sciences
and engineering. The first main area involves the question of whether it is
possible, even in principle, for long-term computer simulations of typical
nonhyperbolic chaotic systems to approximately match true system behavior. Part
of this research involves developing quantitative laws of the expected waiting
time between breakdowns, or mismatches, between computer simulation trajectories
and the trajectories of computer models. The second major area is ongoing work
by the investigator on the interpretation of physical and biological experiments
that generate aperiodic time series. Using univariate or multivariate time
series or inter-event time intervals produced by a deterministic physical
process, the phase space of the process can be faithfully reconstructed as the
basis for applications such as system identification, filtering, prediction and
control. Topological and diffeomorphic embedding theorems guaranteeing this in
various physically verifiable contexts have been the results of previous and
ongoing research by the investigator and coworkers. Computer simulations are a
staple of modern science. National policy decisions are being made which rely
partially on the interpretation of long-term computer simulations of nonlinear
models. The questions explored in the proposal are critical to the analysis of
simulations of nonlinear processes. One goal of this proposal is to explore
these questions in physically relevant models, and in particular to isolate and
quantify the limitations of these representations, especially for the purpose of
long-term modeling. The second focus of this research is the interpretation of
data collected from chaotic systems in experiments and nature. Complex
deterministic time series are being identified in physical, chemical,
engineering and biological/medical setti ngs. As an example, hippocampal slices
from mammals and other small neural systems are studied by the investigator, in
conjunction with a group of medical researchers headed by a neurosurgeon
specializing in epilepsy, with the purpose of detecting deterministic
information processing in the brain. The investigator has done previous work on
expanding these conceptual foundations and developing related computational
implementations, and works to widen their areas of validity and increase their
power for the study of complex systems in natural, experimental, and
engineering-related contexts. New techniques for these applications are
developed in this project, involving methods from numerical analysis used in
conjunction with existing signal processing methods.