* 9626221
* Mathematical Sciences:  RUI:  Topological Embeddings in     Piecewise Linear Manifolds
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/1996,07/31/1999
* John Ferdinands, Calvin University
* Standard Grant
* Gerard A. Venema
* 07/31/1999
* USD 9,750.00

9626221 Venema This is a project in geometric topology. Venema is currently
investigating problems involving existence of topological embeddings in
codimension two. For example, he is working on the problem of determining which
elements of the second homology group of a simply-connected 4-dimensional
manifold can be represented by topologically embedded (possibly wild) 2-spheres.
This is a special case of the following, more general, problem: If a compact
n-dimensional manifold-with-boundary has the homotopy type of some closed
(n-2)-manifold, then is there a (wild) topological embedding of the second
manifold into the first which is a homotopy equivalence? What if the manifolds
are highly connected? This project concerns Venema's efforts to understand
knotted spheres in 4-dimensional space. Specifically, he is investigating the
question of what sorts of knots can be formed from different kinds of spheres.
In the study of spheres in 4-dimensional spaces, three different kinds of
spheres have proved to be useful: those that are smooth (possess continuously
varying tangent vectors), those that are piecewise linear (made up of a finite
number of triangles), and those that are topological (formed by continuous
deformation). Spheres of the first two types are fairly well understood, and
there is a reasonably well developed theory which predicts when a continuous
function from a sphere into a space can be deformed to a one-to-one function
whose image is a smooth or piecewise linear sphere. This research project aims
to understand the mysteries of topological spheres. ***