* 9626108
* Non-parametric Inferences and Related Topics
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/1996,10/31/1999
* Jiayang Sun, Case Western Reserve University
* Standard Grant
* Joseph M. Rosenblatt
* 10/31/1999
* USD 60,000.00

DMS 9626108 Sun This research involves the following non-parametric problems:
BUMP HUNTING PROBLEMS, where tests of unimodality against multi-modality and
related estimators are studied; CONFIDENCE BANDS for the mean response function
in generalized linear models; inferences in PROJECTION PURSUIT; and RANDOM
FIELDS, where the maxima of Gaussian random fields are studied using large
deviations and techniques from differential geometry. All of these problems
involve some nontrivial computations besides methodology development and
theoretical analysis. The investigator also studies efficient algorithms and
applies the techniques to air pollution data and other high dimensional and
categorical data. Modes or bumps in a density estimate of a data set may reveal
interesting structures of the data. For example, in evolutionary biology they
may indicate that a certain kind of species will be a dominating factor in
stabilizing "natural selection", and in high-energy physics they may show the
evidence of "partial-wave scattering amplitudes" or even a new particle. BUMP
HUNTING techniques studied in this research help decide whether the modes or
bumps are real features of the underline distribution of the data or simply a
result of sampling fluctuation. RANDOM FIELDS and GENERALIZED LINEAR MODELS can
be used to model air pollution data and many other data. PROJECTION PURSUIT is a
powerful technique that searches for interesting structures of a high
dimensional data via lower dimensional projections. Another objective of the
research is to determine the amount of confidence that may be attached to an
estimate based on such techniques.