* 9626592
* Mathematical Sciences: Infinite Simple C*-Algebras and TheirInvariants
* NONE,NONE
* 07/01/1996,06/30/1999
* Shuang Zhang, University of Cincinnati Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 06/30/1999
* USD 67,000.00

DMS-9626592 PI: Shuang Zhang Univ of Cincinnati During the next three years the
Principal Investigator, Shuang Zhang, proposes to continue his research on the
following three problems. (1) Is there a simple C*-algebra that contains both
finite and infinite nonzero projections? (2) Determine the K-theory of the
simple C*-algebras generated by the reduced group C*-algebras associated with
free products of cyclic groups and certain projections, and simple C*-algebras
generated by a weighted bilateral shift and an isometry. (3) Classifying these
non-nuclear, purely infinite, simple C*-algebras up to isomorphism. The problem
(1) is an outstanding problem in the theory of simple C*-algebras and the
program of classifying separable simple C*-algebras. The proposer intends to
attack this problem by some techniques in the associated multiplier algebras.
The C*-algebras in (2) and (3) include non-nuclear, purely infinite, simple
C*-algebras which might serve as standard models in certain classes of non-
nuclear simple C*-algebras. Investigation on the structure of these C*-algebras
will supplement the expansion of classification program to the category of non-
nuclear simple C*-algebras. Encouraged by the interests of several leading
researchers on the projects above, the proposer expects that this investigation
will stimulate fruitful research activities on the subjects. The collection of
all linear transformations in the three dimensional space, and in any finite
dimensional space, is generated by translations and certain rotations (via
addition, scalar multiplication, and composition). This collection is the basic
example of simple C*-algebras and can be identified with the algebra of all
square matrices. These elementary simple C*-algebras are fully classified by the
dimension of the space. Many problems in the quantum physics and in modern
technologies (for example, computer programming) are reduced to the
investigation of simple C*-algebras of this sort, and more generally, a variety
of simple C*-algebras generated by certain linear transformations in the
infinite dimensional space. The proposed project is concerned with the structure
of simple C*-algebras generated by some square matrices of infinite size. In the
process of increasing knowledge about these simple C*-algebras, one important
step is to understand their structure and then to classify them. The proposed
project is especially concerned with studying invariants that distinguish these
algebras. The classical dimension is no longer the distinguishing invariant, and
thus, finding and studying new distinguishing invariants become two key
problems. The proposed project aims at attacking these outstanding problems in
this area.