* 9626691
* Multiple Imputation Inferences with Public-Use Data Files   and Frequentist Properties of Bayesian Procedures
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/1996,07/31/2000
* Xiao-Li Meng, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Joseph M. Rosenblatt
* 07/31/2000
* USD 167,000.00

DMS 9626691 Meng This is a comprehensive research program on multiple imputation
methodology. Multiple imputation methodology is the most effective inferential
method available for handling the common and complex problem of nonresponse in
sample surveys, especially those that produce public-use data files shared by
many users. The multiple imputation framework was established under the Bayesian
perspective, mainly because the Bayesian approach provides a coherent and
flexible general framework for constructing sophisticated imputation models that
incorporate all available information. However, the fact that the public-use
data files are designed to be shared by many users requires that the procedures
used for creating multiple imputations, and for analyzing the multiply-imputed
data sets, must have good frequentist properties. Thus, the study and use of
multiple imputation highlights and requires the melding of the Bayesian and
frequentist perspectives, thus posing many challenging and intriguing research
problems at the intersection of these two perspectives. To effectively tackle
these problems, this research is conducted simultaneously at two levels. At the
general level, the research examines new robust frequentist properties of
Bayesian procedures. At the specific level, the research studies the use of
these properties in multiple imputation, with a focus on constructing new
procedures as well as justifying existing ones under more general conditions.
Specific topics include confidence validity under uncongenial multiple
imputation inferences, frequentist properties of posterior predictive p-values,
and unbiased imputations with single observation unbiased priors. This research
studies the important and complicated problem of nonresponse, a problem inherent
to all sample surveys. The most serious problem caused by nonresponse is
nonresponse bias, that is, those people who do not respond are systematically
different from those who do respond. Su ch systematic differences have been
repeatedly documented in the social, economic, and statistical literature, for
example, on self-reporting of income. If the bias is not corrected and only the
answers from respondents are used, a very distorted picture of the
characteristics (e.g., average annual income of households) of the underlying
population is likely to be obtained. Correcting for such systematic distortion,
especially for large public-data files, is a very complex and demanding task.
The basic task is to reduce the nonresponse bias by using available information
(e.g., demographic information) on the nonrespondents to predict their missing
values. Since we have uncertainty in our prediction, we need more than one
prediction, i.e. imputation, to honestly display the uncertainty. With more than
one imputation, it becomes straightforward for an individual user to estimate
the loss of information due to nonresponse and thus obtain valid statistical
inference using only standard complete-data analysis procedures. It is obvious
that the quality of the imputation model has direct impact on the quality of the
subsequent statistical analyses. A main aim of this research is to provide
better and more flexible methodologies for constructing imputation models; the
significance of such a research is highlighted by the fact that the analyses of
public-use data files typically have a profound impact on our society because
the conclusions from these analyses are typically used to answer questions in
economics, education, demographic studies, public health and policy, sociology,
political science, among others. Another aim of this research is to explore the
possible use of the methodologies developed for multiple imputation to missing-
data problems in other content areas, such as the problem of handling the
missing observations in ultraviolet radiation measurements, which are crucial
for accessing global atmospheric changes due to ozone depletion.