* 9626876
* Flora Novo-Galiciana
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/1996,07/31/1999
* Rogers McVaugh, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Douglas Siegel-Causey
* 07/31/1999
* USD 129,537.00

Work was begun in 1950 on a descriptive illustrated flora to include the
estimated 6000 species of vascular plants native in the Mexican states of
Jalisco, Colima, and Aguascalientes, and parts of adjoining states. The first 25
years included both extensive collecting in western Mexico and intensive study
to produce treatments of the larger families. Publication of the Flora Novo-
Galiciana began in 1983, and to date seven of the projected seventeen volumes
have been published, treating almost half of all the species and genera, and a
revised edition of the first volume, prepared by the Mexican botanist Patricia
Davila, will appear late in 1996. The published parts deal with the conifers,
the ferns and their allies, and the monocots, as well as the two largest
families of dicots. No other area of Mexico of comparable size and floristic
richness has a Flora that approaches such a degree of completion. One goal for
the next three years will be for the project's half-time artist, Karin Douthit,
to finish illustrating one species in each genus for the remaining volumes,
after which she will retire. Work already begun at the Universidad Nacional
Autonoma de Mexico on a database for plant specimens from western Mexico will
also continue. The principal author, Rogers McVaugh, and the editor, W. R.
Anderson, assisted by several collaborators, hope to complete two additional
volumes of dicots during that period and make substantial progress on the text
of a third. | H H + (á▀áG À F G ( n H H + ( d ' ╔ @ -- aÝª ▀ ; S u m m a r y I n
f o r m a t i o n ( áááááááááááá ( + áááááááááááá áááááááááááá áááááááááááá ªá =
ÓaOÀ h¢µ +'ª`0 ·   ª &amp; , 8 D P X ` l Ù µ ó áááááááááááááááááááááááááááááááá
&gt; Meredith's MacHD:Applications:Microsoft Word:Templates:Normal National
Science Foundation National Science Foundation '@ Ãv+=ªt @ ªÙ3^G+ @ ¯t `G+ @
Microsoft Word 6.0.1 4 ; áª _Ðh O+ e F F l l l l l l l ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ß ¹ + = ¼ ¼ ¼
¼ ¼ ¼ ¼ ¼ &amp; h X + J + l ¼ ¼ ¼ ¼ ¼ + ¼ l l ¼ ¼ ¼ ¼ ¼ ¼ l ¼ l ¼ Ã Û l l l l ¼
¼ Y ¼