* 9626907
* SBIR Phase II: A High Performance Air Conditioner
* TIP,TI
* 03/01/1997,02/29/2000
* Robert Copeland, TDA Research, Inc
* Standard Grant
* Cynthia J. Ekstein
* 02/29/2000
* USD 294,651.00

*** Copeland 9626907 This Small Business Innovation Research Phase II project
will develop a cost effective method of improving the efficiency of air
conditioners. Air conditioners pump heat from a low temperature to a higher
temperature where it is rejected to the environment. At design conditions, heat
is removed from the room air and rejected to the environment at 95 F, cooling
the room air from 77 F to 55 F. Even though the heat removal is non-isothermal,
the evaporator of the conventional vapor compression cycle operates isothermally
at a single, low temperature (45 F). If some of the heat from the room air were
transferred to the refrigerant at a higher temperature (&gt;45 F), the work
needed to run the cycle would be reduced. During this Phase II effort,
conventional modern vapor compression air conditioners (i.e., pure fluid) will
be modified to effectively remove heat from the room air at a higher average
temperature. Like a conventional cycle, the modified cycle needs only one
mechanical compressor; however, the power needed to compress the vapor is
reduced. With HCFC-22, measurements during Phase I showed an 18% increase in COP
(the theoretical limit was 23%). During Phase II, equipment will be developed
for air conditioners in the range of 2 to 20 tons and the performance
improvement will be demonstrated in a small scale (2 tons) air conditioner. The
innovative air conditioning cycle developed during this Phase II effort will
improve the energy efficiency of both air conditioners and refrigerator units.
The primary commercial market for the proposed system will be large scale, new
installations in commercial office buildings and industrial refrigerators. Split
cycle home air conditioners can also benefit from the improved performance of an
ejector expansion cycle. ***