* 9626942
* STTR Phase II:  A Reagentless Fiber-Optic Chemiluminescence Continuous Flow Chlorine Analyzer
* TIP,TI
* 09/15/1996,08/31/1998
* James Akse, Umpqua Research Company
* Standard Grant
* Darryl G. Gorman
* 08/31/1998
* USD 350,000.00

*** 9626942 Akse This Small Business Technology Transfer Phase II project will
result in the design, fabrication, and testing of an innovative
chemiluminescence (CL) based prototype analyzer capable of continuous chlorine
monitoring in water. This innovative new technology combines the intrinsic
selectivity and sensitivity of CL with the reproducibility and ease of operation
afforded by the use of solid phase modules for control of the pH, luminol
concentration, and as a means to calibrate the analyzer. Solid phase beds
eliminate the need for reagent preparation, and can be quickly and easily
exchanged after long periods of operation (>30 days). Monochloramine, the most
common interference in colorimetric analysis for chlorine, produces no CL
response in the chlorine analyzer. Operation conditions, component hardware,
solid phase bed design, and CL detection efficiency will be refined based on
performance and commercial potential. Methods will be developed for quantitation
of total chlorine and reagentless calibration. A prototype will be built and
tested on real water samples forming the basis for commercialization of the
technology. Such an instrument will permit precise control of chlorination
processes reducing the health risks caused by the formation and release of
chlorinated by-products associated with over-chlorination, particularly in
drinking water. Current analytical instruments are poorly suited to this task
due to interferences, unstable reagents, time dependent responses, operator
dependent results, poor reproducibility, and expense. The CL analyzer will meet
the need for a sensitive, accurate, highly selective, and inexpensive instrument
that is easy to use with a minimum of operator intervention. ***