* 9626599
* Local Electromagnetic Field Characterization for Portable   Wireless Communications
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/1996,02/28/1998
* Jennifer Bernhard, University of New Hampshire
* Standard Grant
* Magdy F. Iskander
* 02/28/1998
* USD 18,000.00

Proposal #: ECS-9626599 PI Name/Institution: Jennifer T. Bernhard/ University of
New Hampshire The referenced female PI in her first year as faculty at
University of New Hampshire has requested Research Planning Grant Funds to
initiate a program to simulate and measure the local electromagnetic
environments of portable wireless communication units, emphasizing the user and
the unit's chassis as part of the electromagnetic subsystem. Several aspects of
the proposed research h are novel and important. The topical area of wireless
communications is rapidly growing in importance. Research within this field is
currently spotty. Higher volume data and video transmission problems are
expected in the near future. The proposed research will explore one of the most
important missing sub-fields, the reverse link (the user &amp; the receiving
unit electrical sub-system). The reverse link is almost always the weaker than
the forward link, hence it is the limiting factor in performance. However very
little research has been done on electromagnetics configurations other that the
base station (the forward link). At the same time, the reverse link is where the
heaviest FCC regulation may be expected to fall since this is the
electromagnetic environment which directly affects the user. This Research
Planning Grant proposal is clearly and carefully designed as preliminary study
to provide important support for a full proposal. It includes both finite
difference time domain simulation and radiation pattern measurement with
electromagnetically simulated "human" absorbers as well as the receiver systems.
Questions of antenna placement will be explored tin the context of a new in-
chassis design which could take advantage of new dialectic materials. Special
emphasis will be placed on developing connections with industry and obtaining
real equipment for test during this RPG grant. The PI has established expertise
in working with electromagnetically simulated "human" absorbers during highly re
levant post-doctoral research at Duke University. The PI's energetic liaisons
with wireless communications industry partners can be exepcted to add very much
to the proposed effort. I strongly recommend funding at the proposed amount of
$18,000.00.