* 9626713
* Mathematical Sciences: Problems in Large Cardinals, Forcing,and Combinatorics
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/1996,06/30/1999
* Richard Laver, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Alvin I. Thaler
* 06/30/1999
* USD 54,000.00

DMS 9626713 Richard Laver The strong infinite Halpern-Lauchli Conjecture (a
partition relation about a product of perfect trees) is still open, but progress
has been made assuming the existence of a measurable cardinal. Namely, a game
theoretic version of the conjecture has been proved under that assumption. It
will be investigated whether these techniques can be applied to prove the entire
conjecture. Also, the necessity of the measurable will be studied. In other work
involving large cardinals, it has been proved that a very large cardinal
assumption implies a combinatorial statement about a tower of finite left
distributive algebras (algebras satisfying the law a(bc) = (ab)(ac)). It will be
studied whether the large cardinals are needed. Also the possibility of
implications of the combinatorial result for the classical braid groups will be
investigated. This research links large cardinal theory with some classical
mathematics. A "cardinal" is the mathematical notion of size as it applies to
finite and infinite sets. A "large cardinal" is an extremely large such size,
with additional technical features. It is known that large cardinals are so
large that their existence can't be proved by the usual methods of proof. This
makes it very surprising that large cardinals have implications for the finite
world, but they do. Indeed, there are mathematical assertions about finite
structures which, surprisingly, need a large cardinal for their proof. Recently
some finite statements which are in the vein of classical mathematics have been
proved using large cardinals. One of the statements is related to the "braid
groups" (a subject which as been studied by mathematicians, with very intensive
investigations since the mid-1980's upon discovery of its connections with
physics). The research in this project is twofold: to determine if the large
cardinal is necessary, and to pursue the fascinating possibility of implications
of large cardinal theory for the braid groups and beyond.