* 9626739
* Theorectical Studies of van der Waals Molecules
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/1996,12/31/1999
* Krzysztof Szalewicz, University of Delaware
* Continuing Grant
* Celeste M. Rohlfing
* 12/31/1999
* USD 320,735.00

This project, supported by the NSF Theoretical and Computational Chemistry
Program, investigates the phenomenon of intermolecular interactions. Prof.
Krzysztof Szalewicz of the University of Delaware and collaborators will further
improve symmetry-adapted perturbation theory (SAPT) developed by them for dimer
interactions, and a new version applicable to trimers will be derived. This
theory allows transparent physical interpretation of intermolecular potentials
in terms of four fundamental interactions: electrostatic, exchange, induction,
and dispersion. The theory is free from basis set superposition problems and is
computationally more efficient than the supermolecular many-body perturbation
theory approach. High-level calculations of state-of-the-art intermolecular
potential energy surfaces for experimentally relevant van der Waals dimers and
trimers will be performed. These studies will help provide an understanding of
the real physical mechanism for the formation of van der Waals bonds and the
physical interactions that are responsible for minima, tunneling barriers, and
anisotropies of the potentials. This work is expected to assist interpretation
of experimental data, particularly in the case of three-body nonadditivities. An
important part of the project will involve applications aimed at resolving
current problems in the field concerning interactions of rare gas atoms with
various molecules such as nitrogen, carbon dioxide, water, or ammonia, as well
as dimers of those molecules. The trimers will include rare gas atoms, Ar2-HF,
and the water trimer. The current theoretical understanding of three-body
interactions is very unsatisfactory, in particular in view of recent
experimental activity in this field. The SAPT method offers the possibility of
physical analysis of nonadditivities and of obtaining accurate numerical values
for them. This project investigates the phenomenon of interactions between
molecules. These interactions, much weaker than the chemical forces binding
atoms in molecules, are responsible for an extensive range of physical,
chemical, and biological phenomena: from the boiling of water to the genetic
code. Standard computational chemistry methods, which are very successful in
describing chemical bonds, are inadequate in describing these intermolecular
forces. Szalewicz and collaborators will develop and use rigorous methods based
on a quantum mechanical description of these systems in order to provide a more
complete understanding of these molecular interactions.