* 9626886
* Biodiversity of Pristine Rainforests in Western Amazonia: A Unique and Urgent Opportunity
* NONE,NONE
* 09/15/1996,09/30/2002
* Richard Prum, University of Kansas Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Norman Platnic
* 09/30/2002
* USD 200,000.00

9626886 Duellman The proposed inventory is designed to survey diverse taxonomic
groups in a largely pristine lowland tropical rainforest in an essentially
unknown region of the western Amazon Basin in northern Peru. The project will
inventory terrestrial plants, beetles, lepidopterans, amphibians, reptiles,
birds, and mammals at six sites in the region. Three geographically distinct
sites will be in terra firma forest, two will be on the floodplains of different
rivers, and one will be in a swamp forest. Specimens of plants and animals will
be prepared in standard ways. Tissues of vertebrates will be frozen in liquid
nitrogen. Ectoparasites will be collected from mammals and birds. Tape
recordings will be made of vocalizations of frogs and birds, and living
individuals of as many species of vertebrates as possible will be photographed
in color. Data on sites and specimens and observations of plants and animals
will be entered into an electronic database (BioRap) and the files placed on the
world wide web. Results of this inventory will be a unique (for the neotropics)
set of GIS-based biodiversity data comparable among sites for diverse groups of
organisms. The integrated data on physiologically and trophically diverse major
groups of organisms and their physical environments will result in estimates of
species richness and community distinctness. The resulting collections will form
a rich resource of material for systematics studies. The data base will also be
used for monitoring reclamation projects in the region by Occidental Peruana
Inc, which is supporting the project by providing transportation to and among
field sites, all lodging and food onsite for all participants, and other
logistical support. This project represents an important partnership
incorporating innovative participation by government, industry and academia in
support of critical biodiversity studies.