* 9626307
* Acquisition of Rheometers for Materials Characterization    under Controlled Stress or Strain
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/1996,06/30/1997
* John Brady, California Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* None
* 06/30/1997
* USD 158,200.00

9626307 Brady A central issue in soft materials is the prediction of their
behavior during processing, especially the evolution of their structure during
flow and/or chemical reaction. With the increasing activity in this area of
materials research, there is a concomitant increase in the need for
instrumentation to characterize the flow behavior of polymeric and colloidal
materials. Research at the California Institute of Technology probes a wide
range of complex fluids: new biomedical materials, mesostructured polymers,
colloidal suspensions and polymer solution-precursors of phase-inversion
membranes. Development of materials for in-situ synthesis of biomedical polymers
demands measurement of rapid changes in the viscoelasticity of reacting systems.
Establishing efficient methods to control order in mesostructured polymers
requires simultaneous optical and mechanical characterization of their flow
behavior. Testing current understanding of colloidal suspensions depends upon
precise measurements of both the first and second normal stress differences, in
addition to the shear stress. It is necessary to examine the dynamics of all
these systems under flow conditions that include inception of shearing at a
fixed rate, creep under fixed shear stress, dynamic shearing, and superposed
steady and dynamic shear. %%% This grant provides funds for the purchase of two
rheometers: one for experiments under controlled shear strain and the other
optimized for controlled stress and strain experiments. ***