* 9626562
* Mathematical Sciences:  Some Problems in Algebraic and      Geometric Topology
* MPS,DMS
* 07/15/1996,06/30/1999
* Erik Pedersen, SUNY at Binghamton
* Standard Grant
* Gerard A. Venema
* 06/30/1999
* USD 65,400.00

9626562 Pedersen This project is mainly concerned with manifolds and their
symmetries. A manifold is a second countable Hausdorff topological space which
is locally homeomorphic to euclidean space. There is quite a difference in
studying manifolds in high dimensions and in low dimensions, and this project is
mainly concerned with high dimensional phenomena. The non-linear similarity
problem is the question whether two representations of finite groups can be
homeomorphic without being linearly ismorphic. This question is high-dimensional
in nature, since it is easy to see that such phenomena cannot occur in
dimensions lower than four. The other main part of this project is the Novikov
and Borel conjectures. These conjectures are concerned with classification of
manifolds in high dimensions. Classification is, of course, interesting in all
dimensions, but the methods are quite different in high dimensions and in low
dimensions. The project has connections to many branches of mathematics, notably
to analysis. The main methods used are from controlled topology, and there are
analogues of controlled topological problems in analysis, notably through the
Baum-Connes conjectures. While high dimensional manifolds are not readily
accessible to our mind's eye, they arise naturally in real-life situations
whenever there are numerous degrees of freedom, as, for example, the space of
all possible configurations of a mechanical linkage with numerous joints and
pivots. ***