* 9626428
* Mathematical Sciences:  Geometric Aspects of Random Motion
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/1996,12/31/1997
* Michael Cranston, University of Rochester
* Standard Grant
* K Crank
* 12/31/1997
* USD 22,500.00

9626428 Cranston ABSTRACT The principal investigator attacks several problems in
the general area of Stochastic Analysis. One problem is to come up with a
coupling for diffusions with degenerate generators given by sums of squares of
vector which satisfy Hormander's hypoellipticity condition. A related problem is
to give a coupling proof of Moser's Harnack inequality. The principal
investigator also uses coupling techniques on Brownian motion on Gromov
hyperbolic spaces to estimate eigenvalues and gradients of harmonic functions.
The principal investigator also studies relativistic Brownian motion. Finally,
the investigator is deriving more results on the behavior of processes with
dependence on the past. The work in the current proposal falls into the general
area of Stochastic Analysis. This means the analysis of randomly evolving
phenomena. The portions of this proposal on coupling are related to the
smoothness of temperature distributions on surfaces, their rate of convergence
to a steady state and the dependence of these on the geometry of the surface.
The problems on processes whose behavior depends on the past have potential
applications to economics (prices e.g.) and to biology (chemotactic phenomena.)
The work on relativistic Brownian motion can have potential applications to
cosmology, especially in deciding whether it is possible to observe black holes.