* 9626736
* Non-Axial Muscle Stress & Stiffness
* ENG,CBET
* 01/01/1997,12/31/1999
* George Zahalak, Washington University
* Continuing grant
* Sohi Rastegar
* 12/31/1999
* USD 221,668.00

9626736 Zahalak Striated muscle, whether found in the limb musculature or
muscular organs like the diaphragm and the heart, is composed of thin elongated
living cells called muscle fibers. It has been assumed, almost invariably, that
such muscle functions as a uniaxial force generator, producing forces and
experiences length changes in the direction of the fibers. With rare exceptions,
experimental investigations of muscle mechanics have focused on contractions and
forces in the fiber directions, and all current theories assume that when
embedded in a mass of contractile tissue muscle fibers behave exactly as
measured in uniaxial experiments. But at least one class of experiments--those
involving osmotically-induced expansion and compression transverse to the fibers
--suggest that non-axial deformations of contractile tissue can greatly reduce
muscle force. At present there exists no method for estimating quantitatively
the effects of non-axial deformations, which occur often in normal physiological
function, on the active stresses generated by striated muscle. The goal of this
research is to develop a quantitative theory of non-axial deformation effects in
muscle. The proposed theory is a generalization of the well established
mathematical theory of muscle contraction at the molecular level, first
formulated by the English biophysicist, A.F. Huxley. Successful completion of
this work will have important implications at both the levels of applied
biomechanics and fundamental biophysics. At the applied level, an ability to
predict quantitatively the effects of non- axial deformations on active muscle
stress will clearly identify the circumstances when these effects are important
and when they am not, and lead to improved descriptions of muscle function in
studies of locomotion, motor control, cardiac mechanics, respiratory mechanics,
and related problems. At the level of basic biophysics, such a quantitative
theory may suggest some non- traditional exper iments--for example, those
involving axial shear, transverse shear, or torsion--that will provide now
information about the fundamental molecular mechanisms of muscle contraction.
***