* 9626298
* Postdoc: Portable Parallel Preconditioning
* CSE,OAC
* 09/01/1996,08/31/1998
* John Gilbert, Palo Alto Research Center Incorporated
* Standard Grant
* John Van Rosendale
* 08/31/1998
* USD 46,200.00

This project will study parallel preconditioners used by iterative methods to
solve general sparse linear systems of equations. The new preconditioning
algorithms will be based on Incomplete Factorization of Complete Matrices (IFCM;
for example, ILU) and Complete Factorization of Incomplete Matrices (CFIM). The
latter approach is rather new. The PI plans to extend the combinatorial
algorithms developed in the parallel direct methods to the construction of
parallel preconditioners. By exploiting both structural and algebraic features
of the original matrix, they will design parallel linear solvers with a blend of
techniques along the continuous spectrum from pure iterative to pure direct
methods. The new preconditioners are independent of problem domain, and hence
are suitable to be used in general-purpose library software. Besides fundamental
algorithms research, the PI will produce widely usable parallel libraries and
tools for computational scientists and engineers. The preconditioning software
will be based on and augment the best available parallel direct-method software
and tools, some of which is being developed in the PIs thesis work. The new
algorithms and libraries will be bench marked in several applications, such as
unsymmetric sparse eigenvalue computation, groundwater remediation modeling, and
Stokesian dynamics models of colloidal suspensions.