* 9626542
* The Electrical Evolution of Thunderstorms
* GEO,AGS
* 02/01/1998,09/30/2001
* Thomas Marshall, University of Mississippi
* Continuing grant
* Roddy Rogers
* 09/30/2001
* USD 345,604.00

9626542 Marshall While much has been learned over the last decade concerning the
electrification of thunderstorms, quite a bit is still unknown. There are
several competing theories concerning the mechanism by which charge centers
develop, but research is still ongoing to determine which of these are valid and
under what conditions. Under this award the Principal Investigator will pursue
two research objectives: (1) investigate how electric charge inside
thunderstorms evolves during the life of the storm; and (2) investigate whether
most of this charge is carried on precipitation-sized particles. To accomplish
these objectives, the Principal Investigator will participate, in conjunction
with other researchers, in two observational efforts one in New Mexico and one
in Oklahoma. Beneath thunderstorms, the Principal Investigator will launch
balloon-borne instruments that will measure the electric field bulk charge and
the charge on individual precipitation particles. To meet objective (1), a
series of balloons will be launched about ten minutes apart into each storm to
be studied. The locations of the main charges in the storm can be inferred from
the electric field measurements made with each balloon launch and with other
supporting instrumentation from aircraft. To meet objective (2), the findings
from the precipitation particle charge instrument will be compared to the bulk
charge inferred from the electric field measurements. Both of these experiments
will provide information on how thunderstorms acquire large amounts of electric
charge. By providing information about the evolution and distribution of charge
in thunderstorms, this research will advance the current understanding of how
these dangerous and damaging thunderstorms become electrically charged. ***