* 9626279
* Acquisition of an Automated Digital Transmission Electron   Microscope
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/1996,07/31/1999
* Mohamed El-Aasser, Lehigh University
* Standard Grant
* None
* 07/31/1999
* USD 709,300.00

9626279 Smith The transmission electron microscope (TEM) has been a mainstay of
materials research for about forty years and remains one of the world's most
important scientific instruments. Over the last 20 years Lehigh has maintained a
leadership position in analytical TEM research and in the education of TEM
users. This award provides funds in partial support of the purchase of an
automated digital transmission electron microscope (ADTEM) for chemical and
structural imaging of materials with an emphasis on in-situ studies. The ADTEM
will combine better than 0.23 nm resolution with 30 of tilt in a variety of side
entry specimen holders. The microscope will feature an electron energy filter
which can produce high clarity energy-filtered images and diffraction patterns.
Included is support for enhancing and up-grading the specimen preparation
equipment and image analysis facilities. The digitally acquired images will be
accessible from any networked terminal on or off campus. %%% The acquisition of
the proposed ADTEM will impact these ongoing or planned research programs in the
four thrust areas of: 1) thin films, 2) amorphous and nanoscale structures, 3)
ceramics and ceramic composites, and 4) environment-sensitive fracture. The
research programs of more than 20 faculty will be impacted by the proposed
ADTEM. The research programs in the area of thin films include a study of CoPt
for magnetic information storage and the role of grain structure and grain
boundary diffusion in the reaction of Nb/Al, Ni/Al and Ti/Al multilayers. Under
the thrust area of amorphous and nanoscale structures a variety of studies in
inorganic and organic materials are being pursed: crystallization of amorphous
silicon, development of copper interconnects with optimized grain structures,
determination of structure around light atoms in inorganic glasses by EXELFS,
novel design concepts in core/shell particles for toughening engineering
plastics, and energy filtered diffracti on of beam sensitive catalyst materials.
In the thrust area of ceramics and ceramic composites, tailoring of grain
boundary chemistry for the development of super creep-resistant oxides,
processing and properties of nanocomposites, and reaction forming of
functionally gradient aluminum oxide/aluminum composites for optimal mechanical
properties are under investigation. The research programs in the last thrust
area of environment- sensitive fracture address environmental and stochastic
aspects of creep crack growth in super-alloys and corrosion and fatigue of
aluminum alloys. The educational role of the ADTEM will be to demonstrate high
resolution structure imaging, advanced diffraction, and energy filtered
microscopy in the laboratory section of a variety of undergraduate and graduate
courses. Digital images from this microscope will be analyzed by students off-
line in our existing cluster of IBM RS6000s and proposed cluster of Macintosh
8100s. ***