* 9626193
* Mathematical Sciences:  Finite Element Superconvergence     in Computational Mechanics
* MPS,DMS
* 07/15/1996,06/30/2000
* Zhimin Zhang, Texas Tech University
* Standard Grant
* Michael Steuerwalt
* 06/30/2000
* USD 34,000.00

9626193 Zhang The investigator studies: (1) Superconvergence points for some
typical equations in computational mechanics on different mesh patterns and for
various finite element bases; (2) Theoretical justification for superconvergence
phenomena for newly developed, highly effective patch recovery techniques in the
engineering community; (3) Superconvergence and its recovery for equations with
small parameters that model some typical mechanical problems, such as beams,
plates, shells, and the Stokes problem; (4) Superconvergence recovery technique
for equations with singular solutions, and interior or local estimates for
recovery techniques in the presence of boundary singularities. Extensive
numerical tests are performed to evaluate the effectness of the proposed
recovery techniques for the Poisson equation, the nearly incompressible
elasticity equation, the Reissner-Mindlin plate model, and the Stokes equation
for different finite element bases. The computational experimentation consider
various mesh geometries and some domains with reentrant corners, such as the
L-shaped domain and the cracked domain. The primary objective of this project is
the study of derivative superconvergence and its recovery in finite element
computations. Such study is of fundamental importance in computational
mechanics, because engineers are interested in more effective ways to estimate
the stress, strain energy, etc. At present, most of the commercial codes used by
the engineering community are required to have adaptive capabilities, which
allow computations to be carried out in the most efficient way. A knowledge of
superconvergence is essential for this adaptivity design through a posteriori
error estimates. This project provides a firm theoretical basis for developing
reliable and computationally inexpensive superconvergent recovery techniques.
The results of this research affect large-scale scientific computing on problems
of practical interest arising in structural me chanics.