* 9626775
* Dissertation Research:  Archaeological Survey of Settlement Patterns in the Banda Region, West-Central Ghana:  Exploring External Influences and Internal Responses in West Africa.
* SBE,BCS
* 05/15/1996,04/30/1999
* Christopher Decorse, Syracuse University
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 04/30/1999
* USD 12,000.00

This program of research consists of a six month archaeological survey of the
Banda region in western central Ghana. Investigations are driven by the
recognition that this area was a political and economic `frontier,` serving as a
refuge for populations fleeing potential enslavement by surrounding states.
Frontier zones such as Banda, are now believed to have played a major role in
the development of complex societies, making their exploration and understanding
of critical importance. Few research efforts to date, however, have addressed
these interstitial or frontier regions. During the last five centuries, Banda
experienced a series of external pressures arising from the expansion of
neighboring states and colonial powers in conjunction with the establishment of
long distance trade and the economic incentives to provide trade goods including
slaves. The people of Banda are believed to have responded in various ways to
these pressures. The archaeological exploration of regional settlement
patterning provides an excellent means to explore the issues of political unrest
and external economic pressure. This is because such archaeologically relevant
variables as settlement size and makeup, location on the landscape and length of
occupation, are strongly influenced by a population's economic needs and
pressures as well as its political strength and security. Thus, archaeological
patterns unique to frontiers will be sought through evidence of abandonment and
defensive behaviors and economic interactions. In this light, the field
objectives of the proposed research are to perform a systematic regional survey
which will locate and characterize a representative sample of settlements from
the last five centuries using the variables described above. The survey will
focus on two previously unexplored portions of the Banda region. This research
will make contributions on a number of different levels. First, it will provide
a better understanding of the region's culture history as well as the range of
behaviors characteristic of peoples inhabiting frontier zones. Second, it will
provide a means of establishing whether sites in these frontier areas have
distinctive archaeological signatures. Finally, employing a regional approach
will afford an understanding of the impact of extra-regional developments and
the variability of responses to those processes, including long distance trade
and incorporation into larger states and ultimately global systems.