* 9626112
* Mathematical Sciences: Superstability in Model Theory
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/1996,06/30/1999
* James Schmerl, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 06/30/1999
* USD 48,324.00

Abstract DMS 9626112 Ambar Chowdhury, U. Connecticut Classification theory is
concerned with determining whether a given class of mathematical objects admits
a "structure theory". In the best cases, a structure theory assigns certain
dimensions which determine each object in the class up to isomorphism. The class
of vector spaces over a given field, with the usual notion of dimension, is a
simple example of a good case. More generally a structure theory aims to
describe how each member of the class is built from smaller objects in the same
class, or even from simpler objects belonging to a second, well understood
class. Shelah has isolated certain properties of a countable, complete first
order theory which are necessary and sufficient for the class models of T to
admit a structure theory. One key property is that of being superstable, a
guarantee that certain subsets of the models of T can be viewed as
pregeometries, and thus carry the desired dimensions. Investigating the precise
nature of the aforementioned pregeometries, and the way in which they interact,
can yield very deep information about the fine structure of the models; such
investigation has become known as geometric stability theory. Chowdhuiy will
apply the methods of geometric stability theory to gain further information
about superstable theories. In particular, his work is aimed at extending
Shelah's classification results to uncountable theories. This should result in
new structural information regarding the models of superstable theories,
countable or not. In addition, Chowdhury plans to examine which properties of
superstable theories can be generalised to a broader class, called supersimple
theories. Supersimple theories, though not necessarily stable, exhibit some of
the important characteristics of superstable theories. In model theory one
studies those mathematical objects (called 'models") which satisfy a given
collection of axioms. While one may think of a group as the set of
transformations , or symmetries, of a particular object - such as an organic
molecule, the general class of objects known as groups are precisely the models
of the three group axioms. In algebra, one attempts to understand complicated
objects (e.g., groups) in terms of how they are built from well-understood
objects; when this succeeds, this is called a "structure theory". In model
theory, one considers a general set of axioms and the collection of models, and
asks whether there are properties inherent in the set of axioms which guarantee
the existence of a structure theory. Rather remarkably, it turns out that
certain abstract properties of a set of axioms do indeed imply certain
structural features for the corresponding objects; one such property is called
"superstability". The principal investigator proposes to continue the study of
superstability (and its variations) and of its structural implications for a
broader array of objects, one which includes interesting and important
mathematical classes.