* 9626949
* MESSAGES
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/1996,08/31/2000
* Betty Davidson, Museum of Science
* Continuing Grant
* Orrin Shane
* 08/31/2000
* USD 668,369.00

9626949 Davidson The Museum of Science in Boston will develop an exhibit and
other interactive activities "Messages". This is about communication. The focus
of the visitor's experience will be exploring the many facets of human and
animal communication including linguistics, psychology, sociology, sociobiology,
cybernetics, information theory, and telecommunications. The activities will
improve visitors general science literacy by helping them understand the nature
of communication both as a subject that encompasses many scientific disciplines
and as a scientific thinking skill. Three themes will be developed 1)
Communication is an integral part of being alive; 2) The modes and media of
community are many; and 3) Communication requires a sender and a receiver. In
addition to the 1200 sq. ft. core exhibit, the museum will develop related
kiosks that will be placed at various locations throughout the museum, public
programs, and Internet-based activities. It will be designed for universal
accessibility and is intended for a diverse audience with special attention to
youngsters and people with few technological skills. Materials developed for
teachers and students will address the Communication basic technology area
recommended in Science For All Americans. Special emphasis will be placed on
linking the content and formal educational and take-home materials with Project
PALMS, the NSF State Systemic Initiative in Massachusetts.