* 9626152
* Rigorous and Empirical Analysis of Random Cellular Automata
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/1996,08/31/2000
* David Griffeath, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* K Crank
* 08/31/2000
* USD 129,000.00

9626152 Griffeath The current and planned research of David Griffeath focuses on
an interplay between mathematical theory and computer visualization for complex,
random and deterministic lattice dynamics. Griffeath exploits this "symbiosis"
in his theoretical and empirical studies of cellular automaton dynamics and
other nonlinear spatial interactions. On the theoretical side, this work is
giving rise to an increasingly rich and illuminating rigorous theory of
Threshold Growth, a new paradigm for discrete-time parallel updating of lattice
configurations. On the empirical side, Griffeath is developing effective,
interactive simulation tools for the study of complex spatial systems, designing
two platforms in parallel: (a) a high-end simulator based on the new CAM8
cellular automaton machine from MIT, of which he has one of the first few
prototypes in the world; and (b) a low-end 32-bit Windows 95 simulator and
graphical front end called WinCA. Over the next three years, among the types of
dynamical system Griffeath intends to study using this hybrid methodology are
various cellular automata, interacting particle systems, and individual-based
models that serve as prototypes for such complex phenomena as nucleation, spiral
formation in excitable media, the shape theory of crystal growth, flocking,
host-parasite interactions, dendritic growth, and phase separation by surface
tension. Mathematical models for growth and competition have played a key role
in the development of spatial complex systems theory since the mid 1950's. An
extensive body of theory and applications, for both random and deterministic
systems, has been developed, especially over the past twenty years. Modeling of
such fundamental phenomena as aggregation, emergence of shape, interfacial
competition, and droplet interaction sheds new light on many areas of applied
science. Griffeath's work during the next funding period will be motivated
especially by problems elicited from the spatial mathematical ecology community,
as identi fied during an interdisciplinary conference that he organized at the
Santa Fe Institute during January, 1996. He expects that the various simulation
tools he is developing will be able to provide new insights into questions of
genuine interest to that clientele, and that a substantial body of interesting
new pure mathematics will result as well.