* 9626399
* Supervisory Control Design for Nondeterministic Systems     With Application to Network Management
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/1996,08/31/2000
* Mark Shayman, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 08/31/2000
* USD 155,000.00

9626399 Shayman Discrete systems are systems that involve quantities which take
on a discrete set of values and which are constant except at discrete times when
events occur in the system. Examples include communication networks, intelligent
vehicle highway systems, manufacturing systems and computer programs.
Supervisory control theory was developed to provide a mathematical framework for
the design of controllers for such systems in order to meet various constraints.
The majority of the research effort in this area has focused on the supervisory
control of deterministic systems. However, unmodeled dynamics or partial
observation often leads to {\it nondeterministic models} in which knowledge of
the current state and next event is insufficient to uniquely determine the next
state. Distributed systems commonly have nondeterministic models. The research
program described in this proposal is intended to extend supervisory control
theory so that it can accommodate technical issues that arise in the automation
of fault management for communication networks. These include, among others, the
effects of a distributed plant on the information available to the supervisor as
well as tradeoffs between the effectiveness of control and the cost of
information. The latter is especially important for network management since the
information gathering process of monitoring the network elements diverts network
resources from the primary task of data transfer. ***