* 9626327
* Mathematical Sciences:  Second Magma Conference on          Computational Algebra; May 12-16, 1996; Milwaukee, WI
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/1996,05/31/1997
* NONE NONE, NONE
* Standard Grant
* Michael Steuerwalt
* 05/31/1997
* USD 10,000.00

9626327 Slattery The investigator and colleagues organize the Second Magma
Conference on Computational Algebra. In the past few years a number of
significant advances have taken place in several different branches of
computational algebra and number theory. Because of the growing interdependence
between the different branches, an algorithmic advance in one area often has a
major impact on the performance of algorithms in other areas. Consequently, the
meeting brings together workers from some of the key areas, including
researchers working on software development as well as those using these tools.
The conference is intended to inform algorithm designers and users of recent
developments in cognate areas of computational algebra, number theory, and
geometry and inform key theoretical mathematicians of the possibilities offered
by the computational algebra tools that are now becoming available. It is also
expected to identify desirable algorithm and software developments that would
result in significant new applications in the near future. The conference
promotes the use of the techniques of computational algebra in application areas
such as digital signal processing, complex system design, network design,
cryptography, coding theory and applied combinatorics. Algebra studies basic
questions about discrete structure and symmetry in the world. Theoretical
results from this branch of mathematics help chemists understand the spectra of
organic molecules, physicists organize families of elementary particles, and
engineers solve systems of equations. Algebraic invariants are used to answer
biochemists' questions about knotting in DNA and anthropologists have even used
algebraic classifications to organize native artifacts in the southwestern U.S.
For many years mathematicians have studied algebra with little more than their
imaginations and a pencil and paper. But now, computers allow researchers to
work with larger and more complicated situations tha n were possible in the
past. Computational algebra is the general title given to these research
efforts. However, to use a computer in mathematical research requires the
development of specialized software -- a task that can be time-consuming for the
typical researcher. One way to address this need is through systems such as
Magma which provide easy access to state-of-the-art algorithms in a number of
fields of study. Another important process is to encourage researchers to share
their experiences (and even software) through conferences such as this; the
interaction at a conference often leads to adaptation of ideas and development
of new directions. These tools enable theoretical researchers to explore more
complicated situations, to gain insight in unfamiliar settings, and to compute
answers to larger problems. Computer-based work on primality testing and
factoring of large numbers is showing direct application to cryptography and
security. Work in finite geometries and designs are providing improved
techniques for error-detection and data compression. These have a large impact
on everyone's use of computers and communications.