* 9626297
* Acquisition of a X-Ray Powder Diffractometer with High      Temperature Attachment for Materials Research at the        University of New Orleans
* MPS,DMR
* 07/15/1996,06/30/1997
* Ashok Puri, University of New Orleans
* Standard Grant
* None
* 06/30/1997
* USD 80,000.00

9626297 Tang This award provides support for the acquisition of an x-ray powder
diffractometer with a high temperature attachment for materials research. This
powder diffractometer offers state- ofthe-art performance for crystal structure
determination, particle size analysis, measurements of crystallinity and
disorder, identification of impurity phases, and determinations of solid
solubility and phase diagram. It has a fully automatic alignment capability and
is equipped with an advanced software system. It is highly versatile and can
function as a 0/0 goniometer or in vertical or horizontal mode to satisfy any
present and future needs. the goniometer radii can be easily adjusted enabling
the selection of the best resolution for application. The high temperature
attachment is designed for automatic recording of crystal structure changes of a
specimen at elevated temperatures (up to 1400 C). It will be mounted on the x-
ray diffractometer and can operate in vacuum, air or inert gasses. This x-ray
diffractometer is crucial to the success of many research projects at the
University of New Orleans, including studies of various electronic and Magnetic
materials and their processingstructure-property relationships. These projects
include investigation on the magnetotransport properties of insulatormetal or
insulator- semiconductor nanocomposites in which giant magnetoresistance (GMR)
may be found; study of a group of new and very promising high density magneto-
optical recording materials CuCr2Se4-x Asx; and study of photomagnetic effects
in intermetallic spin glasses. In addition, diffractometer will enable us to
conduct more effectively research activities in high strength permanent magnets,
superconductors, spin glasses, heavy fermions, biomaterials, polymer-
nanoparticle composites, microporous solids, carbon and related materials,
coatings and their tribological properties. the development of materials with
novel and useful magnetic and electronic pro perties is of strategic importance
for the nation's technological and economic growth. %%% The diffractometer will
enhance the research capabilities of the faculty at the University of New
Orleans and will also be available to the researchers at Tulane University,
Louisiana State University, Xavier University and Louisiana State University
Medical Center. Through the acquisition of this instruments, students will have
much greater opportunities to participate in materials research activities and
be provided access and training on a state-of- the-art instrument. ***