* 9626319
* Mathematical Sciences:  Multivariate Approximation
* MPS,DMS
* 06/15/1996,05/31/2000
* Carl De Boor, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Deborah Lockhart
* 05/31/2000
* USD 203,000.00

9626319 de Boor The proposed research comprises three topics, all in the general
area of representations and approximations of functions of several variables. It
is expected to contribute in the areas of Multivariate Splines, Multivariate
Polynomial Interpolation, Radial Basis Function Approximation, Wavelets, and
Gabor Expansions. The first topic concerns polynomial interpolation. Several
years ago, the proposers came up with a scheme that assigns, to any data on any
finite discrete pointset in several dimensions, a polynomial interpolant of
least possible degree, and with various other desirable properties. It is
proposed to develop an error formula for that scheme, in preparation for its
application in cubatures or in the construction of trivariate finite elements.
The second topic deals with applications of the theory of approximation from
shift-invariant spaces, a theory that was developed by the proposers and others.
One suggested application, of a theoretical nature, but pertinent to wavelets,
explores the (surprising) connection between the smoothness of functions in a
refinable space and the approximation orders provided by such a space. Another,
very unexpected, application of shift-invariant space theory is in the area of
approximation to scattered data from the span of translates of a radial basis
function. The suggested approach is based on a new conversion formula that
allows the extension of many approximation schemes on uniform grids to general
grids. The last topic deals with the representation of functions in one or more
variables via decomposition/reconstruction techniques. A thorough understanding
reached in prior research on general shift-invariant systems is now used in the
constructions of new wavelet and Gabor systems. Special attention is given to
exploiting the freedom offered by the redundancy inherent in oversampled
systems. Computer solutions of physical problems (including the problems to be
att acked by high performance computing) require a description of the various
physical aspects of the problem in the only language a computer understands,
namely numbers. The resulting mathematical description (of a car door or the
human heart, of pictures taken from a satellite, of the moisture content of air
as a function of longitude, latitude and height above sea level, etc.) is of
necessity inexact, and this makes it very important to develop efficient methods
of representation, i.e., methods of acceptable accuracy and using not too many
numbers. The proposal concerns the development of such methods (for descriptions
involving several parameters) and of means for ascertaining their accuracy and
efficiency.