* 9626893
* Fundamental Studies of the Oxidation of Oxidation of Sulfur Dioxide to Sulfur Trioxide over Supported Metal-Oxide       Catalysts
* ENG,CBET
* 07/15/1996,06/30/1999
* Israel Wachs, Lehigh University
* Continuing Grant
* Geoffrey Prentice
* 06/30/1999
* USD 315,000.00

ABSTRACT CTS-9626893 This is a study of molecular structure-activity
relationships in the oxidation of sulfur dioxide to sulfur trioxide over
supported solid metal-oxide catalysts. (The sulfuric acid contact process, which
uses a supported molten salt as the catalyst, is not the subject of this study.)
Fundamental issues addressed include the kinetics, the reaction mechanism, the
nature of the active site including size and structure, and the effects of the
support, surface additives and various gases such as water, nitric oxide,
hydrocarbons, and ammonia. Model supported catalysts containing reducible oxides
of vanadium, molybdenum, chromium, rhenium, or manganese are synthesized,
characterized by Raman, infrared, and nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopies,
and tested for catalytic activity for the subject reaction. This information is
used to establish structure-activity relationships for oxidation of sulfur
dioxide. The solid-oxide catalyzed oxidation of sulfur dioxide is important in
the industrial production of sulfuric acid as well as in several environmental
technologies including the DESONOX and SNOX processes for removing nitrogen and
sulfur from industrial (including electric power generator) plants and selective
catalytic reduction to remove nitrogen oxides, for in which sulfur trioxide is a
poison.