* 9626563
* The Structure, Design and Application of M-band Symmetric   Wavelets and Filter Banks
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/1996,09/30/1999
* Truong Nguyen, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* John Cozzens
* 09/30/1999
* USD 199,876.00

The wavelet transform with symmetric basis functions is emerging as a next-
generation standard for still-image compression. Wavelet methods outperform the
current JPEG standard at low bitrates, and degrade gracefully with decreasing
bitrate. The new M-channel symmetric wavelets are used in image and video
coders, with particular attention to quantization strategies and motion
compensation. This research is addressing the theory, design, and application of
orthogonal and biorthogonal linear-phase M-channel filter banks and M-band
symmetric wavelets. Multirate filter banks are the fundamental building blocks
for subband and wavelet decompositions, as well as frequency-domain/time-domain
multiplexing. Theoretical questions being addressed by the research include the
structure of linear-phase M-channel filter banks and wavelets, including a
comprehensive theory of permissible lengths, minimal structures for
parametrization and fast computation, and mappings for two-dimensional signal
processing. Criteria for wavelet filter design are also being addressed,
including vanishing moments, smoothness and nonnegativity of the scaling
function, and unequal length filters. The investigators are studying
applications of the above to perceptually-based data compression of image, video
and seismic data, multicarrier modulation, and multiscale feature detections.
They are also investigating the use of the M-band wavelet transform for
multitone modulation. The frequency partitioning properties of the M-channel
filter bank enable high efficiency for channels such as twisted-pair copper wire
and hybrid fiber-coax, with reduced susceptibility to narrow-band interference.