* 9626772
* Experimental Investigation of the Creep Behavior of Fiber-  Reinforced Plastic Columns
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/1996,08/31/1998
* Saeed Daniali, Lamar University
* Standard Grant
* Vijaya Gopu
* 08/31/1998
* USD 50,000.00

*** 9626772 Saeed The objective of this study is to investigate experimentally
and theoretically the short-term and long-term behavior of columns made from
pultruded fiber-reinforced plastic (FRP) materials. The slenderness ratios of
these columns will be selected so that both modes of failures, global buckling
and local buckling will be investigated in this study. In the experimental
investigation, full-scale specimens will be prepared from commercially available
pultruded sections. The experimental work will be conducted in two phases. In
the first phase, 32 different specimens will be prepared from wide flange and
structural tubing sections, and they will be loaded to failure by means of a
concentric axial load. In the second phase of this program, 24 specimens made of
similar sections used in Phase I will be loaded axially for a period of 10,000
hours. The sustained loads will be calculated based on 40%, 50%, and 60% of the
ultimate loads obtained in the first phase of the study. Based on the
experimental findings and on basic stability theory and anisotropic materials, a
unified limit state design criteria for FRP columns will be developed.
Guidelines and code-like design provisions will be suggested as an initial Load
and Resistance Factor Design (LRFD) method similar to that which has recently
been developed for timber, cold-formed steel, and masonry structures.***