* 9627775
* Theoretical Studies of Structure and Reactions of Transition Metal Atoms, Ions, Complexes and Clusters
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/1996,06/30/2001
* Keiji Morokuma, Emory University
* Continuing Grant
* Celeste M. Rohlfing
* 06/30/2001
* USD 503,800.00

The Theoretical and Computational Chemistry Program is supporting Prof. Keiji
Morokuma at Emory University in his theoretical research on transition metals
and their complexes. High level ab initio theoretical calculations are applied
to a wide range of problems on structure and reactions of transition metal
atoms, ions, complexes and clusters. The potential energy surfaces of a variety
of chemical reactions will be calculated, ranging from gas phase reactions of
bare transition metal ions and atoms and simple complexes, activation of various
bonds by complicated transition metal complexes, the potential energy profiles
of full catalytic cycles by organometallic catalysts, and reactions of
transition metal clusters and cluster complexes. In addition to the standard ab
initio molecular orbital (MO) methods, the Integrated Molecular Orbital +
Molecular Mechanics (IMOMM) method and the integrated MO + MO (IMOMO) method,
developed recently by the principle investigator, will be used for studies of
reactions involving complicated ligands. Theoretical studies of full catalytic
cycles by transition metal complexes, which still remain a challenge to
theoreticians, will be performed for (1) boration of alkenes and alkynes by
Pt(0) and Pd(0) complexes, (2) regio- and enantio-selective hydroformylation of
olefins by Rh(I) catalyst with a chiral ligand BINAPHOS, and (3) Murai's C-H
activation of aromatic ketones by Ru complexes. In addition copolymerization of
olefin and CO catalyzed by Pd(II) complex and dehydrogenative polymerization of
silanes by zirconocene catalysts will be studied. In the boration of alkenes and
alkynes, Pd(0) and Pt(0) have very different reactivities to different B-X
bonds, and the origin of the difference will be studied. In enantioselective
hydroformylation, the different selectivity with different phosphine ligands
will be studied with the IMOMM method to provide a clue for design of better
ligands. The knowledge to be obtained through this research, such as structure,
spectroscopic properties and energies of reaction intermediates and transition
states, is complementary to that gained from experiments, and is expected not
only to promote the fundamental understanding of complicated chemical reactions
of transition metal complexes but also to help logical design of new catalysts
for better control of complicated chemical reactions. Close contact with
experimental groups will be maintained throughout the proposed research.