* 9627078
* VPW:  Yup'ik Conception of Wellness
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/1996,08/31/1998
* Penelope Cordes, University of Alaska Fairbanks Campus
* Standard Grant
* Margrete S. Klein
* 08/31/1998
* USD 147,824.00

This project describes contemporary Yup'ik conceptions of wellness, i.e.,
beliefs and practices associated with health promotion and illness prevention.
Research is being conducted over a twelve month period in Bethel, Alaska which
is the hub of the Yukon- Kuskokwim Delta, the most populous region of Yup'ik
speakers in the state. The hospital there serves as the medical center for 56
villages. The project entails collaboration with the Alaska Native regional
health entity operating the hospital to prioritize specific issues of concern
within the topic of Yup'ik conceptions of wellness. The specific issues
identified are the focus of ethnographic research at the hospital. By most
epidemiologic, economic, demographic, and social health measures, this region is
the most disadvantaged in the state. Acute infectious disease contributes
substantial morbidity. Additionally, many health problems are due to chronic
disease, injury, and other health problems that have a behavioral factor as a
contributing cause, the prevention which entails a behavior change component.
The illness profile describing the disease and psychosocial dysfunction of the
people of the region is well defined. A wellness profile will be developed
through compilation of quantitative data on diachronic indices of risk factors
and health behavior change, and qualitative, ethnograpic data describing
cognitive categories related to preventive health domains, explanatory models of
illness episodes and their relationship to wellness, and health behavior
"success stories". By focusing on contemporary beliefs, the research will
advance the knowledge of: Yup'ik conceptual categories of etiology and
prevention; beliefs of a much wider age group than has previously been
described; and beliefs related to health issues previously unexamined.
Paradoxically, this work that focuses on the contemporary and on fostering
behavior change, could advance the Yup'ik cultural revitalization agenda by
reinforcing the traditional Yup'ik value of illness prevention and belief in the
role of human agency in the health of the individual and the community.
Interactive activities include teaching an undergraduate course, instruction and
supervision of students as research assistants, teaching a graduate course for
health care providers, giving guest lectures including instruction for Community
Health Aides at the Alaska Statewide Community Health Aide Conference in
Anchorage in April 1997.