* 9627174
* SBIR Phase II: Infrared Detectors Using Micro-Cantilevers
* TIP,TI
* 09/01/1997,09/01/1999
* Scott Hunter, Consultec Scientific, Inc
* Standard Grant
* Michael F. Crowley
* 09/01/1999
* USD 295,549.00

9627174 Hunter This Small Business Innovation Research Phase II project will
result in the development of new types of infrared detectors utilizing very
recent developments in microcantilever technology. Such devices can be mass
produced using standard semiconductor manufacturing methods, and specially
tailored to our particular application using micromachining techniques. During
Phase I of this project, a working laboratory version of a temperature and IR
sensor was constructed and tested using both optical and piezoresistive
techniques to measure the cantilever bending due to thermal induced stress. The
piezoresistive technique was shown to have an order of magnitude higher
sensitivity for detecting optical radiation than the optical sensing technique,
and the attendant alignment and electronic amplification requirements needed to
optimize the output response from the sensor were considerably simpler than
those for the optical detection technique. During Phase II of the project the
performance of the infrared temperature sensor will be optimized using the
piezoresistive technique and various engineering prototypes of this instrument
will be built. Phase III will involve commercialization of this technology
through fabrication and sales of various stand-alone instruments specifically
designed for given IR sensing and temperature measurement applications.
Commercial applications of infrared detectors based on microcantilevers are
numerous since these detectors are extremely sensitive, easily miniaturized, and
can be readily mass produced. Medical applications include non contact
thermometry and whole body thermal imaging for cancer detection. High
sensitivity temperature measurement and IR imaging capabilities are required in
the aerospace industry, military, and for night vision and security
applications. Temperature control in manufacturing and machines also are
possible applications.