* 9627038
* Mathematical Sciences:  Holomorphic Dynamical Systems and   Small Divisions
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/1996,06/30/1998
* Ricardo Perez-Marco, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 06/30/1998
* USD 40,000.00

Abstract Perez-Marco The main goal of the project is to give a complete analysis
of the local dynamics of a one-dimensional holomorphic map near an indifferent
irrational fixed point when it is nonlinearizable due to the existence of Small
Divisors. In particular, I want to understand as thoroughly as possible, the
topological and metrical structure of the mapping invariant sets (Siegel
compacts), and stability properties. Achieving these aims will entail sharp
geometric estimates for analytic circle diffeomorphisms. Using these tools I
propose to study the boundary of what are called Siegel disks of the first type.
A long range objective of this research is to obtain a geometric theory of Small
Divisors applicable to higher dimensional problems. The theory of Dynamical
Systems studies the evolution of solutions of a system of differential
equations, that describe the evolution of a physical system. Typically the
solutions of these equations arising in Physical Sciences, meteorology,
engineering, etc... cannot be obtained by a close formula (it is the same
situation than for the roots of a polynomial: we know that there are always
complex roots, but we cannot express the roots from the coefficients by simple
algebraic operations). It is of fundamental importance in the applications to
determine the future evolution of the physical system. Probably the most
important problem is the question of stability: Is the system going to have a
stable evolution forever or it is going to break at some moment ? Certainly,
this is an every day problem for engineers building planes or other moving
devices, but we can find much more complex situations where the solution of this
problem is of capital importance. For example, one of the hardest problems in
the practice of fusion in the Tokamak machines, is the magnetohydrodynamical
problem of finding stable configurations of a plasma at extremely high
temperatures. The control of fusion will provide clean energy from the water! It
is a quest ion of fundamental importance. As mathematicians, we study the
simplest situations to develop the tools to treat the more complex ones. The
theory of Small Divisors is a fundamental tool to study problems of stability in
conservative situations. Conservative situation meaning that some structure (a
volume, a conformal structure,...) is preserved. This is very common in the
applications, the equations of mechanics without friction are conservative for
example. In my research, I study the situation of a conformal map in the plane,
that is a map that preserves angles. In this situation, there are classical
Small Divisors theorems which guarantee stability properties. A large part of my
research is devoted to study the situation where the tools of Small Divisors
fail to prove stability. New weak stability notions have been found in this
setting. The major part of my research project consists in the detailed study of
these new stability features.