* 9627857
* SBIR Phase II:  Real Time Sputter Depth Measurement for     In Situ Surface Microanalysis
* TIP,TI
* 06/01/1997,05/31/1999
* Carl Colvard, Charles Evans & Associates
* Standard Grant
* Darryl G. Gorman
* 05/31/1999
* USD 293,552.00

DMI-9627857 Colvard This Small Business Innovation Research Phase II project
addresses the problem of knowing what subsurface level of a sample is being
analyzed at any given moment during an analytical depth profile. Depth profile
analysis of elemental composition at solid surfaces with secondary ion mass
spectrometry (SIMS) and Auger electron spectrometry requires ion beam sputtering
of material from the surface to form a crater of increasing depth. Only after
the measurement is completed can the crater depth be measured by profilometry,
the sputter rate averaged, and the calibration of composition versus depth
completed. Unfortunately, sputter rates can vary widely in different materials,
which shifts the apparent position of interfaces. Sputter rate has also been
linked to ion yield, which affects the relative sensitivity factors used to
quantify impurity data in SIMS. As industrial demands increase for higher levels
of spatial and compositional accuracy, and for faster analytical turn around, it
is important to measure crater depth and sputter rate in situ and in real time.
We demonstrated in Phase I an interferometric technique that can perform this
measurement. In Phase II we propose to use this approach to create a new tool,
adaptable to existing analytical instruments, that will provide dynamic depth
measurements, during an analysis, with a resolution approaching one nanometer.
We will build a prototype instrument, adapted to an analytical SIMS
spectrometer, that will monitor sputter depths at a single point during depth
profile analyses. Its performance and functionality will be characterized, and
shortcomings will be addressed. Experiments will be conducted to explore its
behavior with different sample types, and multi-point extensions to the
technique will be examined. Immediate applications exist for incorporation of
this tool into commercial secondary ion mass spectrometers and Auger
microprobes, both in new instruments and as retrofits into the large installed
base.