* 9627329
* Workshop:  The Role of Optical Systems &amp; Devices in Security&amp; Anti-Counterfeiting to be held at the Institute for       Defense Analysis in Alexandria, VA on February 26-28
* ENG,ECCS
* 02/01/1996,01/31/1997
* Bahram Javidi, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* Athena C. Harvey
* 01/31/1997
* USD 20,000.00

9627329 Javidi A three day NSF sponsored workshop, "The Role of Optical Systems
and Devices for Security and Anticounterfeiting," is proposed. This workshop
will bring together thirty-four of the best experts in the field to accomplish
the following goals and objectives: 1. Discuss the recent major advances in the
field. 2. Determine where the US stands in various R&amp;D areas, including
applications, hardware, materials, components, devices, and algorithms. 3.
Determine both the short term and the long term major research and development
goals in the field. Discuss what needs to be done in the next five years, and
what should be done in the next ten to fifteen years. 4. Discuss strategies to
accomplish the short and long-term goals, including: o Encouraging cross-
disciplinary and joint research among algorithmic, systems integration, and
materials and devices research efforts to facilitate the deployment of optical
techniques in security, verification, and anticounterfeiting. o Identifying
industrial/commercial applications of optics and optoelectronics security,
verification, and anticounterfeiting and discussing how more
industrial/commercial funds can be obtained for R&amp;D. o Determining how
optics can complement the existing electronics security, verification, and
anticounterfeiting techniques and processors. ***