* 9627989
* RIMI:  Behavior of Stratified Sand-Gravel Composites Under  Seismic Liquefaction Conditions
* EDU,EES
* 07/15/1996,03/31/2000
* Farshad Amini, University of the District of Columbia
* Standard Grant
* William A. Sibley
* 03/31/2000
* USD 157,723.00

HRD-9627989 University of District of Columbia "Behavior of Stratified Sand-
Gravel Composites Under Seismic Liquefaction Conditions" The proposed research
is to provide an investigation of the behavior of stratified sand-gravel
composites under seismic liquefaction conditions. The behavior of stratified
soils will be evaluated for different gravel contents. The effect of variation
of confining pressure on the liquefaction parameters of sand-gravel composites
will be investigated for two methods of sample preparation, namely pluviation
through air (representing uniform soil conditions) and sedimentation
(representing layered soil conditions). The stress-controlled automated cyclic
triaxial tests at the University of the District of Columbia will be used for
the purpose of evaluating liquefaction potential. The primary objective of the
proposed study is compare the behavior of stratified and homogeneous sand-gravel
composites under seismic liquefaction conditions for various gravel contents and
confining pressures. Such comparison will enhance our understanding of soil
behavior under seismic liquefaction conditions. As a result, a conceptual
framework for analytical studies can be made. The proposed project will only
provide a fundamental advancement for modelling these layered soils, but also
improve the research capability of the civil engineering program at the
University of the District of Columbia. Student exposure to the experiments will
enhance the representation of minorities in engineering disciplines. ***