* 9627333
* Synthesis and Characterization of Silicon Carbide - Group   III Nitrides Layered Structures and Alloys
* MPS,DMR
* 07/15/1996,06/30/2000
* James Edgar, Kansas State University
* Continuing Grant
* LaVerne D. Hess
* 06/30/2000
* USD 254,729.00

9627333 Edgar This research project aims for fundamental understanding of
factors controlling the polytypes and phase stability of epitaxial multilayers
and alloys of SiC combined with AlN and GaN. Vapor phase epitaxy of layered
structures and alloys such as SiC/AlN/SiC, (AlN)x(SiC)1-x and (GaN)x(SiC)1-x of
high crystalline perfection, controlled compositions, polytypes, and interfacial
quality will be studied. The approach is oriented to relating basic chemical and
processing conditions associated with epitaxial growth to the multilayered
structures or polytypes realized. X-ray diffraction techniques will be used to
study dependence of thin film crystal quality, strain, local atomic
configuration, and polytype on the processing conditions, substrate material,
orientation, and composition. Additionally, thermodynamic factors stabilizing
these structures and alloys, and kinetic barriers preventing decomposition to
bulk stable forms will be evaluated. %%% The research will contribute basic
materials science knowledge of technological relevance to advanced
electronic/photonic materials synthesis and processing. Additionally, the
knowledge and understanding gained from this research project is expected to
contribute in a general way to improving the performance of advanced devices and
circuits by providing a fundamental understanding and a basis for designing and
processing more advanced materials. An important feature of the program is the
integration of research and education through the training of students in a
fundamentally and technologically significant area. ***