* 9627160
* Deep Submergence Operations - ALVIN
* GEO,OCE
* 01/01/1996,12/31/2000
* Barrie Walden, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Continuing Grant
* Emma R. Dieter
* 12/31/2000
* USD 9,220,349.00

9627160 WALDEN In 1996 Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution will operate the
Deep Submergence Vessel ALVIN. The submersible is certified for a depth of
4,500M and is designated a national asset. The ALVIN is supported by the
research vessel ATLANTIS II (AII). Both vehicles have been operated effectively
and safely by the institute for a wide variety of NSF-sponsored research
projects. Through a Memorandum of Agreement between ONR, NOAA and NSF the
submersible is operated in support of projects funded by these agencies. The
1996 schedule for ALVIN is lighter than the vessel is capable of performing with
a projected operational schedule of 161 days. Of these days 123 are proposed to
support NSF-sponsored programs. NSF-supported cruises will take place in both
the Atlantic and Pacific in support of biological and marine geological and
geophysical research. The ALVIN schedule is light due to the ABS and Navy
requirements for a major overhaul and recertification being scheduled in 1996
for the DSV. This overhaul normally requires approximately 6 to 8 months to
complete. Since it will be a light year for the submersible the use of remotely
operated vehicles (ROV's) will be used to provide deep submergence access to the
community. Three cruises are scheduled for the WHOI DS/ROV's. Two of these
cruises will be in the Pacific and one in the Atlantic. ***