* 9627221
* Supersonic Source - FTMS
* MPS,CHE
* 05/01/1996,04/30/2000
* Ben Freiser, Purdue Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Gene W. Wilds
* 04/30/2000
* USD 450,000.00

This renewal grant to Professor Ben S. Freiser at Purdue University is in the
Analytical and Surface Chemistry Program and supports studies of gas-phase metal
containing cluster ion reactions by mass spectrometric techniques. Supersonic
and seed plasma sources will be used to generate the clusters and the
measurement step will involve Fourier transform ion cyclotron resonance mass
spectrometry. Particular emphasis will be placed on metal-carbon ion clusters,
including metallo-carbohedrenes. The objectives of the work include the
accumulation of fundamental information regarding the bonding and reactivity of
these clusters, and development of a new approach to synthesis of macroscopic
amounts of the materials. Collaborative theoretical studies will augment the
former and additional collaborative work is involved in the synthesis
investigations. Both collaborations involve other research groups on the Purdue
campus. Cluster compounds have only recently been discovered and much is not
known about their structure, bonding, and reactions. This project is focussed on
obtaining just such information. Using apparatus available to the principal
investigator which represents novel and/or unique approaches, the materials can
be generated and their reactions subsequently studied by mass spectrometric
techniques. In addition, the work may produce these materials in macroscopic
amounts which would greatly accelerate developments in the area.