* 9627170
* What's On Your Mind?  Children's Televised Neuroscience     Education
* EHR,DRL
* 09/01/1996,08/31/1997
* Steven Kostant, Lisboa Associates Inc
* Standard Grant
* Hyman H. Field
* 08/31/1997
* USD 247,162.00

9627170 Kostant Lisboa Associates, Inc. designing, producing, and evaluating a
pilot unit for a thirteen-part, $3.5 to $4 million television series for pre-
adolescent youth. What's On Your Mind? - The adventures of the Brain Gang will
center on the adventures of three youth 'neuro-nauts' who, through special
effects combined with animation, will use their skills of observation and
detection to solve each "mystery" from inside the brain itself. Each episode
will start with a question, e.g. What does the brain have to do with how people
see, smell, taste, feel, and hear? Does what you eat affect your brain? Are
girls' brains different from boys' brains? How does drug use affect the brain?.
The Brain Gang, once they are inside the brain will encounter obstacles and
experience conflicts that can only be overcome or solved by relying on
scientific methods. The Brain Gang also will encounter animated characters, such
as Neuro the Neuron and Endorpah the Endorphin, who will teach and explain
important aspects of the brain to the young team of neuro-nauts. The television
series would be supported by ancillary material including a student/teacher
guide, a newsletter for youth, and a teach newsletter. The PI for the project
will be Steven Kostant, an independent television producer and Creative Director
for Broadcast and New Media at Lisboa Associates, Inc. The Executive Producer
for the project will be Eileen Michaels, Senior Vice President at Lisboa
Associates, Inc. responsible for the organizations outreach programs in areas
such as neuroscience and environmental topics. The head writers will be Rich
Albrecht and Casey Keller, formerly head writers for Beakman's World. There will
be three principal neuroscience advisors: David Friedman, Associate Professor of
Physiology and Pharmacology and Assistant Dean for Basic Sciences and Research
Development, the Bowman Gray School of Medicine of Wake Forest University;
Rochelle Schwarts, Associate Professor in the departments of Pharmacolo gy and
Neurobiology at Duke University Medical Center; and Harold Goldman, Clinical
Research Director, Neurology Unit of Harvard Community Health Plan and
Instructor in Neurology at Harvard Medical School.