* 9627029
* TEAMS Science Museum Exhibit Collaborative
* EDU,DRL
* 10/01/1996,09/30/2000
* Sarah Wolf, Montshire Museum of Science
* Continuing Grant
* Barry A. Van Deman
* 09/30/2000
* USD 1,216,716.00

9627029 Goudy Five small science museums will form "TEAMS (Traveling Exhibits at
Museums of Science) Collaborative". The partners include the Montshire Museum of
Science, Norwich, VT; The Catawba Science Center, Hickory, NC; Sciencenter,
Ithaca, NY; Discovery Center Museum, Rockford, IL; and the Ann Arbor Hands-On
Museum, Ann Arbor, MI. Each museum partner will develop a 1500 sq. ft. (140 m2)
traveling exhibit that will include ten to fifteen interactive units and
supporting graphics and will circulate to all members of the partnership. The
exhibition topics are: AirPlay (Montshire Museum of Science, Dirt (Catawba
Science Center), You Can Count On It (Sciencenter), Amusement Park Science
(Discovery Center Museum), and Eureka Labs: Science from Head to Toe (Ann Arbor
Hands-On Museum). Following the circulation among the consortium members, it is
anticipated that the exhibits will circulate more broadly via the Association of
Science-Technology Centers Traveling Exhibit's Program. In addition to
developing these exhibits, the collaboration has an additional goals 1) focusing
on the family audiences by working together to enhance the family science
learning through the development of resources that can be used by families that
are related to exhibition topics, 2) building institutional expertise in exhibit
design, family programming, and evaluation; and 3) conducting research on family
learning and sharing results with the field. Complementary materials and
activities for teachers will also be developed for each exhibit.