* 9627355
* Mathematical Sciences:  Object Oriented Software Design     for Optimization and Inverse Problems
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/1996,12/31/1999
* NONE NONE, NONE
* Standard Grant
* Michael Steuerwalt
* 12/31/1999
* USD 70,000.00

Symes 9627355 The investigator and his colleague aim to bridge the often large
gap between ``off-the-shelf'' software packages for numerical optimization, on
the one hand, and complex applications in science and engineering, on the other,
through further development of the Hilbert Class Library, an object-oriented
programming environment written in C++. This approach to programming expresses
optimization algorithms in terms of their natural abstract components (vector
addition, inner product, and so forth), without imposing unnecessary constraints
on data structure and representation. Application software, on the other hand,
can be written using the most suitable data structures, algorithms, and
languages (various dialects of Fortran, for instance). The programming
environment provides a flexible and largely automatic interface between the
generic optimization code and the application-specific code. In addition to the
elaboration of the basic class library, objectives of this proposal include the
implementation of several modern algorithms for large-scale optimization, the
design of a software toolkit that allows application programmers and numerical
optimizers easy access to the HCL programming environment, and testing on a
variety of realistic problems. For example, research in seismic data processing
methods provided the original motivation for this project, and remains a
principal target. Reuse of software is a long-standing goal of software
engineering research, as software development and maintenance represents the
bulk of the cost of computation. Object oriented programming designates an
approach to software design that elevates reusability to the status of guiding
principle. Traditional ("procedural") programming style embeds the internal
details of data and algorithms in the interfaces between program parts. Object
oriented programming hides or encapsulates these details, which permits program
parts to be interchanged with considerably great er ease. For this and other
reasons, object orientation has become the dominant methodology in commercial
programming, especially for graphics applications. It has not up to now had much
impact on scientific computation, which has an equally great need for reusable
software. Many scientists do not use freely available high quality numerical
programs, simply because the procedural style in which these programs are
written makes them incompatible with natural data representations in such fields
as computer aided design and manufacturing, materials science, and
biotechnology. An object oriented framework for basic scientific computations,
as proposed here, could lead to greatly enhanced interchange of software between
numerical analysts and other scientists, and so improve the efficiency of
computational research.