* 9627362
* The ALL Workshop:  A Global Approach to Tropical Leaf Litter Biodiversity and Conservation, August 1996, Ilheus, Brazil
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/1996,01/31/1998
* William Brown, American Museum Natural History
* Standard Grant
* Douglas Siegel-Causey
* 01/31/1998
* USD 25,000.00

Natural history collections of mollusk shells are subject to a form of
degradation known as OByneOs DiseaseO if they are improperly housed. ByneOs
disease is a crystalline efflorescence on the surface of the shells that is
formed by the reaction of acid vapors that are released by wood, cardboard, and
paper storage materials with the calcium carbonate of the shells themselves. It
is promoted by high and fluctuating temperature and humidity. The Pacific
mollusk collection of the Bishop Museum is the most comprehensive in the world,
containing over 6,000,000 specimens. As such, it is a major resource for studies
in biodiversity, conservation, and phylogeny. However, the collection is
suffering from ByneOs disease. This award will provide the materials and staff
to properly conserve the collection by carefully cleaning the efflorescence from
the shells, transferring them into modern, acid-free trays, boxes and glass
vials that will be stored within existing and new steel collections cases, and
making new, computerized labels for the collections. The outcome of the project
will be a well curated, computer-catalogued and properly conserved collection
that will be available for study and research well into the future.