* 9627784
* The Influence of Temperature from 25 to 295 C on Ion        Adsorption at Mineral Surfaces
* GEO,EAR
* 08/15/1996,09/30/2001
* Michael Machesky, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* H. Richard Lane
* 09/30/2001
* USD 200,530.00

Machesky The adsorption of ionic species by mineral surfaces influences many
geochemical phenomena including the transport and fate of contaminants, mineral
dissolution and precipitation reactions, colloidal stability and various
oxidation-reduction reactions. Many of the variables that influence adsorption
processes have been extensively studied including pH, type of mineral surface,
type and concentration of adsorption species, ionic strength, and time
(kinetics). Temperature can also profoundly influence ion adsorption, but
studies at other than room temperature are rare, and above 100C adsorption
studies are virtually nonexistent. In contrast, other geochemically important
and related phenomena such as homogenous solution equilibria and mineral
solubility and dissolution kinetics have been studied over a much broader
temperature range. To begin to remedy this imbalance, this study will
investigate how ion adsorption by a model oxide surface (rutile) is influenced
by temperature over the broad range from room temperature to 295C. After ion
adsorption by rutile has been sufficiently well characterized, studies of ion
adsorption by the quartz (SiO2) surface will also be performed. The specific
objectives of this research are: 1) A comprehensive characterization of hydrogen
ion adsorption by the metal oxides rutile and quartz as functions of temperature
and electrolyte concentration and composition using a stirred hydrogen electrode
concentration cell (SHECC). The success of initial efforts in this area a prime
motivation for this study. 2) Direct determination of hydrogen ion adsorption
enthalpies using titration calorimetry over a more limited temperature range (to
75C) but similar pH and electrolyte concentration and composition ranges as
those used for the SHECC experiments. These experiments will provide direct
measurements of hydrogen ion adsorption enthalpies for comparison with those
obtained from the variable-temperature mea surements with the SHECC. These
calorimetric measurements will be the first such experiments conducted over this
broad temperature range. 3) Characterization of model cation (zinc) adsorption
by rutile and quartz and model anion (oxalate) adsorption by rutile over the
temperature and electrolyte composition ranges used for the hydrogen ion
adsorption studies. Parallel calorimetric experiments (to 75C) to directly
determine zinc and oxalate adsorption enthalpies will also accompany these
variables temperature for comparative purposes. 4) The use of the surface
complexation modeling approach to describe the resulting adsorption data with
the goal of identifying a single model, relatively free of fitting parameters,
that can adequately describe all the data generated between 25 and 295C. This
will provide a consistent and powerful framework for data interpretation and
will also increase the utility of the results to the geological community. The
investigation is novel because the study of ion adsorption processes will be
comprehensively extended into the hydrothermal regime for the first time.
Moreover, the conclusions of this study will have broad applications to those
areas of the geosciences concerned with reactions at the solid-liquid interface
because the ion adsorption properties of many other cations and anions will be
generally similar to those of zinc and oxalate. Consequently, the results of
this study will hopefully stimulate and help guide additional research into this
virtually unexplored area of the geosciences.