* 9627927
* RUI: Paleomagnetic Study of the Matuyama-Brunhes Reversal   from Dated Lava Sequences on Tahiti, French Polynesia
* GEO,EAR
* 06/01/1996,05/31/1999
* Kenneth Hoffman, California Polytechnic State University Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Robin Reichlin
* 05/31/1999
* USD 91,618.00

9627927 Hoffman The PI proposes to continue his studies of the earth's most
recent magnetic polarity reversal, Matuyama-Brunhes (M-B) in lavas in Tahiti,
and to integrate this record into a global model of the M-B reversal process
using available data sets from other lava flows and reliable sedimentary
sequences worldwide. The study of geomagnetic field reversals is rapidly
evolving in its degree of sophistication with recent successful 3D computer-
assisted simulations of the dynamo process. These advances make essential an
understanding of actual field behavior at Earth's surface obtained from the
paleomagnetic record. Available data of the Matuyama-Brunhes reversal obtained
from lavas from 4 sites about the globe and recent 40Ar/39Ar age determinations
on these lavas support not a singular process in which the virtual geomagnetic
pole (VGP) migrates along a south-to-north geographic track, but rather a more
complicated process involving a series of dynamo events and long-standing field
configurations. The PI requests funding to continue his effort over the next two
years to (1) sample several parallel sections recording the reversal, (2)
develop further a composite chronological picture of the reversal process as
experienced on Tahiti, (3) perform paleointensity determinations on these rocks
whenever possible using a newly-modified multispecimen technique, and (4)
construct a global model for the Matuyama-Brunhes reversal process using
available data from sediments. This RUI will continue to involve a number of
undergraduate physics majors at California Polytechnic.