* 9627792
* Atmospheric Frontal Dynamics
* GEO,AGS
* 07/15/1996,01/31/2000
* William Blumen, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* Stephan P. Nelson
* 01/31/2000
* USD 250,249.00

Most winter time severe weather in temperate latitudes is associated with cold
fronts. These transition zones between warm air to the south and cold air to the
north represent the focus of weather forecasts. The models used by most weather
services often produce accurate forecasts of these weather systems, but errors,
when they occur, may in part be associated with motions that occur on scales
that are less than the resolution, in space and time, of the numerical models.
One way to alleviate errors in numerical forecasting models is to carry out
research programs to observe small-scale, high-frequency motions and to use this
information to introduce sub-grid scale effects by parameterizing their effects
in a physically realistic manner. The proposed investigation makes use of
observations obtained from two observational programs that have been supported,
in part, by the National Science Foundation: the Stormscale Operational Research
Meteorology-Fronts Experiment Systems Test (STORM-FEST, 1992) and MICROFRONTS,
1995. Observations on the scale of fronts from tens of kilometers down to
millimeter scale were accumulated by means of both sonic and hot-wire
anemometers. A principal objective is to document the dissipation of turbulent
kinetic energy near frontal surfaces in the Earth's boundary layer. The data
from MICROFRONTS serves this purpose, and these data will be used to verify the
accuracy of various theories associated with dissipative processes. Knowledge of
turbulent dissipative processes, in both space and time, is necessary to provide
more realistic parameterizations of boundary layer dissipation for use in
forecast and research models. A second objective is associated with the
improvement of a classical theoretical model that provides a physical
explanation of the frontal contraction process, so-called frontogenesis. This
model neglects certain features that have been observed in a frontogenesis event
that occurred during STORM-FEST: inertial oscillations with periods of about 17
hours. The effect of these oscillations on frontogenesis and the accompanying
motions will be included in a theoretical development. The solutions do not take
account of dissipative processes that become important when the front is within
the boundary layer. The blending of dissipative processes, as determined by the
former investigation, into theoretical models that either handle such effects
crudely or not at all, is a long-range goal of this research.***