* 9627928
* Plant Competition and the Scaling of Soil Resources
* BIO,DEB
* 10/01/1996,09/30/2000
* Carolyn Grygiel, North Dakota State University Fargo
* Standard Grant
* Penelope L. Firth
* 09/30/2000
* USD 185,757.00

9627928 Biondini The objective of the proposed research is to investigate how
the competitive ability of plants is linked to an interaction between their root
scaling properties and the supply rate and scaling properties of soil resources.
The operating hypothesis is that: (1) nutrient supply rates and the spatial
scaling of soil nutrients are two equally important and interactive constraints
to plant growth; and (2) plants contend with these constraints through a trade-
off in the way they scale root biomass to total rooting volume, root surface
density, and root proliferation. Testable hypotheses were derived from a model
that relates the competitive ability of plants to the interaction between the
scaling properties of their root system and the scaling properties of the
resources they utilize. The protocols for testing the proposed hypotheses
involve two sets of experiments. The first is designed to determine the root
lateral spread, root length, root density, and the distribution of root surface
areas of selected plants in the presence and absence of nutrient patches. Plants
will be grown in containers with grid panels located at fixed intervals designed
to keep roots in place once the soil is removed. Nutrient patches will be
generated by Sierra slow release fertilizer prills. Roots will be sampled by
grid depth, separated based on fertilizer location, digitized, and analyzed for
the desired parameters with a Delta-T Scan imaging system. The second set of
experiments will test how the spatial distribution and supply rate of nutrients
can affect plant competition. The experimental system consists of a 3x12x0.3 m
growth container equipped with 3,600 trickle irrigation emitters arranged in a
grid pattern at 10 cm intervals. This system is designed to control the spatial
scaling, and supply rates of nutrients. Each emitter is controlled by one of 10
Dosatron injectors that delivers the desired amount of nutrient within a lOxlO
cm area. The design has the capability of generating spatial patter ns as well
as independent or simultaneous time patterns for nutrients and water delivery.
All experiments will be organized as 2x3 factorials. Factor 1 will consist of 2
spatial scaling factors for either N or P. Factor 2 will consist of 3 mean N or
P supply rates. N and P will be used to account for differences in mobility and
buffer power among soil nutrients. Each of 5 replications will consist of 400
plants from 10 species (40 plants/species) with distinct root scaling patterns
selected from the root architecture experiment. To test the repeatability of
results, each experiment will be conducted twice with two distinctly different
combinations of 10 species.