* 9627044
* Wonders of the Modern World
* EHR,DRL
* 01/01/1997,04/30/2001
* Paula Apsell, WGBH Educational Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Hyman H. Field
* 04/30/2001
* USD 3,106,100.00

9627044 Apsell WGBH will develop, produce, and distribute Wonders of the Modern
World, a project that examines the science and technology behind the building of
five international landmarks -- the Golden Gate Bridge, the Aswan Dam, the
Petronas Towers in Kuala Lumpur, the Toronto Skydome, and the English Channel
Tunnel connecting Great Britain and France. Wonders of the Modern World is an
integrated, synergistic project that combines a nationally-broadcast, prime time
television series with print, interactive components, and on-line products for
home and school. The goals of the project are to educate the public about
concepts in physical science, technology, and engineering and to engage youth
and adults in a diverse range of science and technology activities using various
media ranging from on-line telecommunications to print. The specific components
of the project include: o A prime time PBS television series consisting of five
one-hour programs that will be hosted by David Macaulay, author of numerous
popular books on technology such as How Things Work, Cathedral, Castle, and
Pyramid, o A World Wide Web site where users can conduct interactive science and
technology activities, o Print guides to help with on-line activities, o Family-
oriented video vignettes with experiments in structural design, o Activity kits
that include the materials needed for conducting family-based science
experiments, o Curriculum-based school videos, o Student/teacher guides that
will help interpret the series for classroom use, and o A CD-ROM. WGBH has
formed alliances with four national organizations that will undertake a major
effort to engage members of underserved and low-income communities in the series
and the ancillary activities. These organizations are The Boys and Girls Clubs
of America, The Community Technology Centers Network, The Public Library
Association, and The American Architectural Foundation. The PI and Project
Director will be Paula Apsell, Executive Producer for NOV A and Head of the WGBH
Science Unit. Larry Klein, Head of Production Group, Inc., will be the Series
Executive Producer and Co-PI. Beth Kirsch of WGBH will serve as Director of
Educational Print and Outreach, and Mark Olshaker will be series editor and
scriptwriter. Ted Sicker, Executive Producer for Interactive Projects/New Media
at WGBH Educational Foundation will direct the development and deployment of the
on-line components of the project. Barbara Flagg will conduct formative
evaluation and Irene Goodman will conduct summative evaluation.