* 9627773
* RUI:  Structural and Dynamics Characterization of Dual      Ligand Binding (H2S and 02) Processes in an Unusual         Hemoglobin
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/1996,07/31/1999
* Juan Lopez-Garriga, University of Puerto Rico Mayaguez
* Standard Grant
* Kamal Shukla
* 07/31/1999
* USD 195,946.00

9627773 Lopez-Garriga The goal of this project is to investigate the molecular
basis for oxidation-reduction and ligand selection process of hemoglobin, (Hb1)
isolated from Lucina pectinata. This hemoglobin, produced by a symbiotic
interaction between the clam and a bacteria, transports H2S to the bacteria and
binds O2. Dr. Lopez-Garriga will examine how reduction/oxidation of the metal
center affects the porphyrin ring, and the ligand interaction with nearby amino
acids. Regarding this, the ligand binding properties of Hb 1 may be influenced
by the low distal pocket polarity resulting from the array of phenylalanyl
residues surrounding the heme. Studies on monomeric hemoglobins, such as Hb 1,
with extreme hydrophobic heme pocket environments can provide useful models for
heme proteins to answer questions such as: How does ligand selection occur?
Which ligand-protein conformational and structural changes are important? What
controls ligand reactivity in these proteins? How do the heme pocket aromatic
residues contribute or modulate the association and dissociation ligand rate
constants? To answer these questions, Resonance Raman, FTIR, Time-Resolved
Infrared Spectroscopy and Vibrational Analysis studies of Hb1 and ligand
complexes (i.e. H2S, O2 and CO) are planned in order to probe the relation
between the active site structure, oxidation-reduction reactions, Hb1
conformation, and the function of the protein. %%%