* 9627771
* Interpreting Paleoclimate when Continental Positions are    Uncertain:  the Effects of Sampling, Modeling and           Reconstructing
* GEO,EAR
* 07/15/1996,06/30/1999
* Judith Parrish, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* H. Richard Lane
* 06/30/1999
* USD 77,557.00

Parrish 9627771 Paleogeographers and paleoclimatologists have tended to have
very different agendas in studying paleoclimates, and their differing approaches
and interests have led to a circularity in paleoclimatic studies that the
proposed project is intended to address. The problem is greatest in studies of
climates of the Paleozoic Era, when continental positions are likely to be
poorly known. Paleoclimatologists have used available paleogeographic
reconstructions as if they were independent of paleoclimatic data, but, in fact,
some continental positions are determined at least partly from paleoclimatic
data. The purpose of the proposed research is to: (1) document and evaluate the
problems that arise from using paleoclimatic data to position continents,
including such problems as non-uniquenessof positioning and the use of
probability curves based on zonal climates for positioning continents that were
likely to have had non-zonal climates: (2) establish more rigorous sampling
procedures for the use of paleoclimatic data in both paleogeographic and
paleoclimatic reconstruction. To address the problem of sampling, which refers
not to how the data are collected but, rather, how they are compiled for use in
a spatial fromat, we will develop a new grid system more appropriate for
gridding data on a sphere that the latitude-longitude grid, which suffers from
uneven grid-cell dimensions. We will then develop procedures for reporting the
distribution of paleoclimatic indicators. This will permit evaluation of the
robustness of the various assumptions that are made in this type of work.
Finally, we will apply the developed methods to a persistent problem in
Paleozoic paleogeography, that is, the positions of Gondwana in the Late
Devonian. One possible outcome is that we will be able to eliminate one of the
proposed positions, based on objectives evaluations of the data. A more likely
outcome is that we will show where new data must be collected and which
underlying assumptions must be examined to resolve the conflict. The broader
implications of this project will be to enforce much more rigor into
paleogeographic reconstructions, demonstrate the error introduced by circularity
in using for paleoclimatic modeling paleogeographic reconstructions that are
based at least in part on paleoclimatic indicators, and suggest procedures that
might overcome the basic conflict between the needs of paleogeographers and
those of paleoclimatologists.