* 9627625
* An Inventory of Environmental Features in the McMurdo Dry   Valleys, Antarctica, and Their Recent Changes Using a       Geographic Information System
* GEO,OPP
* 09/15/1996,08/31/2000
* Michael Prentice, University of New Hampshire
* Continuing Grant
* Bernhard Lettau
* 08/31/2000
* USD 398,199.00

Abstract This project is a collaborative effort among the University of New
Hampshire, U.S. Geological Survey, International Center for Antarctic
Information and Research (ICAIR), and the Institute for Geological and Nuclear
Sciences Ltd. (New Zealand). The purpose of this project is to build a
Geographic Information System (GIS) describing the of the Dry Valleys in
Antarctica as it existed in 1993-95. To ascertain recent natural changes in this
environment, the Principal Investigators will add to the GIS environmental
information on a decadal over the preceding forty years. The study region,
consisting of the Wright Valley, Victoria Valley, and Taylor Valley, will be
mapped at a scale of 1:50,000. Inside the study area, two "supersites" will be
studied at a scale of 1:10,000. To support the environmental inventory for
1993-95, the framework will be significantly enhanced. SPOT panchromatic and
Landsat Thematic Mapper will be rectified and merged for the entire study
region. Topographic data at the 1:50,000, currently referenced to an outdated
astronomic datum, will be updated to the current WGS84 satellite datum. Digital
orthophotographic maps at 1:50,000 for the entire region and 1:10,000 for the
supersites, will be produced. Numerous aerial photographs of the regions will be
computerized. Digital basemaps of glacier and hydrologic features will be
derived from satellite imagery for the 1:50,000 analysis and from digital
orthophotographic maps for the 1:10,000 analysis. The geological inventory will
use a genetic systems approach to compile surface and subsurface data on
unconsolidated sediments, bedrock, and geomorphic features. In the
glacial//hydrological meltwater summary, various lake stream and glacier
attributes will be compiled to quantify glacial meltwater production and
transportation. To describe changes in the Dry Valleys, environmental data will
be compiled into the GIS for 1983-85, 1972-74 and 1957-59. Satellite imagery for
1973-74 and 1983-85 will be rectified and used to provide basemaps of glacier
and hydrologic features. Pertinent aerial photography acquired during the latter
intervals and during 1957-59 will be inventoried and used to supplement the
characterization of glacier and hydrologic features. Pertinent aerial
photography acquired during the latter intervals and during 1957-59 will be
inventoried and used to supplement the characterization of glacier and
hyrdologic features. A comparison of four time periods will reveal physical
rates of change in the study area over the past forty years. This research will
provide a foundation for long-term environmental management of the Dry Valleys
and short-term environmental impact assessments. This research will result in
the digital availability of enhanced framework data including topography,
satellite imagery, and aerial photography. It will establish an Antarctic
scientific data repository that will increase the availability of Antarctic
scientific data for scientists and for improved management of science. Finally,
the quantification of recent change in the Dry Valleys constitutes a
contribution the study of Antarctic climate change.