* 9627798
* Reconstruction of the Green Bay, Lake Michigan and          DesMoines Lobes, 21-11,000 B.P.: Ice Surfaces Profiles,     Landform- Sediment Associations & Deglaciation Chronolog
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/1996,07/31/1999
* David Mickelson, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* H. Richard Lane
* 07/31/1999
* USD 144,730.00

Mickelson 9627798 Only a few studies have examined the dynamics of large glacier
lobes, even though they controlled the mass balance of the Laurentide ice sheet.
By analyzing ice-surface profiles, landform-sediment associations, and advance-
retreat chronologies, this research process relationships of three southern
Laurentide glacier lobes, at various time during deglaciation 21-11,000 BP. This
integration of three separate lines of evidence: glacier reconstructions,
landform sediment associations, and chronology should increase understanding of
the dynamic history of these lobes and whether or not they contributed
significantly to the collapse of the Laurentide ice sheet. Geomorphic evidence
suggests that these lobes at times experienced surge type or streaming flow
regimes. There is also evidence suggesting ice marginal stagnation and rapid
retreat. Flow regime at a specific site or time depended on bed conditions
present and climatic factors influencing mass balance. This project will
document these changes in flow regime and derive from field evidence estimates
of bed conditions. The final result will be an improved conceptual model of how
large glacier lobes responded to changing conditions during the last
deglaciation. This will lead to more confident interpretations of the
relationships between climate, ice sheets, and the sedimentary record.
Reconstructions of two lobes of the southern Laurentide ice sheet during several
early phases of deglaciation have been produced so far. Reconstructed glacier
profiles indicate that basal shear stresses varied from >25 kPa to <5 kPa during
deglaciation and that surge-type flow and steady sheet-type flow were common. A
major unanswered question about southern Laurentide lobes is whether retreat
occurred progressively at rates of -40 to 100 m/y or catastrophically with rates
of -500 to 1000 m/y. The answer to this question is fundamental to understanding
the behavior of the southern Laurentide ice margin as well as in interpreting
the deglaciation chronologies of these lobes. Was there a rapid collapse
corresponding to a rapid warming and climate change seen in Greenland ice cores?
Glacial deposits suggest there could be a relationship, but surface exposure
dates (10be, 25Al, and 36Cl) must be obtained from the poorly dated terrestrial
record to provide an independent test of existing chronologies. Landform-
sediment associations will be investigated to determine their relationship to
reconstructions of paleoglacier conditions. Sediment fabric, sedimentary
structures, and basal contacts will be described to determine whether there are
major differences in the type of glacier bed transport between pre- and post-
13,000 BP advances. The association of low profile surge-type lobes with fine-
grained lake sediments and lake basins will be investigated and documented.
Where a clear difference in ice surface slope can be documented, careful
examination of the associated sediment should distinguish a wet deforming bed
from concentration of water at the ice-bed interface. Thus, three different data
sets are used to document glacier conditions during retreat along the southern
margin of the Laurentide ice sheet: ice surface profiles, landform-sediment
associations, and chronology.