* 9627918
* Research Planning Grant: Neuroendocrine Regulation of       Receptivity
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/1996,02/28/1999
* Leslie Meek, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Roy L. White
* 02/28/1999
* USD 18,000.00

Dr. Meek will explore the role of serum estrogen and neural estrogen receptors
in the control of behavioral receptivity in the female meadow vole, a species
without a regular, cyclic estrus. Female meadow voles appear to have several
different mating strategies (associated with different latencies to begin
mating), which result in differential fertility. Specifically, Dr. Meek will (1)
determine if serum estrogen is correlated with the onset of behavioral
receptivity in female meadow voles; (2) determine if there is a differential
sensitivity to the behavioral effects of estrogen among female meadow voles with
different latencies to begin mating, and (3) determine if there is a difference
in the number, location, and/or intensity of staining of estrogen-receptor-
immunoreactive cells among female meadow voles with different latencies to begin
mating. These preliminary experiments should lead to an exploration of GnRH
immunoreactivity (GnRH-IR) in the brains of unmated and mated female voles that
have different mating latencies, and which are housed in photoperiods simulating
either summer (long daylengths, LD) or winter (short daylengths, SD). An
exploration of location, number and staining intensity of GnRH-IR cells in
ovulating (LD) and non-ovulating (SD late-mating) meadow voles may provide
information about how GnRH controls ovulation. Since the neuroendocrine events
leading to fertility are similar in all female mammals, it is possible that
these experiments may lead to a greater understanding of how fertility can be
suppressed or enhanced in other species, including humans, via similar
mechanisms.