* 9627092
* VPW:  Extension of the Temporal Scale of Newly Resolved     Middle Cambrian Sr Isotope Stratigraphy
* EDU,EES
* 08/15/1996,01/31/1998
* Isabel Montanez, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Margrete S. Klein
* 01/31/1998
* USD 126,507.00

Seawater 87Sr/86Sr variations during the Early Paleozoic are poorly documented
relative to the resolution of the Late Paleozoic through Cenozoic portions of
the Phanerozoic seawater Sr isotope curve. The Cambrian portion of the
Phanerozoic seawater Sr isotope curve is especially characterized by a
significant degree of scatter and a large uncertainty envelope. Moreover, the
newly emerging data base of secular seawater 87Sr/86Sr variations for pre-Middle
Cambrian time underscores a conspicuous gap in the Middle to Late Cambrian
seawater Sr isotope record. Consequently, the potential of Sr isotopes for
enhanced chronostratigraphic resolution of Middle to Upper Cambrian
stratigraphic successions, is extremely limited for providing insight into the
Middle to Late Cambrian ocean- atmosphere-biosphere system, and for potentially
constraining rates of biogeochemical cycling during this time interval. The two
main objectives of this study focus on critically addressing these limitations;
the results of this research should minimize or potentially overcome these
limitations. The first objective is to complete a detailed Sr isotopic analysis
of a second section of Bonanza King carbonates from the southern Great Basin in
order to test the robustness of the newly resolved Sr isotope stratigraphy. The
second objective is extend the integrated study to lower Middle Cambrian
carbonates of the Papoose Lake Member of the Bonanza King Formation and the
upper Carrara Formation, southern Great Basin. The results of this research,
when integrated with our new resolved Sr isotope curve and recently published
Early Cambrian seawater 87Sr/86Sr values, will provide a Cambrian seawater Sr
isotope curve of resolution comparable to many portions of the Late Paleozoic
and Mesozoic Sr isotope curve. In turn, this will afford enhanced
chronostratigraphic resolution of Cambrian stratigraphic successions, a refined
understanding of the Cambrian ocean-atmosphere-biosphere system, and potent ial
for constraining rates of biogeochemical cycling during this time interval.
Lastly, the 87Sr/86Sr database which will ultimately result from this integrated
study will inevitably contribute insight into and potentially resolve many
controversial 'Cambrian' issues. Interactive activities consist of four facets:
1) teaching one graduate-upper division undergraduate level seminar in cycle
stratigraphy, 2) actively participating in other carbonate sedimentology,
stratigraphy and digenesis seminars, 3) actively involving undergraduate and
graduate students in this research project, and 4) leading department field
trips to the Cretaceous of Texas and northeastern Mexico.