* 9627898
* COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH:  Radiogenic Helium as a Chronologic Tracer for Young Groundwater
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/1996,08/31/1999
* Robert Poreda, University of Rochester
* Continuing Grant
* L. Douglas James
* 08/31/1999
* USD 119,871.00

9637898 9628627 Poreda Solomon The concentration of radiogenic 4He in
groundwater that results from U/Th decay has been used as a dating tool over
time scales of 103 to 106 years. Recent measurements indicate that aquifer
solids in many shallow flow systems may be releasing 4He at rates that are much
greater than U/Th decay, making it possible to use 4He as a groundwater dating
tool over time scales as short as 101 years. This proposal is to investigate the
mechanisms leading to and the geographical extent of aquifers that are releasing
4He at rates greater than U/Th decay. The primary objective of the proposed
research is to evaluate the use of 4He as a groundwater tracer over time scales
of 10 to several hundred years. Specific research questions include the
following: (1) What are the mechanisms controlling the exchange of 4He between
aquifer solids and groundwater? Can this exchange rate be predicted and if so
what is the uncertainty? (2) How spatially variable are He release rates? Are
spatial variations correlated with variations in basic hydraulic properties
(porosity, permeability) and/or geochemical properties (mineralogy, sedimentary
facies, diagenesis)? (3) What is the geographical extent of shallow aquifers
that are releasing 4He at rates that are significantly greater than U/Th decay?
Is it possible to predict the occurrence of high 4He release rates based on
general geologic concepts? (4) What are 4He release rates in carbonate and other
fractured rock systems? (5) To what extent does the total 4He content of aquifer
solids represent the paleohydrology of the aquifer protolith? Can total 4He
contents be used to reconstruct the hydrologic history of an aquifer? Direct
measurements of the 4He release from aquifer solids will be compared with
release rates based on radiogenic 4He concentrations in groundwater and direct
determinations of groundwater age using 3H/3He and chlorofluorocarbons. An
evaluation of release mechanisms includi ng potential spatial variations in
release rates will be used to assess the viability of dating groundwater with
4He over the time scale of 50 to 500; existing groundwater dating methods are
not accurate over this environmentally important time scale. Evaluating the
potential impacts of anthropogenic practices on the quality of groundwater
resources depends on an accurate measure of fluid velocities and travel times.
However, traditional hydraulic approaches are problematic due to extreme
variability in permeability. The utility of groundwater dating methods results
from the fact that the groundwater age itself, at any point in a flow system, is
an integration of the velocity field along the entire upstream flow path. Thus,
a single measurement of age contains memory and embodies much more information
than a point measurement of velocity (or permeability). Methods that provide
accurate measures of groundwater travel times over time scales of 10 to hundreds
of years may thus allow a characterization of flow systems at a level of detail
that is presently not available and yet is needed to solve water quality as well
as water supply problems. ??