* 9627766
* High Resolution Paleoecology in a Complex Tropical          Ecosystem (Lake Tanganyika, Africa) and the Development of  Paleoecological Models for Lake Conservation Biology
* GEO,EAR
* 08/15/1996,07/31/1999
* Andrew Cohen, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* H. Richard Lane
* 07/31/1999
* USD 179,833.00

9627766 Cohen This project will examine the patterns and timing of benthic
paleocommunity change in Lake Tanganyika, a large and ancient aquatic ecosystem.
Prior investigations in the lake have yielded conflicting views of the nature of
ecological interactions in the lake, whether they are tightly linked and
coevolved, or whether they are much looser assortments of taxa, formed either
through the individualistic habitat requirements of components species or even
more randomly by recruitment from patchy metapopulations. This disagreement is a
microcosm of the broader and long-standing argument among ecologists of what a
community is and how it is assembled. The dispute is not merely academic, since
the design of underwater reserves in a lake implicity requires assumptions about
the permanence or ephemerality of communities and their component species'
populations. Given its intrinsic interest as a major reservoir of biodiversity
(&gt;1400 spp., ~600 endemic), Lake Tanganyika provides an excellent site to
address this problem using paleoecolgical techniques. Preliminary studies have
demonstrated that dateable cores with abundant and diverse faunas can be
obtained from the nearshore sediments of this lake, with stratigraphic
resolution on the decadal (and perhaps even annual) level. Cores taken at
strategic localities in the lake will be taken to create an interface between
the time-scales investigated by Long Term Ecological Research Studies (decadal)
and the time spans to which marine paleoecologist are normally constrained by
time-averaging taphonomic processes (millenia). These cores can be used to
answer questions of interest to both conservation biologist and theoretical
paleoecologists. The primary goal of this project will be to document patterns
of local extinction and recolonization of habitat patches by individual benthic
species (crustaceans, molluscs and sponges) and to determine the degree to which
the various species histories at each site are interrelated. This will be ach
ieved by coring portions of the lake where high resolution paleoecological
records can be obtained, obtaining a closely-spaced series of radiometric dates
(210 PB and AMS 14C) to provide an accurate chronology of the cores, and then
sampling the fossil fauna at ~decadal scale intervals. A series of cores at both
distrurbed (river delta) and undisturbed (platform environments away from major
rivers) localities will be taken along the Tanzanian coast of the lake along
depth transects (25,50 and 75m) and analyzed quantitatively for fossils benthos
content and various paleoenvironmental indicators (sedimentology, stable isotope
history and diatom paleoecology) to address the following questions: -Do species
groups colonize and dissappear from localities in synchrony or
individualistically? -Are appearances and disappearances of species correlated
with changes in overall diversity and/or environmental shifts? -Do particular
clusters of taxa replace each other consistently in biotic overturn, in the
absence of paleoenvironmental change? -Does the paleobiologic record in Lake
Tanganyika better support a model of extreme niche specialization and species
integration (little relative biotic overturn, under relatively constant
environmental conditions or one of continuous non-equilibrium reassortment of
species assemblages? -At what rate do local extinction and recolonization events
naturally occur and how "permanent" or temporary are populations of local
endemics? -What are the implications of the observed presence or absence of
community cohesion for the establishment of underwater reserves in adjacent
parts of the lake? Community paleoecologist and conservation biologists share a
host of questions about community structure and stabilty, although explicit
linkages between the two fields have rarely been articulated. The research
proposed here has the potential to demonstrate ways in which these linkages can
be made.