* 9627879
* Collaborative Research:  Evolutionary Dynamics of           Endosymbiont-Borne Adaptation in Aphids
* NONE,NONE
* 02/15/1996,01/31/1999
* Paul Baumann, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Mark Courtney
* 01/31/1999
* USD 125,000.00

9627879 BAUMANN Aphids and many other plant-feeding insects are dependent on
specialized bacteria, called endosymbionts, that live within cells and that are
transmitted from the mother insect to her offspring. The best documented
function of endosymbionts within aphids is the provision of the essential
nutrient, tryptophan. Because aphids do not ingest tryptophan in their diets,
they depend on their endosymbionts to provide this nutrient. Thus the bacterial
genes that underlie tryptophan production are critical to the growth and
reproduction of the insect host. This study examines the evolution of the
endosymbiont genes underlying tryptophan production in aphids. Previous work has
indicated that these genes show an unusual pattern of accelerated evolution in
the endosymbionts of certain aphid species. This project uses methods of
molecular biology to test explanations for the variation in evolutionary rates
in this gene. Because endosymbionts are an essential component of many crop
pests, including such groups as aphids, whiteflies, and scale insects, this
study will contribute to fundamental knowledge that could ultimately lead to
progress in pest management. Agricultural entomologists have suggested that the
short-term evolution of endosymbiont traits that affect insect performance is
important in the origin of new strains of pest species. This study will be one
of the first to directly examine evolution within endosymbiont genes that are
critical to insect survival and reproduction.