* 9627613
* Fluvial Geochemistry of the Arctic Rivers of Eastern        Siberia
* NONE,NONE
* 07/15/1996,12/31/1998
* John Edmond, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* L. Douglas James
* 12/31/1998
* USD 173,000.00

9627613 Edmund The aims of this continuing project are; (1) to characterize the
chemical compositions of the pristine large rivers of Eastern Siberia and their
fluxes to the Arctic Ocean; (2) to investigate the factors controlling
weathering rates in low temperature environments as compared to those operating
in similar geologic terrains in the Tropics; (3) to constrain the effects that
the large expansion of peri-glacial environments characteristic of the glacial
maxima had on weathering fluxes; (4) to provide base-line data for the
environment likely to be most impacted by future greenhouse warming. This work
will provide insights on the biogeochemical effects that will result from the
climatic and hydrologic changes to be expected from anthropogenic global
warming. In addition the results will allow estimates to be made of the effects
of climatic deterioration, i.e. glacial maximum conditions, on global weathering
fluxes, presently a topic of much controversy owing, mainly, to lack of data.
Strong constraints will also be place on the assumptions used in global climate
models of the geologic past that invoke a pCO2-weathering feedback to stabilize
the greenhouse effect. Extensive field work has been carried out in the basins
of the Lena, Yana and Kolyma. Data from steams draining the igneous and
metamorphic basement rocks of the Aldan Shield and Trans-Baikal Highland in the
Lena headwaters give areal chemical fluxes comparable to those from the Guayana
Shield in the drainage of the Orinoco, this despite the fact that latter has an
annual average temperature~50oC warmer and receives at least four times the
amount of precipitation. While the chemical yields are comparable the severity
of weathering, as indicated by Na/K ratios and the 87 Sr/86Sr values, is much
less in the Siberian basins. In the Tropics weathering of basement is
essentially complete, to kaolinite and gibbsite, but extremely slow, "transport
limited". In cold climates frost action continually generates fresh re action
surfaces at all scales leading to essentially an "exposure limited" situation.
In addition rivers draining the complete range of sedimentary rock types give
fluxes similar to those observed in lower latitudes e.g. the large rivers of
China. It is proposed to extend this work to the other important rivers of the
region, the Anabar, Olenek, Indigirka and Anadyr, and to make a complete
characterization of the major, minor and trace element geochemistry and of the
isotopic systematics of the dissolved and particulate organic carbon and
nitrogen systems of the fluvial regimes in this unglaciated but cold-dominated
environment.