* 9627189
* Mathematical Sciences: Mutual Synchronization of Biological Oscillators
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/1996,07/31/2000
* Steven Strogatz, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Michael Steuerwalt
* 07/31/2000
* USD 185,000.00

Strogatz 9627189 Many populations of biological oscillators can exhibit
remarkable collective behavior. Despite differences in their individual natural
frequencies, the oscillators spontaneously synchronize to a common frequency.
Examples include chorusing crickets, fireflies that flash in unison, and
synchronous firing of cardiac pacemaker cells. The investigator and his
colleagues study the principles underlying these self-synchronizing systems,
using analytical, computational, and experimental methods. The mathematical
investigations concern the dynamics and stability of mutual synchronization,
analyzed with techniques from perturbation theory, nonlinear dynamics, and
statistical mechanics. The experimental aspects of the project deal with the
chorusing behavior of the snowy tree cricket, regarded as a model experimental
system for studying mutual synchronization. The experiments quantify
psychophysical aspects of individual male responses as they relate to chorusing,
and then extend to the behavior of larger groups, based on empirical measures of
auditory perception, physiology, and signal propagation. The goal is to
understand mutual synchronization in this biological system, and to test the
results quantitatively against the predictions of mathematical models. This
study provides the first detailed experimental investigation of mutual
synchronization in a biological system. Although the synchronized chirping of
crickets is the phenomenon being studied, the goals of the project are much
broader. How does synchrony emerge in a group of dissimilar oscillators? This
issue arises throughout all of science and technology, in such problems as the
synchronization of arrays of lasers to achieve greater collective power, or the
synchronization of pacemaker cells in the heart to produce a coherent beat.
Theories of such self-synchronizing systems have been considered mathematically
for almost thirty years, but they have never been checked experime ntally
against any real biological system. This study is the first step in that
direction. Benefits are expected not only for our understanding of biological
synchronization, but also for spin-offs to technological applications involving
arrays of oscillators, such as superconducting Josephson junctions and lasers.