* 9627330
* Mathematical Sciences:  Stabilized Geometric Integrators    with Applications to Molecular Simulation
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/1997,05/31/2001
* Brian Laird, University of Kansas Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Michael Steuerwalt
* 05/31/2001
* USD 287,000.00

Leimkuhler 9627330 The investigator and collaborators form a multidisciplinary
team from biochemistry, chemistry and mathematics that seeks new, more efficient
numerical integrators for problems of molecular simulation. They develop
timestepping schemes that are based on detailed study of the structure and force
laws of these molecular systems, and that respect invariants and symmetries such
as the symplectic structure and time-reversibility associated to the flow map.
The project extends the range of dynamical phenomena accessible to simulation
studies by increasing the allowable timestep and improving stability of
numerical integrators. Moreover, by automating the selection of timestep in
molecular dynamics simulations, this work seeks to remove an outstanding
inefficiency and push forward the state-of-the-art in molecular dynamics
software. The specific problems considered include (1) the development of
combined coordinate and time-transformations as a tool for stabilizing the local
dynamics of close particle pairs, (2) exploration of the relationship between
timestep and numerical behavior for molecular dynamics and the design of time-
reversible stepsize variation mechanisms, and (3) the study of timestepping
schemes appropriate to spin dynamics, constrained systems, and related problems
and their application in chemical and physical dynamics problems. The new
techniques are used to simulate biological macromolecules and for problems
concerning the structure and dynamics of solid-liquid interfaces as well as
studies of transitions in glasses and spin-glasses. Important challenges to our
understanding of physical, chemical and biochemical processes are being tackled
through the use of computer simulations, but many difficult problems remain well
beyond the reach of today's hardware and software technology. Even improvements
in computer power of several orders of magnitude will not enable the direct
simulation of complex proteins or DNA chains on the longest relevant timescales
unless substantial improvements are also obtained in computer algorithms and
software. A key component of simulation software for many large-scale problems
in biochemistry, chemistry, physics, and materials science is the fundamental
molecular dynamics integration scheme, which approximates the changing positions
and velocities of the constituent atoms of a substance from one moment in time
to the next. In this project an interdisciplinary team from biochemistry,
chemistry and mathematics develops new molecular dynamics integrators in order
to improve the efficiency and accuracy of simulations. Funding for the project
is provided by programs of Computational Mathematics, Theoretical and
Computational Chemistry, and the Office of Multidisciplinary Activities in MPS
and by the Computational Biology program in BIO.