* 9627213
* DOING IT
* NONE,NONE
* 09/15/1996,08/31/1997
* Bill Jersey, Quest Productions
* Standard Grant
* Hyman H. Field
* 08/31/1997
* USD 407,924.00

9627213 Jersey Quest Productions is producing and testing the pilot phase for a
series of weekly television programs entitled, Doing It. The series which is
targeted at six to ten year olds is co-production with KCTS, the producer of
Bill Nye the Science Guy in Seattle, will focus on science and technology-
oriented themes by introducing viewers to men and women who develop and apply
science and technology in their everyday lives. In each program, two young
"explorers" will journey to a place in the real world that fascinates them and,
with an adult guide, explore the inner workings of the particular site and how
science is involved in what the person does. An additional character, a young
woman named Howzit Work, will serve as a role model for the process of figuring
out how and why things work. Each episode will end with a Doing It at Home
segment which feature an activity or investigation selected from one of the
activities designed by the GEMS project at the Lawrence Hall of Science.
Ancillary material designed to encourage child/parent involvement is science
include a Doing It booklet, and Internet Home Page, and a CD-ROM. The PI and
Senior Producer will be Bill Jersey. His children's TV credits include 3-2-1
Contact, Sesame Street, and Bi-Lingual Children's Television. Pierre Valette,
who helped develop and produce the pilot for Where in the World is Carmen
Sandiego? is the creator of the project and will serve as Project Director. The
Executive-in-charge of Production at KCTS is Elizabeth Brock, one of the
developers of Bill Nye the Science Guy. The Senior Science Consultant is Ted
Ansbacher, former Director of Exhibits at the New York Hall of Science.
Evaluation will be conducted by Barbara Flagg. They will work closely with an
advisory team of formal and informal science educators.