* 9627406
* Mathematical Sciences Postdoctoral Research Fellowships
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/1996,08/31/2000
* David Borthwick, MI Fellowships
* Fellowship Award
* Lloyd E. Douglas
* 08/31/2000
* USD 75,000.00

9627406 Borthwick David R. Borthwick received his doctoral degree from Harvard
University and will pursue research under the guidance of Marc A. Rieffel at the
University of California at Berkeley. The research deals with analysis on
manifolds, concentrating on deformations of function algebras on symplectic
manifolds, asymptotic problems on Kahler manifolds and scattering theory on
hyperbolic manifolds . %%% The Mathematical Qciences Postdoctoral Research
Fellowships are awards to recent recipients of doctoral degrees in the
mathematical sciences. These awards are a means of contributing to the future
vitality of the scientific effort of the nation. As researchers in the
mathematical sciences expand their interactions with other disciplines, and as
the interplay increases between the various areas of mathematics itself,
opportunities for postdoctoral research and training are becoming increasingly
important. The Fellowships are designed to permit awardees to choose research
environments that will have maximal impact on their future scientific
development. The fellowship is designed to provide 24 months of support divided
into 18 academic-year months and three periods of two summer months. The
recipient may choose (1) the Research Fellowship option which allows for full
time support for any 18 academia year months in a three year period, in
intervals not shorter than 3 consecutive months or (2) the Research
Instructorship option which allows the 18 months of academic year support to be
taken as nine months of full time support and 18 months of half time support.
Not more than two months of summer support from this Fellowship may be received
in any calendar year. ***