* 9627104
* Organometallic Reaction Mechanisms
* MPS,CHE
* 06/01/1996,04/30/2000
* Charles Casey, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Margaret A. Cavanaugh
* 04/30/2000
* USD 605,000.00

This award in the Inorganic, Bioinorganic, and Organometallic Chemistry Program
supports research on mechanisms of organometallic reactions by Dr. Charles P.
Casey of the Chemistry Department, University of Wisconsin at Madison. Three
distinct areas of research will be pursued: investigations of d-0 yttrium and
zirconium olefin complexes; development of pi-propargyl metal complexes; and the
chemistry of rhenium carbene complexes. The systems chosen for the first area of
investigation will permit measurement of the rate of alkene dissociation and the
rate of inversion at the metal center. This information is important for
understanding the stereochemistry of polymerization with chiral metallocene
catalysts. Three methods of synthesis of the pi-propargyl complexes will be
investigated, as well as the reaction of nucleophiles with these complexes,
which have been shown to be useful in organic synthesis. The stereochemistry of
addition of HCl to rhenium carbene complexes will be studied, along with the
formation of some unusual complexes designed to give information about modes of
association of metals with double-bonded carbon compounds and about using
variation in ring strain to favor formation of desired products. Organometallic
chemistry has proved to be very useful in homogeneous catalysis and in
developing new methods and reagents for synthesis of organic compounds. The
reactions chosen for investigation are relevant to the behavior of commercially
important processes.