* 9627334
* Virtual Reality Education
* NONE,NONE
* 05/15/1997,05/31/1999
* Steve Novotny, San Jose High Academy
* Standard Grant
* Dennis Schatz
* 05/31/1999
* USD 43,080.00

*** 9627334 Novotny Through the application of advanced technology, the Virtual
Reality Education project will aid in the development of critical thinking, and
self-assessment skills in the areas of mathematics, and science in students. In
six weeks the students. In six weeks the students will discover and experience
Virtual Reality first-hand, while also learning about its relation to many
different forms of math and science. As the students progress, their ability to
not only comprehend,but visualize, and apply a variety of mathematical concepts
will vastly improve. Their understanding about physics, algebra, logic,
geometry, and (for the more advanced) calculus, will be put to the test as they
are asked to complete a packet of Virtual worlds which contain applications of
those fields of maths and science. Students who complete the packet early enough
will be allowed to develop their own Virtual worlds in which other applications
of math and science will be demonstrated. All the results from each six week
course will be placed on a special web-page on San Jose High Academys' home-
page. This will allow for a quick dissemination of the results, aiding in the
development of other educational VR projects. This, then, would make the VRE
project one that has a global impact, as it would be accessible to the entire
world via the World Wide Web. The potential of Virtual Reality is so immense
that its incorporation into our society is an inevitable fact. The educational
value of this technology lies within its ability to train students to visualize
what would otherwise be vague concepts. As visualization is 90% of the
comprehension process, Virtual Reality can easily be described as one of the
most advanced forms of teaching. By being a pioneer project, VRE is
demonstrating the strength of this new technology at a high-school level. This
demonstration will become a reference point for every educationally based
Virtual Reality project in the future. The impact on the current system of
education, a nd indeed on our own understanding of how to educate, will be
immeasurable. ***