* 9628801
* Hardware Multicast Routing Techniques for Scalable          Parallel Computers
* CSE,CCF
* 06/01/1996,08/31/1999
* Prasant Mohapatra, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* None
* 08/31/1999
* USD 167,486.00

MLulticast communication is an essential feature in parallel computers. It
benefits several parallel applications and is useful for shared memory,
distributed memory, and distributed-shared memory systems. Multicasting also
helps in supporting a class of communication patterns known as collective
operations. Multicasting can be supported by either hardware or software
approaches. However, the hardware approach is significantly faster than the
software approach. Most vendors of parallel computers are either unaware of it
or have made unsuccessful attempts at implementing deadlock-free hardware
multicasting schemes. This project is concerned with efficient hardware
multicast routing techniques for meshes and switch-based parallel computers.
Several implementation details, such as start-up latency, router delays, and
multiple multicasts, will be addressed in this project. The primary objectives
of the research will include the minimization of the total communication latency
by reducing the number of start-up steps required for multicasting in meshes.
For switched-based systems, this project will examine alternative switch designs
to support efficient deadlock-free multicasting. Finally, an effort will be made
to design low-cost routers that support multicast operation. Two primary
constraints will be observed during this research. First, the cost and
complexity of the algorithms will be minimized. Second, the PI will focus on
techniques that not only support deadlock-free multicast operations but also
enhance the performance of node-to-node unicast communications.