* 9628083
* U-Th Systematics of Primitive Icelandic Basalts:  Building  a Foundation for Interpreting U-Th Disequilibrium in MORBs
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/1996,12/31/1999
* Alan Zindler, Florida State University
* Standard Grant
* David Lambert
* 12/31/1999
* USD 300,000.00

9628083 Zindler This proposal describes a detailed chemical and isotopic study
of olivine tholeiites and picrites from three main localities in Iceland. It
will focus on development of a quantitative understanding of the factors that
cause variations in the degree of U-Th disequilibrium in these rocks. The
principal goal of the project is to explore and quantify the effects of
variations in the depth of melting and source composition on U-Th disequlibrium,
absent the complications of age-uncertainty inherent in direct investigations of
MORBs. Samples will be collected during field seasons early in the first and
third years of the project. In addition, the study will make use of existing
well-characterized sample suites. The main stage of data acquisition will occur
during the first two years and result in detailed isotopic and geochemical
characterization of approximately 75 samples. The second stage of data
acquisition will occur during the third year of the project, and will focus on
important targets identified by the earlier work. The results of this
investigation are expected to lead to substantial improvement in the utility of
the U-Th method as a tool for studying MORBs and other mantle-derived volcanics.