* 9628165
* Issues in Design of Lightwave Networks with Sparse          Wavelength Conversion
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/1996,08/31/1998
* Arun Somani, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Tatsuya Suda
* 08/31/1998
* USD 230,082.00

The objective of the proposed research is to develop viable solutions for
topological connectivity and wavelength conversion in all-optical wavelength-
routing networks. There are two major components to the proposed research. The
first is to develop a comprehensive understanding of the role of wavelength
converters in topology design, routing, and performance of wavelength-routing
networks. In particular, we will investigate the effects of a variable number of
converters in a network and address the problem of wavelength converter
placement in the network. We will analyze the behavior of the network with a
nonuniform traffic demand. The effect of network topology and wavelength
conversion on the blocking performance will be investigated. We will also
explore issues in supporting multicast traffic and in network interconnection.
The second component of the project is to develop wavelength-routing algorithms
with a distributed control paradigm. In the resulting network, each node makes
routing decisions dynamically based on a precomputed set of preferred paths and
the current occupancy of wavelengths in its neighborhood. We will develop novel
network management and control mechanisms in this environment. An important
issue in the practical implementation of a fiber-based wide area network is its
ability to survive link failures without serious disruption. We will address
this issue by studying the tradeoff between physical connectivity, wavelength
conversion, and fault tolerance.