* 9628841
* Phylogenetic Studies in Neotropical Vaccinieae (Ericaceae): The Systematics of Macleania, Psammisia, Mycerinus
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/1996,07/31/2000
* James Luteyn, New York Botanical Garden
* Standard Grant
* James E. Rodman
* 07/31/2000
* USD 200,019.00

9628841 Luteyn A promising partnership between morphological and molecular
specialists on the heath family, Ericaceae, is directed toward study of several
genera of tropical montane "blueberries" in Central and South America. Dr. James
Luteyn of New York Botanical Garden is experienced in field collecting and in
taxonomic revisionary work, with a major interest in New World ericads; Dr.
Kathleen Kron of Wake Forest University is a specialist in molecular
phylogenetic analyses of plants, with interests in New and Old World
rhododendrons and other ericads. Combined morphological and molecular (DNA)
analyses will focus on the genera Macleania, Psammisia, and Mycerinus and their
putative relatives in the Vaccinieae or blueberry group of Ericaceae, making use
of newly collected field materials and preserved herbarium specimens. The
taxonomic revisionary work will produce full descriptions of all recognized
species, identification keys, a nomenclator with updated scientific names,
habitat notes, and full inventory of the geographic distribution of all the
species. DNA sequencing will be done for both chloroplast genes and the nuclear
ribosomal region, where nucleotide differences (mutational substitutions) are
likely to prove phylogenetically informative between species and genera. The
combined morphology and DNA data sets can be analyzed to construct a
phylogenetic tree of these ericad taxa. From such a taxon genealogy, one can
study character evolution (in floral form, for example, and fruit type) and
infer migrational histories for the species. The Ericaceae are species-rich in
the Andean regions of the neotropics, and often highly localized or endemic in
their distribution. Increasing habitat destruction adds urgency to the study of
these and other plants. The union of morphological and molecular approaches is
an encouraging response to the need for modern biodiversity studies of tropical
plants. Results of the taxonomic and phylogenetic investigations will prove
useful in ecology and evolut ion and for germplasm research and conservation.