* 9628865
* Examination of the Role of Inbreeding Depression in         Maintaining Polymorphism in Eulimnadia texana Packard       (Conchostraca, Crustacea)
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/1996,08/31/2000
* Stephen Weeks, University of Akron
* Standard Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 08/31/2000
* USD 128,758.00

9628865 WEEKS Evolutionary biologists seek to understand circumstances favoring
self-fertilization as a viable form of reproduction. Commonly, offspring
produced through self-fertilization have reduced fitness compared to outcrossed
counterparts. This "inbreeding depression" is thought to be caused by either
expression of recessive deleterious genes (partial dominance model) or by
reduced heterozygote advantage (overdominance model). Inbreeding depression
should be reduced in a regularly inbreeding population in the former case,
whereas fitness continues to decrease with continued inbreeding as long as there
is genetic variation in the latter scenario. Quantification of the long-term
effects of inbreeding in regularly self-fertilizing species is fundamental to
distinguishing between these two models, and thus to increased understanding of
mating system evolution. The current proposal is designed to explore factors
contributing to the maintenance of outcrossing in a naturally selfing species of
shrimp. Eulimnadia texana. By exploiting both E. texana's unique breeding system
and its extraordinarily short generation time (5-10 days), the consequences of
inbreeding over several generations of self-fertilization will be examined. Data
on several fitness components (egg production, age at maturity, survivorship,
and growth) will be collected. The fitness responses will be compared for 15
generations in four populations differing in their history of previous
inbreeding. These fitness data will be used to compare the predictions of two
models for inbreeding depression, and thus to begin to understand the forces
contributing to the maintenance of the observed polymorphism in natural
populations. This project should lead to a significant increase in our
understanding of the evolution of cross fertilization in plants and animals.