* 9628397
* Investigating the Individuality/Scalability Tradeoff        in the Provision of Networked Services
* CSE,CNS
* 09/15/1996,08/31/2000
* Mostafa Ammar, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Karen R. Sollins
* 08/31/2000
* USD 266,189.00

Networked services are at the heart of the information revolution. This work
focuses on two characteristics of a networked service: 1) scalability: the
ability of the service to handle a large number of end users with low per-user
cost, and 2) individuality: the ability of the service to deal with differing
requirements imposed because of heterogeneity of network paths leading to the
end-users. Although a high level of both individuality and scalability are
desirable features of any networked service, they are normally conflicting goals
that need to be traded-off with each other. This research aims to investigate
this tradeoff from the networking infrastructure's viewpoint. This project seeks
to answer: 1) In services using multicast communication, is it possible to add a
level of individuality while sacrificing scalability in a controlled manner? 2)
In services using unicast communication, is it possible to improve scalability
while controlling how much individuality is sacrificed? 3) Is it possible not to
require the labeling of services as unicast or multicast and move the burden of
deciding the appropriate network support to a "generic" interface layer? To
answer these questions the research seeks to develop network support mechanisms
to navigate the individuality/scalability spectrum, giving multicast services
the ability to be more individualized and unicast services the ability to be
more scalable. The research will consist of investigating specific instances of
adding a measure of individuality to multicast services and specific instances
of making unicast services more scalable by sharing resources through multicast
and requesting batching at servers. The research will include services such as
video distribution, Web information delivery and multimedia-on-demand (live and
streamed). The work will consider Internet as well as ATM-style networking with
some emphasis on Internet over ATM architectures.