* 9628664
* Isomerization Polymerizations of Allyl Ethers and Related   Monomers
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/1996,06/30/2000
* James Crivello, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Continuing grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 06/30/2000
* USD 240,000.00

9628664 Crivello A novel metal catalyzed isomerization/polymerization reaction
has been developed in which readily available and inexpensive allyl ethers and
related compounds can be readily and efficiently polymerized to give high
molecular weight polymers. Depending on the specific metal complex selected,
polymerization can be spontaneous and highly exothermic, or require heat or
light activation. The polymerization of simple allyl, crotyl and cyclic and
acyclic vinyl acetals has been demonstrated. Typical examples of these monomers
will be polymerized and the effects of the structures of the metal carbonyl, the
silane and the monomers on the rate of polymerization and the molecular weight
of the resulting polymers will be determined. The progress of the
polymerizations and their rates will be followed using NMR, GPC and FT-IR
methods. Further, the structures, tacticities, glass transition temperatures
and, where appropriate, mechanical and thermal properties of the resulting
polymers will be fully characterized. Multifunctional monomers and oligomers
bearing pendant and terminal allyl and crotyl ethers will be prepared and
characterized, then polymerized using the optimized catalysts and reaction
conditions. Similarly, monomers bearing various functional groups including
esters, alcohols, carbonates, ethers, urethanes and amides will also be prepared
and their polymerizations using these novel catalyst systems carried out. %%%
One of the major aims of this project is to elucidate the mechanism(s) of the
isomerization/polymerizations . Accordingly, where possible, the synthesis of
appropriate organometallic intermediates will be carried out and their
involvement in the polymerizations be determined. Based on these studies, novel
and more efficient thermal and photochemically activated catalyst systems will
be designed and employed. Lastly, the application of this chemistry to the
preparation of linear and crosslinked polymers of potential practica l and
commerical interest will be addressed. Attempts will be made to prepare and
characterize films and castings of polymerized allyl ethers. ***