* 9628080
* Acquisition of a Stable Isotope Mass Spectrometer for       Automated Carabonate Analysis:  Analytical Instrumentation  for Earth Science/Global Change Research
* GEO,EAR
* 09/15/1996,08/31/1999
* Julia Cole, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Russell Kelz
* 08/31/1999
* USD 113,487.00

9628080 Cole This grant provides $113,487 as one-half support of the costs of
acquiring a stable isotope ratio mass spectrometer (SIRMS) with a dual inlet
system and a Kiel device for automated carbonate sample introduction. The PI's
research involves deciphering high resolution records of climate change
indicated by variations in the carbon and oxygen isotopic signatures recorded in
biogenic carbonates including corals, foraminifera and mollusc shells. The
primary focus of research to be conducted utilizing this mass spectrometer will
be on analyses of the del 18-O recorded in massive, scleractinian coral
skeletons as high resolution indicators of variability in tropical sea surface
temperatures. These corals grow rapidly and can live for periods as long as 800
years and thus offer a unique, high resolution record of climate variability
over decadal to centurian time-scales and can aid our understanding of coupled
ocean-atmospheric systems such as the El Ni o/Southern Oscillation that has
global significance in determining patterns of precipitation and thus is
relevant to worldwide agriculture and flooding hazard mitigation. To effectively
and efficiently analyze the carbon and oxygen isotopic ratios recorded in
biogenic carbonates at sub-monthly resolutions requires a sensitive mass
spectrometer capable of analyzing samples in the 100-600 micro-gram size range
with high throughput. Analyses of upwards of 10,000 samples per year including
sufficient replicates so as to ensure regional fidelity can be required for
century-scale records. The inclusion of a Kiel device in this acquisition will
allow unassisted and sequential sample introduction of up to 74 samples, thus
allowing for nighttime operations which are essential for maintaining the high
throughput necessary for these high- resolution studies. ***