* 9628764
* Collaborative Workshop on the Mission and Design of a       National Organization for Biodiversity Information, Spring  1996, at the San Diego Supercomputer Center
* BIO,DEB
* 05/15/1996,04/30/1999
* Leonard Krishtalka, University of Kansas Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Mary C. McKitrick
* 04/30/1999
* USD 98,786.00

9628764 Krishtalka Currently, there is no single institution, agency, society or
group with the mission to assist biological collections with the task of making
biodiversity information freely and seamlessly available to science and society.
this mission will require technical expertise, political leadership and
scientific vision, but particularly the determination and will for the community
to undertake this effort together. The compelling need for such a national
biodiversity information enterprise has been established in numerous national
and international reports. The purpose of this workshop award is to hold a
planning and development meeting for the biological collections based community
and related disciplines. IN an earlier workshop, the group proposed the
establishment of the US Organization for Biodiversity Information with the
following mission statement, "Create or enhance the infrastructure and tools
necessary to organize information derived from biological collections and
associated biodiversity enterprises into a maximally accessible form to meet the
needs of society and science." Funding for this award will allow participants to
consider the promise of such a community-based organization to achieve this
mission, the changing nature of information, the technologically powerful
solutions that can unite the community's vast biodiversity information and link
it with other disciplines, and the issues and protocols of such an organizations
structure, function, and funding. This workshop is important for the development
of the US-OBI goals, as well as the eventual effort to make accessible the vast
quantity of information in the world's specimen based collections. In addition,
this effort is important to gather a broad based, community endorsement of the
goals of US-OBI.