* 9628802
* CAA:  Cloning and Initial Molecular Characterization of     Yeast VPS47 Gene
* NONE,NONE
* 07/15/1996,06/30/1997
* Editte Gharakhanian, California State University-Long Beach Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Eve Ida Barak
* 06/30/1997
* USD 58,499.00

9628802 Gharakhanian This is a Career Advancement Award for Women Scientists and
Engineers. The project focuses on the selective recognition, sorting and
transport of proteins to the lysosome (vacuole) of the yeast, Saccharomyces
cerevisiae. As in higher eukaryotes, the lysosomal vacuole of the yeast is its
degradative organelle, and several hydrolytic enzymes are localized there via
the secretory pathway. Various mutant screening strategies in different
laboratories have resulted in the isolation of a large collection of yeast
mutants that exhibit severe defects in protein delivery to the vacuole, called
vacuolar protein sorting mutants (vps mutants). The defective genes in these
mutants are likely to encode components of the cell's protein sorting apparatus.
Using a modified screening method, this laboratory isolated a new vps mutant,
vps47, which represents a unique genetic defect: it is the only severe
temperature sensitive vps mutant to date that shows no defects in the integrity,
structure, or function of the vacuole. This represents a very interesting gene
within the vacuolar localization machinery. This project, which will be carried
out during a sabbatical year, entails the cloning and characterization of the
VPS 47 gene. Insight into the function of this and other vps gene products will
be gained from these characterizations. ***