* 9628133
* A New Paradigm for the Analysis of Transient                Saturated/Unsaturated Flow and Transport in Randomly        Heterogeneous Soils
* GEO,EAR
* 02/01/1997,01/31/2001
* Shlomo Neuman, University of Arizona
* Continuing Grant
* L. Douglas James
* 01/31/2001
* USD 283,796.00

9628133 Neuman The objectives of this project are to develop (a) an exact
conceptual/mathematical framework for the optimum prediction and analysis of
transient saturated and unsaturated water flows in randomly heterogeneous
subsurface environments, subject to arbitrary initial conditions, source terms,
and boundary conditions; (b) a related conceptual/mathematical framework for the
prediction and analysis of nonreactive solute transport under transient flow in
saturated and partially saturated media; (c) associated low- and higher-order
computational schemes for such flows and solute transport. The theoretical
framework and computational methodology will rely on stochastically derived
deterministic flow and transport equations which contain both local and nonlocal
information-dependent parameters. In contrast to upscaled quantities which are
often difficult to justify theoretically, or compare with measurements, all
quantities entering into our equations will be defined on a scale compatible
with potentially available field data (their support scale). The theoretical
framework will contain explicit expressions to assess prediction uncertainty.
When the properties of a soil vary randomly in space, the corresponding flow and
transport equations are stochastic. To solve them analytically, the equations
must be linear(ized) and the soil properties severely restricted. To solve them
numerically by (conditional) Monte Carlo simulation is computationally intensive
and does not usually guarantee convergence. Ideally, the Monte Carlo method
converges to a (conditional) mean solution which constitutes an optimum unbiased
predictor of system behavior under uncertainly, and a (contional) variance which
measures prediction uncertainly. Our aim is to circumvent the need for Monte
Carlo simulations by evaluating these (conditional ) moments deterministically.
For this, we propose to first derive exact flow and transport equations that
govern the space-time evolution of these moments, then solv e them numerically
by approximation. We expect such flow and transport equations to be integro-
differential, hence nonlocal, non-Darcian, and non-Fickian. We refer to this new
solution paradigm as "smoothing". Contrary to upscaling in which a grid must be
defined a priori on the basis of ad hoc criteria, here the grid is defined a
posteriori based on how smooth the moment functions are expected to be. Their
smoothness is controlled in part by the quanlity and distribution of
conditioning (measurement) points in space-time. In most cases such points are
sparse enough to render the moment functions much smoother than are their random
counterparts. Hence a grid required to resolve the former is usually much
coarser than that required to resolve the latter. The net result should be a
considerable saving in computer time and storage when compared to the Monte
Carlo method. Exact conditional moment equations have been developed for steady
state saturated flow by Neuman and Orr (1993), and for nonreactive solute
transport by Neuman (1993) and Zhang and Neuman (1995e). These nonlocal
equations involve local and nonlocal flow and transport parameters that are
conditional on data and thus nonunique. Though the equations are exact, their
nonlocal parameters cannot be evaluated directly without either high-resolution
Monte Carlo simulation or approximation; a third option is to estimate them
indirectly by inverse methods. We propose to extend the above nonlocal flow and
transport theories to transient saturated and unsaturated flow conditions; to
develop suitable approximations for the corresponding parameters; and to develop
computational schemes for the solution of the corresponding nonlocal mean flow
and transport equations, as well as for the assessment of the corresponding
prediction errors.