* 9628296
* The Geochemical Carbon Cycle: A Vadose-Hydrologic Study of the Effect of Plants on Chemical Weathering
* NONE,NONE
* 08/01/1996,12/31/1998
* C. Kent Keller, Washington State University
* Standard Grant
* L. Douglas James
* 12/31/1998
* USD 149,999.00

9628296 Keller Carbon dioxide (CO2) is a greenhouse gas. One avenue to
understanding the relationship of atmospheric CO2 concentration to climate, is
to study that relationship over geologic time. This requires that we understand
the processes affecting atmospheric CO2 on long time scales. The principal
pathway for long-term transfer of CO2 from Earth's atmosphere to its crust is
(a) dissolution or "chemical weathering" of common minerals in soils, subsoils,
and groundwater systems, followed by (b) transport of the dissolved material to
the oceans in continental drainage, where (c) precipitation and deposition onto
the ocean floor occur. This sequence effects transfer of CO2 because mineral
dissolution consumes CO2 -containing acids and entrains the product bicarbonate
in drainage waters, which is later deposited in the oceans as carbonate
minerals. In the geochemical carbon cycle, this process is countervailed by the
return of CO2 from subducted and buried carbonate minerals to the atmosphere by
volcanism and metamorphism. The relative rates of these processes determine the
masses of CO2 in the atmosphere and lithosphere at any one time and, in the
process, affect Earth's climate. It is therefore important to understand the
factors controlling the rates of various steps in the cycle. One such factor is
the effect of plant communities, and their evolution over geologic time, on the
rate of chemical weathering. Plants could enhance chemical weathering--relative
to unvegetated conditions--by raising subsurface concentrations of acids,
facilitating the exposure of fresh mineral surfaces, and binding mineral grains
into water-retaining structures characteristic of soils. The actual extent of
weathering enhancement by these mechanisms is, however, poorly understood
because of the difficulty of factoring other variables out of comparative field
studies. This study takes advantage of ongoing long-term, field-scale
experiments in plant nutrient cycling. The experimental plots were designed for
monitoring of drainage water, and a ten-year database now exists. An NSF Small
Grant for Exploratory Research has been awarded to fund the (just-completed)
installation of an extensive network of vadose pore-water samplers to observe
how solution chemistry (the chemical weathering "load") evolves with depth and
time in soils and subsoils beneath the various plots. This proposal is
application for funds to continue the work, i.e., to do the geochemical and
hydrologic research which these facilities can now support. The results will
facilitate testing of hypotheses regarding the relative importance of
weathering-enhancement mechanisms. ??