* 9628190
* Efficient Fair Queuing and Load Balancing
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/1996,08/31/2000
* George Varghese, Washington University
* Continuing Grant
* Karen R. Sollins
* 08/31/2000
* USD 284,587.00

Internet traffic is growing rapidly due to the immense popularity of the World
Wide Web and new multimedia services such as video-conferencing. The increased
traffic volume requires higher speed (Gigabit/sec or higher) links, while some
of the new traffic varieties (such as audio and video) also demand quality-of-
service guarantees. This proposal addresses the problem of providing high speed
links by combining multiple low speed links and performing load balancing. It
also address the problem of providing quality of service guarantees for high
speed links through the design of efficient fair queuing algorithms. The
proposal is concerned with the design, evaluation, and implementation of new and
efficient fair queuing and load balancing algorithms. Although these two
problems may look quite different at a first glance, the Pis show that fair
queuing algorithms can be converted into load balancing algorithms using a time-
reversal argument. Existing mechanisms for fair queuing either are
computationally expensive, or they fail to provide the necessary service
guarantees (e.g., good bounds on latency and throughput) required by many
applications. The PIs develop a new fair queuing scheme called Tandem Clock Fair
Queuing, which offers quality-of-service guarantees comparable to those of the
best previous schemes (such as Weighted Fair Queuing), and yet appears to admit
efficient implementations. Existing methods for load balancing provide
inadequate load sharing in the presence of variable length packets, and may
result in non-FIFO delivery of data if packet headers are not allowed to be
modified. The PIs describe new load balancing schemes that solve these two
problems by transforming fair queuing schemes into load balancing schemes, and
by using the twin mechanisms of logical reception and sender simulation. The
investigators propose to refine and extend these new directions in fair queuing
and load balancing algorithms into complete and workable schem es that can be
deployed in the Internet and other real networks. They plan to evaluate and
refine our schemes using a combination of mathematical analysis, simulations,
and actual implementation using a testbed.