* 9628999
* Presidential Faculty Fellows/Presidential Early Career      Awards for Scientists and Engineers (PFF/PECASE):  Power    Estimation and Optimization in IC Design
* CSE,CCF
* 07/15/1997,09/30/2000
* Massoud Pedram, University of Southern California
* Continuing Grant
* Robert B Grafton
* 09/30/2000
* USD 200,000.00

This is developing a methodology and efficient techniques for evaluating and/or
predicting power dissipation of CMOS circuits. The major components of the
proposed methodology are survey sampling techniques, automata-based sequence
compaction techniques, a behavioral/logic level co-simulation engine,
regression-based power macro-modeling techliques, and information-theoretic
models of power dissipation. Special emphasis is being given to parasitic
capacitance estimation, input data modeling, impact of memory hierarchy and
circuit architecture, and effects of nonlinear delay equations and custom wire
load models on accuracy/efficiency trade-offs of the estimators. Concurrently,
CAD methodologies and techniques for minimizing the power dissipation in VLSI
circuits and systems are being developed. These are: low power optimization
techniques and prototype software programs for system-level partitioning and
hardware/software codesign, communication synthesis, multiple supply voltage
scheduling, activity-driven register allocation and binding, bus encoding, state
assignment for interacting finite state machines, logic restructuring and
simplification, timing-driven placement, routing and zero-skew clock tree
construction. Finally, power management techniques such as (serial or parallel)
gated clocks, stoppable clocks, and dynamic switching between power modes are
being studied and automated.