* 9628306
* Hydrogeological-Geophysical Methods for Subsurface          Site Characterization
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/1996,08/31/2001
* Yoram Rubin, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* L. Douglas James
* 08/31/2001
* USD 270,000.00

9628306 Yoram Rubin This project focuses on three issues that are critical to
environmental management of contaminated sites: reducing cost, reducing risk,
and increasing the effectiveness of subsurface remediation schemes. The
significance of this proposal is that it addresses the issue of site
characterization: not only that this issue is a very significant budget item in
the site cleanup effort, but also it is now realized that accurate and reliable
site characterization is the key to the success of any cleanup effort. Our
objective is to develop the scientific basis and demonstrate methodologies for
inexpensive high resolution imaging of natural heterogeneities and for relating
these heterogeneities to the hydrogeologic parameters that control flow and
contaminant transport--in effect, to develop methods for "imaging" hydrogeologic
parameters. Our focus is to help establish the scientific basis for applying
shallow geophysics to hydrogeological problems, through (a) feasibility studies,
(b) sediment-rock physics, and (c) improvements in the procedures for co-
interpretation of geophysical and hydrogeological data. An essential task will
be to identify limitations, pitfalls, and uncertainties of these co-
interpretation--i.e., to quantify the risks in applying shallow geophysics to
hydrogeological site characterization. The proposal combines theoretical
modeling, analysis of laboratory measurements, and integration techniques. Our
approach is to use seismic and electromagnetic methods jointly to map the
distribution to seismic velocity and attenuation and electrical conductivity in
the the 3-D volume defined by a set of boreholes. In a rough sense, both
velocity and conductivity depend on porosity and to a lesser extent on
permeability, clay content, saturation and nature of pore fluid. Laboratory
studies have shown these relationships in great detail and we now propose to
refine these results to utilize them to interpret survey data in terms of map of
the distribution of t he hydrogeologic properties. This proposal is an
interdisciplinary study, since it integrates the fields of hydrogeology and
geostatistics, geophysics, and rock physics. The team of researchers brings to
this project a large collective experience in performing theoretical, field, and
lab work. In response to cuts in the original budget, we reduced the scope of
lab testing and the variety of geological setting that we shall investigate
under Feasibility Studies. ??