* 9628969
* Interguild Interactions in Communities of Benthic Stream    Invertebrates
* BIO,DEB
* 10/01/1996,09/30/2000
* Stephen Heard, University of Iowa
* Standard Grant
* Margaret Palmer
* 09/30/2000
* USD 150,000.00

9628969 Heard The goal of this research is to test some long-standing but poorly
supported hypotheses about interactions among invertebrates inhabiting temperate
streams. Communities of bottom-dwelling stream invertebrates include organisms
with several different feeding strategies. "Shredders" feed on large pieces of
organic detritus, such as dead leaves and twigs. "Collectors" feed by filtering
small organic particles from the water. Because shredders process larger organic
material to small particles as they feed, it has been widely assumed that their
presence benefits collectors (increases growth and/or survival). However, recent
theoretical work suggests that this is only one possibility. Processing of
detritus produces particles in the short term, but also removes material that
could yield particles later; therefore, the presence of shredders might be
detrimental to collectors, particularly over longer time scales. In the present
study, experimental manipulations of shredder densities in natural and
artificial streams will be conducted to determine the nature of the shredder-
collector interaction in a small stream in eastern Iowa. These will be the first
complete, direct field tests of the shredder-collector facilitation hypothesis.
A third group of invertebrates, called "grazers", feed by scraping algae from
surfaces in streams. These animals also produce particles as they feed, and it
has also been assumed that grazers facilitate collector growth or survival. This
hypothesis will be tested with grazer manipulations in parallel with the
shredder experiments. Understanding interactions among stream invertebrates is
important because these organisms have ecological and economic importance beyond
the local stream reach. For instance, the study organisms are food resources for
aquatic and terrestrial animals including birds, bats, and economically
important fish species such as trout and salmon. Some collectors (blackflies)
are important pests and disease vectors for wildlife and livestock. Finally,
these invertebrates are widely used in assessing and managing stream water
quality. Results from this study will increase understanding of interactions
among species that are central to this important natural community.