* 9628269
* Behavior of Partly Crystallized Basaltic Magma Based on a   Field and Laboratory Study of a Thick Flood Basalt
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/1996,12/31/1998
* Anthony Philpotts, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* David Lambert
* 12/31/1998
* USD 117,000.00

9628269 Philpotts It is proposed to investigate four different profiles through
the Holyoke basalt using chemical analyses to define the degree of compaction
and the partial melting technique to enhance textures for petrographic analysis.
During compaction, the abundances of minerals and residual liquid change, but
these phases are difficult to identify precisely in a thin section of
crystalline rock. Yet it is important to know not only the abundance of liquid
at a given stage of compaction, but also its distribution. In preliminary
experiments on the Holyoke basalt, the P.I. found that by partly melting a
sample, a clear picture of the amount and distribution of residual liquid can be
obtained as a function of temperature. The experiments show that the crystal
mush consisted of a network of chains of refractory minerals surrounding
channels of liquid. In the experiment, the intrinsic permeability of the mush
could also be determined. When applied to rocks that have undergone different
degrees of compaction, the technique has the potential of determining how the
solids and liquid redistributed themselves during compaction and thus of
revealing the mechanisms involved. The results will provide quantitative data on
the mechanisms and rates of compaction of crystal mush formed from quartz
tholeiitic magma. Although determined with data from a surface flood-basalt
flow, the results will be applicable to processes acting in the earth.