* 9628189
* A Scalable Communication Integrated Optical Network (SCION) for Bandwidth Greedy Multimedia Applications
* CSE,CNS
* 09/15/1996,08/31/1997
* Imrich Chlamtac, Trustees of Boston University
* Continuing grant
* Tatsuya Suda
* 08/31/1997
* USD 120,007.00

This proposal introduced an original architectural approach for a scalable
integrated optical network consisting of "LAN" segments with varying topologies
interconnected by bridges. The investigators first investigate the two most
promising topologies, rings and folded buses, interconnected directly by a
bridge. Since in each case synchronization requirements and implementation
issues vary, certain topologies may be preferred in different areas of the
interconnected network. The investigators also propose to consider a network
backbone that serves as an interconnect structure among dozens of subnetworks.
In each subnetwork (rings or buses) packets are individually inserted into and
extracted from the fiber medium, while in the backbone slot routing is used to
exchange information between pairs of subnetworks. The bridge architecture is
one of the main foci of this proposal which will be investigated covering all
main options - a bridge without optical buffering, a bridge with optical
buffering (SDL-bridge), and associated protocols for controlling the bridge
operation and contention resolution, including the slot-override solution. The
node architecture of bridged network nodes must take into account: the type of
transceiver, the optical interface to the network, and the buffer organization
at the transmitter. The transmitters and the receivers can be tunable or fixed,
with at least one of the two devices being tunable to provide full connectivity
among the nodes. These node architecture options will be investigated together
with the new protocols to support different "sorting algorithms" needed to deal
with bridge operation to avoid the creation of electronic bottlenecks. The slot
routing related protocols and control are a key factor in the global network
performance. In order to allocate slots between local and internetwork traffic a
slot management protocol is necessary. Two possibilities will be evaluated: a
fixed slot allocation protocol, which allocates slots in a preset order,
determined by expected traffic and by network conditions, and a dynamic slot
allocation protocol, which allocates slots according to the instantaneous
offered load of each network segment. Analytical models and simulation tools
will be extensively used to assess the performance of the different solutions.