* 9628880
* Logical and Stochastic Approaches to Mismatch Resolution in Machine Translation
* CSE,IIS
* 10/15/1996,07/31/2001
* Megumi Kameyama, SRI International
* Continuing Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 07/31/2001
* USD 394,985.00

A major bottleneck in present-day machine translation (MT) is identifying
appropriate approximations when no exact translation exists between the source
and target languages. An MT system must resolve mismatches either by
incorporating implicit information from context or leaving out some information
in the source text. A prototype MT system is implemented, incorporating the
usual MT steps, analysis (analyzing English sources into an English-oriented
semantic representation), transfer (transferring the English-oriented semantics
into a Japanese-oriented semantics), and generation (building Japanese targets
from the transferred semantics), and adding a novel Mismatch Resolution Module
(MRM) called when generation fails. In this architecture, both analysis and
generation modules are purely monolingual, and transfer is simplistic,
incorporating minimal context information, and the bulk of mismatch resolution
and disambiguation is done in the generation-MRM loop, where the MRM offers
solutions to the problems encountered by generation. Two kinds of MRMs are
explored, logical and statistical, with the design goal of a single MRM
combining the advantages of both approaches. Translations are evaluated by
monolingual English speakers applying evaluation measures modeled on those of
the DARPA MT program. The focus is on translating the Japanese joint venture
business articles in the MUC-5 corpus into English. This project attacks the
crucial mismatch resolution problem with a novel architecture, logical and
statistical techniques, and on-line text resources.