* 9628063
* Paleobiology and Extinction of North American Pleistocene   Proboscideans
* GEO,EAR
* 09/15/1996,08/31/2001
* Daniel Fisher, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* H. Richard Lane
* 08/31/2001
* USD 151,500.00

Fisher 9628063 Near the close of the Pleistocene epoch, 10,000 years ago, many
of the largest and most impressive mammals inhabiting North America went
extinct. Among the most conspicuous of these victims were mastodons and
mammoths, both of which were relatives of elephants and members of the mammalian
order Proboscidea. The cause of this "late Pleistocene megafaunal extinction"
has been vigorously debated by paleontologist and archaeologists, with
implications for evolutionary ecology, global climate change, and conservation
of biodiversity. Opposing schools of thought attribute the extinction to climate
change associated with the end of the last Ice Age, excessive hunting by humans
, or possibly some combination of these factors. The project proposed here
continues a relatively new approach to resolving this controversy, distinguished
by its ability to associate clearly divergent predictions with the operation of
contrasting extinction mechanisms. It focuses on the structure and composition
of the tusks and molar teeth of mastodons and mammoths, revealing new
information about these animal's growth rates throughout life, their individual
reproductive histories, and the environments in which they lived. Mastodon and
mammoth tusks, like those of elephants, began growing shortly after birth and
continued throughout life, adding layer upon layer of new material. Microscopic
analysis of tusks cross sections reveals structural and compositional laminae,
somewhat like tree rings, representing regular intervals of time (daily,
fortnightly, and annual). Records of growth in molar teeth are shorter but
otherwise comparable. Variations in the thickness of these layers record changes
in tusks growth rate and indirectly reflect the animal's nutritional and
reproductive status. Variations in composition of layers, especially with
respect to oxygen isotopes, reflect intra- and interannual climate changes and
confirm annual features for use in age determination. Analyses of these patterns
yield data o n seasonal mortality, age, gender, growth rates, age at sexual
maturity, and calving. For example, sexual maturation in males is reflected as a
pronounced drop in growth rate caused by nutritional stress following expulsion
of maturing males from the matriarchal family units in which they were nurtured
as calves. Calving histories of females appear as multiyear cycles of variations
in tusk growth rate, reflecting a tradeoff between tusk growth on one hand and
fetal bone development and milk production on the other . Life history traits
such as age at maturity and calving interval are sensitive indicators of the
nature and degree of ecological stress because they show predictable patterns of
response to altered nutritional status and/or predation pressure. Deleterious
climate and/or vegetational change tends to retard growth and reproductive
schedules, while overhunting tends to accelerate them. The proposed research
will use patterns of tusk/tooth lamination and composition to quantify changes
in life history traits of North America proboscideans leading up to their time
of extinction. Such trends, within species, represent a population's own
response to changing conditions and thus comprise a sensitive record of the
nature of local ecological stress. the goal of this work is to test the two
major, competing causal hypotheses for the late Pleistocene extinction of
mastodons and mammoths: overkill and climatic/vegetational change. In addition
to contributing to the solution of a major problem in the history of the North
American biota, the results of this study will clarify the nature and history of
human interaction with proboscidean in North America and provide new information
relevant to paleoclimate reconstruction.