* 9628393
* A Theoretical, Empirical and Experimental Investigation of  the Spatial Scaling and Dynamics of Braided Rivers
* GEO,EAR
* 03/01/1997,02/28/2001
* Efi Foufoula-Georgiou, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* L. Douglas James
* 02/28/2001
* USD 192,284.00

9628393 Efi Foufoula Understanding the space-time variability of the morphology
of braided rivers is a challenging and difficult scientific problem. Lack of
data and process complexity have prohibited quantitative studies and hindered
this area of research. Improved satellite technology for remote sensing
monitoring and experimental (laboratory) production of braided rivers offer
essential information. The proposed theoretical, empirical and experimental
investigations, focused on understanding scale invariances and scale
dependencies (collectively called scale relationships) in the geometry of
braided rivers and provide physical interpretations of these relationships. In
particular, the goal is to quantitatively study and characterize the spatial and
temporal structure of braided rivers and ultimately provide a generalized
conceptual framework under which such systems can be studied for both physical
understanding and prediction. The specific objectives of the proposed research
are: Study scale relations in the morphology (planforms) of braided rivers.
Study and statistically characterize the evolution of planforms and spatial
patterns of braided rivers. Study the connection of the spatial and temporal
structure of braided river morphology to underlying physical mechanism via
experimental work and computer simulation. The experimental facility for the
laboratory production and monitoring of braided rivers will be used by and
interdisciplinary research team consisting of a geologist, a hydrologist and an
experimental/theoretical physicist. The main theoretical innovations will be (1)
development of a mathematically rigorous frame-work to address questions of
scale-invariances and scale-dependencies of complex systems, (2)integration of
spatial and temporal scaling ideas under a single framework, and (3) use of a
simple braided river model to investigate physical mechanisms responsible for
observed spatial and temporal structures in the morphology of braided rivers.
The fr amework for analysis and interpretation of these complex dynamical
systems will incorporate notions of multiscaling, self-organized criticality and
deterministic systems with complex behavior. Finding can be applied in (1)
prediction of the evolution of braided rivers for hydraulic engineering and
environmental studies and (2) scale relationships in geometric characteristics
of braided rivers of different size for transferability studies.