* 9628727
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:  The Generation of Cusps on Gravel Beaches:  The Evaluation of Edge Waves and           Self-Organization Hypotheses
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/1996,06/30/1998
* Douglas Sherman, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Bernard O. Bauer
* 06/30/1998
* USD 9,374.00

Wang, Jinkang U. of Southern California The presence or absence of beach cusps
in a coastal environment may be considered as one diagnostic of the nearshore
morphodynamic regime. This project will explore mechanisms of beach cusp
formation on gravel beaches through the empirical evaluation of competing
hypotheses. These are the standing edge-wave model and the system self
organization model. For more than 20 years most coastal scientists have accepted
the edge-wave theory. Recent analyses suggest that self organization may provide
a better explanation. The research is designed to obtain the data necessary to
discriminate between the two mechanisms. Field investigation will be carried out
at Malin Head, Ireland, where cusps are common and active along a stretch of
gravel shoreline, and condition favor a resolution of this conflict. Evaluations
will require measurement and comparison of oscillatory currents and water
surface fluctuations at several points adjacent to the foreshore, repetitive
grid profiling, sediment sampling and measurement of swamp uprush. Through these
efforts the controversy over the origins of beach cusps can be resolved. The
research will expand our knowledge of several prominent beach morphology
mechanisms.