* 9628128
* Paleoclimatic Reconstructions of the Eastern Margin of the  Albian-Turonian Western Interior Basin, USA and Canada
* GEO,EAR
* 07/15/1996,06/30/2000
* Luis Gonzalez, University of Iowa
* Continuing Grant
* H. Richard Lane
* 06/30/2000
* USD 228,999.00

Brenner 9628128 We propose to collect and interpret the stable isotopic
paleoclimatic record of meteoric carbonates from Albian through Turonian strata
along the eastern margin of the Western Interior Basin along a paleolatitudinal
transect between Kansas and Manitoba (Fig.6). Our research has shown that
meteoric phreatic cements along the cratonic margin of the basin yield 18O
values that are characteristic of coastal lowland environments, and are
therefore more directly applicable to paleoclimatic reconstructions for North
America than freshwater carbonates in the western margin facies where they are
affected by orographic complications. The results of this work will be used to
construct sets of paleogeographic map consisting of 1-2 m.y. time slices that
portray paleolatitudinal gradients of meteoric phreatic carbonate 18O values.
These values and maps could be used by other researchers to constrain
experimental simulations of mid-Cretaceous climate systems using an emerging
generation of global generation circulation models (GCMs) that include
hydrological tracers. Ongoing biostratigraphic studies are providing a more
refined chronostratigraphic framework necessary for the time-slice analysis in
the eastern margin area. The most challenging part of the chronostratigraphic
correlations occurs within the dominantly nonmarine Albian to mid-Cenomanian
portion of the section. Work is underway on this portion of the section using a
combination of palynostratigraphy and aspects of sequence stratigraphy modified
for use in this setting. Preliminary results are encouraging, with a workable
palynostratigraphic framework established for western Iowa and eastern Nebraska.
This work is currently being extended into southeast Nebraska. Additional core
and outcrop samples from Kansas, Nebraska, and the Manitoba Escarpment will
provide biostratigraphic data needed to relate nonmarine sequences to previously
delineated marine sequences (e.g., Kauffman et al., 1993). Project objectives
are t o investigate mid-Cretaceous paleoclimate and paleogeography during a
significant greenhouse period along a north-south paleolatitudinal transect of
the eastern margin region of the Western Interior Basin. The project will use an
integrated approach combining biostratigraphy, sedimentology, sequence
stratigraphy, and stable isotope geochemistry. Stratigraphic analyses and
samples will span the outcrop belt that extends from central Kansas to Manitoba
and Saskatchewan, Canada (Fig. 6).