* 9628992
* Presidential Faculty Fellows/Presidential Early Career      Award for Scientists and Engineers (PFF/PECASE)
* SBE,SES
* 05/01/1997,04/30/2003
* Mark Gluck, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Continuing Grant
* Bonney Sheahan
* 04/30/2003
* USD 500,000.00

This award provides support to Dr. Mark Gluck under the National Science
Foundation's Presidential Early Career Awards for Scientists and Engineers
Program (PECASE) formerly called the Presidential Faculty Fellows (PFF) Program.
These programs were established at the request of the President of the United
States to recognize and support the scholarly activities of some of the Nation's
most outstanding science and engineering faculty members early in their careers.
Awards are intended to allow the scientists to undertake self-designed,
innovative research and teaching projects, to establish research and education
programs, and to pursue other academic related activities. This award will allow
the investigator to pursue his research interests in the area of cognitive
neuroscience of human learning, using computational models of neural networks to
relate brain mechanisms to emergent behaviors. The unifying theme of his
research is to better understand the fundamental mechanisms and principles of
learning and memory from behavioral, biological and computational points of
view. During the five year grant, he will (1) study computational models of the
psychobiology of learning, relating postulated brain mechanisms to emergent
behaviors by studying how behavior is altered after functional mechanisms are
disrupted, simulating specific kinds of brain damage; (2) study cognitive
neuroscience, testing the predictions of the computational models by studying
the learning capabilities of hippocampal-damaged amnesic patients, and relating
their behavior to similar deficits seen in hippocampal-lesioned animals; (3)
study how these memorial processes can lead to novel solutions to engineering
problems and the design of artificially-intelligent learning machines. In the
area of teaching and education, Dr. Gluck is (1) creating new interdisciplinary
undergraduate and graduate courses; (2) creating research internships for
undergraduates, especially minority students; and (3) developing a multi-campus
program in Neural Computation which will provide research training and courses
in computational methods for students in Psychology, Neuroscience, Biology,
Biomedical Engineering, and Cognitive Science. Dr. Gluck is making major
contributions to the understanding of fundamental processes of learning and
memory, deriving testable quantitative and computational descriptions of these
processes. His contributions, which have already been recognized in each of the
fields (psychology, cognitive neuroscience, psychobiology, systems neuroscience,
and computer science) which encompass his chosen field of research, will
continue over the duration of this award. Also, the award will provide an
opportunity for him to continue his innovative programs for undergraduate and
graduate students interested in the behavioral and neural sciences.