* 9628769
* Fluorinated Closo-Heteroborane Anions and                   Nonclassical Metal Carbonyls
* MPS,CHE
* 07/15/1996,06/30/1999
* Steven Strauss, Colorado State University
* Continuing Grant
* Raymond Mackay
* 06/30/1999
* USD 348,300.00

Dr. Steven H. Strauss, Department of Chemistry, Colorado State University, is
supported by the Inorganic, Bioinorganic, and Organometallic Program of the
Chemistry Division for research into the use of fluorinated closo-heteroborane
anions as weakly coordinating anions (WCAs) and for investigations into
nonclassical metal carbonyls. Fluorinated closo-heteroborane anions will be
developed as a new set of WCAs that are stable under a wide variety of
conditions, including high temperatures and in aqueous acid and base solutions.
These anions will be relatively inexpensive and easy to prepare and will be
applied to a variety of problems involving structure and bonding, materials
science, and catalysis. The WCAs will be used as counterions with cationic metal
carbonyls that possess little or no metal-ligand pi backbonding. The structure,
bonding, and chemical reactivity of these complexes will be studied and
applications, including Diels-Alder and Michael addition catalysis and lithium
ion conductivity in polymer blends, will be developed. Many important laboratory
and industrial processes are facilitated by metal catalysts. This research
centers about a class of compounds in which a positively charged metal
containing fragment (called a cation) is counterbalanced by a large negatively
charged species that does not interact strongly with the metal (These are termed
weakly coordinating anions or WCAs.). Since cationic metal-WCA complexes are
known to be good catalysts for a variety of reactions, the new WCAs, to be
studied in this project, are important because they will be inexpensive and
stable under the harsh conditions encountered in real world application. Some of
the important industrial processes in which these compounds may be used include
gas purification, water gas shift catalysis, and methanol synthesis catalysis. A
particular application that will be studied is the Cu(I)-catalyzed carbonylation
of organic compounds in homogeneous solution.