* 9628035
* (ESH)  A Modern Test of the Assumptions Used for            Determining Paleo-Atmospheric Carbon Dioxide from           Goethite-Bound Carbon
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/1996,08/31/2000
* Paul Schroeder, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* H. Richard Lane
* 08/31/2000
* USD 87,776.00

9628035 Schroeder The concept of using goethite-bound carbon isotopes as a proxy
for estimating paleo-atmospheric pCO2 throughout the Phanerozoic has been a
kingpin for modeling efforts such as the GEOCARB model used by Berner (1994). In
this study we propose to test the underlying assumptions used by Yapp (1992)
(developer of the goethite inferred paleo-atmospheric pCO2 method) in a modern
goethite forming environment. The study will be performed using goethite forming
in soil-saprolite found overlying granite terrains in the Piedmont of Georgia.
The principal study site is the Panola Mountain Research Watershed (PMRW)
located 25 km outside of Atlanta, Georgia. It is optimal for the test because of
the abundance of soil goethite found and it is part of the large-scale U.S.
Geological Survey (USGS) investigation known as the Water, Energy and
Biogeochemical Budget (WEBB) Program. The PMRW has seen over 10 years of
continuous collaborative hydrologic, climatic, geochemical and botanical
research, thus providing a well-characterized contextual backdrop to examine the
phenomenon of carbon inclusion in goethite. In this study we propose to: (1)
conduct high-resolution sampling of the soil/caprolite/parent rock sequence at
established monitoring stations with the PMRW; (2) detail the crystal-chemical
nature of the authigenic goethite in order to account for such previously
ignored effects such as the isomorphous A13+ substitution on the degree of CO3=
substitution; (3) make stable carbon isotopic measurement of all carbon-bearing
components in the system including atmosphere and soil CO2 at various depths,
soil-respired CO2, live and subsurface degrading organic matter, as well as the
carbon in goethite; (4) evaluate the mechanism of carbon inclusion in goethite
in the context of observed carbon isotopic profiles and concentration gradients,
and (5) understand the process in the context of local denudation rates using
cosmogenic 10Be and 26Al and the heretofore untested idea of using 14C, bound in
goethite. The principal goal of this work will be to establish the critical
relationships between the stable carbon isotopic species (particularly goethite-
bound carbon) and other carbon components in a soil/saprolite sequence. This
work has important implications for the viability of using carbon-bound goethite
as a proxy for paleo-atmospheric CO2. This proposal solicits $87,776 over a
three-year period to be used for Summer salary, extraction line upgrades, mass
spectrometer maintenance, funds for selected cosmogenic nuclide (10Be, 14C,
26Al) accelerator mass spectrometry, expendable supplies and funds to present
scientific findings. ??