* 9628685
* RIMI:  Intelligent Fault Diagnostic Tools for Advanced      Predictive and Preventive Maintenance of Manufacturing      Systems
* EHR,HRD
* 09/01/1996,08/31/1998
* Mohammad Bodruzzaman, Tennessee State University
* Standard Grant
* William A. Sibley
* 08/31/1998
* USD 149,958.00

HRD - 9628685 Shirkhodaie Tennessee State University The College of Engineering
and Technology at Tennessee State University proposes an instructional research
activity to develop intelligent fault diagnostic tools for advanced predictive
and preventative maintenance of manufacturing systems. The significant impact of
this dual purpose project is four fold. First, it will support the college's
effort to implement a maintenance engineering program at the graduate level.
Secondly, it will strengthen the College's research capability to undertake
maintenance projects of mutual interest to industry, Federal Government and
funding research organizations. Finally, it will expand the College's research
capabilities in one of its major core competencies, that of intelligent health
monitoring of structures, and mechanical/thermal fluid systems. For this
purpose, a 30-month, four phase project is proposed to develop and test
intelligent fault diagnostic tools for advanced predictive and preventative
maintenance of manufacturing systems. The research goal of the proposed project
is to develop advanced predictive maintenance tools which can detect a potential
maintenance problem (i.e., dry bearing) 25 to 50 percent sooner than traditional
diagnostic techniques. In addition to detecting a potential problem, the
proposed tools will identify the source of the potential problem and propose a
corrective measure(s). Phase 1 research will focus on development of neural
network based fault detection tools for pump-motor sets found in manufacturing
systems. Phase 2 research objective is to add intelligent diagnostic
capabilities to the neural network based fault detection tools. Artificial
intelligence and fuzzy logic will be incorporated to make the tool intelligent
with the capability to identify the source of a potential problem and recommend
a corrective action(s). Phase 3 research will focus on testing the developed
tools in a simulated, real world, manufacturing en vironment. This proof-of-
concept testing will compare fault detection and identification rates using
conventional techniques to that of intelligent fault diagnostic tools. Phase 4
involves the concurrent modernization of the College's Vibration Laboratory. It
is in this laboratory that the advanced predictive tools will be tested. The
proposed four phase research project will be completed over a 30-month period at
a cost $150,000.00. At the completion of the proposed instructional research
project the College of Engineering and Technology will have in place a
maintenance engineering program at the graduate level, with predictive and
preventative maintenance as a core instructional focus, in addition to proven
analytical techniques for developing intelligent diagnostic tools with a
Vibration Laboratory for testing the developed tools.