* 9628263
* Collaborative Research:  Paleoecology of Fossil Horses      (Family Equidae) over the past 55 Million Years
* BIO,IOS
* 02/01/1996,07/31/2000
* Nikos Solounias, New York Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Zoe Eppley
* 07/31/2000
* USD 73,740.00

Solounias 9628263 The rich 55 million year fossil record of horses demonstrates
evolution in dietary adaptation through time, potentially in response to
environmental change. Tooth and skull morphology changed many times and are
associated with adaptation to new diets. Using a combination of new methods,
this research will test, for the first time, the prevailing theory that the
earliest horses were browsers in rain forests and then gradually evolved into
savanna grazers. Evolution from horse browsers to grazers is assumed to be an
adaptive response to climatic changes and the associated changes in the
distribution of vegetation types. During the Miocene (approximately 20 million
years ago), North American savannas and grasslands spread and replaced rain
forests as global climate became cooler, dryer and more seasonal. In this study,
the diet of fossil horses will be compared to modern ungulate herbivores by
examining: (1) the microscopic scratches made by vegetation on the surface of
the teeth as viewed with an electron microscope; (2) restoration of chewing
muscles; (3) analysis of size and shape of snouts; and (4) carbon isotopic
composition in tooth enamel (the isotopic signature of savanna grasses is
different than forest leaves and the specific isotopic signature of the diet
should be incorporated in tooth enamel). The project thus uses four methods to
study the same dietary questions and the detailed interaction of morphologic
change with the environment. The results may significantly alter the classic
story of horse evolution as it is currently presented in books and museum
exhibits. Furthermore, they will provide detailed insights into the process of
evolutionary change in mammals in response to changing climates and vegetation.