* 9628737
* Collaborative Research: Distribution and Evolution of Geomorphic Process Zones in Large Mountain Ranges
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/1996,08/31/1999
* Thomas Dunne, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* H. Richard Lane
* 08/31/1999
* USD 96,196.00

Dunne 9628737 Large mountain ranges exhibit striking regional scale morphologic
heterogeneity which is reflected in the dominance of different geomorphic
processes in different parts of the range. The spatial and temporal distribution
of these processes and affects the rate and manner in which sediment is
evacuated from the range, which feeds back on tectonic processes and affects the
behavior of rivers beyond the range front, where human populations are often
concentrated. The objectives of the proposed study are to document and
mechanistically explain major downstream, inter basinal, and temporal trends in
morphology and geomorphic process within a large, important mountain range: the
Eastern Cordillera of the Bolivian Andes. Fluvial incision creates relief, which
strongly modulates the type and rate of geomorphic processes acting on
hillslopes, and the relative ability of a river to transport its sediment load
governs loci of incision and deposition, behavior of the river, and therefore
morphology of the valley. Understanding spatial and temporal patterns of
morphology and geomorphic process in large mountain ranges therefore requires
the ability to quantitatively describe fluvial incision into mountain ranges, as
well as to link hillslope and fluvial characteristics resulting from incision to
specific geomorphic processes. These requirements dictate the methodology to be
employed in this study, which involves four major steps. First, the modern
pattern of geomorphic regions must be documented within two large drainage
basins, the Beni and Pilcomayo, in the Eastern Cordillera. These basins share
similar rocktypes and general tectonic histories, but north-south variation in
precipitation and total shortening (and therefore fluvial incision history) has
produced strikingly different morphologies. Regions dominated by particular
hillslope and fluvial geomorphic processes will be identified from field
observations and image interpretation. Each region will be characterized
morphometrical ly to determine: 1) which indices best reflect the occurrence of
particular processed; and 2) what general trends characterize large mountain
drainage basins. The second major task of the study is to develop and apply a
channel network incision model calibrated with field data to illustrate how
channel slopes vary and relief is generated through time. In this model,
downcutting rate is proportional to stream power, and the spatial and temporal
pattern of uplift is constrained by regional structural geology studies,
paleoelevation studies, and a geodynamic model. Third, information derived from
the fluvial incision model will be used in "off-line" calculations to determine
1) how hillslopes change shape and local relief grows and diminishes through
time; and 2) where incisional and depositional regimes occur and how fluvial
regime affect valley morphology. For example, the geometry and rate of hillslope
lowering by deep-seated, bedrock landsliding will be calculated using successive
Culmann wedge stability analyses on steep hillslopes produced by a known rate of
fluvial incision. Calculations will be made at selected times during a fluvial
incision model run and at selected places down the network. Finally, the fluvial
incision model and the predictions made in off-line calculations will be checked
with several sources of independent data. The general geomorphic patterns and
morphometric characteristics of simulated landscapes will be compared to those
of the modern Beni and Pilcomayo basins. Predicted long-term surface lowering
rates will be compared with exhumation rates determined from fission track
analysis of igneous and metamorphic rocks from both basins, while predictions of
the rates determined from fission track analysis of igneous and metamorphic
rocks from both basins, while predictions of the net rate of sediment export
from drainage basins of various sizes will be compared with rates obtained from
analysis of cosmogenic isotopic abundance in alluvium. The proposed study has
many applications ranging from defining the nature of local geologic hazards to
anticipating shifts in gobal erosion and sedimentation patterns due to climatic
change.