* 9628184
* Data Management for Wireless Communication Networks
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/1996,09/30/2000
* Jennifer Widom, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* Karen R. Sollins
* 09/30/2000
* USD 508,838.00

Data management is critical to the functioning of wide-area wireless
communication networks. The communication infrastructure maintains user profiles
to keep track of information for operations such as call setup and delivery,
subscriber authentication, and billing. Data management deals with the problem
of efficiently managing the information in user profiles, which may be
distributed across the network. In evaluating different data management schemes,
performance measures of interest are: 1) profile lookup and update response
times; 2) individual and global database access requirements: 3) individual
communication link and global signaling bandwidth requirements; 4) total memory
requirement; and 5)overall system cost. Information in user profiles can be
classified into "system information", such as current locations of subscribers
and subscriber authorization information, "service provider information", such
as billing records, and "feature support information", such as numbers for call
screening or call blocking. These different categories of information have
different demands on their data management schemes. One of the primary
objectives of our proposed research is to investigate and develop novel database
architectures and protocols for efficiently managing all the classes of
information in user profiles. Specific schemes will be designed to meet the
various data management requirements. We are especially interested in developing
schemes that, unlike current schemes, provide lifelong user numbers through the
support of location independent numbering. Scalability and backward
compatibility to existing standards, IS-41 and GSM, are also important design
issues. We have conceived a promising architecture that is based on a
hierarchical organization of databases. Its performance will be compared with a
representative set of other data management schemes through extensive simulation
studies using a realistic software simulator that we are developing. Another
major objective of our proposal is to develop a realistic and extensible
simulation platform for studying the performance of data management schemes.
Realistic user call and movement models are crucial to our performance
evaluations. We will develop detailed call and movement models and corroborate
them using actual traffic data. We have laid the foundation in this area through
the development of the first version of a highly configurable software
simulator, Pleiades. Our research in user behavior models for our simulations is
expected to have applications in other areas of wireless communication research.