* 9628860
* Nitrogen Uptake, Retention and Cycling in Stream: An        Intersite N-15 Tracer Experiment
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/1996,08/31/2001
* Judith Meyer, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Continuing Grant
* Penelope L. Firth
* 08/31/2001
* USD 1,135,057.00

Webster, et al 9628860 Knowledge of factors regulating the uptake, retention,
and cycling of nitrogen in streams is integral to understanding lotic ecosystem
structure and function. Further, because streams serve as key hydrologic and
biogeochemical links between upland and downstream aquatic ecosystems,
understanding how changes in climate or land use will affect movement of
materials across the landscape and water quality requires working models of
controls on the structure and function of streams. Although there is a rich
literature of process-level studies of key nitrogen transformations in streams,
a robust model linking hydrodynamics, nitrogen cycling, metabolism, and food web
dynamics in streams is lacking. In this project we will use simulation modeling,
field tracer additions and an intersite comparative approach to increase our
understanding of controls on stream nitrogen cycling and develop a generalized
model of nitrogen dynamics in lotic ecosystems. The central hypothesis we will
address is: The considerable variability among streams in uptake, retention, and
cycling of nitrogen is controlled by key hydrodynamic, chemical, and metabolic
characteristics that determine water retention, degree of nitrogen deficiency,
and energyflow through food webs in stream ecosystems. From this hypothesis we
derive a number of specific predictions involving ammonium and nitrate uptake,
food web transfer of nitrogen, and nitrogen turnover. These predictions will be
tested by conducting an identical set of field experiments in each of 10 streams
ranging in latitude from the tropics to the arctic and differing greatly in
their hydrodynamic, chemical, and metabolic characteristics. The field
experiments include: (1) short-term (several hours) injections of a conservative
tracer and application of a transient storage model to define hydrodynamic
characteristics, (2) short-term injections of nutrients (NH4, NO3, PO4) to
determine relative uptake lengths of different nutrients and potential N defici
ency, (3) whole-stream measures of gross primary productivity (GPP) and
community respiration (R) to define stream metabolic characteristics, and (4)
long-term (6 weeks) additions Of 'sNH4 at tracer levels to measure temporal and
spatial (longitudinal) dynamics of nitrogen uptake, retention, and cycling rates
through the stream ecosystem. Simulations of the 'sNH4 addition have been
performed for most of the streams using a 15-compartment, stream nitrogen mass
balance model. The model will be updated and rerun for all streams prior to the
start of the field experiments to provide site-specific predictions of temporal
and spatial distributions of '5N in the ecosystem based on current
understanding. Data from the field N experiments will be used to test the site-
specific model results, as well as to provide measures of N uptake, cycling, and
turnover that will be used in intersite analyses to test predictions of
relationships with potential controlling factors. Potential controlling factors
on N dynamics include stream hydrodynamics ( importance of transient storage
zones), chemistry c~ (streamwater N concentrations and N:P ratios, detrital C:N
ratios), and metabolism (GPP P:R ratios). ??