* 9628283
* Collaborative Research:  Sediment Dynamics in Large         Drainage Basins
* NONE,NONE
* 03/01/1997,02/28/1999
* Louis Derry, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* L. Douglas James
* 02/28/1999
* USD 20,000.00

9628283 Derry Large drainage basins are complex systems in which sediment is
generated, transported, stored, and, after varying amounts of time, either
buried beyond the depth of reworking or exported to the World's oceans. The rate
at which sediment is generated in such drainage basins and the residence time of
that sediment as it moves, grain by grain, down the fluvial transport system are
poorly known; yet measuring these rate is prerequisites to understanding dynamic
interactions between the solid Earth and the hydrosphere. Over the past decade,
advances in mass spectrometry have allowed reliable measurement of extremely
rare nuclides such as those produced as cosmic rays interact with rock. Because
cosmogenic nuclide abundances (when normalized for exposure location) reflect
the residence time of material within the uppermost several meters of Earth's
surface, simple analytical models (beholden to a variety of assumptions) have
been used to estimate "cosmogenic" exposure ages and erosion rates of bedrock
outcrops and boulders. During the past two years, we have been funded by
Hydrologic Sciences to test an interpretive model (Bierman and Steig, 1992,
1995; Brown et al., 1995; Granger et 1994a,b) which suggests that measurement of
cosnogenic 10Be and 26A1 in sediments can be used to estimate the rate at which
drainage basins erode and constrain the transport system, and out of the basin.
Because our initial data (Bierman et apt, 1995, in review) and the data of
others (Brown et al., 1995; Granger et al., l994a,b), suggest that cosmogenic
nuclides are indeed useful tools by which to study hydrologic processes in small
end moderate size drainage basins, we seek funding to expand our current
research to larger scales and over longer tine frames. The overall objective of
our proposed research is to determine at what scale and in what fluvial regimes,
cosmogenic nuclides remain useful tools for 1) determining basin-scale,
spatially-averaged erosion rates and 2) placing limits on the duration of
sediment storage. In order to meet this objective, we seek funding for isotopic
and other corollary measurements needed to determine the spatial variation in
10Be and 26A1 abundances in approximately 80 samples collected from locations
throughout the drainage networks of four tectonically and climatically distinct
fluvial systems.: the Ganges (Himalayas), the Apure (Andean Mountains), the
Sagavanirktok (Alaska, North Slope) and the East Alligator (northern Australia).
Testing the spatial and temporal variation of 10He and 26A1 abundance in
sediments of some of the World's major rivers will constrain the scale of
applicability of existing interpretive models, a significant advance in Isotope
Geochemistry. The data we generate regarding the relative duration of sediment
storage and model rates of basin scale denudation will be of fundamental
significance in the fields of Sedinentology, Hydrology, end Geomorphology. In
the sense that we cannot anticipate the outcome of our measurements, some might
consider our proposal "high risk science In light of the success we and others
have had using 10Be and 26A1 to estimate erosion rates and constrain sediment
storage times in smaller catchments (Biermam et al., 1995, in review; Brown at
al., 1995; Granger et el., 1994a,b), and because of the fundamental nature of
the questions we are addressing, we feel such a "risk" is minimal and worth
taking.