* 9628695
* The Influence of in situ Photoexcitation and Electric Field on Ion Implantation Damage Accumulation in Silicon
* MPS,DMR
* 07/15/1996,09/30/1999
* George Rozgonyi, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* LaVerne D. Hess
* 09/30/1999
* USD 430,706.00

9628695 Rozgonyi This research project is a collaborative effort between
researchers at NCSU and Oak Ridge National Labs(ORNL) to study fundamental
mechanisms and phenomena associated with radiation-produced defects in silicon,
and the complex interactions that control defect formation, diffusion and
annihilation. The project will investigate the effects of in situ changes to the
electronic state of semiconductors by photoexcitation and/or internal electric
fields on damage accumulation processes. In situ measurement of specific defect
levels in ion implanted silicon will be made by deep level transient
spectroscopy(DLTS). Ion flux and temperature variations, as well as in situ
photoexcitation during implantation coupled with in situ DLTS measurements will
be used to elucidate specific mechanisms of defect formation and reaction in
silicon with extension of these studies to GaAs, GaN, and SiC anticipated. %%%
The research will contribute basic materials science knowledge at a fundamental
level of technological relevance to advanced electronic materials processing.
Additionally, the knowledge and understanding gained from this research project
is expected to contribute in a general way to improving the performance of
advanced devices and circuits by providing a fundamental understanding and a
basis for designing and processing advanced materials and devices. An important
feature of the program is the integration of research and education through the
training of students in a fundamentally and technologically significant area.
***