* 9629497
* A Career Development Plan: Nocturnal Atmospheric Exchange   Over Forests
* GEO,AGS
* 09/15/1996,08/31/2000
* Xuhui Lee, Yale University
* Continuing Grant
* Anne-Marie Schmoltner
* 08/31/2000
* USD 226,588.00

9629497 Lee Sequestering of atmospheric CO2 by forest vegetation is a process
that is important to the biogeochemical carbon cycle. This exchange process is
not well understood in a quantitative sense, particularly for nocturnal
conditions occurring within the planetary boundary layer. The research focuses
on the factors that control nocturnal fluxes of CO2 and other scalars between
the biosphere and atmosphere. The project will examine atmospheric exchange at a
process-level by using micrometeorological methods and it is intended to advance
current techniques that quantify carbon exchange over vegetation canopies. This
effort is a modeling study that will analyze currently available
micrometeorological, boundary layer data for two sites located within a boreal
forest ecosystem of Ontario, Canada (i.e., BOREAS experiment, summer 1993). The
PI will also analyze micrometeorological data sets that will be obtained from
two planned ecosystem boundary layer experiments: the Great Mountain Forest
(GMF), Connecticut (site operational April 1996), and the Farm River Salt Marsh,
New Haven, Connecticut (project planned 1998, funded by the Connecticut Sea
Grant Program). The four experimental sites are selected on the basis of canopy
profile (e.g., height, morphology, vegetation composition). Analyses of the
micrometeorological data from these sites are intended to improve the present
understanding of the dynamic coupling between vegetation and atmospheric flow
and how this coupling affects larger scale forest-atmosphere interactions and
boundary-layer turbulence. *** ATM-9629497