* 9629427
* Molecular Systematics of Homobasidiomycetes Emphasizing     Polyporaceae and Corticiaceae
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/1996,07/31/1999
* Michael Donoghue, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Mary C. McKitrick
* 07/31/1999
* USD 210,823.00

9629427 Donoghue Homobasidiomycetes are a diverse group of fungi that includes
mushrooms, polypores, puffballs, stinkhorns, coral fungi, and others. Many
species decay dead organic matter and are important in nutrient cycling. Others
include plant pathogens, ectomycorrhizae (symbiotic associates of tree roots),
lichen-forming fungi, and mutualist partners with arthropods such as the leaf-
cutter ants of the neotropics. Despite their ecological and economic importance,
the evolutionary or phylogenetic relationships of homobasidiomycetes are not
well understood. One reason for this is that fungi are anatomically simple, and
hence they display few characters that could be useful for discriminating among
them and inferring taxonomic relationships. Another confounding factor is the
poor fossil record for fungi in general, and for fleshy homobasidiomycetes in
particular. Research by Drs. Michael Donoghue and David Hibbett at Harvard
University is directed toward the goal of determining evolutionary relationships
among the homobasidiomycetes using DNA sequences. The genes to be sequenced,
called rDNA, encode the nucleic acids that make up ribosomes (organelles
involved in protein synthesis). The rDNAs are highly conserved in sequence,
which makes them useful for inferring very ancient evolutionary divergences.
Both nuclear and mitochondrial rDNAs are being sequenced, from the same set of
exemplar taxa. The sequences are aligned to each other and analyzed using
computer algorithms that estimate relationships among genes based on the pattern
of variation (mutational substitutions) in their DNA sequences. The resulting
evolutionary hypothesis is represented as a phylogenetic tree. Two main groups
of homobasidiomycetes are the focus of this research, the Polyporaceae and the
Corticiaceae. The Polyporaceae includes fungi with poroid fruiting bodies such
as many "bracket fungi", whereas the Corticiaceae includes fungi that have
simple, resupinate (smooth, crust-like) fruiting bodies. Both families are de
limited primarily on the basis of a few macromorphological features, but
anatomical evidence suggests that they are composed of species from many
different evolutionary lineages. One major question being addressed is: are the
morphologically simple corticioid fungi a plesiomorphic (primitive) group from
which other more complex forms have been derived, or have the corticioid forms
evolved by reduction and simplification from more elaborate forms?