* 9629832
* Dissertation Research: Biodiversity Conservation and Rural  Communities in Bulgaria
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/1996,02/28/1998
* A. Endre Nyerges, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Stuart Plattner
* 02/28/1998
* USD 3,640.00

This dissertation research project at the University of Kentucky supports a
cultural anthropology student studying how residents of rural communities in
Bulgaria understand and manage biodiversity conservation. The problem is to
understand how global concerns about biodiversity conservation are mediated by
local non-governmental organizations (NGOs) and practiced by mountain peasants
in Bulgaria. Through studying the effects of variation in gender, age and ethnic
affiliation, the student will measure levels of resource use and management and
study the local meaning of concepts such as `nature conservation` and
`environment`. The site is an area rich in biodiversity. Study methods include a
baseline household survey of two local communities, a detailed study of natural
resource use and economic activities of 20 households in each village, case
studies of natural resource disputes and the collection of documents, as well as
participant observation and formal interviews in local villages and in NGOs in
the national capitol. In addition to enhancing our knowledge of resource use and
conservation activities in post-community Bulgaria and providing a local-level
analysis of NGOs, this study contributes to the broader understanding of the
impact of the transition from state socialism in Eastern Europe on rural land
management practices, conservation efforts and civil society. The project also
increases the nation's expertise about this important region of the world.