* 9629517
* Collaborative Research:  Systematics and Evolutionary       Biology of the Drosophila Quinaria Species Group
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/1996,08/31/1998
* David Grimaldi, American Museum Natural History
* Standard Grant
* Charles O'Kelly
* 08/31/1998
* USD 40,000.00

9629517 GRIMALDI This award will support Dr. David Grimaldi's contribution to a
research project being done in collaboration with Dr. Greg Spicer. Grimaldi will
utilize morphological, ecological, and behavioral information for a group of
flies, the Drosophila quinaria species group (Insecta: Diptera: Drosophilidae),
to derive a phylogeny of relationships among the species. He will also pursue a
biogeographic analysis of the group which is largely Holarctic in distribution
but does include a single described species of unknown affiliation from China
that may represent the tip of an iceberg of undescribed species from that
region. Grimaldi's results will be integrated with those of Spicer who will
pursue a molecular phylogenetic analysis of these same species. At present, the
group is of a manageable size, with 28 described species that show interesting
biological diversity in habitat and breeding sites. It is hoped that the
combined morphological and molecular evidence will result in a fully resolved
phylogeny that, in the future, can be used to address several interesting
evolutionary questions, including determinants of Drosophila host range in
parasitic nematodes and phylogenetic constraints on shifting to a new ecological
niche such as mushroom breeding with possible concomitant shifts in tolerance of
mushroom toxins. This award will contribute to our understanding of an element
of insect biodiversity and begin to provide information concerning how species
change habit and host associations through time.