* 9629901
* Miscible Blend Dynamics
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/1996,08/31/1999
* Sanat Kumar, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 08/31/1999
* USD 283,900.00

9629901 Colby This grant will explore the area of dynamics and rheology in
polymer blends. Recent experiments have shown that miscible blends have complex
rheology. One manifestation of this is the breakdown of the empirical time-
temperature superposition principle, known to be valid for homopolymer systems.
Recent theory suggests that the themorheological complexity in blends is driven
at the segmental level by concentration fluctuations, coupled to differences in
the glass transition temperatures of the components. The goal of the
experimental portion of the proposed research is to carefully measure
concentration fluctuations (using small angle neutron scattering), local
segmental dynamics (using dielectric spectroscopy) and terminal dynamics (using
forward recoil spectroscopy diffusion measurements and linear viscoelasticity)
to systematically test the proposed relation between concentration fluctuations
and dynamics in miscible blends. The theoretical component of the proposed work
will extend previous concentration fluctuation ideas, which currently only model
dynamics at the segmental level, to predict terminal dynamics (relaxation of
entire chains). Computer simulations will also be used to elucidate the role of
different variables in the dynamics of miscible blends. %%% Since polymer blends
are seeing increased use in practical applications, it is important that a
quantitative understanding of their rheology be obtained so as to assist in
their processing. The long-term goal is to develop a complete molecular model
forlthe rheology of miscible polymer blends. ***