* 9629456
* Relationships of Nearctic and Palearctic Black Flies        (Diptera:  Simuliidae)
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/1996,08/31/1999
* Peter Adler, Clemson University
* Standard Grant
* Mary C. McKitrick
* 08/31/1999
* USD 100,110.00

9629456 ADLER Black flies (Insecta: Diptera: Simuliidae) are an abundant taxon
in running water ecosystems, and in recent years they have come to play a
prominent role in ecological investigations. Oddly and unfortunately, research
on black flies has always been conducted separately in the Nearctic and
Palearctic Regions, resulting in independent descriptions and interpretations of
faunas and relationships, as well as different classification systems. This
research project will address that problem by focusing on a synthesis of the
relationships of Nearctic and Palearctic black flies. Specific objectives are to
1) screen Palearctic nominal species of the subgenus Simulium for sibling
species, 2) test for conspecificity between selected Nearctic and Palearctic
populations, and 3) develop a phylogeny for Nearctic and Palearctic members of
the genus Simulium. These objectives will be accomplished by a combined
cytogenetic, morphological and ecological analysis of Palearctic black flies and
comparisons with Nearctic black flies. Results of this research will provide the
first comprehensive analysis of evolutionary relationships of black flies
between two zoogeographic regions, reveal unrecognized, hidden species (sibling
species), provide a powerful predictive framework for further studies on the
biology of the world black flies, and foster international cooperation toward
understanding a part of the global biota. This award will support the training
of a graduate student in the specialized techniques of cytogenetic methods of
study in which Dr. Adler is a pioneering expert for black flies. Black flies,
with their severe and painful bites, are well known for their disruptive effects
on the use of recreational areas throughout this country; they also transmit
both human and animal diseases. Despite these negative attributes, their larvae
are also important components of food webs in aquatic ecosystems and they have
been utilized as indicators in studies of water quality. This research project
will clarify relationships between North American and European species of black
flies as a needed background for studies of their biology and advance our
knowledge of this aspect of insect biodiversity.