* 9629259
* (CAREER) Metals Transport in Transition Wetlands:           Research and Education Development Plan
* GEO,EAR
* 03/01/1997,08/31/2001
* Heidi Nepf, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* L. Douglas James
* 08/31/2001
* USD 213,065.00

9629259 Nept The limnology and wetland research communities have recently
selected metals transport as an area for priority research (In The Freshwater
Imperative, Naiman et al. 1995). This treaties calls attention to the need for
transport models that can predict the short-and long-term fate of metals
contamination in freshwater ecosystems. Wetlands, an intrinsic part of most
freshwater systems, have been observed to trap and store particulate metals, and
thus can influence metals flux. However, the specific factors which control this
trapping and potential re-release are not yet fully understood. In particular,
the following questions still need to be clarified What factors control the
short-and long-term trapping of metals in wetland? How does vegetation influence
the trapping and shortage of metals? How and when are major release or re-
suspension events triggered? The proposed project will address these questions
through complementary field observation and modeling programs. The results will
strengthen the knowledge base needed to design and manage wetlands in order to
alleviate the impact of metals contamination on freshwater systems. The
educational goals of this project emphasize the incorporation of environmental
engineering case studies and current academic research into the undergraduate
curriculum. The first goal is to create case study instruction based on actual
engineering problems drawn from the case files of local engineering firms. The
case study approach exposes student to the complexity of real systems, and
demonstrates the relevance of the course material. The second educational goal
is to provide undergraduates with more opportunities to assist with and/or
conduct their own field research. Four field projects are proposed that can be
conducted annually as an extension to existing undergraduate courses. These
hands-on research experiences will build physical intuition and creativity, as
well as provide a forum for developing team-work skill s. The field projects are
designed to dovetail with the proposed academic research so that the
undergraduates can draw from a larger research scheme to supplement their own
observations. The research and educational goals both emphasize the study and
protection of freshwater systems. The research program will focus on improving
the prediction of metals transport and the remediation of metals contamination.
the teaching program will introduce undergraduates to the complex and
interdisciplinary nature of wetland field study and environmental engineering
design projects.