* 9629316
* Experimental Testing and Modeling Analysis of Regulation in a Host-Parasitoid System
* NONE,NONE
* 08/01/1996,07/31/2001
* William Murdoch, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Continuing grant
* Susan Mopper
* 07/31/2001
* USD 500,000.00

9629316 Murdoch Control of California red scale, a pest of citrus, by the
parasitoid wasp, Aphytis, is one of the most spectacularly successful examples
of biological control. Scale are kept at very low densities, and populations are
remarkably constant in abundance and dynamically stable. The goal of this
project is to explain the co-occurrence of severe pest suppression and dynamic
stability, which is contrary to expectations based on simple standard
mathematical models of such systems. Prior research has narrowed the potential
explanations to only a few, using a combination of observations and experiments
in the field and laboratory to investigate mechanisms, and the development of
detailed mathematical models that incorporate these mechanisms. The remaining
mechanisms include (1) various behavioral responses of Aphytis to individual
properties of scale and scale density, (2) a density-dependent increase in the
rate at which Aphytis kill previously-laid parasitoid eggs and (3) small-scale
spatial heterogeneity in the vulnerability of scale to attack by Aphytis. The
primary approach to testing these hypotheses involves a large field experiment.
Grapefruit trees will be individually caged and the density of scale on the
trees increased 10-fold in one set of trees, 50-fold in a second set and left at
ambient density in a third set. It is expected that, through time, the scale
densities on higher-density trees will converge to those on ambient-density
trees. The hypothesis will be tested by monitoring various system responses as
this "density convergence" occurs. Small-scale experiments carried out
concurrently inside cages will focus on attack responses of Aphytis. The
hypotheses will also be tested by comparing the results of different versions of
a detailed mathematical model of the system that include or omit the various
mechanisms. This research has wide-ranging implications for ecological theory.
It will also contribute to understanding of biological control and to the
ability to use it more broadly and effectively.