* 9629665
* Research Planning Grant: Comparative Actions of Somato-     lactin, Prolactin, and Growth Hormone on Reproductive       Function in Fundulus heteroclitus
* BIO,IOS
* 07/15/1996,09/30/1997
* Susan Safford, Lincoln University
* Standard Grant
* Stacia A. Sower
* 09/30/1997
* USD 17,921.00

Results from several studies suggest that somatolactin (SL), prolactin (PRL),
and growth hormone (GH), structurally related proteins, are involved in some
aspects of sexual maturation in fishes. To investigate the physiological roles
of SL, a model fish species is needed which has been extensively studied and can
provide numerous animals and eggs for study. The mummichog, Fundulus
heteroclitus, is such a species, and Dr. Safford's preliminary research is
designed to begin to develop it as a model for comparing the actions of SL, PRL,
and GH. The objectives of the preliminary project are (1) to determine if
proteins of the appropriate molecular weights from F. heteroclitus pituitary
extracts bind to antibodies against SL, PRL, and GH; (2) to determine if these
immunoreactive proteins are found in the appropriate areas within the F.
heteroclitus pituitary, and (3) to determine if the F. heteroclitus genome has
gene sequences corresponding to conserved regions of fish SL. The experiments
for the follow-up project will focus on comparative actions of SL, PRL, and GH
on reproductive function in F. heteroclitus, as more studies on SL focus on
reproduction than on other processes and there is evidence from the literature
that PRL and GH also have reproductive functions. If these three hormones are
shown to have some functions in F. heteroclitus, then SL, PRL, and GH will be
cloned so that recombinant F. heteroclitus hormones.will be available for more
detailed studies in a homologous system.