* 9629854
* Conducting Polymers Derived from Novel Electron Rich        Condensed Heterocycles
* MPS,CHE
* 06/15/1996,05/31/2000
* Alan Katritzky, University of Florida
* Continuing Grant
* Seymour Lapporte
* 05/31/2000
* USD 310,000.00

This award, made in the Special Projects Office of the Chemistry Division and
the Polymers Program in the Division of Materials Research continues support for
the research of Professors Reynolds and Katritzky at the University of Florida.
The goal of the research is to design, synthesize and characterize electron-rich
conducting polymers prepared from substituted condensed heterocycles including
indolocarbazoles, bis(thieno)-benzenes, bis(pyrrolo)naphthalenes and bisindoles.
These selected monomers lend themselves to facile electropolymerization. The
planarity induced within the repeat unit and the low redox switching potentials
will make the polymers quite stable when oxidatively doped and highly
conducting. Pendant substituents will be incorporated onto the polymers to
control polymer physical properties. Alkyl substitution will facilitate
solubility and processibility. Polar substituents will be incorporated to
enhance polymer interactions with electrolyte and ion-transport during redox
switching. Alkyl sulfonate substitution will be used to induce water solubility
and will lead to a new family of self-doped conducting polymers.
Electropolymerized polymers formed on conducting surfaces can be easily switched
between redox states resulting in highly controllable physical and electonic
properties such as conductivity, ion content, volume and color. These materials
are likely to find application in electrochromic devices, ion release
electrodes, biosensors and transducers. The design, synthesis and
characterization of new structures will advance the fundamental understanding of
structure-property relationships in conducting polymers.