* 9629152
* PFF/PECASE:  Hardware-Based Simulator for Real-Time Control and Optimization of Flexible Manufacturing Systems
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/1997,09/30/2000
* Fengshan Chen, University of Toledo
* Continuing Grant
* george hazelrigg
* 09/30/2000
* USD 329,829.00

*** 9629152 Chen The major research thrust for the awardee during the period of
this award will be to investigate an innovative approach that might enable
revolutionary advances in microprocessor-based digital circuit simulation for
design and real-time control of advanced manufacturing systems. The core of the
hardware-based simulator is a microprocessor-based digital circuit board that is
comprised of a collection of "micro control boxes" mimicking the complete array
of machinery and equipment of a flexible manufacturing system such as
workcenters, transporters, and load/unload stations. For each micro control box,
the operating logic of the designated resource (equipment/machinery) such as
processing times for different parts, expected breakdown frequency and recovery
time will be captured via micro-programs. By using microprocessors for each of
the resources, a printed circuit board (PCB) can be designed and built to
represent the total functions and operating conditions of a flexible
manufacturing system. A laboratory flexible manufacturing system will be
acquired and implemented at the early stage of the project to serve as an
experimental testbed for the development of the proposed hardware-based
simulator. If successful, results of this research will advance simulation
technology for real-time control and optimization of advanced manufacturing
systems. This research will also assist agile and lean production processes.
This technology could become an integrated tool to realize the virtual reality
(VR) manufacturing technologies now being tested by a few pioneering
applications. ***