* 9629857
* Experiment in Graduate Education with an Environmental and  Public Policy Focus
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/1996,02/29/2004
* Thomas Spiro, Princeton University
* Continuing Grant
* Richard D. Foust
* 02/29/2004
* USD 809,848.00

With this award, the Division of Chemistry supports the early stages of
development of the Princeton Environmental Institute: Research Initiative in
Science and Engineering. Ten science and engineering departments will
participate in a joint effort to prepare science and engineering graduate
students for life-time careers of effective participation in environmental
problem-solving. In addition to pursuing the usual departmental research
programs, students will engage in a supplemental course of study and research
addressing the environmental implications of their research topic. This
educational effort is also expected to result in a better alignment of faculty
research programs with environmental objectives. Emphasis will be placed on
improving information flows among various disciplines and the development of
interdisciplinary research programs. The program will be led by Dr. Thomas G.
Spiro, Chemistry Department, Princeton University, and Dr. Robert G. Socolow,
Director of the Center for Energy and Environmental Studies in the School of
Engineering. Faculty from the Woodrow Wilson School of Public and International
Affairs in the area of Science, Technology, and Public Policy will staff courses
on policy issues. Students will have opportunities for internships in industrial
and other non-academic settings. Examples of case studies to be examined
include: interplay of stratospheric ozone chemistry with advanced engine design
for supersonic transport; metals cycling in the ocean; pollution management at
coal-fired power plants; dioxin transport in the biosphere; and dioxin formation
in combustion of chlorinated feedstocks.