* 9629366
* CAREER: Molecular Evolutionary Studies of the Barbus Fish Species Flock of Lake Tana Ethiopia (Teleostei: Cypriniformes)
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/1996,08/31/2001
* Walter Dimmick, University of Kansas Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* James E. Rodman
* 08/31/2001
* USD 284,988.00

9629366 DIMMICK Lake Tana supports the largest freshwater fishery resource in
the East African nation of Ethiopia. A key element of this fishery is a group of
African carps (genus Barbus). The adult Barbus carps in Lake Tana can be
separated into fourteen different morphological types (morphotypes), varying in
size, shape, habitat within the lake, and feeding preferences. These morphotypes
may represent variants of a single species, any of whose members may breed with
any other, or they may represent up to fourteen distinct species, each incapable
of breeding with any other form. Strategies for conserving the Lake Tana biota,
and for managing its fishery, will differ significantly depending on whether the
carps belong to one species or many. Also, the Lake Tana Barbus likely will
provide scientists with important information on how living species change in a
particular place over time. Walter Dimmick, with his colleagues and students,
will attempt to determine the number of Barbus species present in Lake Tana by
comparing several different types of molecular data from each of the
morphotypes, including sequences from several mitochondrial and nuclear genes
and variations in regions of short repeated DNA sequences ("microsatellites").
Cooperative activities include collaborative fieldwork with a team of three
scientists from the Russian Academy of Sciences in Moscow. Participation by
Native American students in the project, and in related teaching and research
activities at the University of Kansas Natural History Museum, will provide
opportunities for these students to assess and pursue careers in systematic
biology.