* 9629457
* Mutational Effects on Quantitative Traits of Arabidopsis    thaliana
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/1996,08/31/2000
* Ruth Shaw, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Elizabeth Lyons
* 08/31/2000
* USD 269,000.00

9629457 Shaw Spontaneous mutation is the ultimate source of genetic variation
which is the basis for evolutionary divergence due to selection and drift.
Theory concerning the evolutionary consequences of spontaneous mutation in genes
affecting quantitative traits of multicellular organisms has been well developed
over the past 20 years. This work has revealed that inference of the
evolutionary consequences of mutation depends on detailed information, including
the rate of introduction of variation due to mutation, per genome mutation
rates, the distribution of mutational effects, and gene action of mutant allele.
Mutation rate derived from the occurrence of readily detectable effects
('visible mutations') have been documented for many traits. These, however,
likely underestimate rates of evolutionarily significant mutation because they
fail to account for mutations of small effect. Empirical studies, most focusing
on Drosophila melanogaster, have provided evidence concerning aspects of
mutations affecting quantitative traits, and for some of these aspects consensus
is gradually emerging. The few available studies on other organisms have tended
to be limited in scope. In particular, very little information is available from
plants, though they offer a clear experimental advantage for studies of mutation
in that seeds representing distinct generations can be stored for eventual
simultaneous rearing in a common environment. The experiments proposed here are
designed to estimate the properties of mutations affecting quantitative traits
in the annual crucifer, Arabidopsis thaliana. This study will employ lines of A.
thaliana that have previously been advanced from a single founder through 17
generations. The proposed experiments will assay variation among lines derived
from a common founder and also among progenies resulting from formal genetic
crosses among lines. The major goals of this study are: (1 ) to infer
distributions of mutational affects, (2) to assess the mode of inheritance of
newly arising mutations, and (3) to infer the parameters of gene action,
including dominance, epistasis, and pleiotropy.