* 9629422
* CAREER:  Molecular Analysis of Avian Breeding Ecology: A    Research and Education Program in Molecular Ecology
* BIO,IOS
* 07/01/1996,06/30/2001
* Michael Webster, SUNY at Buffalo
* Continuing grant
* stephen vessey
* 06/30/2001
* USD 234,403.00

ABSTRACT PI: Webster PROPOSAL NUMBER: 9629422 The recent application of
molecular genetic techniques to ecological studies has yielded important
insights and some surprising results. One example is the recent application of
DNA profiling analyses to studies of avian mating systems, that have shown that
many young are sired by males other than their social father (i.e., the male in
attendance at the nest). Such extra- pair fertilizations call into question a
basic assumption of many models in behavioral ecology; i.e., reproductive
fidelity between mated pairs. Although several studies have addressed the
selective benefits that females might receive by copulating with extra-pair
males, relatively few have examined the ecological conditions that lead some
females, but not others, to engage in such copulations. At the core of the
career development plan proposed here is a four-year research project designed
to examine the ecological basis of extra-pair copulations in a socially
monogamous passerine, the black-throated blue warbler. The primary objective of
this research project is to discriminate among four hypotheses to explain female
reproductive strategies. This objective will be achieved by using molecular
genetic techniques, in combination with observations of marked individuals and
experimental field manipulations, to examine the ecological and social factors
thought to affect female behavior. Multilocus DNA profiling and PCR-
amplification of SSR loci will be used to identify young sired by extra-pair
males and their sires, and experimental field manipulations will be used to test
for associations among territory quality, male genetic quality, female
settlement, male behaviors and extra-pair fertilizations. In addition, these
data will also be used to achieve two secondary objectives: (1) the selectiv e
benefits of extra-pair copulations to females in this population will be
examined and (2) extra-pair sires will be identified to determine true
reproductive success. Thus, this study will yield a better understanding of the
ecological causes and consequences of extra- pair copulations, as well as a
better understanding of how sexual selection operates in socially monogamous
species. Although molecular biology techniques have revolutionized almost every
discipline in biology, only recent have they been applied to ecological
research. This career development plan proposes an education program in
molecular exology that will meet this need in the training of graduate and
undergraduate students. The education program consists of: (1) a lecture course
in exological genetics, (2) a lab course in this subject, (3) a molecular
ecology journal club, (4) direct supervision of students conducting research in
molecular ecology. This education program will be closely integrated with the
proposed research program.