* 9629732
* RPG: Mapping Critical Determinants of AUF1-ARE Protein-RNA  Interaction
* BIO,MCB
* 07/01/1996,06/30/1998
* Belinda Wagner, Wake Forest University School of Medicine
* Standard Grant
* Marcia Steinberg
* 06/30/1998
* USD 17,996.00

9629732 Wagner This proposal will study the RNA-protein interactions that are
involved in mRNA turnover. A+U-rich elements (ARE) in some mRNAs have been
identified as markers for rapid degradation in cell-free systems. A protein,
AUF1, has been found to interact specifically with ARE regions. The goal of this
proposal is to identify polypeptide motifs within the AUF1 protein that are
important for ARE-binding activity. To identify polypeptide motifs that are
critical for AUF1-ARE interaction, a powerful combination of mutagenesis and in
vitro genetic selection will be employed. First, linker insertion will be used
to create a pool of AUF1 mutant coding sequences containing a substitution of
2-4 amino acids at numerous positions within the wild-type context. Second,
phage display will be used to select AUF1 polypeptides in vitro for their
ability to bind ARE sequences. Clones encoding non-binding mutants present in
the input pool will be absent from pools selected for ARE-binding activity.
Regions critical for ARE-binding will be mapped by comparing the positions of
linker insertions in the binding versus non-binding phage pools. DNA isolated
from input and selected phage pools can be efficiently screened because the
inserted linker will contain a unique KpnI restriction site. DNA samples will be
subjected to unidirectional PCR using a radiolabeled primer that hybridizes to a
vector-insert junction at the 5' or 3' end of the insert. Digestion of the
resulting double-stranded DNA with KpnI followed by denaturing gel
electrophoresis and autoradiography will yield a ladder of fragments whose
length indicates the position of linker insertion. Gaps in the ladder(s) of
selected phage DNA will indicate positions where linker insertion affects ARE-
binding activity. The relative affinities of selected vs. non-selected clones
for ARE sequences will then be measured by bacterial expression, affinity
purification of recombinant protein over Ni 2+-agarose columns and gel shift
assays. The su ccessful completion of these experiments will map critical
determinants of AUF1-ARE interaction. Further, this study will establish a
mutagenesis strategy that, when combined with phage display, can be of general
use in the study of RNA binding protein-RNA interactions. %%% Degradation of
mRNA is one mechanism of gene regulation. An A+U-rich element (ARE) in certain
mRNA species has been identified as one marker for mRNA degradation. A protein
that interacts with the ARE sequence (AUF1) has been cloned and characterized.
The goal of this proposal is to identify polypeptide motifs (domains of
proteins) that are important for ARE-binding activity. Experimental strategies
will include mutagenesis experiments in which different amino acids will be
substituted at different positions in the normal protein to identify relevant
stretches of the protein, and phage display methods to select AUF1 polypeptides
(fragments of the AUF1 protein) for their ability to bind ARE sequences. These
methods in combination with other state-of-the-art approaches make it highly
likely that important structural information on the determinants of AUF1-ARE
interaction will be obtained. ***