* 9629714
* RPG: Exploring the Evolutionary Consequences of Spatial     Variation in Marine Plant-Herbivore Interactions
* BIO,DEB
* 08/15/1996,01/31/1998
* Mary Ruckelshaus, Florida State University
* Standard Grant
* Mark Courtney
* 01/31/1998
* USD 17,996.00

Ruckelshaus 9629714 Marine organisms and communities are characterized by strong
species interactions, and the intensity and character of these interactions can
vary geographically, even when the same species are involved. This research
investigates the evolutionary consequences of spatially-varying species
interactions, with the ultimate goal of quantifying the likelihood that
coevolution has occurred between a marine plant and its herbivores. The plant,
Fucus distichus, inhabits rocky intertidal habitats and is widely distributed
geographically, extending from Alaska to southern California in the western part
of its range. Throughout this range, a number of herbivore species occur,
including a number of littorine snails, an isopod, and possibly a small crab
species. In order to quantify spatial variation in herbivore intensity, the
occurrence of the herbivores and the damage each species imposes on the plant
will be quantified throughout the geographic range of F. distichus. Next, the
potential for the plant to respond to the selection pressures exerted by the
herbivores will be quantified by estimating the size of an interbreeding
population of plants using genetic markers. If F. distichus individuals are
interconnected by dispersal throughout much of their geographic range, then
within-population spatial variation in herbivore intensity is not expected to
result in local variation in response to herbivory on the part of the plant. On
the other hand, if F. distichus occurs in small, isolated populations, spatial
variation in the presence of herbivores and the amount of damage they inflict
may result in spatially heterogeneous responses of the plant and genetic
divergence among populations. Results from this research will begin to address
the question of whether well-known spatial variation in marine species has
evolutionary consequences. Does spatial variation in species interactions
observed in the sea result in a significantly heterogeneous selective
environment? Do long ran ge dispersal capabilities of marine organisms result in
large interbreeding populations which "swamp out" the effects of local variation
in species interactions? Answers to these questions also will provide valuable
data for conservation biologists, whose recent focus on conserving whole
ecosystems requires data on the nature of species interactions in natural
habitats.