* 9629596
* Benthic Microalgal-Macrofaunal-Solute Interactions in       Coastal Marine Sediments
* GEO,OCE
* 09/15/1996,10/31/2000
* James Nelson, Skidaway Institute of Oceanography
* Continuing Grant
* Donald L. Rice
* 10/31/2000
* USD 252,258.00

9629596 Marinelli This project under the Faculty Early Development Career
Program is a combined research and education effort with two thrusts. The focus
of the research program is an interdisciplinary study of benthic ecological and
geochemical processes in the nearshore zone. The focus of the educational plan
is the development of an interdisciplinary program in coastal studies
(particularly sediment studies) at Skidaway Institute of Oceanography. The
research and education plan are united under the common view that the study of
coastal processes and coastal biogeochemistry should be approached in an
integrated, quantitive way. The proposal research will examine the effect of
individual infauna and benthic assemblages on microalgal productivity and
sediment nutrient fluxes using a combination of laboratory experiments, field
experiments and numerical models of biological and geochemical processes. This
approach incorporates ecology, geochemistry and mathematics to examine two
biogeochemically important processes in the coastal zone: primary production and
sediment-seawater nutrient exchange. The education plan will: (1) Instigate a
Summer Program in Coastal Oceanography at Skidaway Institute of Oceanography,
and (2) develop interactive materials for instruction over the distance learning
network, Georgia's two-way interactive video system that links classrooms from
different colleges within the University System. The summer program courses will
consist of (1) a survey course in Coastal Oceanography and Field Methods, (2) a
follow-up Independent Study course and (3) a field course in Sediment Processes.
The distance learning initiative will test the effectiveness of using internet
facilities to enhance interactive learning among remote sites.