* 9629470
* Career Advancement Award: Physiological Regulation of       Sulfate Homeostasis: Development of Techniques
* BIO,IOS
* 07/01/1996,06/30/1998
* Marilyn Morris, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* Elvira Doman
* 06/30/1998
* USD 50,000.00

Dr. Morris's long-term research goal is to understand the regulation of sulfate
homeostasis. Inorganic sulfate is a physiological ion necessary for biosynthetic
reactions especially important in growth and development, and for the biologic
activity and detoxification of various compounds produced in the body. Sulfated
proteoglycans are components of mammalian cell membranes and tissues, and are
part of the cell-recognition system necessary for cell differentiation. Serum
concentrations of sulfate increase in pregnancy and are higher in fetuses and
young children than in adults, consistent with an increased physiological
requirement for this anion during growth and development. Capacity-limited renal
reabsorption is of primary importance in the regulation of plasma concentrations
of inorganic sulfate. The mechanism(s) underlying these alterations in renal
transport is not known. However, the antibodies necessary to evaluate protein
expression of the two renal sulfate-transport proteins are not available. As
well, no available cell line exhibits sulfate transport with characteristics
similar to those observed in isolated kidney-cortex preparations. Both of these
tools are essential in order to evaluate the physiological regulation of sulfate
reabsorption. Therefore, Dr. Morris will (1) develop methods to quantitate mRNA
for the sulfate anion-exchange protein (sat-1), (2) produce antibodies to
determine protein expression for the renal brush-border membrane sodium-
dependent cotransport protein (NaSi-1) and the renal basolateral membrane anion-
exchange transport protein (sat-1) and to characterize the specificity of these
antibodies, and (3) develop a primary cell-culture system of guinea-pig
proximal-tubule cells and to characterize the uptake of sulfate and other
endogenous substrates in these cultured cells.