* 9629741
* RPG: Origin of Retrotransposon RNA Polymerase III           Transcripts in Drosophila
* BIO,MCB
* 07/15/1996,12/31/1997
* Irina Arkhipova, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* DeLill Nasser
* 12/31/1997
* USD 18,000.00

Arkhipova 96-29741 Research Planning Grant Abstract This project focuses on a
Drosophila melanogaster moderately repetitive retrotransposon, mdg1, with an
exceptionally complex promoter, the activity of which can be changed during
development of the fly. A novel aspect which has never been observed in vitro is
its duel specificity for RNA polymerase II/III (pol II/III). The generality and
the basis of this phenomenon need be investigated but preliminary studies are
needed to define the two possible origins of pol II/III transcripts of the
retrotransposon and to detect any variation in transcripts during the
development of the fly. These results will allow further research in one of two
alternate directions. %%% Participation of mobile DNA in the organization and
function of eukaryotic genomes remains a subject of controversy. However it is
beginning to be recognized that many different roles might be played in various
processes at the cellular, organismic and population levels by different
transposons. Transposons share the corresponding machinery with many host genes
and their ability to multiply can lead to multiplication of regulatory elements
found in the transposons. Therefore, a knowledge of the diverse regulatory
sequences carried by transposons, such as promoters, could result in
understanding of transposon involvement into qualitative as well as quantitative
aspects of regulatory evolution in higher eukaryotic organisms.