* 9629658
* Dissertation Research:  Mate Choice and Competition Among   Female Hamadryas Baboons in the Awash National Park,        Ethiopia
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/1996,10/31/1998
* Marina Cords, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Mark L. Weiss
* 10/31/1998
* USD 10,840.00

Over the past two decades, the role of female strategies in nonhuman primate
societies has become a major topic of investigation. Studies of many primate
species have shown that both female and male behavior contribute to primate
social organization. Hamadryas baboons, however, have long been considered to be
a very male-dominated species, in which the role of females has been assumed to
be negligible. Male behavior is distinct and highly visible in hamadryas
society: males, in trying to prevent females from mating with other males, are
very aggressive toward females and often `herd` them by biting them on the neck.
Females are generally described as lacking opportunity, and perhaps even
motivation, to escape male coercion and behave independently. However, both
observations of hamadryas baboons in captivity and evidence from other primate
species suggest that females do pursue their own reproductive interests,
independent from the behavior of males. This study will be the first to
investigate female mate choice and competition among wild female hamadryas
baboons and will thus help to clarify the role of females in this presumably
male-dominated species. The study will take place in the Awash National Park,
Ethiopia, over a period of 18 months. Focal females will be observed and social
and sexual behavior between females and males, as well as competitive
interactions among females, will be recorded. Fecal and blood samples will be
analyzed genetically to determine paternity of infants born to focal females,
which will indicate the males with which females have mated and conceived. This
study will contribute to our understanding of social and sexual behavior of wild
hamadryas baboons.