* 9629363
* RUI:  Impacts of Sediment Deposition on Wetland Functions
* BIO,DEB
* 08/15/1996,07/31/1999
* Catherine Owen, FRANKLIN PIERCE UNIVERSITY
* Standard Grant
* Martyn M. Caldwell
* 07/31/1999
* USD 37,830.00

9629363 Owen This project will address the impacts of sediment deposition on the
functions of non-tidal freshwater wetlands. Non-point source pollution such as
stormwater runoff is often directed into wetland areas, sometimes resulting in
changes in water quality and hydrology of the wetland. Although this stormwater
may contain many types of pollutants, the focus of this stage of research is on
the physical impacts of sediments in stormwater runoff on wetland processes.
Sediment from construction sites, parking lots, roads, and farms may alter the
ecological processes of wetlands. Wetlands are recognized for their ability to
filter out sediments and improve water quality, however, there may be some point
at which so much sediment is deposited in the wetland that the wetland is
degraded, and its ability to perform some or all of its ecological functions is
diminished. The general hypothesis of this study is that sediment deposited in a
wetland will alter the wetland soil's natural characteristics such as
capillarity, porosity and hydraulic conductivity. Highly organic soil is often
very porous in the top layers, and as a result may be open to settling and
compaction by sediment deposited in runoff; if the results of this sediment
deposition is a significant change in soil moisture retention, hydraulic
conductivity or other soil characteristics, then water flow and biological
processes in the wetland may be altered. The ultimate goal of the study is to
identify sustainable loads of sediment for a wetland. Here the term sustainable
is used to mean the level of sediment that the wetland can receive without
significantly altering its ability to perform its other functions besides
sediment filtration, such as providing wildlife habitat, biodiversity, flood
storage, streamflow maintenance and groundwater recharge or discharge.