* 9629949
* Dissertation Research:  Refugee Return-Resettlement and the Social Organization of Political Authority in Mozambique
* SBE,BCS
* 12/01/1996,11/30/1997
* Bradd Shore, Emory University
* Standard Grant
* Stuart Plattner
* 11/30/1997
* USD 5,045.00

This dissertation research project by a student of cultural anthropology from
Emory University will study how tribal communities in northern Mozambique that
were displaced during the recent war have reconstructed those aspects of their
social organization oriented around political authority. Through a comparative
analysis of two communities differently affected by the war, one having been
displaced and then resettled, the other having been relatively unaffected during
the violent period, the research will test the hypothesis that the resettled
community will demonstrate more `open-endedness` or will reveal a greater range
in its political authority. This research is important because it will advance
our understanding of the effects of resettlement. Existing theories focus on the
conservative tendencies of resettled groups. The hypothesis will be tested
through a combination of quantitative and qualitative methods, involving a
household questionnaire, semi-structured elicitation of cultural models, life-
history interviews, and an analysis of micro-interaction and conflict
situations. In addition to increasing our understanding about the effects of
resettlement on traditional communities, knowledge which will be important for
policy makers, the project adds to the nation's expertise about this important
area of the world.