* 9629956
* Mathematical Sciences:  Applied Mathematics Workshop for    Materials Studies and Industrial Applications
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/1996,07/31/1997
* Maria-Carme Calderer, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Lockhart
* 07/31/1997
* USD 5,000.00

9629956 Cao The philosophical theme of the meeting hinges on exploiting the
analogy between piezoelectricity of ferroelectric ceramics, piezocomposites and
flexoelectricity of certain liquid crystals. This analogy will embrace
experimental, modelling, computational, analytic as well as industrial problems
and mathematical methods arising in the study of such solid and liquid
materials. It will simultaneously address issues related to processing and
applications of polymeric liquid crystals, functional ceramics and composites.
In a broader sense, solid materials with electromechanical or magnetomechanical
coupling belong to a general category of ferroic materials. %%% The purpose of
this interdisciplinary conference is bringing together researchers from
interacting areas of Materials Science, including Physics and Applied
Mathematics, with special focus on the latest scientific and industrial
developments in materials which are currently used in computer display devices,
smart structures, sensing and control devices. Through the interchange among
different disciplines, we hope to channel the expertise of mathematicians and
physicists to more practical problems and to form new constructive research
groups to tackle such problems. Details of the workshop information can be found
in the following World Wide Web address: http://www.math.psu.edu/mcc/imm.html
***