* 9629487
* Molecular Phylogeny of the Phylum Haplosporidia
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/1996,08/31/1999
* Mark Siddall, College of William & Mary Virginia Institute of Marine Science
* Standard Grant
* Mary C. McKitrick
* 08/31/1999
* USD 181,583.00

9629487 BURRESON The phylum Haplosporidia (three genera, about 31 species)
consists of spore-forming parasitic protozoa, found in a wide variety of marine
and freshwater invertebrate animals. Some species cause serious disease in
commercially important shellfish, including oysters along the east coast of the
United States. Accurate knowledge of the biology of Haplosporidia, starting with
reliable identification and classification of the species, is essential for
disease prevention and control. Classification depends on basic knowledge of how
haplosporidian species are related to one another, and how the phylum
Haplosporidia is related to other protists. This knowledge currently is
inadequate. In this study, Eugene Burreson, Mark Siddall and Kimberly Reece will
examine the morphological and molecular characteristics of several species of
Haplosporidia, including the type species of each genus, and use this
information to infer the phylogenetic relationships among haplosporidian
species, and between Haplosporidia and other protist groups. They will conduct
detailed observations on morphological features, especially the spores, with the
light and electron microscopes, and will sequence small-subunit ribosomal RNA
and actin genes. The phylogenetic reconstructions, and the classification
schemes resulting from them, will inform pathogen control strategies by
permitting more accurate identification of pathogens and, possibly, discovering
novel aspects of haplosporidian biology (for example, different spore
morphologies may represent stages in the life history of one haplosporidian
species, rather than two different species).