* 9630618
* Cell Biology and Genetics of Acetabularia Phenotypes        That are Arrested in Development
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/1996,08/31/2000
* Dina Mandoli, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Judith A. Verbeke
* 08/31/2000
* USD 220,000.00

9630618 Mandoli Dr. Mandoli's long-term goal is to understand how developmental
age and/or size of an organism and blue light co-regulate initiation of
reproductive development. A genetic dissection of the initiation of reproduction
in Acetabularia acetabulum will provide unique insights into development at the
level of the single cell. Initiation of reproduction in A. acetabulum, requires
de novo protein systhesis, and is regulated at the translational level by a)
developmental age/size of the cell b) blue light and c) a putative cytosolic,
nuclear-encoded inhibitor. There are 3 specific aims in this proposal. AIM 1:
Continue inbreeding morphologically distinct, near isogenic cell lines. She has
inbred cell lines which are morphologically distinct and are more robust than
their progenitors. She will determine which cell lines have the fastest growth
rate, the highest numbers of progeny, and differ from each other in the greatest
number of gross morphological phenotypes. She will continue inbreeding only
those cell lines. AIM 2: Use cell grafting to study her developmentally arrested
(da) cell lines. Developmentally arreseted cells grow normally at first but
later arrest in vegatative growth. Based on morphology and behavior of cells in
grafts and upon amputation, her 11 da cell lines comprise 4 classes. She has
compensated for da defects in 3 ways: a wildtype nucleus can 'piggy-back' some
mutants through reproduction in a birhizoidal heterokaryon; a wildtype apex,
which always lacks a nucleus, permits some mutants to reproduce in a
mutant::wildtype graft; some phenotypes reproduce if the defective apex is
simply removed. Here, she will establish complementation groups and dominance
using classical genetics for da cells that act like single gene traits and
establish cell biological relationships between the da cell lines using
mutant::mutant grafts between apices and rhizoids. AIM 3: Make transformants
made via microparticle bombardment. In this funding period, she will optimize
transformation frequency, examine the nature of the inserts, and determine
inheritance, segregation, and stability of intruduced traits.