* 9630054
* Microbiology and Ecology of Filamentous Sulfur Formation
* BIO,IOS
* 07/01/1996,06/30/2000
* Carl Wirsen, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Continuing Grant
* Zoe Eppley
* 06/30/2000
* USD 334,985.00

9630054 Taylor The microbial oxidation of geothermally produced sulfur
compounds, principally hydrogen sulfide, is the energy base for supporting dense
animal communities surrounding deep-sea hydrothermal vents. To broaden our
understanding of this process in warm water vents laboratory enrichments were
established where seawater in contact with coastal marine sediments were exposed
to hydrogen sulfide in continuous flow reactors. A self sustaining white
flocculant material became established that was found to be comprised of solid
sulfur filaments that were 0.5-2.0 micrometers wide and ranged between 20-500
micrometers in length. Preliminary studies have shown that the filaments are
produced via direct excretion by a motile bacterium and the filaments produced
become a site for attachment and continued excretion by other members of the
population. An intriguing observation in our laboratory indicates that
filamentous sulfur may be an abundant product of free-living microbial sulfide
oxidation in subseafloor regions of warm water hydrothermal vents. Recent
descriptions of an extensive discharge from so-called called "blizzard" or
"snowblower" vents on the East Pacific Rise indicated large amounts of white
flocculant material was released and accumulated into mats of 5 cm thickness. We
have examined this material and found it to be microscopically and chemically
nearly identical to the filamentous sulfur material produced in our laboratory
reactors. The overall goal of this project will be to study the microbial
ecology of filamentous sulfur formation, and to apply this information to a
greater understanding of the microbial processes occurring in warm water
hydrothermal vents and other sulfidic open flow environments. We will focus on
three interdependent areas of research: (A) Characterization of the process and
physiology of the sul fide oxidizing organism directly responsible for
filamentous sulfur formation, and study of the interactions between these
organisms and the filamentous product that presumably allow their existence in
high fluid flow environments. (B) Determine the taxonomic and phylogenetic
characteristics of coastal filamentous sulfur-producing organisms. (C)
Determination of the morphological mechanism of filamentous sulfur formation.
The oxidation of hydrogen sulfide to elemental sulfur of filamentous form is a
unique and undescribed phenomenon, and suggests a novel solution to a microbial
existence in turbulent environments. Proposed studies, we believe, will provide
the beginnings of an interesting new chapter in our understanding of the
microbiology of the marine sulfur cycle, and will introduce a novel form of
sulfur that may have future industrial application.