* 9630707
* A Nomenclature and Database for Sequenced Plant Genes
* BIO,DBI
* 09/15/1996,08/31/2000
* Carl Price, International Society for Plant Molecular Biology
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 08/31/2000
* USD 236,389.00

In 1994, the The International Society for Plant Molecular Biology's Commission
on Plant Gene Nomenclature (CPGN) opened a Registry of Sequenced Plant Genes to
serve as an international clearing house for reviewing and assigning gene
designations for sequenced plant genes. The nomenclature developed by the CPGN
is based on the function of gene products and is common across the plant
kingdom. The project has been supported with funds from the USDA and from the
European Commission which underwrites the operations of the CPGN in Europe,
including a Registry Office in Norwich, UK. The "Mendel" database implemented in
the ACEDB database management system is currently accessible over the WWW at:
http://probe.nalusda.gov:8300/. In this project, the International Society for
Plant Molecular Biology through the CPGN will continue to provide standardized
common designations for sequenced plant genes and to re-evaluate the technology
support infrastructure for the project. Advisory committees of scientific users
and of bioinformaticians will undertake a needs analysis, the production of a
data model and design planning for the project in order to increase the level of
automation and efficiency of data acquisition and verification. The current
system of collecting data in a flat file system will be examined and re-
implemented based on the recommendations of the technical and scientific
advisory committees. The specific objectives of the project are to: 1) Expand
the system of working groups to include all shared categories of plant genes
plus certain categories of special scientific, industrial, or pharmaceutical
importance, 2) Develop plant-wide designations for 4,000 plant-wide families of
genes by the end od 1999. These designations will correspond to 90 percent of
all isolated plant genes and for most genes expected on the basis of known
proteins and metabolic pathways, 3) Re-design Mendel from its present system of
linked flat files to a single database on the A CEDB platform
(http://probe.nalusda.gov:8000/acedocs), 4) Organize a system for reciprocal
updates of Mendel between the American and European registry offices of the CPGN
and 5) Organize an on-line, real-time system of communication with EMBL/GenBank.