* 9630903
* Role of a Novel EGF-Related Growth Factor in                Mouse Gastrulation
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/1996,07/31/1999
* Michael Shen, Rutgers, The State University of New Jersey-RBHS-Robert Wood
* Continuing Grant
* Judith Plesset
* 07/31/1999
* USD 300,000.00

9630903 Shen To understand the molecular mechanisms that regulate embryonic
pattern formation and differentiation, it is necessary to identify candidate
growth factors that may be involved in these processes, and to characterize
their functional properties. Previous studies of mouse embryogenesis in this
laboratory have used a differential display screening approach to identify
mesoderm-specific genes expressed during the differentiation of embryonic stem
(ES) cells in culture. This strategy has resulted in the isolation of a novel
gene named Cryptic, which encodes a potentially secreted molecule containing a
single copy of an epidermal growth factor-like (EGF) motif. Analysis of Cryptic
expression indicates that it is expressed during gastrulation in two distinct
spatial domains, which correspond to the axial mesoderm and to the lateral plate
mesoderm. Thus, the novel gene Cryptic encodes a potential signaling molecule
that has an expression pattern consistent with a role in mesoderm patterning and
differentiation. Notably, Cryptic appears to be a member of a new family of EGF-
related growth factors. The Cryptic gene was originally named on the basis of
its significant sequence similarities with the Cripto gene, which is also
expressed during mesoderm formation and has growth stimulating activities in
cell culture. The Cryptic gene is also related to a recently described Xenopus
gene named FRL-1, which has mesoderm - and neural-inducing activities in
embryonic assays, and can activate fibroblast growth factor IFGF) receptors.
Based on (1) the sequence similarities between Cryptic, Cripto, and FRL-1, (2)
the growth factor activity of Cripto, (3) the mesoderm and neural-inducing
activities of FRL-1, (4) the activation of FGF receptors by FRL-1, and (5) the
spatially and temporally restricted pattern of Cryptic expression, it is likely
that Cryptic encodes a potential signaling molecule that may be involved in
cellular interactions during embryonic pattern formation and cell fate det
ermination. To address this hypothesis, the proposed research will investigate
the biological and biochemical properties of Cryptic, organized around three
specific aims: (1) Characterization of Cryptic mRNA and protein expression
patterns, (2) Investigation of the biochemical properties and function of
CRYPTIC protein and its receptor, and (3) Analysis of biological requirements
for Cryptic during mouse development. Taken together, these studies will
synergize to provide a greater understanding of the biological and biochemical
functions of this novel growth factor-like molecule, and perhaps those related
family members. Furthermore, these investigations may lead to insights
concerning the molecular mechanisms involved in growth factor signaling during
embryonic patterning and differentiation in vertebrate development.