* 9630861
* Biochemistry of Luminescence
* BIO,MCB
* 07/15/1997,06/30/1998
* Osamu Shimomura, Marine Biological Laboratory
* Standard Grant
* Marcia Steinberg
* 06/30/1998
* USD 12,000.00

9630861 Shimomura Technical abstract Bioluminescence occurs in a wide variety of
organisms, involving diverse types of compounds and reaction mechanisms in the
chemical process of light emission. This research is focused on the biochemical
understanding of the bioluminescence of fungi, which has been challenged by
several groups in the past 40 years without success. The bioluminescence of
fungi is unique and distinctly differs from all other bioluminescent systems
presently known. Their glow is continuous and nearly constant for days, and the
light-emitting reaction is catalyzed by surfactants, not by conventional
luciferases. In the chemical study of bioluminescence, the identification and
characterization of the key components involved are most important. Thus, the
central theme of this project is the structure determination of various fungal
luciferins and their precursors. The luciferin of the luminous mushroom Panellus
stipticus was found to have a complicated structure consisting of three
molecules of the precursor (ketoaldehydes PS- A and PS-B) and two molecules of
methylamine; the molecule contains an unusual 9-membered ring. In order to
determine the complete structure of the P. stipticus luciferin, a luciferin
sample that contains C-13 atoms at the key positions of the molecule will be
prepared, and the sample will be analyzed by a NMR technique newly developed at
Dr. Kishi's lab at Harvard. From the luminous fungus Mycena citricolor, more
than 10 kinds of luciferin precursor were recently isolated in pure states;
their structures are now being elucidated. These precursors readily form
luciferins when reacted with decylamine; the structures of the M. citricolor
luciferins thus obtained will be determined. It seems apparent that the
luciferin of all luminous fungi are derived from a precursor of aldehydic type,
such as PS-A and PS-B, and a primary amine, and that all of them contain an
identical light-emitting chromophore. Such a chromophore will be identified from
t he structures of more than two different types of fungal luciferins. In the
luminescence reaction of fungi, a luciferin is oxidized by molecular oxygen in
the presence of superoxide anions and a cationic surfactant, in which the
emitted photons play no apparent role, but by which the reaction can eliminate
harmful superoxide anions in the tissue; the proposed study might uncover other
important roles for the reaction. The involvement of a surfactant that mimics a
luciferase suggests that the study may contribute to the understanding of
enzymatic action. The high sensitivity of fungal luciferin to superoxide anions
suggests its possible use as a superoxide probe. Non-technical abstract In the
chemical study of bioluminescence, it is most important to identify and
characterize the key substances involved in the light emitting reaction.
Luciferin is a type of substance that exits in luminous organisms and emits
light when it is oxidized. The central theme of this research is to find out the
structures of various fungal luciferins and their precursors. The luciferin of
one type of luminous mushroom, named Panellus stipticus, was found to be a
complicated compound that includes and unusual ring of 9 carbon atoms. The PI
plans to determine the complete structure of this luciferin by preparing a
luciferin sample that contains a heavier-than-average carbon atom (13C) at the
key positions of the molecule, and then analyzing this sample by a process known
as nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) spectroscopy. The luminous Costa Rican
tobacco fungus (Mycena citricolor) contains more that 10 kinds of luciferin
precursor which have been recently isolated and purified; we are now trying to
determine their chemical structures. These precursor molecules are readily
converted to luciferins when treated with a substance called decylamine; we plan
to investigate the chemical structures of these luciferins. Now it seems
apparent that the luciferins of all luminous fungi are derived from similar mat
erials, and that all of them contain an identical light-emitting structure
called a chromophore. We plan to identify such a chromophore based on the
chemical structures of more than two different types of fungal luciferins In
luminous fungi, light is emitted when a luciferin is oxidized by molecular
oxygen, in the presence of certain negative ions (called superoxide anions) and
a detergent; in this reaction, the emitted photons play no apparent role, but
the reaction can eliminate the superoxide anions, which are harmful, from the
tissue. The involvement of the detergent that mimics an enzyme suggests that the
study described here may also contribute to the understanding of enzymatic
action. The high sensitivity of fungal luciferin to superoxide anions also
suggests the possibility of using this material as a means of detecting the
presence of harmful superoxide anions in biological systems.