* 9630278
* Links Between Soil Nutrient Dynamics and Surface Water      Biogeochemistry Following Deforestation for Pasture         Agriculture in Amazonia
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/1996,08/31/1998
* Linda Deegan, Marine Biological Laboratory
* Standard Grant
* L. Douglas James
* 08/31/1998
* USD 290,000.00

9630278 Deegan This project will examine how the conversion of moist tropical
forest to cattle pasture in the Amazon Basin alters the patterns and rates of
element cycles in soils and how these changes are linked to changes in the
chemistry and ecology of small streams. The Amazon is a region with one of the
world's highest rates of conversion of natural ecosystems to human dominated
use. Cattle pasture is the dominant use of deforested lands. Conversion of
native forest to pasture causes large changes in the patterns and rates of
nutrient cycling and the potential for nutrient losses from soils. Small streams
function as key hydrologic and biochemical links between upland soils and
downstream aquatic ecosystems. This project will examine soils and streams in
small drainage basins in Rondonia, rapidly developing state in the southwest
Brazilian Amazon. Four pairs of drainage basins will be compared. One basin in
each pair will drain intact forest, the other will drain land that has been
cleared and planted to cattle pasture. The availability of nitrogen, phosphorus
and major ions will be examined in drainage basin soils. Measurements of
streamwater concentrations and forms of nitrogen, phosphorus, major cations and
anions, trace elements and suspended sediments in the paired catchments will
link changes in soil chemistry with stream biogeochemistry. To determine how
long the influence of one land use is maintained as streams pass through one
land use to another, the rates at which nutrients are taken up will be
determined by measuring solute concentrations upstream and downstream of land
use boundaries and by experimental injections of nitrate and phosphate and a
non-reactive tracer in forest and pasture streams to determine how
biogeochemical inputs from soils in the drainage basin affect stream organic
matter production. This work will provide important new information that will
help to predict the effect of agricultural development and deforestation.
Examination of stream pro ductivity will provide new information on how land use
change affects biological functions that maintain water quality and support
fisheries that are important to human well-being. On a longer time frame, this
project will provide a foundation for future modeling efforts to link land use
changes in small watersheds with biogeochemical changes in the larger rivers of
the Amazon using models of water routing and within stream biogeochemical
processing. This proposal was submitted to the Environmental Geochemistry and
Biogeochemistry solicitation, and the project is being jointly supported by the
Divisions of Earth Sciences (Geosciences), Environmental Biology (Biological
Sciences), Mathematical Sciences (Mathematical and Physical Sciences) and
International Programs -Brazil (Social, Behavioral &amp; Economic Sciences).