* 9630252
* Mitochondrial Factors Associated with Pollen Development
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/1996,07/08/1999
* Sally Mackenzie, Purdue Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* DeLill Nasser
* 07/08/1999
* USD 344,700.00

Mackenzie 9630252 A mutation in the mitochondra of the common bean, Phaseolus
vulgaris, results in male sterility. The mutation is dominant, non-lethal and
can be suppressed by nuclear genome suppressors. A mitochondrial sterility-
associated protein, designated pvsORF239, is found only in reproductive tissues
of the male-sterile plant localized to the pollen wall. It appears to be
posttranslationally regulated. The possibility that, by virtue of specific
characteristics found in this protein, it is actively transported from the
mitochondrion to the callose layer of the developing pollen will be investigated
by genetic methodology. Other aspects to be investigated are the possible
involvement of a mitochondrial protease in the rapid turnover of the protein in
the mitochondria of vegetative tissues and the function of nuclear suppressors,
if any, in either the transport or turnover of the protein. In order to pursue
these questions in a more tractable organism, the system will be introduced into
yeast for further study. %%% This investigation of the cytoplasmic male
sterility system in common bean will give added insight into our limited
understanding of mitochondrial export mechanisms, the tissue-specific regulation
of plant mitochondrial gene expression and the molecular basis of nuclear
suppression of a mitochondrially-induced phenotype.