* 9630215
* Structural Basis for Electron Transfer Between the Bacterial Reaction Center and Cytochrome c2 in Rhodobacter           Sphaeroides
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/1996,08/31/1999
* Melvin Okamura, University of California-San Diego
* Continuing Grant
* Kamal Shukla
* 08/31/1999
* USD 360,000.00

9630215 Okamura The aim of this project is to study the molecular basis for the
binding and electron transfer reactions between cytochrome c2 and the bacterial
reaction center (RC) from the photosynthetic bacterium Rhodobacter sphaeroides.
Site directed mutagenesis will be used to modify residues on both the RC and
cytochrome in the interfacial region. The types of mutations to be constructed
are: 1) Charge reversals: carboxyl groups on the RC will be changed to Lys and
Lys on the cytochrome will be changed to carboxyls. The binding of Rcs and
cytochromes with compensating mutations at interacting site should show
improvement in the binding. 2) Formation of hydrophobic binding domains: polar
residues on both proteins in the binding domain will be converted to hydrophobic
residues to increase stability of the complex. 3) Site directed crosslinking:
Cys residues will be introduced at putative interacting sites on both RC and
cytochrome and used to crosslink the two proteins into a stable configuration.
The binding constants and electron transfer rates of the complexes formed by
mutated proteins will be measured and correlated with the structural changes in
order to deduce the structure of the RC-cytochrome complex. Mutations will be
made to improve the binding of the cytochrome to the RC to facilitate structural
studies of the RC-cytochrome complex by x-ray diffraction. %%% Electron transfer
reactions in biological membranes are essential to provide energy necessary for
life processes. The reaction between cytochrome c2 and the RC in photosynthetic
bacteria displays both the specificity in binding and high rate of interprotein
electron transfer within the bimolecular complex necessary to maintain a fast
electron transfer through the electron transfer chain. These studies of the
binding and electron transfer reactions of between cytochrome c2 and the
bacterial RC are aimed at determining fundamental principles of protein
association and electron transfer in biology that should provide the basis for
understanding energy conversion processes in other important biological systems.
***