* 9630733
* Mathematical Models of Oculomotor Reflexes
* BIO,DBI
* 11/15/1996,10/31/2000
* Mark Shelhamer, Johns Hopkins University
* Continuing grant
* Lee C. Makowski
* 10/31/2000
* USD 217,649.00

The principal investigator and colleagues will address two issues in
mathematical modeling and analysis of oculomotor reflexes. First, the various
published models have not been fully verified by comparison with actual data and
comparison with other models. Second, a new and powerful class of dynamic
measures has recently been developed in the field of nonlinear dynamics ("chaos
theory"). These measures provide a way to assess nonlinearity and determinism in
a time series, but the measurements are not always easy to interpret and to
relate to the underlying physiology. This research project addresses these
issues in two ways. First, the investigators will implement on a computer
several mathematical models of reflexive oculomotor control, obtain actual data
from the species (cat, turtle, human) for which each model was developed, and
use the dynamic measures (correlation dimension, prediction error, fractal
structure, and others) to compare the data to simulated data generated by each
model. Making allowances for differences between species, the models will be
compared with each other in the same manner. In the course of this work the
investigators also plan to develop new models of oculomotor control. Second, the
models will be modified systematically (by making small parameter changes,
changing the form of probability distributions, etc.), and a record will be kept
of the effect of each modification on the various dynamic measures. In this way,
the project will give insight into the interpretation of the measurements, what
physiologic processes might be responsible for their taking on particular values
and how pathologic conditions alter the nominal values.