* 9630736
* Effects of Disorder on Phase Transitions of Quantum Fluids
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/1996,11/30/1999
* Moses Chan, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* H. Hollis Wickman
* 11/30/1999
* USD 420,000.00

w:\awards\awards96\*.doc 9630736 Chan This research will explore the effects of
disorder on phase transitions, particularly the superfluid transition in
Helium-4 and phase separation in Helium-3/Helium-4 mixtures. This is
accomplished by introducing liquid Helium-4 and Helium-3/Helium-4 mixtures into
porous media, such as silica aerogel or porous gold, two substrates made by the
investigator. In this random environment of the porous media, the superfluid
transition of confined pure Helium-4 was found to be completely altered from the
bulk liquid although the transition remains remarkably sharp and exhibits well
defined simple power law behavior. The power law exponents are significantly
modified even though the silica based aerogel constitutes only a few percent of
the total volume. When Helium-3/Helium-4 mixtures are added to the aerogel the
phase diagram of Helium-3/Helium-4 mixture is completely altered giving rise to
a new Helium-3 rich superfluid phase in addition to the usual Helium-3 rich
superfluid. The phase diagram and behavior of mixtures when the volume fraction
of the aerogel is further reduced will be studied. %%% In the last two decades,
a great deal has been learned about how one phase of pure matter transforms into
another, e.g., liquid into gas and superconductor into normal metal. In the real
world, disorder and impurities are very often present in these systems. This
project will provide an understanding of the effect of such impurities on the
nature of a specific system, namely the transformation of liquid Helium-4 from
the superfluid to the normal state. This system can be carefully controlled so
that conclusions can be applied to technologically important materials.
Impurities are introduced by adding liquid helium into porous aerogel or porous
gold of well characterized porosity and topology. Experiments to date reveal
unexpected results including an extraordinary sharp transition inspite of the
random environment and the creation of a new 3He rich superfluid phase. Study is
planned of this unusual behavior and the variation of these properties with
temperature, pressure and concentration of the two helium isotopes. ***