* 9630935
* Biochemistry and Molecular Biology of Beta-Glucosidases and Alpha-Hydroxynitrile Lyases Involved in Cyanogenesis
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/1996,07/31/1998
* Jonathan Poulton, University of Iowa
* Standard Grant
* Judith A. Verbeke
* 07/31/1998
* USD 55,000.00

9630935 Poulton Rosaceous stone fruits (Prunus spp.) are among many
commercially important crops that cause cyanide poisoning in humans and
livestock through release of hydrogen cyanide from cyanogenic glycosides by
endogenous beta-glucosidases and alpha-hydroxynitrile lyases. Black cherry (P.
serotina) seeds are highly cyanogenic because they are a rich source of the
cyanogenic diglucoside (R)-amydalin and its catabolic enzymes amygdalin
hydrolase (AH), prunasin hydrolase (PH) and (R)-mandelonitrile lyase (MDL). In
undamaged seeds, large-scale amygdalin hydrolysis is precluded by tissue level
compartmentation, since the two beta-glucosidases are located exclusively in the
procambium, whereas amygdalin occurs with MDL within the cotyledonary parenchyma
cells. Rapid cyanogenesis ensues when tissue disruption breaches critical
permeability barriers, allowing amygdalin access to its catabolic enzymes. The
objective of this proposal is to gain a better understanidng of the biochemistry
and molecular biology of AH, PH and MDL. The Prunus cyanogenic system is complex
in that all three enzymes exist as multiple forms, the exact nature and
physiological significance of which require clarification. Whether individual
isoforms of each catabolic enzyme carry out defferent functions or exhibit
differential expression, either temporally or spatially, remains largely
unclear. The proposed studies are designed to lead to an improved understanding
of the spatial and temporal regulation of cyanogenesis in plants, thereby
contributing toward the long-term goal of reducing the toxicity of cyanogenic
plants to animals including man. Furthermore, this research will generate
important information about the functioning of beta-glucosidases and FAD-
containing alpha-hydroxynitrile lyases, thus facilitating future efforts to
engineer the substrate specificities of these enzymes for biotechnological
purposes.