* 9630783
* Genetic and Developmental Dissection of Integrin            Function in Drosophila
* BIO,IOS
* 07/01/1996,09/30/1999
* James Fristrom, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Steven Klein
* 09/30/1999
* USD 229,853.00

9630783 FRISTROM Vertebrate integrins, transmembrane adhesion proteins, are
implicated in the organization of the cytoskeleton as well as in signalling
pathways that regulate gene expression. These properties of integrins suggest
that they play important roles in development and in cancer. This proposal aims
at elucidating through genetic analyses pathways of integrin function during
Drosophila development. The components of the Drosophila integrin pathways
should have homologs in vertebrates. Drosophila integrins have already been
shown from mutational and immunological studies to have roles in maintaining
adhesions between muscle and tendon cells (as they do in vertebrates) and
between the two epithehal layers of wings. The failure of these junctions in
mutants lacking integrins often has clear consequences (muscle detachment and
consequent lethality in embryos and blisters in wings). Wings are not essential
for the viability of fhes, so otherwise lethal mutations can be isolated and
studied in homozygous clonal wing patches produced by somatic recombination. The
genetic analyses proposed here continue to make use of a highly efficient
technique for generating somatic recombinants, a technique utilizing the yeast
FLP recombinase gene that has been introduced into Drosophila. The high
frequency of recombination obtained with this recombinase permits developmental
analysis of clonal patches and facilitates screens for mutations that produce
wing blisters in clonal patches. The goal is to identify genes, other than those
encoding integrins, that encode components of PS integrin pathways. The approach
is based on the belief that PS integrin pathways will be similar (though not
identical) in wing cells and in tendon cells (epidermal cells to which muscles
attach). In both these cell types integrins localize to highly organized
intercellular junctions that interact with the cytoskeleton. The PI will
continue to screen for new mutations by identifying wing blisters that arise
within clonal patches created by FLP-recombinase-dependent somatic
recombination. Using this approach, they have already identified 50 mutations in
19 different complementation groups. Many more genes, however, remain to be
identified. The investigator will determine whether the new mutants also disrupt
myotendon junctions in embryos, interact with known integrin mutants to produce
wing blisters and exhibit other abnormalities characteristic of integrin
mutants. Mutants with most of these abnormalities are expected to encode
components of PS integrin pathways. The PI will also determine when in wing
development blisters arise in clonal patches. Early blisters (as in integrin
null mutants) suggest the normal product of the mutant gene has a signalling
function. Late blisters suggest that the normal product of the mutant gene has
only a structural function. One new gene they have identified, emu, is strongly
implicated in integrin-dependent junction formation and signalling. The
investigators propose a molecular and developmental characterization of emu to
understand its fupktion in integrindependent junction formation.