* 9630926
* Dissertation Research:  Use of Ancient mtDNA D-Loop         Sequences to Test Hypotheses of Prehistoric Native          American Population Movement
* NONE,NONE
* 08/01/1996,01/31/1999
* David Smith, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Mark L. Weiss
* 01/31/1999
* USD 9,575.00

The colonization of the Americas and prehistoric movements by Native Americans
have been central issues for American archaeologists. Although research has
centered on archaeological and linguistic evidence, recently genetic evidence
has also been applied to these questions. This project seeks to utilize
mitochondrial DNA extracted from the skeletal material of at least 47 ancient
Native Americans, excavated from archaeological sites in the Stillwater Marsh
and the margins of Pyramid Lake in western Nevada which date between
approximately 290 and 9500 years before present, to genetically characterize the
prehistoric Native Americans of western Nevada. Most modern Native Americans
belong to one of four maternally inherited mitochondrial lineages whose
frequencies vary significantly among language and geographic groups. The
distribution of these four mitochondrial lineages among the ancient individuals
will be characterized, as will the existence of any additional lineages. High
resolution sequence data from the mitochondrial hypervariable region (D-Loop)
will also be gathered. Comparison of these ancient Native Americans to modern
Native Americans, based both on the frequency of mitochondrial lineages and
phylogenetic analysis of the sequence data, should contribute to the resolution
of current debates regarding the existence and timing of the spread of modern
Numic-speaking peoples into the Great Basin and the identity of the pre-Numic
inhabitants of that region. In addition, analysis of these data may help to
identify (or delimit) probable Asian source populations, the presence of
founder's effect or a bottleneck, and the number of migration events
contributing to the peopling of the Americas.