* 9630934
* Mechanisms by Which Root Disease Induced Changes in         Ponderosa Pine Physiology Effect Bark Beetle Behavior
* BIO,IOS
* 08/15/1996,07/31/1999
* David Wood, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing grant
* William E. Winner
* 07/31/1999
* USD 300,000.00

9630934 Wood The physiological responses of trees to root pathogens, and the
resulting effects on plant-feeding insect behavior are poorly understood. The
studies outlined here aim to characterize: 1) the biochemical changes in
ponderosa pine (Pinus ponderosa) in response to annosus root disease
(Heterobasidion annosum), emphasizing induced changes in parts of the tree not
infected by the fungus (i.e., systematic induction). Preliminary evidence
indicates that a systemic response occurs, especially with respect to stilbenes,
and that these substances are associated with development of disease symptoms.
Greenhouse and field experiments will be carried out to further characterize
this unexpected and novel phenomenon in conifers. 2) the influence of compounds
produced by the host in response to the root pathogen (including stilbenes and
ethylene, among others), and by the pathogen itself, on bark beetle behavior
mountain pine beetle (Dendroctonus ponderosae) and the western pine beetle (D.
brevicomis) (Coleoptera: Scolytidae) . The role of compounds produced during the
physiological response of the host tree to the root pathogen as attractants
and/or feeding stimulants will be determined in the laboratory and the field, in
order to better understand how these bark beetles detect suitable host tissue
for colonization. This work will significantly advance our knowledge of
fundamental ecophysiological interactions, integrating partners as diverse as
fungal pathogens, forest trees, and associated bark beetles. A greater knowledge
of this three way interaction will also ultimately lead to a greater
understanding of other plant/herbivore systems and provide the basis for
elucidating the physiological mechanisms of host resistance to herbivores.
Hence, this investigation may also result in modified strategies for forest
disease and bark beetle man agement, based on better knowledge of tree decline
and the role of host physiopathology in bark beetle colonization.