* 9630891
* Spatial Firing Patterns in the Rat Subicular Cortex
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/1996,07/31/2000
* Patricia Sharp, Yale University
* Continuing Grant
* Sonya K. Sobrian
* 07/31/2000
* USD 209,817.00

9601382 Sharp The hippocampal formation is a part of the brain known to be
critically involved in learning and memory. Hippocampal damage in humans cause
profound, nearly global amnesia for events which occur after the lesion. One
type of ability affected is spatial, or navigational learning. Individuals with
hippocampal damage cannot learn their way around in a new environment. Some
insight into how the hippocampus may accomplish its role in spatial learning has
come from studies which examine the physiological signals in the hippocampal
formation as individuals navigate. One kind of spatial signal is the place, or
locational cell rate, while there are other regions where the cell fires at
lower rates, or is silent. Thus the cells provide an ongoing indication of the
animal's current location. In the hippocampus proper, each new environment is
coded using a different pattern of firing in these cells, so that each
environment has its own unique "neural map". Recently, we have discovered a
novel type of locational signal in a subregion of the hippocampal formation
known as the subiculum. In the subiculum, each environment is represented using
the same spatial signal. That is, the spatial pattern in one environment appears
to be a rubber sheet transformation of the pattern in any other environment it
appears that the subicular cells may each have a single, abstract, generic
firing pattern which is transferred and shaped to fit into each new enclosure.
Such a generic map could play a critical role in abstract spatial reasoning.
Several manipulations are planned, in order to further characterize the
subicular spatial signal. First, the initial work (above) has only examined
cells when recorded in two subicular patterns can expand and/or contract when
the overall environmental size changes, cells will be serially recorded in
chambers which differ in total area. In addition, it is not clear how one
environment is demarcated from another, by the s ubiculum. That is, how do the
subicular cells "decide" to make a new replica of the one environmental area to
another? To examine this issue, cells will be recorded as animals navigate
through environments in which there are partial boundaries dividing one
enclosure from another, to see what kinds of boundaries will cause the
generation of a new replica of the map. Finally, the spatial and behavioral
firing patterns of cells in brain regions which project messages onto the
subiculum will be examined, in order to determine what could be the
computational and sensory building blocks for the generic subicular maps. The
results will be used, along with formal neural network models, to try to
understand the role played by the hippocampal region in learning and memory
generally.