* 9630311
* Development of a Population Genetics Database Prototype
* BIO,DBI
* 08/15/1996,07/31/1999
* Joseph Neigel, University of Louisiana at Lafayette
* Standard Grant
* Paul Gilna
* 07/31/1999
* USD 148,219.00

The investigators will develop a prototype database of published surveys of
animal mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA). Surveys of genetic variation in natural
populations have been a major component of research in population biology and
systematics. The data from these surveys are valuable resource for further
research and for applications in conservation biology. Animal mtDNA surveys are
appropriate targets for standardized methods of representation and analysis.
Variation in mtDNA reflects a hierarchy of maternal lineages, which often
exhibit considerable temporal and geographical structure. Although surveys of
mtDNA variation may employ any of several methods to detect variation (DNA
sequencing, RFLP, DGGE, SSCP), there are standard statistical quantities that
can be calculated from any of these data, as well as standard methods for
interpreting these statistics. The investigators will identify authors of animal
mtDNA surveys by literature searches, and contact them with a request for data.
When necessary (and feasible), they will also extract data from printed tables
in published articles and reports. The raw data will first be assembled as a
hierarchical database in which the data for each survey will consist of records
for individual animals that include genetic and other biological data. An object
database will be developed in which each survey will be represented as an object
that includes both data and a set of methods for manipulating and representing
the data. The methods will provide both statistical and graphical
representations of population genetics surveys that can be directly compared.
Database programming will done in C++, a standard object oriented programming
language, and will use PARODY, a database management system that supports
persistent data objects. The investigators will test the functionality of the
prototype object database with an application that requires a uniform
representation of population surveys that conforms to a single sta tistical
model. This application will detect patterns in the geographic distributions of
mtDNA variation that are shared among multiple species, and will assess their
statistical significance by performing a meta- analysis. Previous studies
utilizing graphical comparisons of the geographic distributions of mtDNA
variation for multiple species have revealed similarities that have been
interpreted as evidence for the influence of common historical and environmental
forces. However this graphical approach is not based on any statistical model.
The object database will enable a new approach to the analysis of multiple
population genetic surveys, based on the statistical principles of meta-
analysis.