* 9630630
* RUI:  Localization of Peptide Hormone (Arginine Vasotocin   and Parathyroid Hormone) Action in the Avian Nephron
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/1996,09/30/2000
* David Goldstein, Wright State University
* Continuing Grant
* Judith A. Verbeke
* 09/30/2000
* USD 183,000.00

9630630 Goldstein The kidney is the organ fundamentally responsible for
regulation of water and salt balance in birds. As in other vertebrate groups,
these are regulated by a number of hormones. Studies of whole animals have
elucidated a basic picture of some of these mechanisms. For regulation of water
balance, the hormone arginine vasotocin (AVT, released from the pituitary gland
of the brain) is primarily responsible for reducing urine flow. For regulating
the balance of phosphate (a principle component of bone), the hormone
parathyroid hormone (PTH, from the parathyroid glands in the neck) is primarily
responsible for stimulating urinary excretion of phosphate. Yet the sites of
action of these hormones (or, in fact, of any hormone) within the avian kidney
are unknown. The avian kidney consists of thousands of individual functional
units, the renal tubules. Within each kidney are two major subclasses of tubule,
and within each tubule are several differently specialized regions. In the
present studies, the PI will evaluate the specific site of aciton of AVT and PTH
within the renal tubules. Adequate regulation of water and phosphate excretion
are of basic value to survival; disruptions in these processes can lead to a
variety of pathologies (e.g., kidney stones, a common disease of poultry). The
present studies should lead to an improved understanding of the mechanisms which
regulate these basic aspects of avian physiology.