* 9630763
* The Role of a Nuclear-Encoded Plastid RNA Polymerase        in Plastid Function and Development
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/1996,08/31/1999
* Pal Maliga, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Continuing Grant
* Susan Porter Ridley
* 08/31/1999
* USD 285,000.00

9630763 Maliga The plastid genome of higher plants encodes subunits which are
homologous to certain bacterial DNA-dependent RNA polymerase (RNAP) subunits.
The promoters utilized by this plastid RNAP are similar to E. coli (70
promoters. Promoter selection by the plastid-encoded RNAP is dependent on
nuclear-encoded (-like factors. In addition, transcription activity from some
promoters is modulated by nuclear-encoded transcription factors interacting with
elements upstream of the core promoter. Several reports have suggested the
existence of an additional plastid-localized, nuclear-encoded RNAP. To confirm
the existence of a second plastid transcription machinery, the rpoB gene for the
essential ( subunit of the E. coli-like enzyme was deleted from the tobacco
plastid genome. Transcripts in plastids lacking the ( subunit ((rpoB plants)
accumulate to relatively high levels for genes which encode components of the
gene expression apparatus. Therefore, the second RNA polymerase is referred to
as the genetic system (GS) RNAP. In the (rpoB plastids transcription was
detected from promoter regions with no similarity to (70 consensus elements. The
research objective is to identify the role of the two RNA polymerases in plastid
function and development. The proposal is focused on the role of the GS enzyme.
The specific objectives of the research are: 1) Identification of promoters for
the GS polymerase in tobacco plastids. Genes for which mRNAs are abundant in
tobacco plastids lacking the rpoA, rpoB and rpoCl and rpoC2 genes will be
identified by RNA gel blot analysis. The transcription initiation sites will be
mapped for these mRNAs, and a consensus sequence will be derived based on
sequence comparison. 2) In vivo definition of GS promoter architecture.
Functionally important elements of GS promoters will be identified by testing
expression of reporter genes from the mutant promoters in vivo in tobacco
plastids. 3) Determination of tissue and cell-type specific transcription from
GS pr omoters. This will be accomplished by testing tissue-specific accumulation
of mRNAs and immunolocalization of reporter gene products. 4) Testing the role
of GS and E. coli-like RNAPs in the expression of the plastid rRNA operon. The
rRNA operon has both GS and E. coli-like (70 promoters. Expression of the operon
from only one promoter will test role of each of these promoters in plastid
function and development. 6) Developing an in vitro system for the analysis of
the GS transcription machinery. An in vitro assay will be established using
tobacco extracts in which GS RNAP transcriptional properties and GS promoter
functional elements will be identified. Purification of the GS RNAP will
facilitate the identification of subunit composition, the prerequisite of
cloning GS subunit genes. %%% Plants contain specialized organelles called
chloroplasts which convert light energy to carbohydrates. These chloroplasts
have an unusual gene expression apparatus which compares with certain bacterial
systems. When this apparatus is blocked another gene expression system is seen
that is unlike the bacterial system. This system will be studied to determine
what contribution it makes to plant gene expression in leaf and root tissues.
***