* 9630781
* Spectral Hole Burning in Hyperquenched Glassy Films and     Biomolecular Gels:  Science and Applications
* MPS,DMR
* 11/01/1996,10/31/1999
* Gerald Small, Iowa State University
* Continuing Grant
* David Nelson
* 10/31/1999
* USD 310,193.00

Abstract 9630781 Small The proposed studies are inspired mainly by the
development of a versatile thermospray based-hyperquenching apparatus for
reproducible vitrification of liquids and its successful application, with
nonphotochemical hole burning and other spectroscopies, to Al-phthalocyanine
tetrasulphonate (APT) in hyperquenched glassy films of water (HGW). The ability
to study films at a given temperature with different histories of preparation
(deposition temperature, annealing procedure) opens the way for further detailed
studies of thermodynamic continuity / kinetic accessibility between different
states of a glass, disorder-induced and other mechanisms for optical dephasing,
electron-phonon coupling and mechanistic aspects of nonphotochemical hole
burning. To this end, sulphonated Al-phthalocyanines and resorufin in
hyperquenched films of ethanol and methanol and the cyanine dye HITCI in
ethylene glycol glasses will be used. The data will be used with theory to test
the suggestion that the marriage of hole burning and photon echo techniques is a
promising approach to understanding optical coherence loss in liquids.
Construction of a novel hyperquenching apparatus compatible with pressure
dependent (&lt; 5 MPa) hole burning is proposed. It would be used to determine,
for example, the relative compressibilities (5 K) of unannealed and annealed HGW
films (APT as the chromophore). This is important because the density of
intrinsic two level systems (TLSint), responsible for dephasing at low
temperatures, is a factor of 5x higher in unannealed than in annealed films.
Thus, it will be possible to test the hypothesis that TLSint are intimately
associated with the excess free volume of glasses. Work completed under the
current NSF grant has also shown that the hole burning properties of APT in HGW
at low and high temperatures (- 77 K) are significantly superior to those of
other molecular amorphous systems. The Principal Investigator proposes to study
APT in high water content protein gels (e.g. "Jello") whose ease of preparation
and high optical quality make them attractive for time domain optical
memory/processing applications. The goal is to achieve a frequency storage
density of 600 at 77 K, a factor of four higher than that for APT in buffered
HGW. Additional studies of APT in HGW are proposed, the objectives being to
understand the hydrogen-bond switching associated with the exceptionally
efficient hole burning at both low and high temperatures and to test predictions
of a notable resilience of APT/HGW (deuterated)'s optical memory against
destructive readout due to hole burning and light-induced hole filling. Finally,
infra-red hole burning experiments with annealed and unannealed HGW films will
be performed in order to determine the contributions from inhomogeneous
broadening and vibrational excitonic coupling to the underlying structure of the
OH stretching band. The understanding of this structure is a fascinating problem
of longstanding interest, one whose solution bears on the structure and
intermolecular forces of liquid water. %%% Disorder and its effects on
configurational relaxation, energy and charge transport, the dynamics of
spectroscopic transitions and other properties in complex solids, such as
glasses, polymers and proteins, are subjects of intense interest in the physics,
biophysics and chemistry communities. This is understandable since to understand
physical and biological phenomena which are strongly influenced by structural
disorder is both important and very challenging. Furthermore, such research has
and will continue to reveal new physics and chemistry. This project is concerned
with configurational relaxation and dynamics in molecular glasses and the
development of a new class of efficient, high temperature persistent spectral
hole burning materials for optical memory/processing and other applications.
These and other projects are designed to provide insights on the relationship
between optical coherence loss in liquid and glasses, and destructive readout of
optical memory at high temperature.