* 9630936
* MASSBANK - A Protein Mass Spectrum Database
* BIO,DBI
* 08/01/1996,07/31/1998
* Brian Chait, Rockefeller University
* Standard Grant
* Paul Gilna
* 07/31/1998
* USD 260,000.00

9630936 CHAIT This project will facilitate the use of mass spectrometry in
biology and protein chemistry by developing a national relational database for
the mass spectra of proteins. The database, named "MassBank", will include the
mass spectra of intact proteins, peptides generated by enzymatic digestion of
proteins, and ion products produced by mass spectrometric fragmentation of
peptides. The mass spectra (both published and unpublished) will be submitted by
researchers in the mass spectrometric and biological communities. Tools will be
provided to search and analyze the mass spectra in the database and to identify
proteins using mass spectral data, and to obtain all available information about
any given protein or its corresponding gene. To enhance the utility of the
database, a wide range of information about proteins from other databases will
be made easily available during the process of examination of the mass spectral
data. This information will include amino acid sequences, post-translational
modifications, three dimensional structures, literature references, and
positions on two-dimensional gels. Tools will be provided to analyze the primary
structure of proteins with reference to the mass spectra in the database. The
database will be publicly accessible through a World Wide Web server. All
submissions, searches, and analysis of mass spectra will be done by filling out
Hyper Text Markup Language forms. The introduction of this new database will
greatly facilitate the identification and characterization of mature gene
products -- and hence provide an important tool for biologists and protein
chemists.