* 9630787
* Fiber Diffraction from Macromolecular Assemblies
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/1996,07/31/2000
* Lee Makowski, Florida State University
* Continuing Grant
* Kamal Shukla
* 07/31/2000
* USD 330,000.00

9630787 Makowski The long term goal of this project is to develop reliable
methods for extracting structural information from fiber diffraction data and to
use these methods to characterized the structure and activity of maromolecular
assemblies. The ratio of data-to-model parameters for fiber diffraction is
substantially lower than for x-ray crystallography, and even when a number of
isomorphous derivatives are available, it may not be possible to obtain a unique
structural solution from fiber diffraction data. Consequently, after a number of
years, there continues to be substantial controversy in the literature about the
structure of the filamentous bacteriophages M13 and Pf1. Differences among the
molecular models for the viruses have substantial implications for our
understanding of their membrane-mediated assembly, and for their use in phage
display technology. Recent developments provide substantial hope that these
controversies can be resolved in the near future: (i) It is now possible to
obtain fiber diffraction data from structural variants of filamentous
bacteriophages that can provide rigorous tests of competing structural models.
(ii) A number of computational tests have recently been developed to assess the
accuracy with which a molecular model of a crystalline protein has been
constructed. These tests have been demonstrated for globular proteins and can
now be utilized for analysis of structures of macromolecular assemblies. The
principle goal of this project is to utilize these strategies to resolve the
controversies about the structure of filamentous bacteriophages and to establish
the use of these techniques for other systems to be studies by fiber
diffraction. %%% The macromolecular assemblies that constitute a large part of
any living system are far less amenable to structural characterization than
soluble macromolecules, but information about their three-dimensional structure
is central to understanding many biological processes at the molecular level.
Few membran e proteins, filamentous proteins or large macromolecular assemblies
have been solved to atomic resolution. Acquisition of structural information is
the rate limiting step in our efforts to answer many fundamental questions about
living systems: How are living structures assembled and how do the constituent
molecules move in carrying out their vital functions? Answers to these questions
require a detailed characterization of the role of macromolecule assemblies in
the organization and activities of cellular systems. There are, as of yet, no
routine procedures for determining the three-dimensional structures of these
systems. The human imagination is such that a three-dimensional picture is
really essential for an understanding of the function of a complex molecular
machine. Fiber diffraction is one of the few techniques that can provide atomic
or near-atomic resolution information about the structure of these systems.
There are currently very few scientists using fiber diffraction in this country,
and much of the future progress is likely to come from Europe and Japan. This
program seeks to maintain state-of-the-art research in fiber diffraction in this
country, and to improve the techniques in order to facilitate in the
characterization of these system. ***