* 9630775
* NMR Studies on Scorpion Neurotoxins
* BIO,MCB
* 11/01/1996,10/31/2000
* N. Rama Krishna, University of Alabama at Birmingham
* Continuing Grant
* Kamal Shukla
* 10/31/2000
* USD 300,000.00

9630775 Krishna The proposed research will focus on the structures and dynamics
of long chain neurotoxins isolated from the New World scorpion Centruroides
sculpturatus Ewing, and the Old World species Leiurus quinquestriatus
quinquestriatus. Specifically, several neurotoxic proteins from both species
will be purified and sequenced. The proteins that will be characterized will
include both the long chain - and neurotoxins. Standard 2D-NMR methods as well
as NOESY-TOCSY will be employed to extract experimental constraints needed for
structure refinement calculations. Protein breathing motions will be probed by
measuring amide proton exchange life times. The order parameters and correlation
times will be measured from 13C relaxation time measurement at natural abundance
using a double DEPT sequence. The differences in the structures and dynamical
behavior within each class, and between the two classes of proteins will be
examined. A number of hypotheses on the structure- function relationships among
this class of proteins will be tested. %%% Neurotoxins serve as excellent probes
of ion channels Despite a high degree of sequence homology, the scorpion
neuroxtoxins can differ dramatically in their toxicities and the nature of
interactions with the ion channels. The proposed studies will be important in
understanding the intriguing differences exhibited by the - and - toxins. This
work will significantly enhance fundamental knowledge on the molecular mechanism
of interactions between the neurotoxic proteins and the sodium channel. ***