* 9630647
* Relationship of Glyoxylate Shunt &amp; Acetyl - CoA Synthetase  Regulation
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/1996,08/31/2000
* Alan Wolfe, Loyola University of Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Hector E. Flores
* 08/31/2000
* USD 270,000.00

9630647 Wolfe To grow and divide, a cell must use the compounds that it consumes
both to construct cellular components and to generate the energy required for
that construction. Often a cell will use the same compound for both purposes,
funneling some of it into a biosynthetic pathway and some into an energy-
producing pathway. To survive, the cell must efficiently balance its
biosynthetic and energetic needs. To characterize the mechanisms used by cells
to perform this physiological balancing act, the flow of carbon through the
tricarboxylic acid cycle (TCA) and the glyoxylate shunt (GS) has been studied.
Cells balance their interrelated biosynthetic and energetic needs by using
exquisitely sensitive genetic and biochemical switches to control the metabolic
fate of isocitrate. When they need energy, cells funnel isocitrate through the
TCA cycle; if they require biosynthetic components, they channel it through the
GS. Although the genetic switch has been investigated for years and some of its
components are known, the underlying mechanism(s) of control remains a mystery.
We have evidence that, in the bacterium Escherichia coli, control of this switch
coordinates with the synthesis of the enzyme acetyl-CoA synthetase (AcsA). This
project is designed to test the hypothesis that, under certain conditions, AcsA
can switch on or induce the GS; once induced, the GS feeds back to turn off AcsA
synthesis. To determine how AcsA and the GS regulate the synthesis of each
other, the following specific aims will be addressed: (i) identify and
characterize the mechanism(s) by which the GS controls the synthesis and/or
activity of AcsA and (ii) identify and characterize the mechanism(s) by which
AcsA controls the synthesis and/or activity of the GS. %%% To grow and divide,
all cells must use the compounds that they consume both to construct cellular
components and to generate the energy required for that construction. Often
cells will use the same compound for both purposes, funneling some of i t into a
construction or biosynthetic pathway and some into an energy-producing pathway.
To survive, cells must efficiently balance their biosynthetic and energetic
needs. To identify and characterize the mechanisms used by cells to perform this
fundamental physiological balancing act, the flow of carbon through two central
metabolic pathways; the tricarboxylic acid cycle (TCA) and the glyoxylate shunt
(GS), has been studied. Cells balance their conflicting biosynthetic and
energetic needs by using exquisitely sensitive genetic and biochemical switches.
Although the genetic switch has been studied for years and many of its
components are known, the underlying mechanism(s) of control remains a mystery.
We now have evidence that, at least in the bacterium Escherichia coli, control
of this switch coordinates with the synthesis of an enzyme, called acetyl-CoA
synthetase (AcsA), that generates the starting material for both the TCA cycle
and the GS. This project will investigate the relationship between this genetic
switch and the synthesis of AcsA. ***