* 9630412
* Maturation of the Anitbody Response to a Protein Antigen
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/1996,07/31/2000
* Ronald Jemmerson, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Barbara K. Zain
* 07/31/2000
* USD 299,979.00

9630412 Jemmerson Following exposure of the immune system of experimental
animals such as mice to small chemical compounds, the antibodies that are
produced initially by the white cells bind the compounds weakly, then after
about one week, the antibodies that are made begin to bind the compounds more
strongly until a maximum binding ability is achieved. This increased strength in
binding, also known as affinity, results from changes, or mutations, in the
genes that code for the antibodies. Although not yet definitively shown, it is
believed that this model also applies to the immune response to more complex
molecules including proteins which are present on microorganisms that the immune
system normally eliminates. In this study, this model will be extended to the
immune response to a protein that has been well-characterized both structurally
and chemically, cytochrome c. In preliminary work it has been determined that
several mutations in the genes encoding antibodies specific for cytochrome c do
occur after immunizing mice with the protein and that together these mutants
result in higher affinity antibody binding. Now, the effect of each of the
mutations in the antibody genes on the affinity will be tested by altering the
genes at each of the several sites independently. In addition, the structure of
a complex of an antibody bound to the protein will be determined using the
technique of X-ray crystallography to find out whether the mutations cause
changes in the antibodies that directly contact the target molecule (antigen) or
whether the effects are indirect. The cytochrome c to be employed in this study
is a protein expressed in mice. Previously it was found that the antibody genes
used in the immune response to this self antigen are also used in response to a
related protein and that during the response the antibodies acquire higher
affinity for this protein than for the self antigen. In this study, the
mutations in the antibody genes that allo w for this conversion will be
determined. It has been suggested for a long time that this may be a general
mechanism for immunological recognition of foreign antigens but an experimental
system to study it has been available. In summary, this study will extend our
understanding of affinity maturation in the antibody response from what was
previously known in studies of model compounds to a more complex, protein
antigen. It will also provide further insight into how immune recognition of
foreign antigens may initiate with the response of antibody-producing white
blood cells that possibly evolved to recognize self antigens. ***