* 9630735
* Chromosome Aberration Frequencies and Chromatin Geometry:   Algorithms and Experiments
* BIO,DBI
* 09/15/1996,08/31/1998
* Lynn Hlatky, New England Deaconess Hospital
* Continuing grant
* THOMAS QUARLES
* 08/31/1998
* USD 237,433.00

The recent development of FISH (chromosome painting) technology has
revolutionized radiobiology. The interpretation of the large amount of FISH data
now being collected on chromosome aberrations can be greatly facilitated by
computer codes modeling the mechanisms involved. Chromosome aberrations are
molecular rearrangements following DNA double strand breakage. They are relevant
to cell death, DNA damage repair, carcinogenesis, biological dosimetry and most
other aspects of radiobiology. Significantly for this grant, aberration yields
are influenced by large-scale chromosome geometry during cell-cycle interphase,
and act as probes for the geometry. The geometry dependence is in the form of
"proximity" effects, i.e. effects caused by chromosome localization within a
cell nucleus and by spatial limitations on DNA double strand break induction or
interactions. With the advent of (FISH), a rich spectrum of detail has become
available in the 90's on various kinds of aberrations, including quite
complicated ones. It is non-trivial to evaluate systematically the implications
of the yield pattern for chromatin geometry and for the mechanics of double
strand break reactions, because of multiple DNA double strand break
interactions, of the dependence of yields on individual chromosome arm lengths,
and of influence of radiation track geometry. In addition, different experiments
often use different painting schemes, making more difficult intercomparisons or
comparisons to older, non-FISH experiments. However, Monte Carlo methods are
well-suited for analyzing the molecular reshufffling problems involved, and a
code has been developed by members of our team and coworkers which gives methods
for interpreting data, comparing experiments, and predicting; it uses only one
adjustable parameter (corresponding to the radiation dose), and gives good
results for some experimentally observed ratios, e.g. when comparing chromosomes
of different lengths for aberration yields. Thi s algorithm does not incorporate
the proximity effects discussed above, although there is clear experimental
evidence, involving the ratio of ring aberrations to exchange aberrations or the
ratio of complex aberrations to simple aberrations, that such a generalization
is needed. Moreover, the code is applicable only to sparsely ionizing radiation,
not to densely ionizing radiation, whose known geometric properties can lead to
additional geometric information about the biological target. Consequently the
code is not yet useful for analyzing the relations between aberration yields and
chromosome geometry. The object of the grant is to develop better algorithms,
which do incorporate geometric effects, and check them experimentally. The
simplest new algorithm will incorporate proximity effects by an extension of the
present code with just one extra adjustable parameter (for a total of two).
Further extensions of the algorithms will use recently published data and
quantitative models for large-scale interphase chromosome structure and cell
nucleus ultrastructure. In addition, up-to-date algorithms for simulating
ionizing radiation tracks will be developed and included, as will a number of
technical refinements. The resulting algorithms will be tested by chromosome
aberration experiments which use different cell types and different FISH
painting schemes in a controlled comparison. The code will also be compared to
experiments using sparsely or densely ionizing radiation reported in the
literature from various laboratories, world wide. The algorithms will be used to
critically test and extend modern models, including polymer models, for large-
scale chromatin geometry during the Gl phase of the cell cycle. The work will be
a joint effort by scientists with primary training in radiobiology, mathematics,
cytogenetics, or radiation biophysics. Individual team members have extensive
interdisciplinary experience in programming for biology. The algorithms
developed will be important for the increasing number of scientists using FISH
technology to study DNA damage processing, to probe chromosomal structure, or in
applications.