* 9630870
* Reconfigurable Architectures with Shift Switching for       Novel Parallel Arithmetic Schemes
* CSE,CCF
* 08/01/1996,07/31/2000
* Rong Lin, SUNY College at Geneseo
* Standard Grant
* None
* 07/31/2000
* USD 110,370.00

This research will investigate a novel VLSI arithmetic design approach using
reconfigurable architectures with shift switching, aimed at achieving an
innovative design methodology which could lead to a substantial improvement on
both speeds and areas for several arithmetic devices including parallel
counters, parallel compressors, parallel multipliers, precharged CMOS
adders/comparators, prefix parallel counters, as well as elementary function
evaluations. The proposed technique will employ enhanced reconfigurable buses,
i.e., buses containing shift switches with buffers properly inserted. It
possesses the following new features. First, when specified digital signals are
propagating through shift switching buses, the desired modulo operations can be
performed directly, which simplifies the traditional model of this basic
arithmetic computation. Second, after passing through each shift switch, the
state signals are inverted alternatively in two mutually inverted forms (n and
p), which minimizes the load of transistors and maximizes the speed of circuits.
The research will focus on the development of enhanced reconfigurable bus-based
VLSI schemes for important arithmetic operations. The goals are to investigate:
1. shift switching parallel compressors and conditional compressors; 2.
efficient partial product reduction schemes; 3. application-specific array
processors for realization of some optimal arithmetic algorithms; 4. various
shift switching parallel counter schemes and their applications; 5. shift
switching with precharge CMOS domino logic and its applications in designing
arithmetic devices and asynchronous arithmetic devices.