* 9630293
* Quantitative Lux-Based Assessment of Interacting Microbial  Activity and Vadose Hydrology
* BIO,MCB
* 09/15/1996,08/31/2000
* Larry Boersma, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Susan Porter Ridley
* 08/31/2000
* USD 414,741.00

9630293 Selker This proposal was reviewed by the Environmental Geochemistry and
Biogeochemistry panel (solicitation NSF 96-2) and jointly funded by several
divisions at the National Science Foundation: Molecular and Cellular
Biosciences, Earth Science, Environmental Biology, and Mathematical Sciences.
The dynamic temporal and spatial distribution of microbes in the unsaturated
media above aquifers is essentially unknown; though it is recognized that the
distribution can be significantly heterogeneous. Since microbial communities in
the unsaturated zone degrade the vast majority of contaminants applied to the
earth's surface, this lack in understanding presents profound limitations to our
ability to predict or enhance this essential contaminant treatment system. These
studies involve the development and application of an analytical methodology
that allows for direct, continuous observation of microbial distribution and
activity, as well as the transport of contaminants through heterogeneous
unsaturated porous media. This is made possible through the unification of two
new technologies in an interdisciplinary effort between groundwater hydrology
and environmental microbiology, namely: (1) the utilization of bioluminescent
microbes to quantify microbial activity and contaminant movement; and (2) the
use of light transmission chambers to quantify pore water content, pressure, and
hydraulic flow paths. The system employs a naphthalene-degrading bacterium,
Pseudomonas flourescens HK44, which has a lux gene cassette inserted into the
naphthalene degradation pathway such that light is emitted in direct proportion
to the rate of degradation of naphthalene or its metabolite salicylate. These
experiments will be carried out in two-dimensional glass-walled flow cells
containing packed aquifer sands at two scales: 2 x 1.5 m and 60 x 60 cm. The
flow cells provide for controlled aqueous flux, illumination, and continuous
time-lapse video and digital CCD imaging of the entire experiment. The effect s
of geologic heterogeneity will be studied by packing the chambers with fine over
coarse sand textural interfaces. Theses studies will: 1) Determine if regions of
heterogeneous microbial colonization develop in otherwise uniform porous media
under continuous unsaturated flow conditions. 2) Evaluate the effect of
geological heterogeneities (textural variation) on localization of microbial
development. 3) Investigate the combined and possibly interacting effects of
geological and biological heterogeneities on contaminant fate and transport. 4)
Assess the predictive capabilities of present microbial and hydrodynamic theory
with respect to the experimental results of this research through the use of
numerical models which simulate flow and microbial habitat. These studies will
provide a powerful new analytical tool for the scientific and engineering
communities to gain understanding of subsurface microbial activity and growth in
natural and contaminated sites. The ability to make quantitative non-destructive
observations on the rate and position of microbial activity, while monitoring
water content and pressure, will significantly increase the capability to
exploit microbial degradation toward environmental bioremediation. ***