* 9630904
* RUI: Studies on Intermolecular Interactions Nuclear         Transport of SV40 Vp1
* NONE,NONE
* 07/01/1996,06/30/2000
* Editte Gharakhanian, California State University-Long Beach Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Eve Ida Barak
* 06/30/2000
* USD 209,998.00

9630904 Gharakhanian Simian Virus 40 (SV40) is a small DNA virus which undergoes
a permissive course of infection in simian cells. Its major structural protein,
Vp1, is the basic unit of its pentameric capsomeres. It is synthesized in the
cytoplasm of the infected cell late in the permissive infection, and along with
the minor structural proteins is transported to the nucleus where viral assembly
takes place. The early steps of SV40 assembly, including the early
oligomerization of Vp1 and interactions with the minor structural proteins, and
the mechanism of its nuclear transport, have not been fully explored. Several
lines of evidence suggest the formation of interactive Vp1 complexes in the
cytoplasm prior to nuclear transport. Evidence suggests that disulfide bonds may
be involved in the stable formation of Vp1 oligomers and that oligomerization
may play a role in the nuclear transport of Vp1. Here, we propose studies on the
early Vp1 interactive complexes in permissive mammalian cell lines including
identifying specific cysteines that may be involved in the disulfide bonded Vp1
oligomerization. The potential role of oligomerization and complex formation
with the minor structural proteins in the nuclear transport of Vp1 will also be
explored. ***