* 9630705
* Development of Egg Organization During Oogenesis
* BIO,IOS
* 10/01/1996,06/30/2000
* Edwin Stephenson, University of Alabama Tuscaloosa
* Continuing Grant
* Judith Plesset
* 06/30/2000
* USD 300,000.00

Stephenson 9630705 The eggs of most animals are asymmetric, and this asymmetry
establishes the pattern of the embryo during early development. In the best
understood case, a localized mRNA, that of the bicoid gene, is localized to the
anterior margin of Drosophila (fruit fly) eggs, and directs the development of
anterior embryonic structures. While the development role of bicoid mRNA is
fairly well understood, the mechanism by which it is localized is not. The work
in this application is directed toward obtaining a better understanding of the
localization of bicoid mRNA and the roles of molecules that participate in this
process. One emphasis will be to determine the function of the swallow gene,
whose protein product is required for bicoid mRNA localization. To this end Dr.
Stephenson will try to identify and characterize other proteins that associate
with the swallow protein in vivo and in vitro. He will also determine the
subcellular distribution of swallow protein by fusing it to the fluorescent
protein GFP. These experiments should give him a more complete view of the
localization mechanism and of the specific role of swallow. A second emphasis
will be to identify other proteins that interact with bicoid mRNA during the
localization process. There is circumstantial evidence that bicoid mRNA is
associated with the egg cytoskeleton, and he will explore this association in
more detail and characterize some of the molecules that participate in it.