* 9630277
* Processes Controlling the Export of Trace Metals from       Contrasting Watersheds
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/1996,08/31/2000
* James Hurley, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* L. Douglas James
* 08/31/2000
* USD 380,000.00

9630277 Armstrong Watersheds have a major influence on water quality. Concern
over the impacts of metals on receiving waters emphasizes the need for
information on the factors controlling the forms and amounts of metals exported
from watersheds and the influences of extreme hydrologic events and changes in
land use. Our premise is that the forms, concentrations, and loadings of metals
in streams can be used to discern the watershed processes controlling metal
export. We also postulate that the nature and amounts of dissolved organic
carbon (DOC) and suspended particulate matter (SPM) transported from watersheds
are the main geochemical factors controlling metal export. Our goal is to
identify and quantify key geochemical and hydrologic processes controlling the
forms and amounts of trace metals exported from watersheds representing diverse
geology, hydrology, soil type, and land use/cover. Specific objectives are to
determine (1) The importance of hydrologic events in controlling metal export
from watersheds of contrasting geology and land use; (2) Factors controlling
within-watershed differences between base flow and event periods in metal
levels, partition, and yields; (3) Relationships controlling metal speciation in
dissolved and particulate phases and (4) Factors and processes controlling
delivery of key metal transport phases from watersheds. A matrix of six
relatively homogenous watersheds will be compared. (iradients in stream DOC,
SPM, and ionic strength will be represented. Export will be determined by
concurrent measurements of discharge and metal concentrations. "Ultra clean"
sampling and analysis methods will be employed to quantify metals. Speciation
will include particulate, colloidal, and "labile" fractions, and free and DOC-
associated "dissolved" forms. We will model geochemical processes regulating
dissolved metal concentrations and loadings. Speciation techniques include
ultrafiltration, selective resin partitioning, electrochemical/voltammetric
measurements, solid -phase partitioning experiments, chemical extractions, and
oxidation state measurements. The properties of a suite of metals (Ag, Al, As,
Be, Cd, Cr, Co, Cu, Hg, Mo, Ni, Pb, Sb, Tl, U, V, Zn) will be used to probe the
watershed characteristics and geochemical processes controlling metal export. We
expect to provide a basis for assessment and prediction of both metal export.
Speciation will be quantified and modeled as a function of geochemical factors.
Predictive capability for metal export will be based on watershed
characteristics and discharge-geochemistry relationships. This proposal was
submitted to the Environmental Geochemistry and Biogeochemistry solicitation,
and the project is being jointly supported by the Divisions of Earth Sciences
(Geosciences) and Chemical and Transport Systems (Engineering).