* 9630997
* Substructure and Communication in Myosin and Actin
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/1996,07/31/1999
* Emil Reisler, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing grant
* Thomas E. Smith
* 07/31/1999
* USD 369,789.00

9630997 Reisler The contraction of skeletal, smooth, and cardiac muscles is
fueled by the hydrolysis of ATP which is coupled to cyclic interactions between
the two main muscle proteins, myosin and actin. These proteins, along with other
motor proteins, are involved also in diverse functions of non-muscle cells
including their locomotion, division, organelle transport, etc. According to
prevalent views, motion and force are generated by myosin and actin as a result
of cyclic changes in their interaction and structures during the different steps
of ATP hydrolysis by myosin. A major goal of our research is to clarify the
molecular basis of these events. To achieve this goal we will map those sites on
actin which bind myosin in the presence of ATP and will analyze their role in
specific steps of ATP hydrolysis and force and motion generation. The
experimental materials that will be used in the mapping of the dynamic changes
in myosin binding to actin during ATP hydrolysis include engineered actin
mutants and chemically modified actins. These materials will be used in the in
vitro measurements of actin filament motion and the force generated with myosin
and ATP, and in biochemical, biophysical, and kinetic assays of actomyosin
interactions. In another part of this program, the role of actin filament
structure in actomyosin-based cellular functions will be clarified. The specific
aim of this project is to determine the relationship between the functional
interactions of actin with myosin and the dynamic changes in the organization of
actin filaments. Proteolytically cleaved actin, chemically crosslinked actin,
and actin mutants will be studied in this project by functional and structural
analysis methods, by assays of actomyosin interactions, and by spectroscopic
methods. The results of the proposed work will provide a structural description
of the evolution of actomyosin interactions during force and motion generation
by these proteins. This information will lead to the understanding of the basic
molecular mechanisms by which chemical energy is converted into mechanical
events in biological systems. On a broader scope, such an understanding will be
instrumental in the design of biomimetic devices that will generate force or
motion. %%% Muscle contraction involves the interaction between actin and myosin
in a process that is dependent upon energy in the form of ATP hydrolysis. This
project will investigate actin-myosin interactions and the mechanism by which
these interactions contribute to the generation of force and motion in muscle as
well as non-muscle cells. A variety of methods will be used including in vitro
motility assays, force measurements, fluorescence spectroscopy, and biochemical
characterization of the actomyosin interactions. These studies will improve the
understanding of muscle contraction and the transduction of chemical energy into
work in biological systems. *** .. . __,