* 9630675
* Ran BP1 Function: Setting the Specificity of the Ran GTPase Switch
* NONE,NONE
* 08/15/1996,07/31/2000
* David Frendewey, New York University Medical Center
* Continuing grant
* Barbara K. Zain
* 07/31/2000
* USD 315,000.00

96-30675 D'Eustachio Progression of eukaryotic cells through the cell cycle,
except at the onset of embryonic development, is regulated by checkpoints: at
initiation of DNA replication, and entry into and exit from mitosis. Ran, a
small GTP-binding and -hydrolyzing protein, modulates several aspects of the
cell cycle progression, presumably by linking them through the intracellular
trafficking of macromolecules. Ran BP1 and Ran GAP/Rna1 attenuate the Ran GTPase
switch. The genes that encode these proteins have been cloned and sequenced and
functional defects of these proteins have been identified in vivo. The Ran
GTPase has been linked to the regulation of mRNA export from the nucleus. This
activity of Ran GTPase is regulated by RanBP1. The goals of this project are: to
characterize the interactions of RanBP1 with Ran and with RanGAP/Rna1 in vitro,
using wild-type and mutated RanBP1; to identify additional proteins that
interact with the switch through RanBP1 and RanGAP/Rna1, using the yeast
interaction trap system; and to define functions of RanBP1 domains in vivo by
characterizing the phenotypes of fission yeast strains whose wild-type RanBP1
genes have been replaced by mutant constructs. %%% Progression of eukaryotic
cells through the cell cycle, except at the onset of embryonic development, is
regulated by checkpoints: at initiation of DNA replication, and entry into and
exit from mitosis. Ran, a small GTP-binding and -hydrolyzing protein, modulates
several aspects of the cell cycle progression, presumably by linking them
through the intracellular trafficking of macromolecules. Little is known about
the molecular mechanism of how Ran controls the progression of the cell cycle.
***