* 9630069
* Dissertation Research:  Sex Differences and Social Bonds in Captive Juvenile Rhesus Macaques
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/1996,01/31/1998
* Walter Leutenegger, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Trudy R. Turner
* 01/31/1998
* USD 6,586.00

The proposed study of captive juvenile rhesus macaques will fill in several gaps
in our knowledge of primate social development. One of the most significant
influences on an individual's development is its gender. This research project
will provide important data which should aid in the construction of general
principles regarding the range and robusticity of gender differences in primate
behavior. Of particular interest to this study is how a primate's gender affects
the partner preferences and quality of social relationships juvenile rhesus
macaques form. Although strong gender differences in social bonds and
interactions are apparent among adult rhesus macaques, it is unknown whether
juveniles exhibit these same differences, or when these behavioral patterns
arise. Consequently, a major goal of this study is not only to document gender
differences in behavior which occur among juveniles of this species, but also to
describe when the differences observed among adults originate. Furthermore, the
proposed study will test a previously untested assumption that behavioral
development represents a continuous, linear process. Recent research suggests,
however, that this model of behavioral development may not be universal among
primate species, especially where gender differences in behavior are concerned.
The proposed study will provide data which will aid in the development of a more
accurate model of primate behavioral ontogeny.