* 9630144
* Present and Past Variability in Monsoon Climate Over the    Himalayas Reconstructed from Tree Rings
* GEO,AGS
* 09/01/1996,02/28/2001
* Edward Cook, Columbia University
* Continuing Grant
* David Verardo
* 02/28/2001
* USD 416,550.00

Abstract ATM-9630144 Cook, Edward R, Columbia University Lamont-Doherty Earth
Observatory Title: Present and Past Variability in Monsoon Climate Over the
Himalayas from Tree Rings This award supports a research project designed to
reconstruct climate of the past few centuries over Nepal from a network of
climatically sensitive, absolutely dated, annual tree-ring chronologies. The
principal tree-ring variable for this purpose is ring width. However, some of
the wood collections will also be processed for tree-ring density to extract as
much useful climate information as possible from the tree-rings. The principal
emphasis will be on reconstructing various features of the Southwest Monsoon as
it affects the Himalayas. Past temperatures, which tend to be tightly linked to
variations in the ring density, will also be reconstructed. Therefore, a variety
of climatic reconstructions will result from this research. All of the pre-1960
Nepalese climate records will be digitized and analyzed to better understand the
spatial patterns of climate in Nepal, their relationships with longer records in
India, and for calibrating the tree-ring reconstructions of past climate. 50-100
tree-ring chronologies will be developed in Nepal over the life of this project.
Most of these chronologies will exceed 200 years in length, with some extending
back 300-400 years. In addition, attempts will be made to gain access to Bhutan,
northern Pakistan, Kashmir, and Sikkim to extend the geographic coverage of this
effort.