* 9630625
* Development of Low Dark Current, High Quantum Efficiency    10 Micro Meters Arrays under the GOALI Program
* MPS,AST
* 07/01/1996,12/31/1999
* Kadri Vural, University of Rochester
* Standard Grant
* Wayne Van Citters
* 12/31/1999
* USD 315,112.00

Abstract This proposal capitalizes on the on-going working relationship between
the infrared astronomy group at the University of Rochester and the infrared
array detector group at the Rockwell International Science Center in the
development of long-wave infrared (LWIR) HgCdTe focal plane arrays for
astronomy. Rockwell has developed LWIR HgCdTe arrays under DoD contracts that
are operated with large background irradiance. Since the dark current need only
be much less than the background induced photocurrent these DoD arrays do not
have very stringent dark current requirements, and are operated at high
temperatures (80K). Rockwell has developed new Buried Planar Heterojunction
(BPH) HgCdTe devices. Low dark current, high sensitivity 10 micrometer
wavelength arrays constructed by this technology are promising possibilities at
low temperatures (25K - 30K). However, there are a variety of technical hurdles
to overcome. At these temperatures generation-recombination (G- R) dark current
will dominate diffusion dark current (prevalent at 80K), and G-R current drops
precipitously with temperature. However, at the lower temperatures there can be
tunneling dark current in addition, and a decline in quantum efficiency. This
effort will seek to produce devices that do not exhibit tunneling and which have
excellent quantum efficiency. HgCdTe is expected to have wide applicability to
astronomy and other applications.