* 9630407
* Plant Proteins Involved in Desiccation Tolerance
* BIO,IOS
* 07/01/1996,12/31/1999
* Leon Dure, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Michael Mishkind
* 12/31/1999
* USD 240,000.00

9630407 Dure The Lea Proteins are late-embryogenesis abundant. Although first
recognized in cotton seeds, homologs of many of the cotton Leas have been found
in embryos of other species, both monocot and dicot. Thus, their occurrence in
higher plant seeds is probably universal. Subsequently, it was observed that the
Lea proteins accumulate in all tissues of the maturing embryo, indicating that
the induction of their genes is not tissue or organ specific, but a whole-plant
response. More recently, several lea genes homologous to cotton lea families
have been shown to be induced into high levels of expression in non-seed tissue
by subjecting the plant or organ to a water stress or exposing it to exogeneous
ABA. Even more recently, some of these genes have been shown to be induced into
high expression by salt stress or cold stress, both of which force a water-loss
stress. Finally, proteins homologous to two Lea families have been found to
increase in leaves of the desiccating "resurrection plants." The common aspect
of late embryogenesis and these stresses is the loss of waters from plant cells.
Several of the Lea proteins have regions of amino acid sequence that strongly
suggest secondary and tertiary structures. These structures in turn suggest
functions in handling the molecular problems encountered when cells lose 50-90%
of their total water. Our present goal is 1) to determine the 3D structure and
other biophysical properties of these Lea proteins under various intracellular
conditions with the hope of implicating their cellular function in so doing. 2)
Concomitantly, we wish to test the protective effect of several of these
purified proteins on cellular entities (organelles, membranes, enzymes)
subjected to drought stress. In short, the PIs intend to describe the phenomenon
of desiccation tolerance/water stress survival in terms of the properties of the
proteins evoked by the stress. Implicit in this research is the fact that
understanding the function of these drought-in duced proteins would seem to be a
requisite for manipulating drought tolerance in crop plants in a sophisticated
manner.