* 9630427
* A Microbial Biodegradation Database on the World Wide Web
* BIO,DBI
* 08/01/1996,07/31/1999
* Lawrence Wackett, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Paul Gilna
* 07/31/1999
* USD 196,373.00

The University of Minnesota Biocatalysis/Biodegradation Database (UM-BBD) first
appeared on the World Wide Web (http://dragon.labmed.umn.edu/ ~lynda/index.html)
less than one year ago to meet the information needs of microbial biotechnology.
It was designed to provide information on specialized, non-intermediary
metabolic pathways for the microbial biodegradation of primarily xenobiotic,
organic chemical compounds. While microbial catabolism of these types of
compounds in nature is more difficult to study than intermediary metabolism, it
is important for understanding the cycles of nature, bioremediation of
industrial chemicals, and biocatalysis for synthesizing commodity chemicals. The
UM-BBD provides locally, or through external links, information on the
compounds, the enzymes that metabolize them, the genes that produce the enzymes,
and the organisms that contain them. In less than one year of operation, usage
has grown to over 20,000 accesses a month from six continents, and over 200
national and international users have joined the UM-BBD e-mail users list. It is
well accepted by its peers: Five world-renowned content experts have agreed to
join the UM-BBD Scientific Advisory Board. It is or will soon be linked to by
six prominent biological databases including Entrez Medline, PIR and GenBank,
PUMA, Genobase and Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes. And it has been or
will be used instructionally at the University of Minnesota, the University of
Connecticut and the Hebrew University in Jerusalem. The UM-BBD's use, users and
peer-acceptance within its first year of operation emphasizes a great demand for
the information it contains, a design that is attractive to its users, and a
desire in ~e scientific community for an accelerated pace of development. The
next phase of growth includes increases in depth, breadth, quality and
representations of its information; and improved tools to manipulate it; all
developed in close consultation with the user community. The number of
degradation pathways will be expanded from 8 to 100, the amount of information
contained will increase from the present 30 to 300-500 Mbytes; and searching
will be allowed not only by compound and enzyme names but by EC codes, CAS
numbers, and possibly other ways including compound structure and substructure.
The pathways chosen for the expansion will be chosen to represent compounds with
the broadest possible set of organic functional groups and biochemical
reactions. The UM-BBD will then contain direct information on the most
environmentally-relevant organic molecules and a become a knowledge base that
can be used to predict the metabolic and environmental fate of the majority of
the 8 million known organic compounds, whose microbial metabolism has not yet
been studied. The UM-BBD is well-positioned to become a community database, used
and useful to scientists at every level and with a wide range of interests. A-l