* 9631982
* Intracellular Ca2+ Regulation in the Unfertilized Sea       Urchin Egg and the Ca2+ Response During Fertilization
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/1996,07/31/2000
* Sheldon Shen, Iowa State University
* Continuing Grant
* Judith Plesset
* 07/31/2000
* USD 315,000.00

S. Shen 9631982 Changes in ionic activities, especially intracellular calcium
activity ( Ca2+ i), have been linked to a wide variety of signal transduction
pathways mediating the actions of growth factors, hormones and other extrinsic
ligands. A model cell system for studying ionic events is the fertilization
reaction in sea urchin eggs. Changes in ionic activities in the sea urchin egg
during fertilization are necessary and sufficient for activation of the
developmental program. Central to the ionic changes is a transient rise in Ca2+
i, which has been extensively characterized. The egg is similar to many somatic
cells by having both conventional Ca2+ release mechanisms, that are sensitive to
inositol 1,4,5-trisphosphate (IP3) and ryanodine. The egg also contains a
recently discovered novel Ca2+ release that is induced by nicotinate adenine
dinucleotide phosphate (NAADP). Despite the significance of the rise in Ca2+ i
during fertilization, how the response is triggered by the sperm is still
unknown. Based on pharmacological studies, the two conventional Ca2+ release
mechanisms were considered to be redundant for triggering the fertilization
response. But more recent pharmacological studies suggest that the IP3 receptor
Ca2+ channel is the primary and required mechanism for Ca2+ release during
fertilization, rather than equal redundant mechanisms. As with all
pharmacological studies, the conclusion is limited by the specificity of the
agents utilized. The objective of this proposal is to define the required
mechanism(s) for the rise in Ca2+ i during fertilization. The experiments in
this proposal are designed to establish the significance of inositol
phospholipid hydrolysis during fertilization. Rather than block the activity of
IP3 receptor Ca2+ channel, the requirement of IP3 production will be directly
assessed by inhibiting inositol phospholipid hydrolysis. The significance of IP3
production is also evaluated indirectly by further characterization of the
ryanodine and NAADP Ca 2+ release mechanisms.