* 9631590
* GOALI/Faculty and Students in Industry:  Variation          Simulation and Planning for Deformable Part Assembly
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/15/1996,08/31/1998
* S. Jack Hu, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* george hazelrigg
* 08/31/1998
* USD 25,000.00

9631590 Hu This GOALI award is for the development of an industrial-university
cooperative relationship between Variation Systems Analysis, Inc. (VSA, Inc.),
and the University of Michigan in jointly developing manufacturing process
simulation methodologies for deformable part assembly. A Ph.D. student from the
University of Michigan, under the guidance of an academic advisor and an
industrial mentor, will (1) gain experience in manufacturing process simulation;
(2) develop a new, generic mechanistic variation simulation methodology for
deformable part assembly; (3) validate the newly developed variation simulation
methodology by comparing with of the art techniques; and (4) apply this
methodology to assembly fixture configuration design. Manufacturing process
simulation, in particular, variation simulation, can provide valuable knowledge
about the characteristics and capability of the process, thus helps
manufacturers design better processes to deliver quality products in a timely
fashion. However, currently available variation simulation methodologies are not
applicable to deformable part assembly processes because these methodologies are
based on rigid body assumptions. Deformable part assembly processes are widely
used in manufacturing automobiles, aircraft, furniture, and appliances. The
mechanistic variation simulation methodology will greatly enhance the scientific
understanding of deformable part assembly product/process design.