* 9631308
* Genetic Analysis of Pokeweed Antiviral Protein
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/1996,08/31/2000
* Annette Chiang, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Continuing Grant
* Joanne Tornow
* 08/31/2000
* USD 290,039.00

9631308 Tumer Pokeweed antiviral protein (PAP), a ribosome-inactivating protein
(RIP) isolated from pokeweed (Phytolacca americana) has ribosome inhibitory
(cytotoxic) activity. PAP works as a nondiscriminatory antiviral agent on both
plants and animals despite vast differences in infection mechanisms. Basic
information about how PAP acts on cells and how it can inhibit viral infection
is not well understood. Recently, by using random mutagenesis and selection in
yeast, a number of different nontoxic PAP mutants were isolated, some of which
retain their enzymatic activity. Sequence analysis of the mutants indicated that
in addition to residues at the active site, sequences near the N-terminus and at
the C-terminus of PAP are critical for cytotoxicity. Thus the toxicity of PAP is
not due solely to enzymatic activity and may involve different domains of the
protein. Analysis of virus resistance in transgenic plants expressing an active-
site mutant demonstrated that enzymatic activity of PAP is required for its
antiviral activity. The primary objective of this proposal is to use recombinant
mutants of PAP to investigate the mechanism of selective cytotoxicity and
antiviral activity. The proposed studies may lead to a better understanding of
nonspecific and targeted toxicities of PAP and ultimately to the design of more
effective therapeutic agents. Objectives are: 1. To identify PAP sequences that
are critical for cytotoxicity and antiviral activity. PAP residues which
correspond to those involved in substrate binding and catalysis in ricin will be
mutated to determine if the toxicity and antiviral activity of these mutants is
affected. Structural models of these mutants will be generated by substitution
of the mutant residues in the three dimensional structure of wild-type PAP as
rudimentary guides for understanding mutations abrogating the toxicity of PAP.
2. To compare the ability of PAP and PAP mutants to bind to healthy versus
virus-infected plant cells and identify domains that are critical in binding and
internalization. PAP has been shown to nonspecifically bind to certain cell
types and enter them by pinocytosis. Whether PAP can bind to plant cells and
whether PAP's selective toxicity is due to differences in binding and/or
internalization between healthy versus virus-infected cells will be tested. 3.
To determine if PAP acts on the viral RNA and whether antiviral activity results
from a direct effect on the viral RNA. Studies with animal viruses suggest that
PAP and related RIPs can inhibit viral RNA translation without affecting the
host cell translation, suggesting that RIP's cytotoxicity against virus-infected
cells may be due to modification of the viral nucleic acid, rather than the
disruption of the host ribosomal RNA. Studies will test the hypothesis that PAP
may use viral RNA as a substrate and the antiviral activity may result from
depurination of the viral RNA. 4. To characterize chromosomal mutants of yeast
resistant to PAP and clone the genes responsible for the mutations. Toxicity of
PAP to normal yeast cells and an inducible expression system has to be used to
isolate yeast mutants which can grow in the presence of galactose. Several
plasmid-linked and chromosomal mutants were identified. The plasmid and
chromosomal mutants will be further characterized and the genes responsible for
the chromosomal mutations will be cloned by complementation. ***