* 9631375
* Characterization of Mechanisms Controlling Cellular         Resistance to Singlet Oxygen Generating Photosensitizers
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/1996,02/29/2000
* Margaret Daub, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Philip Harriman
* 02/29/2000
* USD 300,000.00

Daub 9631375 The goal of this work is to characterize genes and defense
mechanisms responsible for cellular resistance to singlet oxygen generating
photosensitizers. Photosensitizers are light-activated compounds which, in the
activated state, react with oxygen through electron or energy transfer reactions
to produce active oxygen species. One of the most reactive of the oxygen species
is the activated singlet state of oxygen (singlet oxygen or 1O2). 1O2 is highly
toxic, destroying critical cellular components such as lipids, proteins, and
DNA, and often leading to cell death. This project focuses on the
photosensitizer cercosporin which is produced by members of the fungal genus
Cercospora and plays an important role in the ability of these organisms to
parasitize plants. Cercospora is toxic to plants, fungi, bacteria, mice, and
cultured human tumor cells. Cerospora species. however, are resistant to it. In
order to isolate genes which are responsible for resistance to cercosporin, two
types of cercosporin-sensitive Cercospora mutants were isolated. Two cercosporin
resistance genes were then isolated by complementing the mutants with DNA from a
genomic library of the wild type strain. The goal of this project is to
characterize these genes and to determine their cellular function. First, the
gene sequence and deduced amino acid sequence will be used to identify homology
with other known genes and gene products. Second, the regulation of the genes
will be investigated. Third, the location of the gene products in cells will be
determined by immunolabeling and electron microscopy. Finally, the ability of
the genes to impart cercosporin and photosensitizer resistance in normally
sensitive organisms (Escherichia coli and Aspergillus flavus) will be
determined. If time permits, a separated-surface-sensitizer system will be used
to define if the genes are able to protect against 1O2 itself or if they
function by altering the photosensitizer molecule. These studies will lead to
the iden tification and characterization of genes and defense mechanisms that
control cellular resistance to 1O2 -generating photosensitizers. Although oxygen
is necessary for life on our planet, slightly modified forms of oxygen exist
which are highly toxic to living organisms. Toxic forms of oxygen, usually
referred to as "active oxygen", have been implicated in aging and in diseases of
plants. This research focuses on characterizing genes which protect organisms
against toxic forms of oxygen and understanding how they work. This work will
advance our understanding how to protect organisms against the damaging effects
of active oxygen and thus have the potential to lead to improvements in plant
health.