* 9631837
* MPWG: Internet Explorers:  Using New Technolgies to         Encourage Women Toward SEM Careers
* EDU,EES
* 01/01/1997,12/31/1998
* Lawrence Genalo, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Margrete S. Klein
* 12/31/1998
* USD 99,990.00

High school girls who have completed their junior year will spend eight weeks
during the summer on the Iowa State University (ISU) campus where they will
research programming methods and develop biological and physical science,
engineering, and mathematics (SEM) units for the Internet. These units will be
designed to get middle school girls to explore careers in those areas. The
summer research interns will be directed by a team of four female graduate
students who have demonstrated ability in computers, are trained in courseware
development, and are in SEM-related fields. A fifth female graduate student in
secondary education will work as consultant to the team to provide expertise in
curricular content, educational delivery, and impact on the targeted middle
school students. Although the graduate women's experiences also will enhance
their professional development, the primary goal of increasing girls'
participation in SEM will be accomplished through the following: developing
computer Internet explorations packages that will attract middle school girls to
SEM; training high school girls in the use of computer technology to design and
develop the explorations package, which will be the focus of their summer
research internship on the ISU campus; using ISU graduate women in SEM to
supervise the explorations package development process on a daily basis, adding
a special dimension to their graduate school experience; working with experts in
middle school education to achieve the desired impact; disseminating the
developed packages through the Internet; publicizing these readily available,
no-cost resource packages to statewide education agencies through announcements
in education journals, at educator conferences, and at career exploration events
for middle school girls and community groups like the Girl Scouts and 4-H; and
advertising the project and its product nationwide through notes to education-
oriented newsgroups and through reports at conferences on edu cation, computers,
and gender issues.