* 9631124
* Cellular and Molecular Studies of Tobamovirus Movement Proteins
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/1996,08/31/1999
* Roger Beachy, The Scripps Research Institute
* Continuing grant
* Eve Ida Barak
* 08/31/1999
* USD 330,000.00

96-31124 Beachy Most plant viruses, including tobacco mosaic virus (TMV), use
plasmodesmata, the cytoplasmic bridges between proximal cells, to spread to
adjacent cells. Most plant viruses encode one or two proteins that are required
for virus movement through the plasmodesmata. These proteins are termed movement
proteins (MP). The latter apparently functions by modifying the size exclusion
limits of plasmodesmata. The PI has constructed mutants of MP in which the
latter is fused to the green fluorescent protein (GFP) of Aequorea victoria to
study cellular distribution and mode of action of the MP. The general goals of
this proposal are: to determine the time course of GFP-MP cellular distribution
during the course of infection in protoplasts and in leaves; to create mutations
in the MP that leads to accumulation of GFP-MP in specific cellular structures,
but not in other; to isolate cellular structures that contain GFP-MP, to
determine what cellular components are associated with GFP-MP; as well as
studies that include detailed analyses of GFP-MP in cells. These studies will
add significantly to our knowledge about the intra- and inter-cellular
distribution of TMV, as well as our knowledge of the role of the cytoskeleton in
the targeting and transport of proteins in plasmodesmata. %%% Most plant viruses
have evolved the capacity to use components in host cells for viral genome
replication, for translation of viral proteins, for sorting and packaging of
viral components, for export, and for spreading to proximal cells. For the
latter process, most viruses encode proteins that modify the size exclusion
limit of plasmodesmata. These proteins are termed movement proteins (MP). Little
is known about the molecular mechanism of the MP. The proposed studies will
investigate the cellular localization and mode of action of the tobacco mosaic
virus (TMV) MP. These studies will increase significantly our knowledge about
the cellular distribution of TMV as well as the role of the cytoskeleton in the
t argeting and, possibly, in the transport of MP to plasmodesmata. ***