* 9631760
* Comparative Statics:  Theory and an Empirical Framework for Testing Predictions
* SBE,SES
* 11/01/1996,10/31/1999
* Susan Athey, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 10/31/1999
* USD 160,026.00

Since Paul Samuelson's text in mathematical economics, economists have studied
and applied mathematical tools for making predictions. They accomplish it by
deriving comparative statics predictions in optimization problems and in
equilibrium problems. Recently, this topic has received renewed attention. The
first goal of this project is to develop and apply new methods for deriving
comparative statics predictions in formal economic models of stochastic problems
and games of incomplete information. The second goal of the project is to
develop a framework for empirical testing of the theoretical predictions about
comparative statics, focusing on problems with multiple endogenous variables.
The theoretical part of the project concerns monotone comparative statics in
stochastic optimization problems and equilibrium problems. Theorems are
introduced which can be used in conjunction with the new methods on comparative
statics, or with traditional methods of analysis in stochastic problems. A
number of potential economic applications are explored, some of which require
further theoretical research. In addition a monograph is developed, providing a
systematic approach to the analysis of comparative statics based on the new
literature. It advances a particular set of themes which is to some extent
implicit, but far from fully articulated, in the published research to date, and
also included some new results, particularly in the area of equilibrium
analysis. The empirical component is motivated by a growing theoretical and
empirical literature which studies complementarities in a wide variety of
economic problems (two variables are complementary if increasing one variable
increases the returns to increasing the other.) An econometric strategy is
developed to test theories about complementarities, evaluate the properties of
these tests using Monte Carlo experiments, and finally, to apply this strategy
to an economic problem.