* 9631103
* Modified Uridines, Contributors of Novel Chemistries to     Functional RNA Structures
* BIO,MCB
* 01/01/1997,06/30/2001
* Wanda Smith, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Parag R. Chitnis
* 06/30/2001
* USD 368,037.00

9631103 Agris The project has two overall objectives. The first objective is to
determine the chemistry/structure/ function relationships of selected modified
uridines that have specific, yet unexplained, biological relevance. In the
second objective, the chemical and structural contributions of modified
nucleosides that explain these biological observations will be used to predict,
design and produce RNA structures with certain characteristics. The specific
aims are to: (i). Determine the physicochemical properties of mnm5s2U34 and
mcm5s2U34 that contribute to a biologically important and possibly atypical
anticodon conformation in tRNALys. Preliminary data indicate that the modified
uridines interact with N6-threonylcarbamoyladenosine-37 (t6A37) creating a
novel, non-covalently produced loop even in as small a model system as a
pentanucleotide. This unique structure within the anticodon domain may explain
both lysyl- and/or glutamyl-tRNA synthetase recognition of cognate tRNAs and the
observed behavior of tRNALys in codon reading. Using information from the study
of tRNAs and model systems, a modified nucleoside-dependent interaction
resulting in a novel covalently bonded, pseudo-circular RNA will be designed and
synthesized. (ii). Determine if the metal-binding properties of modified
uridines and adenosines contribute to tRNA's binding of Mg2+. tRNA's binding of
Mg2+ is important to function. Amino acid modified uridines and adenosines bind
metals and the localization of dihydrouridine (D) in Dloops and extra arms of
tRNAs correlates with the appearance of the hydrophilic, metal-binding uridine,
3- 3-(S)-amino-3-carboxypropyl -uridine (acp3U). Preliminary data indicate that
D is almost 100% 2'-endo and that it induces 2'-endo pucker in 3'-adjacent
nucleosides. The combination of the D and TpsC domains of tRNA produces a high
affinity Mg+ binding site. However, there is too little information to predict
which structures constitute high affinity Mg2+ binding sites in RNA, in general,
and tR NAs in particular. An understanding of metal chelation by amino acid
modified nucleosides and the influence of D on local structure will aid in
understanding the functional significance of metal binding. As part of this
specific aim, a modified nucleoside-dependent, high affinity metal binding RNA
will be designed and synthesized based on knowledge of the chemical and
structural contributions of the modified nucleosides in this study. Modified
uridines and t6A will be introduced into small (3-6mers) and large (17-19mers)
naturally-occurring sequences using manual and automated chemical syntheses.
Sufficient quantities of oligomers will be produced to confirm, using
ultraviolet and circular dichroism spectroscopy, preliminary evidence of the
effects of metal ions and solution conditions on chemistry and structure.
Interactions with aminoacyl-tRNA synthetase will be assessed by analysis of
enzyme activity and gel shifts. Functional interactions with the ribosome will
be detected by inhibition of codon-dependent tRNA binding and chemical
modification. Selected structures, analyzed by NMR, will be modeled with
molecular dynamics refined, NMR derived distance and torsion angle constraints.
Computer-assisted design will lead to the synthesis and analysis of novel
modified uridine-containing, pseudo-circular and Mg2+ binding RNAs. %%% Encoded
within DNA is genetic information for the production of proteins. Transfer
ribonucelic acids, tRNAs, decode this gentic information into the correct
sequence of amino acids in each new protein. tRNAs are composed of four
nucleosides, adenosine, guanosine, cytidine anduridine, and minot amoounts of
modifications of these four. Modified uridines are of particular interest
because they occur at positions in tRNA where they contribute to the correct
reading and progress in translating the genetic code. The project has two
objectives. Since modified uridines may affect tRNA structure, and thus tRNA's
ability to decode, the decoding structures of tRNAs that have the same modified
uridin, but are responsible for bringing two different amino acids, glutamic
acid and lysine, to the protein manufacturing unit, the ribosome, will be
determined. Modified uridines may bind metal ions, such as magnesium, and affect
code-reading strucute and function. The ability of glutamic acid and lysin tRNAs
are responsible for unexplained biological observations in both bacterial and
mammalian cells. ***