* 9631845
* Collaborative Research:  Multi-Unit Demand Auctions
* NONE,NONE
* 08/01/1996,07/31/2000
* Dan Levin, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Continuing grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 07/31/2000
* USD 181,582.00

Recent theoretical developments in multi-unit demand (one sided) auctions make
it clear that uniform price auctions create an incentive for demand reductions
(bid shaving) resulting in inefficient outcomes. In contrast, extensions of the
Vickrey auction rule to multi-unit demand auctions promise, in theory, to
restore economic efficiency and to raise expected revenue relative to uniform
price auctions under a wide variety of circumstances. These predictions rest
critically on bidders recognizing and responding appropriately to the strategic
opportunities for demand reductions in uniform price auctions and following a
"sincere" bidding strategy in the Vickrey auctions. The purpose of this research
is to explore behavior in multi-unit demand auctions through both theory and
experiments. The experiments will focus on the extent to which bidders reduce
demand, and the resulting inefficiencies and revenue impact, in uniform price
auctions when bidders have equal and unequal demands and with more or less
intense competition. Vickrey auction experiments will focus on the effects of
different implementation rules for inducing sincere bidding using a relatively
transparent, open English clock auction procedure and a sealed bid version of
the clock procedure that may prove more tractable in field settings. Behavior
will be studied in both interactive and non-interactive (games against
computerized bidders) environments with the latter designed to eliminate the
"noise" associated with other players' actions on learning to behave
strategically. Theoretical work will provide benchmark models against which to
evaluate the experimental outcomes and to identify conditions where there are
tradeoffs in theory, between efficiency and revenue under the different auction
institutions. Work in multi-unit demand auctions is important because (i) most
auctions involve multi-unit demands and (ii) a number of insights obtained from
unit demand auctions fail to hold with multi-un it demands. Many of these issues
have come to the forefront-with the design and implementation of the recent
spectrum auctions.