* 9631907
* Evolution of Cellular ATP Buffering and Energy Transport    Systems
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/1996,02/28/2002
* W. Ross Ellington, Florida State University
* Continuing Grant
* William E. Zamer
* 02/28/2002
* USD 332,121.00

9631907 Ellington Living cells, in effect, behave as internal combustion
engines. Various fuels such as fats and carbohydrates are metabolically
combusted yielding water, carbon dioxide and a form of chemical energy currency
known as ATP. ATP provides the energy for most useful processes in the cell
including biosynthesis, pumping of materials across membranes and cell movement.
Muscle and nerve cells display high and variable rates of ATP utilization which
often exceed the capacity for metabolic ATP synthesis. In vertebrates, these
cells stockpile a chemical known as creatine phosphate which acts as a reservoir
of energy during periods of intense energy use. Creatine phosphate belongs to a
family of energy storage compounds collectively known as phosphagens. A variety
of other phosphagens (ca., arginine phosphate, taurocyamine phosphate) are found
in the non-vertebrate animal groups. These compounds function in a manner
analogous to that of creatine phosphate. However, certain fundamental functional
differences are evident. The present research project will further investigate
functional differences in the diverse phosphagen compounds using high field
nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) spectroscopy and conventional biochemical
methods. Once these differences have been delineated, mathematical models will
be developed to evaluate the functioning of these compounds in various kinds of
biological contexts (different cell types, cell ultrastructure, rates of ATP
utilization). The resulting simulations will be used to evaluate and
subsequently explain the distribution of particular phosphagens in various
animal groups. These studies will provide insight into the evolution of cellular
energy metabolism, a process vital to the functioning of all cells.