* 9631387
* Project to Revise the Historical Labor Statistics of the    United States
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/1996,01/31/1999
* Susan Carter, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Cheryl Eavey
* 01/31/1999
* USD 119,706.00

This award assists in a major collaborative effort to produce an updated,
revised, expanded, and electronically-accessible `millennial edition` of the
United States Census Bureau's Historical Statistics of the United States.
Historical Statistics of the United States is a massive, two-volume compendium
of 54 chapters on topics touching all of the social, behavioral, humanistic, and
natural sciences, including history, economics, government, finance, sociology,
demography, education, law, natural resources, climate, religion, international
migration, and trade. Over 12,500 statistical time series are presented. It is
the standard source for quantitative indicators of our country's history. This
award supports the revision of Chapter D, Labor. By the end of the grant period
a completed manuscript ready for distribution to the scholarly community and to
the general public will be available. The project also will develop a protocol
for the revision of the remaining chapters in Historical Statistics. Historical
Statistics of the United States, now long out of date, is the standard reference
for quantitative information on American history for scholars, authors,
reference librarians, journalists, and the general public. It also serves as a
guide to more detailed data, to commentary on data reliability, and to
historical scholarship on virtually every topic in American history. It is found
in every academic, corporate, and public library in the country and in many
libraries around the world. The new edition will thoroughly revise and update
the previous edition and has the potential of having a major impact not only on
historical scholarship but on academic research in the social, physical, and
biological sciences. It will also serve to reacquaint the general public with
the long record of American economic, social, and demographic diversity, change,
and development.