* 9631249
* Bipyridyl Ruthenium Oximates: Models for Proton-Coupled     Electron Transfer
* MPS,CHE
* 07/15/1996,12/31/1997
* Elisabeth Bell-Loncella, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Brian J. Rappoli
* 12/31/1997
* USD 18,000.00

Dr. Elisabeth Bell-Loncella, Department of Chemistry, University of Pittsburgh,
Johnstown, is supported by the Inorganic, Bioinorganic, and Organometallic
Program of the Chemistry Division under a Research Planning Grant to study
nitrogenase model systems. The role of the driving force of the redox-active
metal and the number of acid-labile protons on the non-innocent ligand are the
focus of this proposal. Planning activities involve the synthesis and
characterization of a series of oxime complexes coupled to
bis(bipyridyl)ruthenium. The goal is to determine the conditions which
facilitate proton-coupled electron transfer over a range of oxidation states.
The project is intended to lay the foundation for further study of the
synergistic transfer of protons and electrons, and will be included as
preliminary data in preparation of a Faculty Research Project Proposal to be
submitted through the NSF's Research at Undergraduate Institutions program.
Nitrogenase is an important enzyme in plants which allows for the conversion of
molecular nitrogen to ammonia, an essential plant nutrient. The mechanism of
this conversion involves the simultaneous transfer of protons and electrons, and
metals such as ruthenium play a key role in facilitating these transfer
processes. Ruthenium complexes will be synthesized and studied as models for
this fundamental biological process, and the factors affecting the transfer
processes will be determined.