* 9631278
* Mathematical Sciences/GIG:  "Group Infrastructure Grant for Stanford Statistics"
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/1996,08/31/2002
* Iain Johnstone, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Lloyd E. Douglas
* 08/31/2002
* USD 1,000,000.00

The Department of Statistics at Stanford University will enhance its research
and research training programs by developing the following, interconnected,
aspects of its infrastructure: A. Graduate Student Support with
Interdisciplinary Orientation. Building on a base of faculty joint appointments
in application areas and prior experience, Stanford will expand its training of
interdisciplinary Ph.D.s. by supporting four additional students. There is an
extensive network of faculty contacts in relevant departments at Stanford, and
support in the curricular structure for building competence in the application
area while acquiring a thorough research training in statistics. B. Summer
Mentoring programs for Women and Minority faculty and for Post-doctoral
scholars. The department will continue and expand a highly successful program to
help launch the careers of pre-tenure women and minority faculty and post-
doctoral scholars by involving them in the already active program of visitors,
seminars and research at Stanford each summer. C. Computer Infrastructure. The
department aims to provide a research computing environment for its faculty,
students and visitors that enables maximum productivity. The department will
acquire hardware and software on a staged basis in support of the core equipment
already in place. Examples include X terminals to maximize student and visitor
access to computing, and extra disk and memory to support increasingly memory
intensive research, such as in statistical image processing.