* 9631766
* Collaborative Research:  Empirical Implications of Sunk     Entry and Exit Costs
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/1996,07/31/2000
* Mark Roberts, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 07/31/2000
* USD 214,934.00

Despite the important role that sunk costs potentially play in explaining market
structure and firm performance there is relatively little empirical evidence on
their magnitude, how they vary across different products or across different
types of firms, and whether they are useful in explaining the persistent
heterogeneity in firm performance within markets. The purpose of this research
is to estimate the magnitude of sunk entry and exit costs for a number of U.S.
manufactured products and test if they are an important determinant of firm
turnover and performance patterns. This project will utilize data from the U.S.
Census of Manufactures for the period 1963-1992 to study the entry and exit
process for a number of products that are sold in relatively small geographic
markets. The substantial movements in population across geographic areas over
this 30 year period have produced changes in the structure of local markets as
firms have entered and exited in response to these changing demand patterns. The
first part of this project will measure entry and exit rates across geographic
markets and use these turnover patterns to estimate the magnitude of sunk entry
and exit costs faced by firms in specific product markets. The work will
recognize that there are different types of entrants, including new firms and
those diversifying from other product and geographic markets, and that firms can
enter through several channels, including constructing new plants or altering
the product mix of their existing production facilities. Each of these types and
methods of entry is likely to involve very different levels of sunk investments
and thus lead to different firm turnover rates. By estimating sunk costs that
vary by type of firm and method of entry, it should be possible to determine if
sunk costs are a significant factor generating the differences in turnover
patterns and firm lifetimes. The second part of the project will utilize the
estimated patterns of sunk cost s across products and entry types to determine
if sunk costs contribute to the amount of producer heterogeneity observed within
different product markets. Predictions will be tested about the relationships
among sunk costs, turnover, and the level and persistence of firm heterogeneity
that are derived from recent theoretical models of industry evolution. The
Census of Manufactures data are also uniquely suited to this endeavor because
they allow the characterization of the amount of heterogeneity among the entire
set of producers in a market.