* 9631132
* Effects on Object Perception of Spatial Deficit Due to      Brain Injury
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/1996,03/15/1999
* Lynn Robertson, University of California-Davis
* Continuing Grant
* Jasmine Young
* 03/15/1999
* USD 324,997.00

9631132 ROBERTSON Objects and scenes are normally coherent and integrated in
visual perception. Yet, biological and behavioral evidence has demonstrated
visual modularity; different visual areas within the mammalian brain respond to
particular features such as color, motion, shape, size, or location. The way in
which these features get bound together in awareness to produce normal coherence
is not known. One major cognitive theory has proposed that attention to spatial
locations provides the basis for feature binding. It follows that damage to
areas of the brain that represent spatial information should produce severe
problems in binding features together to produce perceptual wholes. This
research will explore the relationships between selective attention, spatial
representations, feature binding, and object individuation, using evidence from
the breakdown of performance in individuals with damage to brain areas that
disrupt spatial perception. The main hypothesis is that interactions between
neural areas that represent object features and those that represent space
achieve accurate visual percepts and produce rapid and accurate visual search,
especially when feature binding is required. Thus, the spatial problems observed
in individuals with selected types of neurological damage should be accompanied
by problems with specific types of object perception that require integration.
Individuals with selected spatial deficits will be tested in both object
perception and spatial tasks to look for hypothesized relationships between the
two. Other studies will attempt to determine the type of spatial information
that is critical for feature binding and that which is not. Behavioral measures
will include error data and reaction time. Biological measures will include
lesion location and volume, as determined by reconstructed 3-D structural MRI.
Although physiological and metabolic techniques for measuring cortical function
in neurologically normal individu als have improved dramatically in the recent
past, observing the effects of lesions remains a major means to determine
whether or not a particular region of the brain is both sufficient and necessary
for a particular function. Evidence derived from humans with lesions to
particular areas provides informative data to build hypotheses about function
and interactions between functions that then might be observed using other
techniques, such as single unit recording in animals or functional imaging in
normal individuals. The data may contribute at least a partial solution to the
binding problem and will certainly suggest where to look for correlated neural
activity that may support accurate feature integration. ***