* 9631808
* Social Comparison Proxy Model for Ability Self-Evaluation
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/1996,06/30/2000
* Jerry Suls, University of Iowa
* Continuing Grant
* Steven Breckler
* 06/30/2000
* USD 213,983.00

A new theory -- the Proxy Model -- addresses the use of social comparison
information in realistic appraisals of ability. Previous social comparison
theories have not provided a systematic explanation of how social comparison
information is used to answer the question: Can I do X? Recent empirical studies
of social comparison have primarily attended to comparison processes motivated
by self-enhancement or self-protection purposes, rather than self-assessment.
The present investigation returns to the question of how comparison information
is used when people want or need accurate predictions of future performance. The
Proxy Model builds on insights from Heider (1958) and extends the related
attributes hypothesis developed by Goethals and Darley (1977). In essence, the
Proxy Model contends that future performance in some domain can be predicted by
comparing with a proxy who has already completed the task of interest. An
informative proxy is one who either (1) performed similarly, under conditions of
maximal effort, to the comparer on a related, previous task or (2) shares
related attributes with the comparer that allow him or her to infer that Proxy's
maximal capability is similar to his or her own. Eight experiments are proposed;
all share a common paradigm in which participants predict performance after
receiving various types of comparison information. Incentive for accuracy is
also manipulated, providing high vs. low motivation to make accurate estimates.
The proposed studies should provide evidence for the Proxy Model, and add to
deeper understanding of the psychology of self-evaluation. The proposed research
both advances basic knowledge about social comparison theory and increases
understanding of related phenomena for which social comparisons play a vital
role, such as self-esteem, goal setting, and self-efficacy. %%% The proposed
experiments are concerned with how people decide whether they are capable of
achieving performance tasks involving physical or intellectual abilities. For
some time, social scientists have recognized that the comparisons people make
with others influence, and partially determine, our performance predictions
about what we can achieve ourselves. The factors that determine which persons'
performances affect us are not well understood. The proposed studies are based
on a new theory, the Proxy Model, which identifies the characteristics of other
people which make them useful for making performance predictions and choices for
one's self. Eight experimental studies will examine basic elements and
implications of the Proxy model. The proposed research will not only contribute
to our understanding of a classic phenomenon in social psychology, but also
provide useful information in understanding how people choose academic and job
performance goals, and how social factors contribute to the maintenance of
motivation to learn and perform in school and work settings. By specifying how
social factors influence the predictions people make about their future academic
and job performance, we also learn about the goals people are likely to strive
for, and the reactions they should have when they meet or fail to meet their
expectations, two topics of pressing importance for our society.