* 9631846
* Primitive Antibodies
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/1996,07/31/2000
* Samuel Schluter, University of Arizona
* Continuing Grant
* Barbara K. Zain
* 07/31/2000
* USD 330,000.00

96-31846 Marchalonis The combinatorial immune response of vertebrates is a
complex and precisely regulated defense system. An understanding of the
fundamental nature and mechanisms of operation of this system may be gained by
exploration of its evolutionary origins. This will be done by determining
whether the most primitive jawed vertebrates, represented by sharks, possess the
genetic and biochemical machinery to generate a completely diverse immune
response. Studies have clearly demonstrated that the genes specifying
immunoglobulin segments and the biochemical machinery (recombinase activating
gene RAG1) necessary for their rearrangement emerged early in the evolution of
vertebrates, being definitively present in all gnathanstomes. The high degree of
variable region diversity in light chains, in heavy chains, and in the newly
discovered immunoglobulin IgW as well as the differences in the arrangement of
gene segments have disclosed novel mechanisms that offer new perspectives in
understanding the origins and the function of the immune system. The proposed
objectives of this grant are: to characterize the shark recombination activating
genes RAG1 and RAG2; to determine the structure, genomic organization, and the
molecular mechanism for generating diversity in the primordial class of
immunoglobulin called IgW; and to determine the genomic organization and
diversity of expression of light and heavy chains that are involved in
generating the major serum immunoglobulin IgM. The results of these studies
should allow investigators to develop realistic hypotheses regarding the origins
of combinatorial immune system which is characteristic of vertebrates which in
turn should lead to novel approaches to understanding and to manipulating the
immune system of all vertebrates. %%% The combinatorial immune response of
vertebrates is a complex and precisely regulated defense system. An
understanding of the fundamental nature and mechanisms of operation of this
system may be gained by exploration of it s evolutionary origins. This will be
done by determining whether the most primitive jawed vertebrates, represented by
sharks, possess the genetic and biochemical machinery to generate a completely
diverse immune response. The results of these studies should allow investigators
to develop realistic hypotheses regarding the origins of combinatorial immune
system which is characteristic of vertebrates which in turn should lead to novel
approaches to understanding and to manipulating the immune system of all
vertebrates. ***