* 9631128
* Cytochrome P450 Enzymes:  Identification, Diversity, and    Potential Functions in Marine Invertebrates
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/1996,08/31/1999
* Mark Snyder, University of California-Davis
* Continuing Grant
* Zoe Eppley
* 08/31/1999
* USD 200,050.00

9631128 Snyder Cytochrome P450 enzymes are perhaps the most diverse family of
proteins in nature. They are found in all organisms thus far examined and have
extensive abilities to metabolize foreign chemicals (xenobiotics) and endogenous
molecules such as steroids and fatty acids. One of the driving forces for P450
diversification is thought to be the appearance of toxic chemicals in the diet,
the so-called plant-animal warfare" hypothesis. In mammals, one hundred or more
P450 forms may exist in a single individual, each with its own metabolic
capabilities. Likewise, insects appear to have a large number of P450 forms,
some involved in insecticide and dietary plant allelochemical resistance. Marine
invertebrates also have demonstrable P450 enzymatic activities that are
inducible by exposure to pollutants, though virtually nothing is known about the
role of detoxification enzymes in marine invertebrate to dietary chemicals. New
information on this group of enzymes may help explain aspects of individual
species diet and metabolism as well as identify factors that affect tolerance to
other xenobiotic exposures. The investigator proposes to utilize molecular
cloning approaches to isolate and identify new cytochrome P450 genes from
several marine invertebrate species representing three different Phyla (Aim 1).
Those data will provide the first estimate of the diversity of this large
protein superfamily among marine invertebrates. The induction of gene expression
for selected new proteins belonging to this family will be studied in both field
collected species and in controlled laboratory feeding experiments (Aim 2).
Antibodies will be produced to several new forms for the design of sensitive
immunological assays to measure P450 induction in response to toxin exposures
(Aim 3). Since there are currently no marine invertebrate P450 sequences known,
these studies will provide much needed information about the diversity of these
important enzymes. The results will allow comparisons concer ning the evolution
and functions of detoxification enzymes between marine and terrestrial
organisms. An eventual goal is the development of methods that will test
species-specific responses following exposure to natural and artificial
toxicants.