* 9631745
* Myelin Lectins Bind to Neuronal Carbohydrates to Control    Axon Outgrowth
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/1996,08/31/1999
* Ronald Schnaar, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Paul B. Farel
* 08/31/1999
* USD 317,677.00

IBN: 9631745 PI: Schnaar Nerve cells send signals to other nerve cells and to
target tissues (such as muscle) through long cellular extensions, or "wires,"
called axons. In the developing brain, billions of growing axons weave their way
to their appropriate targets through a free-wheeling process of extension and
migration. After appropriate connections are established, many of the axons are
wrapped by layers of insulation, called myelin, which is made by support cells
in the brain. In addition to insulating the axons, myelin signals them to stop
extending and migrating, thereby stabilizing the pattern of connections in the
mature brain. Specific molecules on myelin interact with complementary molecules
on the axon, like a lock and key, to trigger the axon to stop extending or
migrating. This proposal investigates the structures and functions of these
interacting molecules. Specifically, a well-defined protein on myelin, called
myelin-associated glycoprotein (MAG for short) is one of the myelin molecules
responsible for signaling axons to stop growing. We discovered complementary
sugar molecules on the surface of axons which bind to MAG, and which may be
responsible for initiating the "stop growing" signal. Experiments detailed in
this proposal will test whether these axon sugar molecules, termed gangliosides,
are required in order for MAG to halt axon extension and migration. Gangliosides
with different structural variations will be tested, to define the specific
chemical determinants required for MAG's binding and actions. These studies may
elucidate basic molecular mechanisms for stabilization of neuronal connections
in the mature brain, and may help explain why central nervous system axons fail
to regenerate in some vertebrates, including mammals.