* 9631257
* Carotenoid Cyclase Enzymes from Arabidopsis thaliana:       Structure, Function, and Interactions
* BIO,MCB
* 07/01/1996,06/30/2000
* Elisabeth Gantt, University of Maryland, College Park
* Continuing Grant
* Hector E. Flores
* 06/30/2000
* USD 300,000.00

9631257 Cunningham The cyclization of lycopene is a key branch point in the
pathway carotenoid biosynthesis. Two types of cyclic end groups are commonly
found in higher plant carotenoids: the ( and ( cyclase enzymes are encoded by
homologous genes in Arabidopsis thaliana, and both enzymes us the linear,
symmetrical lycopene as a substrate. However, the ( cyclase adds only one ring
while the ( cyclase introduces a ring at both ends of the molecule. The
objectives of this research are to examine and compare substrate utilization and
product formation by the ( and ( cyclases of A. thaliana, to identify functional
regions and amino acid residues within these two enzymes, and to ascertain
whether cyclase-cyclase interactions play a role in enzyme function. Carotenoids
with cyclic end groups are essential components of the photosynthetic membranes
in all plants, algae and cyanobacteria. These lipid-soluble compounds protect
against photooxidation, harvest light for photosynthesis, and dissipate excess
light energy absorbed by the antenna pigments. The accumulation of carotenoid
pigments in the photosynthetic membranes is closely coordinated with the
biosynthesis and assembly of the photosynthetic apparatus. The regulatory
mechanisms that serve to coordinated these processes are obscure. The classical
biochemical approaches have been of limited value in the study of the membrane-
associated enzymes of the carotenoid pathway, therefore the approach to be taken
is largely a genetic one. The results of this research will provide valuable
information on the operation and control of the essential plant pathway of
carotenoid biosynthesis, and can provide insights on the functioning and
regulation of other metabolic pathways that involve membrane-associated
multienzyme complexes.