* 9631050
* Computational Studies of Biological Membranes
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/1996,07/31/2000
* Eric Jakobsson, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Kamal Shukla
* 07/31/2000
* USD 270,000.00

9631050 Jakobsson The general objectives of the proposed work are to improve our
understanding of the physical principles underlying the structure and functional
mechanisms of biological membranes. The methodologies employed are computer
simulations and statistical mechanical theory. The overall strategy of our
laboratory is to validate computational methods on relatively simple systems
that are well characterized by experimental measurement. Then we can extend the
methods to using them to explore more complex systems of biological interest. In
ion channels, the simplest and best characterized channel is the antibiotic
channel-former gramicidin. In membranes themselves, the simplest system is a
homogenous lipid bilayer. Our initial approach then has been to use gramicidin
channels and pure homogenous lipid bilayers as test systems to develop efficient
and accurate methodologies for the simulation of membrane proteins and membranes
themselves. We have now begun to use these methodologies to understand more
complex systems of interest. These more complex systems include the gramicidin
channel-lipid complex, biologically important specific ion channels, such as
voltage-gated sodium and potassium channels, and membranes interacting with
signal peptides and organic molecules. An ultimate goal is to understand the
complete interactions of large proteins with membranes and to understand the
structure of heterogenous membranes, that include proteins, different species of
lipids, and other molecules such as cholesterol. But the necessary intermediate
goal, which we are pursuing in the next phase of our laboratory's work, is to
understand the details of the interactions of different types of molecules in
the membrane environment. These details will provide the building blocks for the
more comprehensive understanding that it our ultimate goal. %%% Membranes are
the surfaces of the cells that make up the building blocks of all living things.
The forces that cause biological membranes to fo rm are much like the forces
that cause the formation of soap bubbles, but membranes are much more chemically
complicated than soap bubbles. In fact, many physicists believe that biological
membranes are the most complicated condensed matter (liquid or solid) in the
known universe. The basic building blocks of biological membranes are fatty
molecules called phospholipids. In addition to phospholipids, biological
membranes have many proteins embedded in them that carry out important
biological functions. These functions include transporting materials between the
inside of the cell and the outside, and sending and receiving chemical signals
from other cells. For many complicated systems, computer simulations can help in
understanding how the systems work. This is because the computer can show
details that are very hard to measure directly. The current project is to use
computer simulations to see the details of how membranes form, and how they
function. In the computer simulations, we can see details of the interactions
between the membrane phospholipid molecules and the surrounding water, details
of the interactions between phospholipid molecules and proteins in the membrane,
and details of the protein function. This project looks especially at one type
of membrane protein called an ion channel. Ion channels are proteins whose
function is to move across the membrane charged atoms called ions. One of the
ion channels studied in this project is gramicidin, an antibiotic which kills
cells of other organisms when it is inserted in their membranes, by making them
too leaky to ions. Other ion channels studied in this project are important in
generating electrical signals in cells. The goal of the project is to contribute
to a basic understanding of biological membrane function. This is important both
because of the inherent fascination of this extremely complicated type of matter
and also because of the importance of understanding how biological function
comes from the behavior of individua l molecules. ***