* 9631129
* Mechanism of Protein Retention in the Golgi Apparatus
* BIO,MCB
* 07/15/1996,06/30/2000
* M. Gerard Waters, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Eve Ida Barak
* 06/30/2000
* USD 300,000.00

96-31129 Waters The secretory pathway of eukaryotic cells consists of a set of
membrane-bounded compartments that are involved in delivery of newly synthesized
proteins to their final destinations. The Golgi apparatus is involved in the
post-translational modification and sorting of proteins that pass through it.
The Golgi consists of several topologically distinct cisternae, each contains a
unique set of resident proteins. These proteins resist dispersion by the large
flux of vesicular traffic to and from the Golgi apparatus. The maintenance of
the Golgi integrity is an essential process, yet it is poorly understood. Do
newly synthesized Golgi proteins simply cease their forward movement upon
reaching the correct cisternae, or do they localized by a more dynamic mechanism
involving retrieval from distal compartments? The goal of this proposal is to
gain insights into Golgi retention mechanisms. The budding yeast Saccharomyces
cerevisiae is used as a model system since it is amenable to biochemical, cell
biological, and genetic analyses. The Golgi mannosyltransferase, Och1p, will
serve as the model protein because the inability to retain Och1p in the Golgi is
readily detectable by both biochemical and genetic techniques. Fusion proteins
of Och1p fused to the reporter protein invertase have been used in initial
studies. Inclusion of a cleavage site specific for a late Golgi endoprotease,
Kex2p, in some of the fusion proteins, allows monitoring of the release of the
invertase moiety if the fusion protein reaches the distal compartments of the
Golgi. Initial results from these studies imply that newly synthesized Och1p is
not retained efficiently on its first passage through the Golgi apparatus, that
is, Och1p moves to distal compartments and is retrieved. Retention in the Golgi
apparatus is not a static process, but is dynamic, involving, apparently, both
anterograde and retrograde vesicular transport. The mechanism of this process
will be further investigated by identifying components o f the cellular
machinery that retains Och1p and mediates its retrieval from distal
compartments; by determining if Och1p recycles through the ER and the endosomes,
as well as the Golgi, by using mutants that can "trap" recycling Och1p in the ER
or divert it from the endosomes to the plasma membrane; and by biochemically
characterizing the statically-retained form of Och1p. Known mutants of the
retrograde vesicular traffic will be examined to study their impact on the
recycling of Och1p through the Golgi. New components of the retrograde transport
apparatus will be identified by selecting mutants defective in recovering Och1p
from distal compartments. These mutants will be phenotypically characterized and
the gene will be examined at the molecular level. Studying protein retention in
the Golgi of S. cerevisiae will be relevant to Golgi retention processes in
mammalian cells as well as to the maintenance of other organelles. Since there
exist numerous examples of evolutionary conservation of biological processes
among various species, these studies will help reveal how human cells maintain
compartmentalization that is so critical to cell viability. %%% The secretory
pathway of eukaryotic cells consists of a set of membrane-bounded compartments
that are involved in delivery of newly synthesized proteins to their final
destinations. The Golgi apparatus is involved in the post-translational
modification and sorting of proteins that pass through it. The Golgi consists of
several topologically distinct cisternae, each contains a unique set of resident
proteins. These proteins resist dispersion by the large flux of vesicular
traffic to and from the Golgi apparatus. The maintenance of the Golgi integrity
is an essential process, yet it is poorly understood. Do newly synthesized Golgi
proteins simply cease their forward movement upon reaching the correct
cisternae, or do they localized by a more dynamic mechanism involving retrieval
from distal compartments? The goal of this proposal is to gain insi ghts into
Golgi retention mechanisms. Studying protein retention in the Golgi of S.
cerevisiae will be relevant to Golgi retention processes in mammalian cells as
well as to the maintenance of other organelles. Since there exist numerous
examples of evolutionary conservation of biological processes among various
species, these studies will help reveal how human cells maintain
compartmentalization that is so critical to cell viability. ***