* 9631169
* GOALI/Faculty and Students in Industry:  Simplifying the    Prediction of Labor Hours Needed for a Project
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/1996,07/31/1998
* Kyung Min, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence M. Seiford
* 07/31/1998
* USD 16,715.00

9631169 Filipowski This GOALI project supports a faculty-student team working
with engineers from the Collins Avionics and Communications Division of Rockwell
International Corporation to develop a system for accurately and quickly
predicting required labor hours for a new project. Predicted labor hours are
part of a work measurement system, and are used to plan, schedule, budget,
establish cost estimates, and measure an employee's performance. Inaccurate
prediction can lead to increased costs and decreased productivity. Current labor
hour prediction often involves complicated procedures that are expensive and
time-consuming. This project will develop simple and efficient methods for
predicting required project labor hours that use historical estimates of normal
and standard times for similar projects, as well as allowances for project
complexity, manufacturing inefficiencies, learning, and labor performance. Two
systems will be developed, one to provide quotes of acceptable accuracy within
an hour or less, and another to provide more accurate quotes within a day or
less. The results from this project can be used to improve customer
serviceability by providing quick and accurate quotes for new product
development costs. As part of an overall budgeting system, they will also be
useful in operational planning, budgeting, and cost-control.