* 9631346
* SBIR Phase II:  Polymer Electrolyte for Internally          Humidified Proton Exchange Membrane Fuel Cells
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/1997,06/30/1999
* Hari Dhar, BCS Technology Inc
* Standard Grant
* Cheryl F. Albus
* 06/30/1999
* USD 300,000.00

*** 96-31346 Dhar This Small Business Innovation Research Phase II project
proposes to build one marketable prototype of the self-humidified PEM (proton
exchange membrane) fuel cell stack using the deposit of solubilized Nafion
membrane as the electrolyte. During the Phase I project, the feasibility of
using this electrolyte was demonstrated in small single cells and one multi-cell
stack. The research objectives of the Phase II include the optimization of
performance of self-humidified PEM fuel cells, operation of larger fuel cells,
and design and operation of one 1 kW fuel cell stack. The best possible fuel
cell performance will be solubilized forms of electrolytes that can be used as
proton exchange membranes in fuel cells. Fuel cells will be operated with
reactant combinations H2/air and H2/O2. Emphasis will be given to the operation
of fuel relationships, calculations of kinetic parameters, efficiencies of
platinum utilization, and reactant cross-over currents. Larger single fuel cells
of areas up to 400 cm2 will be evaluated, and one multi-cell stack of capacity
200 W will be built and evaluated to gain experience at the level of a large
cell stack performance, and other important issues such as effectiveness of
manifolding, thermal and water management. As the final outcome of this project,
one 1 kW fuel cell stack will be designed and evaluated. The anticipated results
include the availability of developed technology for a high performance,
simplified PEM fuel cell at substantial savings of the amount of electrolyte
material, and a low cost alternative energy source. The PEM fuel cell will be
most suitable for use in electric vehicles. The fuel cell will be equally
suitable as a power source for use in homes, various industries, defense
applications, and space missions. As a standby power source the fuel cell will
be useful for the utility and remote site operations. The proposed project will
make the fuel cell simplified and cost effective- important criteria for commerc
ial viability. ***