* 9631554
* Mathematical Sciences:  Subgroups of Residually Torsion-    Free Nilpotent Metabelian Groups
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/1996,07/31/1998
* Ada Peluso, CUNY Hunter College
* Standard Grant
* Lloyd E. Douglas
* 07/31/1998
* USD 18,000.00

Research results over the last thirty years have indicated that finitely
presented groups are very complex in their subgroup structure. For instance, it
is known that a finitely generated metabelian group is a subgroup of a finitely
presented metabelian group. In order to examine still further the complexity of
finitely presented groups, it is of interest to determine whether a finitely
generated metabelian group with a specific property can be embedded in a
finitely presented metabelian group with the same property. The initial
objective of the investigator had been to prove the general statement that if G
is a finitely generated residually nilpotent (or residually torsion-free
nilpotent) metabelian group, then G is a subgroup of a finitely presented
metabelian group that is also residually nilpotent (or residually torsion-free
nilpotent). This appears to be a complicated problem, as evidenced by the
machinery required to solve it for the free metabelian case. In the special case
of free metabelian groups it is known that finitely generated free metabelian
groups are residually nilpotent and residually torsion-free nilpotent. The
investigator has proved that a finitely generated free metabelian group can be
embedded in a finitely presented metabelian group that is also residually
nilpotent. Furthermore, a finitely generated free metabelian group can be
embedded in a finitely presented metabelian group that is also residually
torsion-free nilpotent. One of the tools developed by the investigator to obtain
these results is a sufficient condition for the residual nilpotence and residual
torsion-free nilpotence of certain finitely presented metabelian groups that
arise from a matrix representation for metabelian groups. The matrix entries
belong to specified groups and specified modules of fractions. To show the
sufficient condition can be satisfied, use is made of the notion of S-isolator
of an ideal, where S is a multiplicative semigroup. The investigat or is
attempting to develop further insight and additional tools with which to try to
solve the initial problem mentioned above. An extension to be considered is to
let the matrix entries belong to certain factor groups of modules and to
determine whether the resulting matrix group is residually torsion-free
nilpotent.