* 9631216
* SBIR Phase II:  In-Line Process Monitoring &amp; Control for    Poly-Silicon Formation Inside Cluster Tools
* TIP,TI
* 09/01/1997,08/31/1999
* Peter Solomon, Advanced Fuel Research, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Michael F. Crowley
* 08/31/1999
* USD 299,944.00

*** 9631216 Solomon This Small Business Innovation Research Phase II Project
will develop Fourier transform infrared (FT-IR) instrumentation for in-line
monitoring and control of poly-silicon and dielectric fabrications processes
within a cluster tool.. An FT-IR based method to determine polysilicon and
dielectric film thicknesses, and free carrier concentrations and scattering
rates of doped poly films has been developed. The technique is adaptable to
multilayered and patterned samples, and the measurement and analysis can be
performed in real-time, while the wafer is in the cooldown chamber of the
cluster tool. Field tests in Phase I on a cluster tool at Texas Instruments
established the capability to measure doped and undoped poly films, relatively
thich ((250 nm) field oxides, thin ((10nm) gate oxides, and patterned wafers. A
collaborative effort will be made to: 1) develop test a refined in-line FT-IR
process monitor on the cluster tool, 2) Develop robust automated software for
analysis of multilayered poly/dielectric films on blanket and patterned wafers,
3) Develop a high speed wafer mapping system for measuring uniformity of
dielectric and poly properties, and 4) Develop process monitoring, optimization
and control software and analysis methodology. This project will result in
rugged multi-applications instrumentation for in-line monitoring and control of
a wide range of fabrication processes performed in a cluster tool. This project
can increase integrated circuits (IC) production yield, eliminate scrapped
batches due to undetected out-of-spec wafers, reduce manpower requirements, and
reduce the time between start-up and high yield production. The wafer mapping
tool will also be useful for quality control of many other IC fabrication
processes such as epi and ion implantation. ***