* 9631647
* Regulator and Class Number Computation in Cubic Congruence  Function Fields
* MPS,DMS
* 09/15/1996,02/28/1998
* Renate Scheidler, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* Lloyd E. Douglas
* 02/28/1998
* USD 17,995.00

The objective of this project is the development of an algorithm for computing
the regulator and the ideal class number of a purely cubic congruence function
field of unit rank 1. Recently, the continued fraction baby step giant step
algorithm for finding the regulator of a real quadratic number field has been
adapted to work in real quadratic congruence function fields. This method has
also been applied to work in real quadratic congruence function fields. This
method has also been applied to a variety of areas that are not immediately
related to the theory of algebraic congruence function fields, such as elliptic
curves and public-key cryptography. An Euler product technique for determining
the class number of a real quadratic number field has also been successfully
modified to compute the ideal class number of a real quadratic congruence
function field. In a complex cubic number field, Voronoi's continued fraction
algorithm for obtaining relative minima in cubic lattices is the base for
computing the regulator of the field. A giant step optimization has been
developed for this method as well. As in the quadratic case, Dirichlet series
and Euler products represent a tool for finding the class number of the field,
once the regulator is known. Considering the success of modifying number field
techniques to work in function fields in the degree 2 situation, a logical
approach is the adaptation of the regulator and class number algorithms in
purely cubic number fields to the corresponding function field setting, that is,
a purely cubic congruence function field of unit rank 1. Such a field takes the
form K = k(x)(cube root of D) where k is a finite field whose order is congruent
to -1 modulo 3, x is a fixed element that is transcendental over k, and D is a
cube-free polynomial in k x whose highest coefficient is a cube in k. Questions
to be addressed during the planning period of this project include embedding a
purely cubic unit rank one congruence fu nction field K into the field of power
series in 1/x over k in order to obtain a theory of continued fractions in K,
the development of a reduction theory for ideals in K, and a first design of a
regulator algorithm, initially without giant steps. The giant step version as
well as the class number computation will be the subject of research following
the planning stage.