* 9632996
* Conference on Biochemical Engineering (Biochemical          Engineering X) to be held May 18-23, 1997 in Kananaskis,    Canada
* ENG,CBET
* 03/01/1997,02/28/1998
* James Swartz, United Engineering Trustees, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Fred G. Heineken
* 02/28/1998
* USD 16,000.00

9632996 Hu The objective of this conference is to bring together academic,
government, and industrial researchers representative of the comprehensive
spectrum of research areas that comprise the state of the art in Biochemical
Engineering. This conference will emphasize efforts to expand the intellectual
and industrial scope of biotechnology and to expand the contributions which
biochemical engineers can make to such growth. Three opening lectures will cover
important aspects in this field. These include: (a) the biotechnology industry
in the past half century and what biochemicals engineers have contributed to
advance this industry, (b) the academic experimental research in the United
States, including food technology, biomass and biofuels, cell culture, protein
folding and bioanalytical instrumentation, and (c) mathematical modeling in
biochemical engineering, including unstructured models, segregated models,
cybernetic models, metabolic flux analysis, and pattern recognition. Technical
sessions will include: (1) bioenergy, chemical and renewable resources (2)
environmental issues and waste reduction (3) metabolic engineering and
quantitative physiology (4) biochemical engineering in the medical industry, (5)
biomaterials, miniaturization and automation (6) bioprocess development and
manufacturing, (7) unit operations and scale up, and (8) frontiers in
bioprocessing. This conference will provide and important service to the
research community in this area and provide the opportunity to potentially
impact future research directions in a significant manner. Information generated
at this conference will be useful for planning purposes for the Biotechnology
and Biochemical Engineering Programs in the BES Division. ***