* 9632986
* GOALI/FSI: High Speed Contouring Control of Stewart Platform Based Machine Tools
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/1996,06/30/2001
* Krishnaswamy Srinivasan, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Standard Grant
* george hazelrigg
* 06/30/2001
* USD 60,692.00

9632986 Srinivasan This GOALI/Faculty and Graduate Student Internship award will
investigate control and design approaches that can achieve contouring errors of
less than 20 microns at machine tool feed rates of 10-20 m/s. The technical
approach will use control algorithms that make effective use of machine dynamic
models and two stage actuation concepts: short range-high bandwidth and long
range-lower bandwidth actuators. These approaches are necessary and the
performance results are possible with the six degree of freedom parallel link
machines based on the Stewart platform machine tool designs introduced in recent
years. This project will be carried out by a team of researchers at Ohio State
University, the National Institute of Standard and Technology (NIST) and
Ingersoll Milling Machine Company. It will support the faculty principal
investigator and a graduate student as they experimentally determine dynamic
parameters of Ingersoll's version of the Stewart platform machine tool at NIST.
The research team will design a controller using this dynamic information and
the two stage actuation concept, followed by experimental implementation at both
NIST and Ingerqoll to evaluate performance. The technical impact of this
research will be greater productivity in the manufacture of dies and molds
through a combination of new structural designs integrated with new control
concepts. Because of the three way partnership established between a university,
national lab, and industrial firm, this project offers an ideal model for
technology transfer.