* 9632082
* A Genetic Approach to Ordered Sequencing of Arabidopsis
* BIO,DBI
* 08/15/1996,08/31/1999
* Robert Martienssen, Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory
* Cooperative Agreement
* DeLill Nasser
* 08/31/1999
* USD 4,185,000.00

9632082 This award supports a consortium of three laboratories located at Cold
Spring Harbor Laboratory, Washington University at St. Louis and the Applied
Biosystems in forest City, California. It supports the group's effort to produce
at least 7 Mb of finished sequences of DNA from chromosome 4 and 5. The
sequencing strategy uses a combination of shotgun and more ordered approaches.
This group makes maximal use of softwares and technologies developed for the C.
elegans genome sequencing project for sequencing and finishing large contiguous
DNA pieces. All sequences will be deposited in GenBank upon completion of each
BAC clones. Unfinished sequence data will be made available on a WWW site very
rapidly. Clones and other materials will be made available through the
Arabidopsis Biological Resource Center at Ohio State. This award is one of the
three awarded by the triagency (Department of Energy, National Science
Foundation, and US Department of Agriculture) Arabidopsis thaliana genome
research program. The activity of this consortium will be coordinated with the
other groups engaged in large scale sequencing of the Arabidopsis genome. The
results will contribute to determining the overall strategy for the completion
of the sequence of the entire Arabidopsis genome. More importantly, the
information and data produced will be useful to the general research community
and will contribute to rapid advances in plant biology.