* 9632506
* Seismic Behavior of Steel Moment-Resisting Frames with      Composite Reinforced Concrete Infill Walls
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/15/1996,08/31/2000
* Jerome Hajjar, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* John Scalzi
* 08/31/2000
* USD 253,896.00

A three-year experimental and analytical research program is undertaken to study
the design and behavior of steel moment-resisting frames with composites
reinforced concrete (RC) infill walls subjected to seismic excitations. The
program includes a series of two two-story, one-bay frame experiments, cyclic
shear connector experiments, and a comprehensive analytical effort. In the steel
frame-RC infill system, the steel beams and columns act as boundary members
resisting gavotte loads and axial forces from seismic overturning, while the RC
infills serve as webs resisting shear. Simulated seismic load testing of one-
third scale, two-story, one-bay frames will be conducted to determine the
seismic behavior of steel frame-RC infill composite wall systems. The
proportions of strength and stiffness provided to the system by the steel frame
and the RC infills will be determined. Fully-restrained (moment) beam-to-column
connections partially-restrained will be tested. In addition, cyclic shear tests
of connector specimens to quantify the strength of shear studs under cyclic
shear and axial tension will also be tested. Data analysis coupled with linear
and nonlinear analysis of steel frame-RC infill subassemblages will serve to
establish analysis and design recommendations. Experimental observations from
the frame tests, coupled with all existing experimental data on similar systems
conducted to date which consist mainly of geometry, topology, and constitutive
properties of simple computational models for the RC infills (e.g., effective
compression struts or membrane elements). This is a project supported under the
second year program of research initiative `Composite and Hybrid Structures`,
NSF-94-154.