* 9632879
* The Higher Level Phylogeny of the Trichoptera (Insecta)
* BIO,DEB
* 09/15/1996,08/31/1999
* Karl Kjer, Brigham Young University
* Standard Grant
* John R. Gold
* 08/31/1999
* USD 200,001.00

9632879 KJER This study involves a molecular phylogenetic analysis of higher
level (suborder and family) relationships among members of the caddisflies
(Insecta: Trichoptera) based on sequence data from both the mitochondrial and
nuclear genomes. Knowledge of the phylogeny and evolution of this group of
aquatic insects is of interest to freshwater ecologists, behavioral biologists,
biodiversity advocates (Trichoptera larvae are classic water quality
indicators), and historical biogeographers. In particular, the evolution of case
and retreat making behavior of the immatures has been the center of spirited
debate. Three competing hypotheses have emerged for the evolution of these
traits that differ in their presumed character state homologies and
transformation series (TS). The molecular phylogeny provided by this
investigation will be used to test the alternate TS, using character mapping;
preliminary results suggest that putative homologies of some behaviors will need
to be reassessed. This research will also address methodological issues such as
weighting schemes, Transition-transversion bias, and how to incorporate
secondary structure concerns in rRNA analysis; these methodological concerns are
of broad interest to the systematic community. This award will help support
training of graduate students in modern methods of molecular systematic analysis
and enhance our knowledge of this important element of insect biodiversity.
Caddisflies are important elements of fresh water ecosystems and their species
composition in streams has been used to assess and monitor water quality.