* 9632059
* Non-Linear Transport and Spatial Organization Processes
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/1996,04/30/2000
* Sidney Redner, Trustees of Boston University
* Continuing Grant
* G. Bruce Taggart
* 04/30/2000
* USD 182,000.00

9632059 Redner Theoretical studies will be done on non-linear transport
processes and related collective properties in heterogeneous media. Two general
topics will be considered, including the dynamics of inelastic gases and
filtration processes. A primary goal will be to develop new models and new
qualitative methods to account for basic phenomena. The steady response of an
inelastic gas in small temperature and concentration gradients will be used to
help develop basic insights into the transient cooling and underlying clustering
phenomenon. Investigations will be done on basic aspects of filtration in which
small suspended particles in a fluid are removed by passing the suspension
through a porous matrix. These removed particles gradually plug the porous
medium giving rise to feedback between transport and filtration efficiency. New
models will be developed to describe this non-steady response analytically and
to understand the underlying percolation problem induced by the plugging
network. Investigations will also be done to understand coarsening processes and
related kinetic phenomena in simple models of competitive and adaptive behavior.
The "vicious civilization" model appears to account for some aspects of the time
development and relative strengths of real civilizations. A transition between a
"fair" and a "superpower-dominated" world is identified and studies will be made
to quantify the essential phenomena associated with this transition. Similarly,
studies of "adaptive" voter models will be done. In these models new types of
transition rate rules are introduced to mimic several basic elements of human
behavior. The long-time properties of these systems will be investigated with
particular emphasis on the statistics of opinion changes. %%% This research
involves theoretical studies of statistical models which describe transport
phenomena, such as the flow of liquids, through filters and th eevolution of
spatial organization, such as p attern formation in fluids. The results will be
of wide interest to the mathematics, statistical mechanics and materials and
processing communities. ***