* 9632851
* Long-Term Ecological Research in Tallgrass Prairie:  The    Konza Prairie LTER Program
* BIO,IOS
* 11/01/1996,12/31/2003
* Alan Knapp, Kansas State University
* Continuing Grant
* William E. Zamer
* 12/31/2003
* USD 4,063,236.00

9632851 Knapp A long-term ecological research program will be continued and
expanded at the Konza Prairie LTER site in NE Kansas. Konza Prairie, a pristine
tallgrass prairie is, arguably, the most intensively studied grassland site on
earth. The 15 year old, broadly-based research program encompasses studies from
the population, community, ecosystem and landscape ecology levels. These studies
are linked by a theme that includes all the major abiotic and biotic factors
influencing this ecosystem. Our central hypothesis is that fire, grazing and
climatic variability are essential and responsible for the structure and
function of tallgrass prairie. In contrast to many other grasslands where
ecological processes are constrained by a single resource (e.g., water),
organismic to ecosystem processes and dynamics in tallgrass prairie are products
of a variety of limiting resources (water, light, nitrogen). Variability in, and
switching among, these primary limiting resources are caused by both present and
historical fire, grazing and climatic regimes. As a result of this complexity,
and because grazing and fire regimes are managed in grassland systems worldwide,
data from the Konza Prairie LTER program have relevance not only for
understanding this grassland, but for broader ecological issues such as
stability diversity questions and interactions between land-use, biodiversity
and climate change. The proposed research includes continuation of long-term
fire and grazing studies as well as short-term studies focused on key processes
and mechanisms. Proposed new research includes studies of the effect of fire
season, a fire-treatment reversal experiment in which watersheds that have been
annually burned or unburned for 20 years will have their treatments reversed,
comparative studies of bison vs. cattle as the dominant grazers, and a long-term
study of how grazing, fire, climatic variability and agriculture affect annual
carbon, water and energy budgets in tallgrass prairie. A key question addressed
by the latter study is whether or not tallgrass prairie soils are a sink or
source for carbon and how land-use (fire, grazing) and climate affects the
carbon budget.