* 9632277
* (ESH) Collaborative Research: Lake Quaternary Climatic and  Glacial History of Africa from Cosmogenic Dating of         Glacial and Lake Deposits
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/1996,08/31/2000
* Marek Zreda, University of Arizona
* Continuing Grant
* H. Richard Lane
* 08/31/2000
* USD 225,602.00

9632277 Zreda Reconstruction of the timing and extent of past glaciers and
closed-basin lakes is critical for understanding regional and global climatic
changes during the Quaternary. Such data are critically needed in the tropics,
and equatorial Africa in particular, because of considerable discrepancy between
paleoclimates deduced from terrestrial records and those calculated using
general circulation models. Development of high quality terrestrial
paleoclimatic data bases is one of the primary research needs in
paleoclimatology. The proposed research contributes to fulfilling these needs by
providing accurately dated, quantitative climatic proxy data for climatically
sensitive locations in the equatorial and subequatorial Africa. Glacial deposits
have been recognized and mapped in alpine regions of subtropical northwestern
(the High Atlas) and tropical east-central Africa (Kenya and Kilimanjaro, among
others). At these locations, multiple moraine systems record past glacier extent
and provide an important proxy of previous climatic fluctuations. Very few of
these landforms have been numerically dated because of lack of datable material
associated with glacial deposits. Consequently, local chronologies have been
based mainly on stratigraphic relationships between landforms and comparative
relative weathering studies. We propose to use cosmogenic isotope dating methods
(36Cl,10Be, 26Al,14C, 21Ne and 3He) to establish chronology of glaciations in
Africa for the past 100,000 years or more. We also plan to use cosmogenic
nuclides to date paleolake shorelines from accessible locations where strand
lines are well preserved and have appropriate surfaces to date. High resolution
glacial and lake-level chronologies from these sensitive locations should
provide important data relevant to understanding the factors controlling late
Quaternary climates in equatorial and subtropical regions of Africa. The final
goal of the proposed project is to synthesize the geochronological inf ormation
obtained from the above sources into a coherent paleoclimatic record and to
place this regional reconstruction in the context of global climate change in
the late Quaternary. Our geological and paleoclimatic data collected in Africa
will contribute to the construction of the global database of Pleistocene
glaciations based on cosmogenic dating terrestrial deposits. The results will be
valuable for researchers in the areas of Quaternary geology, geomorphology,
glaciology, geochemistry, paleoclimatology, atmospheric sciences and hydrology.
??