* 9632716
* Materials Research Science and Engineering Center
* MPS,DMR
* 09/15/1996,03/31/2002
* Philip Pincus, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Cooperative Agreement
* Carmen I. Huber
* 03/31/2002
* USD 12,647,560.00

9632716 Cheetham The Materials Research Science and Engineering Center (MRSEC)
at the University of California Santa Barbara supports research in the area of
complex materials in four interdisciplinary groups. One group investigating
complex fluids is focused on the creation and control of biomolecular materials.
The emphasis is on biomolecular materials whose microstructure can be controlled
for possible applications to the development of heat-proof proteins, artificial
tissue, novel drug delivery systems, and biogels. A second group investigating
solution synthesis of inorganics at molecular and atomic interfaces seeks to
understand basic mechanisms of these processes and to explore the synthesis of
new materials with applications to electro-optics, catalysis, and biotechnology.
Heterogeneous polymeric structures are investigated by a third group. These
structures include heterogeneous block copolymers for potential biomedical
applications and network blends for polymer light-emitting electrochemical
cells. Strongly non-equilibri um phenomena in complex materials are investigated
by a fourth group that has a strong theoretical component focused on issues of
practical importance in the materials area with a common theme of nonlinearity.
Planned studies include fundamental mechanisms of friction, dynamics of
fracture, including both conventional fracture and seismic events, the
structural evolution of thin films, and phase transitions in reacting polymers.
The MRSEC supports the development, operation and maintenance of shared
experimental facilities for materials research. It provides seed funding for
exploratory research and emerging areas, and fosters research participation by
undergraduates. The MRSEC has strong industrial links and an educational
outreach program. The educational program includes the Science Partnership for
School Innovation and an internship program involving instructors and students
from a local city college. The Center currently supports 30 senior
investigators, 10 postdoctoral research associates, 5 technicians or other
professionals, 35 graduate students, and 25 undergraduates. The MRSEC is
directed by Professor Anthony K. Cheetham. %%% The Materials Research Science
and Engineering Center (PARSEC) at the University of California Santa Barbara
supports research in the area of complex materials in four interdisciplinary
groups. One group investigating complex fluids is focused on the creation and
control of biomolecular materials whose microstructure can be controlled for
possible applications to the development of heat-proof proteins, artificial
tissue, and novel drug delivery systems. A second group investigating synthesis
of inorganics at molecular and atomic interfaces seeks to understand basic
mechanisms of these processes and to explore the synthesis of new materials with
applications to electro-optics, catalysis, and biotechnology. Heterogeneous
polymeric structures are investigated by a third groupwith potential biomedical
applications and polymer light-emitting electrochemical cells. Strongly non-
equilibrium phenomena in complex materials are investigated by a fourth group
that has a strong theoretical component focused on issues of practical
importance in the materials area. Planned studies include fundamental mechanisms
of friction, dynamics of fracture, including both conventional fracture and
seismic events, the structural evolution of thin films, and phase transitions in
reacting polymers. The MRSEC supports the development, operation and maintenance
of shared experimental facilities for materials research. It provides seed
funding for exploratory research and emerging areas, and fosters research
participation by undergraduates. The MRSEC has strong industrial links and an
educational outreach program. The educational program includes the Science
Partnership for School Innovation and an internship program involving
instructors and students from a local city college The Center currently supports
30 s enior investigators, 10 postdoctoral research associates, 5 technicians or
other professionals, 35 graduate students, and 25 undergraduates. The MRSEC is
directed by Professor Anthony K. Cheetham. *** _