* 9632960
* Contrast Resolution Enhancement for the Early Detection of  Breast Tumors by Ultrasound
* NONE,NONE
* 07/15/1996,06/30/1998
* Bernard Steinberg, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Janice M. Jenkins
* 06/30/1998
* USD 54,400.00

9632960 Steinberg This project will test a new concept that may lead to early
detection of tumors in breasts by echo ultrasound. Early detection by ultrasound
or any other imaging modality requires high spatial resolution and high contrast
resolution. Modern ultrasound systems can detect objects as small as 1 mm when
used in the hands of skilled operators. Contrast resolution of ultrasound is
excellent relative to x-ray mammography (the gold standard for breast cancer
screening tests), and ultrasound is used in distinguishing dense breast tumors
from clear, liquid-filled cysts, provided the cysts are large enough to be
distinguished from noise (speckle) in the image. Therefore, contrast resolution
becomes the ultimate limiting factor in high quality echo ultrasound. The
elimination of speckle is the goal of the project. This project addresses
contrast resolution and offers a way materially to improve it using a novel,
automatic signal processor instrument with real-time potential. The instrument,
which was developed during a radar study of 3-D high resolution imagery, has
strong potential for discriminating between soft breast tissue and dense tissue
typical of lesions (tumors). Success with the project would provide the ability
of ultrasound systems to detect breast cancer at an earlier stage and therefore
improve the probability of long term survival. This award is made under the
guidelines applicable to Small Grants for Exploratory Research. ***