* 9632300
* STTR PHASE I:  Hybrid Optical Module with a Narrowband      Electro-Optically Tunable Filter
* TIP,TI
* 09/15/1996,08/31/1997
* Robert Tavlykaev, Advanced Photonics Technology, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Darryl G. Gorman
* 08/31/1997
* USD 100,000.00

*** 9632300 Tavlykaev This STTR Phase I project will develop a waveguide grating
filter device with enhanced performance that can meet the needs of most complex
WDM systems. This filter will then be coupled to an external laser source to
form a hybrid optical module with tunable wavelength for a number of practical
applications. This new technology, developed in conjunction with the University
of Florida, will then be transferred to Advanced Photonics Technology Inc. for
further refinement to a precommercial level. Wavelength-selective filters in the
integrated-optic embodiment are the most promising candidates for deployment in
Wavelength-Division-Multiplexed networks. A waveguide grating filter appears to
be very promising on account of its extreme wavelength sensitivity and
compactness. However, the performance of practical devices has thus far been
severely limited by the lack of high-reflectance waveguide gratings. The unique
feature of the proposed effort in achieving high-reflectance gratings is the use
of a Silicon overlayer to substantially perturb the mode index of an optical
waveguide underneath it without adding an additional mode loss. Silicon has been
selected on account of its large refractive index, processibility, and low cost.
The primary commercial application of waveguide grating filters is in
Wavelength-Division-Multiplexed networks. Another most important application is
the development of compact and efficient waveguide lasers and amplifiers. ***