* 9632443
* High-Performance Composite Infrastructural Systems UtilizingAdvanced Cementitious Composites
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/1996,02/28/2002
* Paul Zia, North Carolina State University
* Continuing Grant
* Vijaya Gopu
* 02/28/2002
* USD 219,648.00

Until the present, major progress has been made in the field of high-performance
materials, while comparatively little has been done in the development of
advanced infrastructural systems. The goal of this research project is to
develop innovative, partially-cast-in-place High-Performance Composite Frame
Systems (HPCFSs) by selectively using high-performance materials, including: (1)
continuous fiber-mat High Performance Fiber Reinforced Concretes (HPFRCs) called
Slurry Infiltrated Mat Concrete (SIMCON), (2) discontinuous fiber HPFRCs called
slurry Infiltrated Fiber Concrete (SIFCON), and (3) High Strength - Lightweight
Aggregate Fiber Reinforced Concrete (HS-LWA FRC). The research will focus on the
development of high-performance composite (A) column members, (B) beam members,
and (C) beam-column sub-assemblages consisting of both experimental and
analytical components. Behavior under (a) service loads and (b) service loads
combined with laterally applied reversed-cyclic loading will be investigated.
Partially cast-in-place HPCFS will be created by developing novel, stay-in-place
formwork elements made by encasing steel members (e.g., light steel shapes
and/or steel tubes) into HPFRCs. The stay-in-place formwork will also act as
surface reinforcement, thus replacing conventional reinforcing bars. The `core`
of the member will be cast-in-place using HS-LWA FRC. These developments are
expected to lead to: (1) simpler, faster and more cost-effective construction,
(2) improved structural performance, (3) reduction in element size and weight
leading to the reduction in dead load, earthquake induced loading and an
increase in usable floor space, and (4) improved durability of the structure.
This is a project supported under the second-year program of research initiative
on `Composite and Hybrid Structures`, NSF 94-154.