* 9632284
* Object Store Garbage Collection
* CSE,IIS
* 08/15/1996,07/31/1999
* J. Eliot Moss, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Maria Zemankova
* 07/31/1999
* USD 200,820.00

The project adapts and extends an existing block-by-block main-memory garbage
collection scheme, called Mature Object Space, for use in collecting persistent
object stores. The scheme will locate and reclaim database memory containing no
longer accessible data. This will relieve programmers of the burdensome and
error-prone task of indicating which memory can be reused, thus allowing better
programming styles. The algorithm is the first to work block by block (important
for integrating nicely with databases) and to guarantee to find all inaccessible
memory. It can also help reorganize (recluster) data and thus improve store
performance. The algorithm is incremental, with a coarse granularity (collecting
one block at a time). A significant contribution of the research is the
algorithm itself. Perhaps more significant will be the implementation and
measurement of the algorithm, and investigation of how to incorporate
reclustering. The resulting storage management techniques will be suitable for
incorporation into practical database management systems, guaranteeing that
storage is not `lost` but eventually `found` and `recycled` for further use. The
techniques will be substantially independent of storage management policy,
allowing policy to be chosen by database implementors and application builders
to best suit their needs.