* 9632309
* Multigrid Methods for Simulation of Complex Materials
* MPS,CHE
* 08/15/1996,07/31/1998
* Thomas Beck, University of Cincinnati Main Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Richard Hilderbrandt
* 07/31/1998
* USD 189,245.00

Thomas Beck, University of Cincinnati, is funded by a grant from the Theoretical
and Computational Chemistry Program to continue his work in the use of multigrid
methods for simulations of complex materials. Beck will continue his development
of multigrid methods for solving the Kohn-Sham equations of density functional
theory and the Poisson electrostatic equation. New algorithms will be developed
for use on massively parallel computers such as the Cray T3D. Once the methods
have been developed test computations will be carried out on small molecules and
periodic lattice systems for direct comparison with existing ab initio and plane
wave computations. Applications include: 1) calculations involving the chemical
binding of sulfur compounds on gold surfaces; and 2) Monte Carlo simulations to
compute thermodynamic information in hydrogen and hydrogen/helium plasmas at
high pressures not available to experiment. Understanding chemical processes at
the molecular level requires a quantum treatment to accurately describe chemical
bonds and rearrangements occuring in complex condensed phase environments.
Existing algorithms for studying these processes have been limited both by the
inherent difficulties in such calculations and by the scaling properties of the
methods. The multigrid methods being pursued by Beck offer promising
alternatives to more traditional electronic structure approaches due to their
rigorous linear scaling capabilities and computational flexibility.