* 9632316
* Global Optimization and Parallel Processing of              Nonlinear Problems in Engineering Applications
* CSE,CCF
* 07/15/1996,12/31/1999
* Benjamin Wah, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* None
* 12/31/1999
* USD 318,229.00

The objective of this project is to develop an efficient nonlinear optimization
method - NOVEL: Nonlinear Optimization Via External Lead - and the supporting
hardware/software to solve large-scale nonlinear optimization problems in
operations research, digital signal processing, and neural-network learning.
Such a method will allow many important application problems in these areas to
be solved better as well as faster than existing methods. The method first
transforms nonlinear constrained optimization problems using Lagrange
multipliers into unconstrained optimization problems. This transformation allows
both constrained and unconstrained problems to be solved in a unified framework.
The key idea of the method is to use a user-defined trace to pull a search out
of a local optimum (a local saddle point in constrained optimization and a local
minimum in unconstrained optimization) without having to restart it from a new
starting point. The proposed method has a good balance between global search and
local search. In global search, NOVEL relies on two counteracting forces: local
gradient information that drives the search to a local optimum, and a
deterministic trace that leads the search out of a local optimum once it gets
there. The effect of the trace on the search trajectory is expressed in terms of
the distance between the current position of the trajectory and that of the
trace. Good starting points identified in the global-search phase are then
searched more extensively using pure local searches. The proposed research
consists of four aspects: refinement of the NOVEL method, parallel processing,
extension to mixed-nonlinear optimization problems, and applications of the
methods developed to solve problems in operations research, digital signal
processing, and neural-network learning.