* 9632118
* GOALI: An Improved Method for Computing Zero-Sequence       Impedance of An Underground Pipe-Type Cable
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/1996,07/31/2000
* Xiao-Bang Xu, Clemson University
* Standard Grant
* Marija Ilic
* 07/31/2000
* USD 93,588.00

9632118 Xu Underground pipe-type cables in power transmission systems are widely
used in urban areas. To protect such systems, it is necessary for the utilities
to be able to accurately calculate fault currents in the system. An accurate
calculation of fault currents requires precise knowledge of the impedance of the
underground cables. The objective of the proposed research project is to develop
an improved method for computing zero-sequence impedance of underground pipe-
type cables. The pipe of the cable is grounded at both ends and the phase
currents may be unbalanced. Since the pipe is normally made of steel which is a
nonlinear magnetic material, special attention will be paid to its nonlinear B-H
characteristic and an iterative procedure will be employed to determine the
varying permeability in the steel pipe. The zero- sequence impedance can be
computed based on information of the nonuniform current distribution in the
phase conductors as well as the electric field intensity and the total current
in the steel pipe. Therefore, it is proposed that the major effort be devoted to
obtaining the necessary information in these two respects. In the determination
of the nonuniform current distribution in the phase conductors, a Fourier series
technique developed in the proposer's previous research project will be
employed, taking into account the skin effect, the proximity effect and the
influence of the steel pipe. To compute the electric field intensity and the
total current in the steel pipe, including the circulating current and the
returning zero-sequence current, a set of equations are formulated based on
Faraday's law. The equations formulated will be solved by an iterative
procedure. To validate the numerical techniques developed, it is proposed that
measurement of zero- sequence impedance be performed. The computational results
will be compared with the measurement data. ***