* 9632391
* Dynamics of Mediated Electrochemical Synthesis in           Microemulsions
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/1996,12/31/2000
* James Rusling, University of Connecticut
* Continuing Grant
* Geoffrey Prentice
* 12/31/2000
* USD 360,000.00

ABSTRACT CTS-9632391 The goal of this project is to develop a fundamental
understanding of how surface dynamics on electrodes and kinetics in
microemulsions influence control of reactivity in mediated electrochemical
syntheses. Electrochemical studies are used to relate surfactant and reactant
adsorption-desorption dynamics on electrode surf aces to catalytic reaction
rates. The mediated reactions include carbon-carbon coupling, cyclizations, and
olefin production. Catalytic efficiencies of mediators in the bulk fluid using
bare carbon electrodes will be compared with those of new catalytic electrodes
designed specifically to achieve high reaction rates in microemulsions.
Macrocyclic metal complexes that catalyze reactions by efficient inner sphere
pathways, such as vitamin B12 and Cobalt-, iron-, and nickel-porphyrins, are
used as mediators. Layer-by-layer electrode coating strategies based on
polymeric silicon-oxygen-carbon linkages to carbon electrodes are compared with
a previously developed polymer deposition method. Electroanalytical methods are
used to compare reaction rates in microemulsions and homogeneous organic
solvents and catalytic electrodes. Synthetic electrolyses in a stirred batch
electrochemical reactor with product analysis are used to assess the practical
utility of the systems, and to optimize yields and reactant conversion rates.
Compositions of microemulsions and properties of catalytic coatings are tuned
for best reaction rates and yields for key reactions. Surface dynamics of
reactants and surfactants on electrodes are measured by time-resolved flow
voltammetry on bare and catalytic electrodes. Methods and theory developed
earlier are employed. Molecular interactions between co-adsorbates will be
assessed via Frumkin interaction parameters obtained from wave voltammetry. As
possible limiting factors for the rates of mediated reactions, reactant and
surfactant exit and entry rates are estimated for the new catalytic films using
electroactive probes. Correlations between rates of all surface dynamic events
and rates of mediated synthetic reactions are sought. The objective of this work
is to provide fundamental guidance for the future design of efficient mediated
electrochemical synthetic processes in relatively inexpensive, low toxicity,
water-based fluid media. Mediated electrochemical addition reactions are major
targets because these atom-economical processes can be utilized to prepare
chemicals of many classes, including lactones, pheromones, prostaglandins,
C-glycosides, optically active olefins and alcohols, and cyclic molecules. New
catalytic surfaces design specifically for microemulsions combined with kinetic
control by fluid composition may provide a basis for future cost-effective,
environmentally benign processes for the synthesis of high value chemicals.