* 9632525
* Materials Research Science and Engineering Center:  Polymersat Engineered Interfaces
* MPS,DMR
* 09/15/1996,04/30/2002
* Miriam Rafailovich, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Cooperative Agreement
* Ulrich Strom
* 04/30/2002
* USD 3,039,188.00

9632525 Rafailovich This Materials Research Science and Engineering Center
(MRSEC) at the University of New York at Stony Brook supports research in the
area of polymer thin films at engineered interfaces. The MRSEC is a
collaborative activity between researchers at a number of institutions in the
New York metropolitan area, including Brookhaven National Laboratory,
Polytechnic University, Queens College, Lehman College, and two industrial
research and development centers. The research is carried out in one
interdisciplinary research group. The focus of the Center is the design of
polymer thin film properties through precise control of interfacial structure. A
central goal of the Center is to address technological problems related to
polymer thin films, and to develop cutting-edge enabling technologies that take
existing polymeric systems and markedly improve their properties. The MRSEC
supports the development, operation and maintenance of shared experimental
facilities for materials research. It provides seed funding for exploratory
research and emerging areas, and fosters research participation by
undergraduates. The MRSEC has strong industrial links and an educational
outreach program from the pre-college to the graduate level. The Center
currently supports 12 senior investigators, 3 postdoctoral research associates,
10 graduate students, and 6 undergraduates. The MRSEC is directed by Professor
Miriam Rafailovich. %%% This Materials Research Science and Engineering Center
(MRSEC) at the University of New York at Stony Brook supports research in the
area of polymer thin films at engineered interfaces. The MRSEC is a
collaborative activity between researchers at a number of institutions in the
New York metropolitan area, including Brookhaven National Laboratory,
Polytechnic University, Queens College, Lehman College, and two industrial
research and development centers. The research is carried out in one
interdisciplinary research group. The focus of t he Center is the design of
polymer thin film properties through precise control of interfacial structure. A
central goal of the Center is to address technological problems related to
polymer thin films, and to develop cutting-edge enabling technologies that take
existing polymeric systems and markedly improve their properties. The MRSEC
supports the development, operation and maintenance of shared experimental
facilities for materials research. It provides seed funding for exploratory
research and emerging areas, and fosters research participation by
undergraduates. The MRSEC has strong industrial links and an educational
outreach program from the pre-college to the graduate level. The Center
currently supports 12 senior investigators, 3 postdoctoral research associates,
10 graduate students, and 6 undergraduates. The MRSEC is directed by Professor
Miriam Rafailovich. ***