* 9632263
* STTR PHASE I:  Diode-Pumpable Compact Blue Fiber Lasers for Optical Data Storage and Printing Applications
* TIP,TI
* 09/01/1996,10/31/1997
* Ravinder Jain, Uniphase Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Darryl G. Gorman
* 10/31/1997
* USD 99,995.00

*** 9632263 Xie This STTR Phase I propject describes two novel designs for
diode-pumped, compact, efficient, blue laser sources. Such sources are needed in
many applications including high density optical data storage, laser printing,
and free space optical communication. Presently, such compact and efficient
sources are not commercially available for these applications. The designs
described in this proposal are based on upconversion lasing in rare-earth doped
fluorozirconate (ZBLAN) glass fiber. The first is a Pr/Yb co-doped fiber which
has previously been demonstrated as a laser operating at red, orange, green and
blue wavelengths. The blue laser output power, however, was severely limited due
to competing transitions from a common upper laser level. Our solution to the
problem is described and will be tested and developed in this proposal. The
second upconversion blue fiber laser to be developed in this proposal is based
on Tm doped ZBLAN fiber. This laser has also been demonstrated, but lacks a
convenient, scalable, diode-based pump source for commercialization. In this
project, a novel and efficient pump source will be developed and demonstrated.
Prototype laser systems for each of the two designs mentioned will be
constructed and tested for future development Potential applications are in the
fields of optical data storage, printing applications, free space optical
communications, optical display, spectroscopy, flow cytometry, molecular
biology, high performance imaging, and semiconductor inspection. ***