* 9632929
* Advancing the Manufacturing of High Precision Optics by     Replication in Different Substrate Materials
* ENG,ECCS
* 03/15/1997,07/31/2000
* Sing Lee, University of California-San Diego
* Continuing Grant
* Gernot S. Pomrenke
* 07/31/2000
* USD 330,000.00

9632929 Lee Two new replication techniques will be developed to reduce the costs
of manufacturing precision diffractive gratings and optics, binary optics,
micro-optics and computer generated holograms. These replication techniques will
show their advantages specially when they are non centro-symmetric, their
aperture areas are not circular (e.g. square or hexagonal), and/or they are in
an array format with precise center-to center spacings. The first technique can
be applied to replicate infrared as well as visible-uv precision optics on
environmentally durable substrates. It requires first generating a gray level
mask with only one writing step of an electron beam by controlling the electron
dosage spatially. Then, using this gray level mask, it requires for each copy
only one iteration of exposing the analog photoresist and transferring the
analog photoresist pattern into the substrate by chemically assisted ion beam
etching (CAIBE). Since multiple substrates can be etched simultaneously, the
CAIBE is a batch process and the etching cost for each copy is reduced.
Moreover, since the same gray level mask can be used over and over again for
making many copies with a projection aligner, the cost of generating the gray
level mask will be spread over the number of copies. The copies of diffractive
optics can be in different (infrared-uv) substrate materials. The second
replication technique starts with a master on quartz or glass. Replica are made
from liquid photopolymer by molding. Diffractive optics on curved surfaces or
with integrated receptacles can be replicated with liquid photopolymer to work
in the visible range. Being able to put diffractive optics on curved surfaces
allows the optical designers additional degrees of freedom for aberration
removal; being able to replicate diffractive optics with integrated receptacles
reduces the assembly costs. In other words, our overall technical objectives
will be demonstrating the feasibility of these two replication techniques in
different mater ials as well as studying the manufacturing issues. Several
industrial collaborators have shown strong interests in the proposed
investigations. The overall effort will be divided approximately as follows: 70%
to the first replication technique and 30% to the second.