* 9632448
* Collabortive Research:  Understanding, Improving and        Combining Subjective Judgements
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/1996,07/31/2000
* David Budescu, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Rodney R. Cocking
* 07/31/2000
* USD 203,811.00

9632448 BUDESCU Many decisions under uncertainty depend on expert judgments,
because suitable statistical information is lacking. Examples include military
and international policy contexts, business forecasting, medical diagnosis, and
earthquake prediction. Experts do not always agree with each other, nor do they
always express themselves in ways that best reflect their underlying opinions.
This research will develop new and improved procedures for eliciting and
combining their judgments to yield the most accurate and diagnostic conclusions.
The project will investigate factors that affect human judgment under conditions
of incomplete knowledge. The research also will develop new analytic procedures
for such judgments, which take into account the sources and nature of the random
error components that are normally present. One line of the project will ask
why, if people are generally truly overconfident, they appear systematically
underconfident given specific procedures and methods of analysis. A second line
will explore why, at least for some judgment tasks, the way in which people
think about uncertain information depends on the type of response they are
required to give. A third line will investigate how people learn to make
probability estimates and how feedback affects those estimates. The goal of all
three lines of research is to develop a cognitive model of human information
processing under uncertainty that applies to a broad range of situations, and
can be expressed mathematically. One application of the mathematical model to be
developed is to serve as a basis for combining multiple subjective estimates. A
fourth line of work will pursue this goal. This approach is novel, as no other
approach to the issue of combining judgments has depended on a model of the
individual judge. ***