* 9632515
* Structure and Dynamics of Hydrogen Bonds and Related        Interactions
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/1996,07/31/1999
* John Bevan, Texas A&M Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Janice M. Hicks
* 07/31/1999
* USD 270,000.00

In this project in the Experimental Physical Chemistry Program of the Chemistry
Division, Bevan and Lucchese perform an experimental and theoretical study of
hydrogen-bonded and related proton-donor-proton acceptor dimer moleculess.
Vibrational- and rotational-state-resolved infrared spectroscopy will be
combined with theoretical modeling to investigate the nature of the interactions
including geometries displaced from those occupied by the ground state.
Complexes of homologous series of hydrogen halides and isoelectronic proton
donors will be examined to gain a quantitative understanding of the hydrogen
bond and related interactions in systems spanning Group VII elements. Two
absorption spectrometers, one an FTIR instrument and the other an infrared diode
laser spectrometer, both with supersonic slit-jet sample sources, will be used
to study small (HX)n clusters and rare-gas-HX dimers. The range of applicability
of the Buckingham-Fowler (B-F) electrostatic-plus-hard-sphere interaction model
will be considered. Hydrogen bonds are not really chemical bonds such as exist
in molecules, but rather they are weaker attractions between the hydrogen atoms
of one molecule and other atoms in a neighboring, or even in the same, molecule.
These interactions strongly affect such phenomena as the boiling point of water,
the melting point of ice, and the structure of strands of DNA and have an impact
in such wide-ranging disciplines as biochemistry, chemistry, genetics, and
advanced materials technology. The results from these studies will help us
understand better the nature of hydrogen bonds.