* 9632117
* Mathematical Sciences:  "Statistical Methods for            Summarizing and Combining Gene Maps"
* NONE,NONE
* 11/01/1996,04/30/1999
* Shili Lin, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Standard Grant
* Lloyd E. Douglas
* 04/30/1999
* USD 17,999.00

The past few years have seen rapid advancements in developing and constructing
gene maps for humans. Because these maps are constructed from different sources
of data and methods, a search of the genome databases may result in several
different maps on the same group of markers. Therefore, it is important to
combine (integrate) them to form consensus maps so that they can then be used
for mapping new genes. The long-term objective of this project is to develop
sound statistically-based procedures for integrating human gene maps. This
includes integrating genetic maps from several studies, and integrating genetic
maps with a variety of other maps, including physical maps and radiation hybrid
maps. As a first step, the focus is to develop a workable statistical procedure
for summarizing genetic maps, including summary statements of uncertainty about
the order of loci and genetic distances from each study; and to develop
statistical procedure for integrating genetic maps from different independent
studies. The specific aim of the current proposal is to carry out a preliminary
study to determine whether Markov chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) methods are feasible
in addressing these issues. We plan to first explore various possibilities of
constructing an efficient MCMC scheme for sampling from the distribution of
interest. This includes studying sensitivities of prior distributions,
efficiencies of proposal distributions, and feasibility of existing methods for
ensuring irreducibility in the current application. We will then consider what
summaries should be retained from MCMC outputs, and what statistical procedures
should be employed to combine the summaries from separate MCMC runs.