* 9632521
* Materials Research Science and Engineering Center on Oxide  Thin Films, Probes and Surfaces
* MPS,DMR
* 09/15/1996,05/31/2001
* Ellen Williams, University of Maryland, College Park
* Cooperative Agreement
* Ulrich Strom
* 05/31/2001
* USD 7,051,400.00

9632521 Williams The Materials Research Science and Engineering Center (MRSEC)
at the University of Maryland supports interactive research in two
interdisciplinary groups focusing on oxides, thin films, and novel surface
spectroscopic probes. One of the research groups emphasizes fundamental
materials issues in ferroelectric thin film heterostructures , related device
problems of technological relevance, and fundamental materials physics of
perovskite materials that exhibit unusually large ("colossal") magneto-
resistance. The second group investigates the structure of surfaces on length
scales from nanometers to microns, with the goal of developing a predictive
understanding of surface morphology. The work may ultimately find practical
application in micro-electronics, thin film growth, lubrication, catalysis, and
other areas. A common theme for both groups is the development, optimization and
utilization of novel surface sensitive tools to measure structural, magnetic,
and electrical properties at microscopic length scales. The MRSEC supports the
development, operation and maintenance of shared experimental facilities for
materials research. It provides seed funding for exploratory research and
fosters research participation by undergraduates. The Center is associated with
an educational outreach program designed to enlighten pre-college and
undergraduate students about science and the role of the center's research
program in the modern world. The MRSEC also supports enhanced collaboration with
industry, shared experimental facilities that also support research not directly
funded by the MRSEC, and seed funding for exploratory research. The Center
currently supports about 15 senior investigators, 7 postdoctoral research
associates, 1 technician or other professional, 12 graduate students, and 8
undergraduates. The MRSEC is directed by Professor Ellen D. Williams. %%% The
Materials Research Science and Engineering Center (MRSEC) at the University of
Maryland supports interactive research in two interdisciplinary groups focusing
on oxides, thin films, and novel surface spectroscopic probes. One of the
research groups emphasizes fundamental materials issues in ferroelectric thin
film heterostructures , related device problems of technological relevance, and
fundamental materials physics of perovskite materials that exhibit unusually
large ("colossal") magneto- resistance. The second group investigates the
structure of surfaces on length scales from nanometers to microns, with the goal
of developing a predictive understanding of surface morphology. The work may
ultimately find practical application in micro-electronics, thin film growth,
lubrication, catalysis, and other areas. A common theme for both groups is the
development, optimization and utilization of novel surface sensitive tools to
measure structural, magnetic, and electrical properties at microscopic length
scales. The MRSEC supports the development, operation and maintenance of shared
experimental facilities for materials research. It provides seed funding for
exploratory research and fosters research participation by undergraduates. The
Center is associated with an educational outreach program designed to enlighten
pre-college and undergraduate students about science and the role of the
center's research program in the modern world. The MRSEC also supports enhanced
collaboration with industry, shared experimental facilities that also support
research not directly funded by the MRSEC, and seed funding for exploratory
research. The Center currently supports about 15 senior investigators, 7
postdoctoral research associates, 1 technician or other professional, 12
graduate students, and 8 undergraduates. The MRSEC is directed by Professor
Ellen D. Williams. ***