* 9632252
* Microscopy and Modeling of Collective Behavior during Ion   Beam Processing of Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 07/15/1996,01/31/2000
* David Cahill, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* LaVerne D. Hess
* 01/31/2000
* USD 329,867.00

9632252 Cahill This research project aims for fundamental understanding of ion-
induced surface damage using atomic resolution STM and molecular dynamics(MD)
computer simulation methods. The approach is to characterize a wide variety of
materials and correlate the damage observed using the STM to MD simulations of
the ion-surface collisions; the research is also oriented toward critically
testing some of the assumptions commonly made in MD simulations. Defect
generation in solids is a complex many-body process which cannot be
theoretically treated in the binary collision approximation. Collective
behaviors such as thermal spikes play a critical role in determining defect
structures and are increasingly important for precision ion-beam processing
applications such as shallow implant doping of semiconductors. A variety of
materials(Ge, Si, Au, Pt, Cu, Ni, GaAs, GaN and amorphous NiZr) will be grown by
MBE and examined by STM for ion impacts using Ga, In, and Au in the energy range
of 1 keV to 40 keV. MD simulations will be performed for 5-15 keV impacts on Ge,
Pt, and amorphous Cu to elucidate the mechanisms of surface damage. %%% The
research will contribute basic materials science knowledge at a fundamental
level of broad technological relevance to advanced electronic materials
processing. Additionally, the knowledge and understanding gained from this
research project is expected to contribute in a general way to improving the
performance of advanced devices and circuits by providing a fundamental
understanding and a basis for designing and processing more advanced materials
and devices. An important feature of the program is the integration of research
and education through the training of students in a fundamentally and
technologically significant area. ***