* 9632202
* Highly Reduced Complexes: C-C Bond Forming Reactions of     Arenes Coordinated to Manganese (-I)
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/1996,06/30/2000
* N. John Cooper, University of Pittsburgh
* Continuing Grant
* Timothy Patten
* 06/30/2000
* USD 370,000.00

Dr. N. John Cooper, Department of Chemistry, University of Pittsburgh, is
supported by the Inorganic, Bioinorganic, and Organometallic Program of the
Chemistry Division for studies of highly reduced complexes of manganese. The
primary objective of this project is to use the unusual reactivity of a
tetrahapto Mn(-I) benzene complex to develop new reactions of arenes coordinated
to transition metals. The electrophilicity of cationic reagents, such as the
hexahapto Mn(I) complex, iminium salts, and cationic cycloheptatrienyl
complexes, will be used to drive additions to the Mn(-I) complex. These
additions are expected to produce new biaryl ligands, amino alkyl substituted
ligands, and 6:4:7 fused ring systems. Fundamental studies of the mechanism and
the scope of these additions will be explored using ketenes, and reactions with
keteniminium salts will be tested to force entry into (2+2) additions which lead
to fusion of a 4-membered carbon ring on to the benzene nucleus. Strategies for
the removal of the diene ligands from the metal center will also be
investigated. The reactions proposed share several characeristics which are
likely to make them of strategic value in organic synthesis; all involve
formation of new C-C bonds to the benzene nucleus, many introduce useful
functional groups for synthesis, all are likely to be stereospecific, and most
should be accessible with other substituents on the arene nucleus. Benzene is
one of the most central molecules in chemistry, and the broader significance of
the proposed ressarch is that it will lead to new reactions of benzene which
cannot be achieved through traditional organic methods. These studies will shed
new light on carbon-carbon bond forming reactions to benzene, and the results
are expected to be of general utility to the field of organic synthesis.