* 9632390
* Numerical Study of Interactions Between Mesoscale Convective Systems and Ocean Mixed-Layer in the Western Pacific Warm  Pool Using a Nested-Grid Coupled Ocean-Atmopshere Mesoscale
* GEO,AGS
* 04/15/1997,03/31/2002
* Sethu Raman, North Carolina State University
* Continuing Grant
* Stephan P. Nelson
* 03/31/2002
* USD 340,679.00

9632390 Raman The meteorology over the Western Pacific Ocean is not well-known,
but has a great influence on the global climate. A field program named the
Tropical Ocean Global Atmosphere, Coupled Ocean-Atmosphere Response Experiment
(TOGA COARE) had as one of its objectives to increase understanding of the
characteristics of mesoscale convective systems (MCS) over the Western Pacific.
Of special interest is the potential for MCSs to significantly modify air-sea
momentum, heat and moisture fluxes over a large area relative to that of an
individual cumulonimbus cloud. The Principal Investigator will investigate and
quantitatively describe the interactions between MCSs and the ocean mixed layer
in the Western Pacific warm pool (WPWP) using a nested-grid, coupled ocean-
atmosphere mesoscale model. Specific objectives include: (i) improve
understanding of the effect of the WPWP on the equilibrium and transient
structures of the marine atmospheric boundary layer; (ii) identify and quantify
the feedback effect of wind, air temperature and precipitation associated with
MCSs over the warm pool on the horizontal and vertical density distributions of
the ocean mixed-layer, and on the air-sea heat and moisture fluxes; (iii)
identify and quantify the feedback effect of changes in air-sea heat and
moisture fluxes, sea surface temperature and sea surface temperature gradients
due to convective and mesoscale processes on subsequent development of
convective and mesoscale events; (iv) assimilate important parameters in the
atmospheric and oceanic boundary-layers using a coupled mesoscale model.
Successful completion of this research will assist in improving knowledge of the
impact of MCS on planetary scale events such as El Nino. ***