* 9632844
* MRCE:  Renewal Proposal for Center for Theoretical Studies  of Physical Systems
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/1996,02/28/2003
* Alfred Msezane, Clark Atlanta University
* Cooperative Agreement
* JAMES J. POWLIK
* 02/28/2003
* USD 4,930,886.00

HRD-9632844 Clark Atlanta University A renewal proposal has been submitted on
behalf of the Center for Theoretical Studies of Physical Systems (CTSPS) at
Clark Atlanta University (CAU). During its first 4 plus years of existence,
CTSPS has become a regional resource center surpassing all of its objectives:
prosecution of forefront, basic and applied, research; production of significant
numbers of peer reviewed publications; presentation of research results at
national and international conferences; creation of a sophisticated research
computing facility, including the most powerful CRAY platform in Georgia;
acquisition of $6.2 million dollars in non-NSF federal funding; formation of
academic/corporate research-educational partnerships support of research faculty
from the Atlanta University Center (AUC); hiring of key researchers to
coordinate and stimulate new interdisciplinary interactions; creation of a vital
visiting scientists program; support for important local, national, and
international conferences; production of significant numbers of Ph.D. bound
minority students; creation of a Mobile Physics/Mathematics Demonstration Unit;
and promotion of technology transfer in important areas such as infrared sensor
technology, and image processing (to name a few). These accomplishments have
catapulted CAU s research capacity into a nationally competitive research center
of excellence. CTSPS has become a paradigm for quality, cost-effective, research
and research training in the physical and mathematical sciences, within the AUC.
It has positioned CAU s physics department to become one of the outstanding
computational physics programs in the nation. Efficient use of NSF funded
resources has allowed CTSPS to leverage non-NSF support for expensive items
(i.e. powerful computers, etc.), all dedicated to solving important problems in
diverse areas. The establishment of a world class research center, within an
HBCU environment, continues to positively impact the student body, attracting
many CAU/AUC students from all SEM disciplines. Accordingly, CTSPS is a genuine
national resource whose continued funding would insure the consolidation and
growth of a vital and nationally important research enterprise (in the context
of a newly created HCU institution) contributing to the nation s technological
readiness, and serving as a vital professional role model to the
underrepresented minorities in the sciences, engineering, and mathematics.