* 9632385
* IEEE Conference; Plasma Science; June 3-5, 1996; Boston MA; ICOPS '96 Conference - Graduate Students and Young          Researchers Support
* NONE,NONE
* 06/01/1996,05/31/1997
* Chung Chan, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* Virginia M. Ayres
* 05/31/1997
* USD 6,000.00

Proposal Number: ECS-9632385 Principal Investigator: Chung Chan This proposal
seeks support from NSF for the conference: "the IEEE 1996 International
Conference on Plasma Science (ICOPS)" which will held in Boston, Massachusetts,
June 3-5, 1996. Funds from NSF will be used to partially support costs of
travel, accommodations, and registration fees of young American scientists and
graduate students in cases where their attendance at the meeting would not
otherwise be possible. We have added several new conference activities this
year. A corporate management panel will discuss opportunities in plasma science
from an industrial perspective. This Monday evening session, open to all
attendees, will allow graduate students to see for themselves what various
industries hope to get from plasma science in the next several years. We have
expanded the number of technical session categories to twenty-eight, grouped
under seven super-session categories, with three new session topics: inertial
confinement fusion, thermal plasma processing, and flat panel displays. Two
special sessions on "Computer Simulation of Vacuum Power Tubes" and "Space
Plasma Measurements - New Techniques and Technology" have been introduced to
promote interest in these areas. An afternoon meeting on stimulating "Advanced
Lighting Research" will take place on Wednesday; representatives from government
and industries will discuss new research proposals. This is a special attraction
for graduate students to participate in research that impacts the environment as
well as our US energy policies. With such diverse programs, ICOPS '96 showcases
a steady expansion of plasma science research into critical areas that help
shape the nation's economic well being and industrial competitiveness. The
plenary sessions highlight recent advances in plasma science research as well as
the role of past and future government funding. Students may participate in any
of the above mentioned areas which will enhance and develop their rese arch and
scholarship. ===============