* 9632304
* Modeling Anthropogenic Desiccation of the Aral Sea: A Unique Test of the Predictive Capabilities of a Regional Earth    System Model
* GEO,AGS
* 09/01/1996,08/31/2000
* Lisa Sloan, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Continuing Grant
* Jay S. Fein
* 08/31/2000
* USD 174,894.00

Abstract ATM-9632304 Sloan, Lisa C. University of California, Santa Cruz Title:
Modeling Anthropogenic Desiccation of the Aral Sea: A Unique Test of the
Predictive Capabilities of a Regional Earth System Model The utility of global
and regional earth system models (ESMs) for investigating causes of past climate
change, and predicting impacts of future human activities, depends on how
accurately changes driven by specific perturbations are predicted. This accuracy
is controlled primarily by how well feedbacks are simulated. The accuracy of
ESM-predicted changes is unknown, because previous model validation has been
limited to assessing how well present conditions are reproduced or comparing
paleoclimate model results with sparse and potentially ambiguous proxy data. In
order to conduct a more thorough evaluation of ESM performance, model- predicted
and observed changes resulting from known perturbations over historical
timescales will be compared. In this study, anthropogenic desiccation of the
Aral Sea will be used as a test of the predictive accuracy of a regional ESM
(the RegCM2 and lake model associated with the National Center for Atmospheric
Research) that includes an interactively coupled atmosphere and lake.
Desiccation of the Aral Sea since 1960, resulting from diversion of water for
intensive irrigation in the surrounding basin, has been extensive enough to
produce a regional climatic response. Desiccation of this magnitude should also
produce a model response. Importantly. meteorological and hydrologic
observations that span the interval of desiccation are available so the actual
changes can be quantified. The predictive capabilities of the model will be
tested by comparing model-simulated changes with observed changes that have
occurred between 1960 and 1995. The work consists of three components. First,
observations will be used to quantify regional climate and lake hydrologic
changes that are likely due to Aral Sea desiccation. These obser ved changes
will be used to (i) test model predictions, (ii) directly measure how the
presence of the Aral Sea alters regional climate, (iii) directly measure how
lake-level variations have impacted the Aral Sea's hydrology, and (iv) quantify
regional-scale human impacts. Second, the interactively coupled Reg CM2-lake
model's strengths and weaknesses in predicting changes will be assessed, by
comparing simulated and observed desiccation-induced regional climate and lake
hydrologic changes. In order to gain a more thorough understanding of the causes
for the coupled model's successes and failures, the predictive accuracy of
independent (non-interactive) versions of RegCM2 and the lake model, driven by
meteorological or hydrologic observations, will also be evaluated. Third, the
regional climate effects generated by the Aral for seas of different surface
area, depth and salinity will be calculated. This will allow: (i) quantification
of lake-atmosphere interactions and feedbacks associated with lake-level
variations; (ii) prediction of future climate changes driven by further
anthropogenic Arals Sea desiccation; and (iii) assessment of how much of the
model predicted change between pre- desiccation and -present and present
intervals was due to large-scale meteorological variability. Predictions of
future climate changes resulting from additional desiccation will be prepared
and evaluated in terms of the model's strengths and weaknesses as determined.
This research is important because it seeks to test how well coupled regional
climate lake models predict the impact of human activities on a large shallow
terminal lake and how that feedbacks on the regional and global climate.