* 9632427
* Effects of Predators on Resource Heterogeneity:  A Behavioral Trophic Cascade
* BIO,DEB
* 01/01/1997,12/31/2001
* Angus McIntosh, Rocky Mountain Biological Laboratory
* Standard Grant
* Scott L. Collins
* 12/31/2001
* USD 214,797.00

9632427 McIntosh This research will improve understanding of the influence of
predators on stream communities. Predators often change the foraging behavior of
their prey, because prey avoid dangerous situations. In Rocky Mountain streams
trout feed on aquatic insects, such as mayfly larvae. In trout streams, mayflies
avoid trout predation by foraging and moving mainly at night, when these visual
predators are unable to see them. Thus, avoidance of trout restricts the amount
of time that mayflies can spend foraging. Large predatory stoneflies also feed
on mayflies and confrontations with stoneflies also disrupt mayfly foraging.
Thus, both trout and stoneflies reduce the amount of food that mayflies are able
to consume. Since mayflies eat algae, this reduction in grazing may also affect
the distribution and abundance of algae when predators are present. Through
observations and experiments conducted in natural streams and in stream-side
channels, this research will measure the effects of trout and stoneflies on
mayfly and algal distribution and abundance. It will also determine whether
trout and stoneflies affect how mayflies respond to patchy distributions of
their algal resources, and whether trout change the distribution of algae by
modifying mayfly or stonefly behavior. Finally, data from these experiments will
be used in a simulation model to predict how prey movement under different
predator regimes affects algal patches over time. This work builds on a long-
term data base from 20 years of research in Colorado streams. It will provide a
more detailed understanding of how trout, aquatic insects, and algae function in
balanced communities of pristine systems. This information will be useful in
preserving the biotic integrity of those systems, and restoring the biotic
integrity of more disturbed streams.