* 9632862
* Molecular Structure and Dynamics Beyond the Born-Oppenheimer Approximation
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/1996,07/31/1997
* Edward Grant, Purdue Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Joan M. Frye
* 07/31/1997
* USD 124,462.00

The Experimental Physical Chemistry Program is supporting Edward R. Grant of
Purdue University to continue his research on state-to-state photoionization and
the dynamics of intramolecular relaxation in highly excited states of small
molecules. Systems to be studied include a set of fundamentally important oxy-
hydrocarbon and metal-centered free radicals, relevant as intermediates in air
pollution, combustion and electronic materials processing. Multiresonant
excitation techniques will be used to make high-resolution spectroscopic
measurements of resonant lineshapes and positions for final states coupled to
ionization and dissociation continua. These observations will lay an
experimental foundation for collaborative theoretical work, designed to achieve
a fundamental understanding of the interaction between core-vibrational and
extravalent-electronic degrees of freedom, and to determine the source of mode
selectivity in the vibrational autoionization of polyatomic molecules.
Photoselection and specialized detection methods will also be used to study
rovibrational structure in the electronic ground states of cations and precursor
free-radicals: zero-kinetic-energy threshold photoionization measurements will
establish vibrational-rotational level spectra of closed-shell oxy-hydrocarbon
cations, characterizing potential energy surfaces and anharmonic coupling from
zero-points to thresholds for intramolecular proton transfer. Similar
measurements on Group III hydride cations will follow progressions of
vibrational resonances up to and beyond thresholds for diatomic hydrogen
elimination. Vibration-rotation spectra obtained by state-to-state
photoionization - bleaching methods will address outstanding issues of structure
and symmetry in free-radical ground states. The detailed dynamics of energy
transfer between electronic and internuclear degrees of freedom has significant
practical consequences. In nature, for example, photosynthesis begins with
selective intramolecular energy migration, followed by charge separation and
electron transfer. In an extension of his previous research effort, Grant will
now include studies on main-group free radical systems, chosen for their
relevance to thermochemical issues in combustion, atmospheric chemistry and
electronic materials processing. As an example, the group III radical hydrides
mentioned above are important intermediates in the metallization and p-doping of
silicon devices by chemical vapor deposition.