* 9632707
* Microstructure-Processing-Property-Performance Relationshipsin Integrated Ferroelectric Capacitors: The PLZT/Metallic   Ruthenate/TiN System
* ENG,ECCS
* 03/01/1997,02/28/1998
* Timothy Sands, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Usha Varshney
* 02/28/1998
* USD 62,256.00

9632707 Sands A 12 month comprehensive investigation of microstructures-
processing-property-performance relationship in integrated ferroelectric
(Pb,La)(Zr,Ti)O3 capacitors is undertaken. A capacitor layer structure with
metallic ruthenate (SrRuO3-RuO2-Ru) electrodes and a conductive TiN diffusion
barrier on poly-Si/Si and low-stress Si-N (LSN)/Si substrates will be studied in
the context of applications to Gbit-scale nonvolatile memory and piezoelectric
membranes for sensors and actuators in MicroElectroMechanical Systems (MEMS).
The objectives of the proposed research include: i) development of a model of
microstructure-processing-property relationships based on observed constitutive
relationship between processing variables, microstructural characteristics, and
the resultant properties (e.g., remnant polarization, coercive field, breakdown
field, piezoelectric coefficients, dielectric permittivity and loss tangent);
ii) determination of failure mechanisms and conditions, including the factors
that affect the electrical continuity from the substrate to the bottom
electrode; iii) direct in situ observation of non-180o domain wall motion and
ferroelastic behavior in the transmission electron microscope, and the
relationship between the in situ observations and ex situ studies of electrical
poling behavior at elevated temperature. ***