* 9632974
* Dissertation Research: The Social Construction of           Anti-Stalking Legislation in the American States
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/1996,07/31/1997
* Mary Ruggie, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Harmon M. Hosch
* 07/31/1997
* USD 1,877.00

9632974 Ruggie In the 1990s, American states adopted legislation to make it
illegal to repeatedly follow or harass someone with the intent of bringing about
emotional distress. These "stalking laws" were intended to prevent relatively
harmless situations from escalating into violent confrontations. But many of the
laws were problematic and a number of them were overturned by the courts. This
dissertation addresses three questions. What factors determined whether or not a
state adopted a stalking statute that was overly broad, overly narrow, or used
language that was vague? What factors determined whether or not a state amended
its law? In what ways could problems with the stalking legislation could have
been prevented? Theoretically based hypotheses (diffusion, structural
equivalence and interest group pressure theories) will be tested with data
collected from state governments, the census, newspaper sources, and interest
groups across the US. Analyses will attempt to determine what factors led each
state to amend its law. Standard Regression techniques and Qualitative
Comparative Analysis (QCA) will be used to analyze the data for the first two
questions. Answering the final question will involve an examination of the
legislative history of the first anti-stalking law, passed in October 1990 by
the state of California. %%%%