* 9632847
* International Travel Support Grant:  1996 International     Congress on Membranes and Membrane Processes (ICOM '96)     in Yokohama, Japan
* ENG,CBET
* 08/15/1996,07/31/1997
* Timothy Barbari, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* VIJAY T JOHN
* 07/31/1997
* USD 12,000.00

CTS-9632847 Timothy Barbari Johns Hopkins University ABSTRACT The 1996
International Congress on Membranes and Membrane Processes (ICOM '96) will take
place in Yokohama, Japan from August 18-23, 1996. ICOM '96 is sponsored by the
Membrane Society of Japan and co-sponsored by the North American Membrane
Society and the European Society of Membrane Science and Technology. The 1996
ICOM will focus on both synthetic and biological membranes in the hope that the
exchange of information between these two fields will contribute to innovative
and exciting membrane technologies in the future. Specific topics include multi-
phase transport phenomena, hydrodynamics, reverse osmosis, nanofiltration,
ultrafiltration and microfiltration, gas separation, pervaporation and vapor
permeation, inorganic membranes, electro-membranes, liquid membranes, vesicles
and microcapsules, biological and biomimetic membranes, membrane reactors, food
processing and environmental applications. This grant will provide partial
support of the expenses of about 15 participants. The United States academic
community has long played a key role in membrane research. Interactions with
international colleagues will help the American membrane researchers to maintain
a leadership role in the field. This meeting could help to make the U.S.
membrane industry more competitive globally and to handle environmental and
biotechnological applications more effectively.