* 9632326
* Self-Correcting Distance Geometry for NMR Analysis and      Protein Design
* BIO,DBI
* 08/01/1996,07/31/1998
* Werner Braun, University of Texas Medical Branch at Galveston
* Standard Grant
* THOMAS QUARLES
* 07/31/1998
* USD 100,000.00

This project will enhance the stability, reliability and efficiency of Prof.
Werner Braun and coworkers' new computational tool, the self-correcting distance
geometry (SECODG) method for NMR structure determination and protein design.
Three-dimensional structures of proteins, RNA or DNA are calculated by the
SECODG method from distance and dihedral angle constraints. Unlike previous
distance geometric methods, which were designed for consistent data sets, the
SECODG method can generate accurate structures even from sets of constraints
that contain errors. The SECODG method dramatically reduces the time to generate
protein structures from NMR data. Dr. Braun's group will further improve this
method and explore new statistical methods for error detection. The SECODG
method can also be used to predict the tertiary folds of proteins from the amino
acid sequence, if the secondary structure is partially or completely known. It
was successfully tested in a preliminary study for its ability to predict the
fold of small helical proteins from their amino acid sequences, and it will now
be applied to a broader range of protein folds. The SECODG method will be a
powerful computational tool to speed up macromolecular structure determination
from NMR data. Experimentally determined three-dimensional protein structures
are the basis to design new drugs or proteins with improved or new functions. In
combination with energy minimization and Monte Carlo simulations it will help in
designing proteins with given structural and new functional properties.