* 9632750
* Dissertation Research:  A History of the Appropriate        Technology Movement in the United States
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/1996,07/31/1997
* Robert Westbrook, University of Rochester
* Standard Grant
* Linda Layne
* 07/31/1997
* USD 7,000.00

This dissertation improvement award is being used to defray the costs of major
research trips in the United States to various repositories and libraries
holding literature on the Appropriate Technology (AT) movement. Defined by its
preference for small-scale, democratically controllable technologies that are
not capital intensive, adaptable to local cultural conditions, and
environmentally sustainable, the AT movement has been dismissed by some scholars
as a product of the self-indulgent countercultural escapism of the 1960s and
70s. Others have seen great promise in the movement's ideas and projects.
Through extensive archival research, oral histories, and empirical observation
of demonstration projects at governmental and non-governmental organizations
across the nation, the student will use primary sources and intensive immersion
in the ideas and activities which shape and constitute the AT movement to
consider the merits of these alternative views. The dissertation will examine
the historical significance of the AT movement and explore its relationship to
the environmental and sustainable agriculture movements, as well as its views on
urbanization, professionalization, and democratic participation. The work will
attempt also to place the AT critique of industrial society in the context of a
growing body of American social criticism of orthodox technological practice. By
evaluating the promise of the movement's vision, the dissertation fills an
important gap in American historical scholarship and brings contemporary
deliberation over America's technological direction into sharper focus.