* 9632072
* Inorganic Thin Films Deposited on Chemically                Modified Surfaces by Pulsed Laser Vaporization
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/1996,12/31/1997
* Eileen Spain, Occidental College
* Standard Grant
* David J. Curran
* 12/31/1997
* USD 18,000.00

This project will investigate inorganic thin films deposited on chemically
modified surfaces using pulsed laser vaporization. The work will be carried out
under the direction of Dr. Eileen M. Spain at Occidental College under this
Research Planning Grant supported by the Analytical and Surface Chemistry
Program and the Office of Special Projects in the Chemistry Division. An organic
layer will be placed on a Au(111) surface by self-assembly of n-alkanethiols.
This will be followed by depositing thin films of transition metal chalcogenides
onto the self-assembled monolayer (SAM) using pulsed laser vaporization in a
vacuum system which will be locally constructed. After transfer to ambient
conditions, the film morphology and structure will be imaged by atomic force
microscopy (AFM). The long range goal of this research by Dr. Spain and her
undergraduate students is to understand the growth and nucleation of inorganic
thin films on chemically modified substrates. Thin film technology involving
layered structures is of the utmost importance to the microelectronics,
adhesive, and lubricant industries. The properties of the interface between
these film layers are critical to performance. The focus of this work is to
develop an understanding of the interface between an inorganic film deposited on
top of an organic film anchored to a metal. Results from these studies will
advance our understanding of the structure of these interfaces and could lead to
the manufacture of new layered materials.