* 9632166
* Epitaxial Growth of Gallium Arsenide Nitride                Heterostructures from the Vapor Phase
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/1996,07/31/2000
* James Rogers, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* LaVerne D. Hess
* 07/31/2000
* USD 570,054.00

9632166 Pearsall This multidisciplinary research project addresses basic
materials synthesis and processing research on the epitaxial deposition of a
compound semiconductor mixed crystal system, GaAsN, having intrinsic strong
immiscibility. A novel approach based on conditions far from equilibrium
involving atomic layer growth techniques demonstrated by the PIs in earlier
research will be pursued; detailed structural, optical and electrical
characterization will be an integral part of the project. The proposal addresses
two controversial topics, the realization of GaAsN alloys, and the
heteroepitaxial growth of such low defect density III-V alloy films on silicon
substrates, and strives for greater understanding and experimental demonstration
of progress in both areas in a phased approach. %%% The project combines
fundamental materials chemistry/solid state physics and materials processing
studies with advanced characterization tools and analysis methods to address
forefront issues in a topical area of high scientific value and potential
technological benefits. The research will contribute basic materials science
knowledge at a fundamental level to several aspects of advanced compound
semiconductor materials and structures appropriate for device assessments. The
knowledge and understanding gained from this research project is expected to
contribute in a general way to improving the performance of advanced
microelectronic and photonic devices by providing a fundamental understanding
and a basis for designing and producing improved materials, and materials
processing routes. An important feature of the program is the integration of
research and education through the training of students in a fundamentally and
technologically significant area. ***