* 9632854
* Long-Term Studies of Disturbances as They Affect Ecological Processes in Landscapes of the Southern Appalachians
* BIO,DEB
* 10/15/1996,09/30/2004
* Theodore Gragson, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Henry L. Gholz
* 09/30/2004
* USD 6,714,562.00

9632854 Coleman This research will continue investigations on the extent and
complexity of natural and human-caused disturbances, and how they interact with
ecological processes along environmental gradients in the landscape. This work
builds upon extensive long-term studies of landscape processes in the southern
Appalachians and spans four levels of resolution (plot, watershed, landscape and
region) in the Little Tennessee and French Broad River basins. Individual and
interacting effects of disturbance and environmental heterogeneity on
populations, communities, and ecological processes forms the unifying theme of
this proposed LTER research. The research team will focus on three areas of
inquiry: (1) characterization of disturbance and environmental heterogeneity in
the southern Appalachians, (2) effects of disturbance and environmental
heterogeneity on populations and communities, and (3) effects of disturbance and
environmental heterogeneity on biogeochemical cycling and ecosystem processes.
The project builds on extensive understanding of disturbances occurring with the
Coweeta basin and continues to characterize environmental heterogeneity,
maintaining continuity in the 60+ year record for some variables. As the focus
expands to the southern Appalachian region, historical fire regime and socio-
economic drivers of land-use change will also be considered. The effects of
disturbance and environmental heterogeneity on plant and animal populations will
be assessed at a range of scales and key questions will be addressed on the
effects of resource variability on terrestrial and aquatic biodiversity. Using a
combination of new studies and continued long-term measurements, investigators
will examine the role of environmental heterogeneity and disturbance in
regulating ecosystem pools and processes in streams, riparian zones, and
forests. This research approach utilizes an integrated program of long-term
field measurements, experiments and modeling.