* 9632236
* Algorithms for Global Optimization, Enhanced Sampling and   Reaction Pathway Determination
* MPS,CHE
* 07/15/1996,12/31/1999
* David Coker, Trustees of Boston University
* Continuing grant
* Celeste M. Rohlfing
* 12/31/1999
* USD 272,000.00

John Straub is supported by a grant from the Theoretical and Computational
Chemistry Program to continue his work on developing new algorithms for global
optimization, enhanced sampling and the determination of reaction pathways. Two
areas of algorithmic development will be explored. The first area involves the
use of generalized statistics, as opposed to Gibbs-Boltzmann statistics, which
can be used to describe highly delocalized distributions of configurations for
systems that are strongly localized in the standard statistics. This technique
leads to a higher likelihood of finding low energy configurations. The second
area of research involves an optimization technique known as quantum mechanical
annealing, in which the value of Planck's constant is greatly exaggerated
causing the system to `spread out` in space and more effectively seek the lowest
energy configurations by tunneling through energy barriers that would otherwise
be hard to climb over. This technique employs imaginary-time path integral
quantum simulations in a novel way. Applications include: 1) model protein
folding; 2) optimal reaction path determination; and 3) enhanced sampling of
molecular configurations for the computation of average thermodynamic
properties. Computer simulations have provided a number of molecular level
insights into chemical processes which occur in solution and on surfaces. The
technique is very powerful, but is limited by statistical sampling problems
associated with the speed of current supercomputers and the time available to
perform such simulations. Straub is developing a new algorithm for performing
molecular simulations which should be a major improvement in statistical
sampling. If successful, this new algorithm could provide a significant decrease
in the amount of computational resources required to obtain meaningful sampling
statistics in molecular simulations.