* 9632524
* Materials Research Science and Engineering Center
* MPS,DMR
* 09/15/1996,04/30/2001
* Clyde Briant, Brown University
* Cooperative Agreement
* Ulrich Strom
* 04/30/2001
* USD 4,686,500.00

9632524 Clifton The Materials Research Science and Engineering Center (MRSEC) at
the Brown University supports interactive research in one interdisciplinary
group focusing on advanced materials for structural and electronic applications.
The research group emphasizes the development of a new generation of
capabilities for measuring and modeling mechanical response at the microscopic
level. Advanced measurement and modeling techniques will be used. The goal will
be to develop methodologies to realize predictive capabilities and to understand
the performance and limitation of particular microstructures at micron and
atomic length scales. The MRSEC supports the development, operation and
maintenance of shared experimental facilities for materials research. It
provides seed funding for exploratory research and fosters research
participation by undergraduates. The Center develops educational modules
consisting of interactive demonstrations and laboratory projects to be used by
mathematics and science teachers. The MRSEC also supports enhanced collaboration
with industry, shared experimental facilities that also support research not
directly funded by the MRSEC, and seed funding for exploratory research. The
Center currently supports about 12 senior investigators, 2 postdoctoral research
associates, 3 technician or other professional, 12 graduate students, and 4
undergraduates. The MRSEC is directed by Professor Rodney Clifton. %%% The
Materials Research Science and Engineering Center (MRSEC) at the Brown
University supports interactive research in one interdisciplinary group focusing
on advanced materials for structural and electronic applications. The research
group emphasizes the development of a new generation of capabilities for
measuring and modeling mechanical response at the microscopic level. Advanced
measurement and modeling techniques will be used. The goal will be to develop
methodologies to realize predictive capabilities and to understand the
performance and limitation of particular microstructures at micron and atomic
length scales. The MRSEC supports the development, operation and maintenance of
shared experimental facilities for materials research. It provides seed funding
for exploratory research and fosters research participation by undergraduates.
The Center develops educational modules consisting of interactive demonstrations
and laboratory projects to be used by mathematics and science teachers. The
MRSEC also supports enhanced collaboration with industry, shared experimental
facilities that also support research not directly funded by the MRSEC, and seed
funding for exploratory research. The Center currently supports about 12 senior
investigators, 2 postdoctoral research associates, 3 technician or other
professional, 12 graduate students, and 4 undergraduates. The MRSEC is directed
by Professor Rodney Clifton. ***