* 9632695
* Learning Science by Design
* EDU,DRL
* 09/15/1996,01/31/2002
* Yasmin Kafai, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing Grant
* WALTER C. ERMLER
* 01/31/2002
* USD 221,214.00

9632695 Kafai Future workplaces require that schools prepare students to become
technologically fluent and informationally and scientifically literate. The new
National Science Standard (1995) demand that students know not only the facts
but also how to reason scientifically. The growing infusion of information
technologies into the home and work place demands that students know not only
how to access and retrieve information on the Internet, but also how to use it
discriminantly in their learning. Technologically competent students know not
only the facts but also how to express their knowledge and ideas with these
tools. These are challenging tasks for schools and teachers which need to be
addressed beginning at an early age when students' attitudes about science and
technology are still open and project-based activities are easier to integrate
into the curriculum. The proposed research addresses these challenges by
developing an integrative year-long curriculum consisting of a rich fabric of
instructional techniques materials, and technology use in elementary school
science. Learning Science by Design builds on young students' informal science
knowledge and asks them to program, i.e., design, interactive multimedia
resources to teach science concepts in either physics (magnetism/electricity) or
life sciences (ocean habitats) to younger students. Students' programming
process provides the driving force for their science investigations, Internet
information searching, and design of instructional interventions. This approach
uses proogramming as a tool for students' knowledge reformulation and personal
expression by engaging them in key scientific practices: fostering information
inquiry, constructing representations and visualizations of scientific
processes, explaining and defending ideas, and managing of their projects. Two
questions will be addressed in the proposed research: (1) What is the efficacy
of such a comprehensive learning environment for y oung students? (2) What kind
of skill and knowledge transfer can we observe? Research will be conducted in
several public elementary classrooms in implementing the year-long curriculum
that comprises two distinct design experiences, thus facilitating the assessment
of transfer of programming, project and information management skills, and
science knowledge. The evaluation is divided into three phases: Phase I builds
the model case and assessment tools, Phase II conducts the experimental and
comparative assessment, and Phase III examines the applicability of the model to
different school sites and classrooms. The principles that I am developing in my
research will also be directly applied to my teaching activities. My teaching
plan emphasizes the integration of education and information studies and will
create a set of courses that provide both graduate and undergraduate students
with an introduction and experience of the new information and learning media,
their theoretical underpinnings, and meaningful applications in formal and
informal educational settings. The findings of the proposed research will be
disseminated to resarchers and to teachers. I anticipate that the approach
provides a model for implementations of advanced technologies in elementary
school classrooms, also applicable to other grades and school levels.
Furthermore, the proposed integration of information and education fields will
lead to an improved understanding of educational theory and practice and the
disign of future learning and information technologies. ***