* 9632651
* Nanostructure Technology for Making Photonic Crystals
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/1996,08/31/2000
* Eli Yablonovitch, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing grant
* Filbert J. Bartoli
* 08/31/2000
* USD 195,000.00

9632651 Yablonovitch The analogy between electromagnetic wave propagation in
multi-dimensional periodic structures, and electron wave propagation in real
crystals, has proven to be a very fruitful one. Initial efforts were motivated
by the prospect, of a "photonic bandgap"; a frequency band in 3-dimensional
dielectric structures, in which electromagnetic waves are forbidden,
irrespective of propagation direction in space. These 3-dimensionally periodic
dielectric structures are frequently called "photonic crystals". These can be
useful in opto-electronics as electromagnetic micro-cavities for so-called
"zero-threshold lasers" and single-mode light emitting diodes. Such structures
would exhibit inhibited spontaneous emission, which could lower the power
requirements and increase reliability, particularly of optical arrays.
Alternately, such structures can show enhanced spontaneous emission which would
allow faster modulation speeds for optical interconnects. More and more often,
manufacturing consists of making small things. Much of today's technology is the
consequence of 2-dimensional patterning on a microscopic scale. In this
proposal, the emphasis is on the technology for making valuable 3 dimensional
nanostructures, namely photonic crystals. Three dimensional nano-fabrication is
an extraordinarily challenging undertaking. This project began in September of
1993. After an intense initial period of equipment acquisition, installation,
and testing, of; electron beam writers, optical diagnostic probes, chemically
assisted ion beam etchers, and other thin film processing apparatus, the first
photonic crystals were made in early 1995. At this point in the project, the
initial optical evidence for a 3-dimensional photonic bandgap at optical
wavelengths has been detected. The appropriate Figure-of-Merit is the
reflectivity within the 3-d forbidden gap. The observed shape of the optical
transmission spectrum of the photonic crystal is close to expectations, but thus
far the best midgap experimental reflectivity is only ~80%. While this is
already sufficient to begin monitoring the effect of the photonic bandgap on
spontaneous light emission devices, further improvements will definitely be
needed. Improved reflectivity within the photonic bandgap will demand a higher
degree of structural precision in the nanostructure. If funded, the work program
would include the following: (a) Multiple ion beam etching, in which 3 ion beam
directions fire simultaneously, as opposed to the current system of sequential
etching steps, from a single ion beam, interrupted by multiple sample rotations.
(b) Optical feedback control of the hole diameters during the chemically
assisted ion beam etching. (c) 3-d ion beam mask structures will be built and
used. (d) If needed, the 3-d thickness of the photon crystal will be built up by
stacking nano-structure layers which are separated by epitaxial liftoff, aligned
by surface tension techniques, and then rebonded by wafer fusion procedures. (e)
3-d nano-machining technology will be extended to InP, whose electron/hole
surface recombination properties are favorable enough to allow the creation of
tiny, electrically pumped, light emitting devices. This renewal proposal is
being submitted in parallel with a substantially identical one by our
collaborator Prof. Axel Scherer of Caltech. Funding would allow continuation of
the joint UCLA/Caltech effort to develop the technology for making 3-dimensional
photonic crystal structures at the scale of optical wavelengths, and to improve
the structural precision and midgap reflectivity of these structures. Such
refined photonic crystal structures should lend themselves to opto-electronic
technology, and they might be generically useful in optical science. REVISED
WORK STATEMENT The overall scope of this NSF proposal will not change, but the
amount requested will be diminished to $60K/year respectively (from an original
request for $110K/yr.), to allow for th ose functions which will be supported by
the Army Research Office through an anticipated MURI contract. The ARO and NSF
efforts will divide along the following lines: Extensive equipment development
and construction necessary for our ambitious program will be supported through
the Army MURI, whereas most of the training of both graduate and undergraduate
students to build, use and maintain this equipment will be primarily funded
through this NSF grant at UCLA. The complex process which is necessary for
defining and evaluating 3-d photonic crystals will provide our students working
on this project with an excellent opportunity to become well acquainted with
using and maintaining a wide repertoire of advanced fabrication equipment. We
propose that much of the process development and optimization as well as student
training which will lead to the definition of advanced 3-d photonic crystals
will be done under the NSF proposal. On the other hand, the device fabrication
and construction of the equipment necessary for this effort will be supported by
the Army MURI. Excluded from the NSF project will be more near term mission
oriented projects, such as microwave photonic crystals, the inclusion of
2-dimensional photonic crystals as end-mirrors on edge-emitting laser diodes,
the definition of deep gratings used to form birefringent computer generated
holograms, and the development of high-contrast polarizing beam-splitters (with
measured TE/TM contrast ratios in excess of 300:1). Thus, the specific tasks
performed for the NSF supported program will be: 1. The design of a multiple ion
beam etching system with three ion sources, 2. The development of new three-
dimensional masking procedures to make thicker photonic crystals. 3. The
development of mechanical stacking procedures using epitaxial liftoff for thick
photonic crystal fabrication. 4. The design and modeling of new optoelectronic
devices based on photonic crystals. 5. The development of altern ative
lithography techniques over large areas, such as through electrochemical self-
assembly. All of these tasks will be performed with the help of graduate and
undergraduate students, who will be trained in microfabrication conventions,
optical measurement techniques, and numerical modeling of optical phenomena in
photonic crystals. Graduate students will be directly supported by the grant,
whereas undergraduates will be exposed to this state of the art equipment
through summer programs and senior thesis and workstudy experience in the
laboratory. ***