* 9632502
* Seismic Design and Behavior of Composite RCS Frames
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/1996,09/17/1998
* Gregory Deierlein, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Shih-Chi Liu
* 09/17/1998
* USD 240,000.00

The overall objective of this research is to develop and synthesize information
on the design, construction and inelastic behavior of composite frame buildings
that will lead to their broader acceptance and utilization in the U.S.,
particularly in seismic regions. In spite of some notable applications for tall
buildings, wider use of composite RCS frame construction is hindered by the lack
of comprehensive design criteria and construction methodologies. Widespread use
of composite RCS frames in the U.S. will require development of construction
schemes that may differ from those previously used for high-rise construction.
The research has three interrelated composites: Prototype Composite System
Designs: Several prototype buildings will be designed using available
information (connection test data and design guidelines) from the US and Japan.
The goal of this exercise will be to develop innovative designs using precast
and/or prefabricated composite subassemblies that facilitate construction and
provide required toughness and difficulty for seismic applications. Inelastic
Seismic Behavior and Response: The seismic behavior of the prototype building
designs will be evaluated and compared to conventional steel and reinforced
concrete systems through detailed inelastic static and transient structural
analyses. These studies will include parametric studies of building response to
assess and improve seismic design criteria in existing specifications for
earthquake response modification factors, inelastic drift and stability limits,
ductility demands, etc. Design Criteria for Composite Frames and Connections: A
critical review of existing design provisions in the U.S. and Japan will be
conducted to see where improvements can be made based on the latest research
data related to composite RCS frames and connections. This will include
development of a state-of-the art report to summarize extensive test data,
design criteria, and construction practice for RCS frames in Japan, much of
which is only written in Japanese and is currently inaccessible to U.S.
engineers and researchers.