* 9632990
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Community Policing -        Rhetoric or Reality?  The Contemporary Chinese Community -  Based Policing System in Shanghai
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/1996,07/31/1997
* Marjorie Zatz, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Harmon M. Hosch
* 07/31/1997
* USD 9,990.00

9632990 Zatz This project examines Chinese community policing during the
economic reform era. Chinese informal social control practices are rooted in
China's historical, social and cultural traditions. By focusing on community
policing during this transitional period, this project will contribute to our
understanding of community policing globally. Braithwaite's (1989) theory of
reintegrative shaming serves as the theoretical framework. The primary social
conditions for reintegrative shaming are communitarianism and interdependency.
Although the Chinese community has been largely shaped by the state, which
inevitably deviates from the Western conceptualization of community, the Chinese
decentralized and informal social control strategies at the grass-roots level
entail the essence of a community-based social control system. By identifying
key variables central to Chinese community policing, this research will unveil
how, in the Chinese context, contradictions between law and order are
reconciled, the interdependent relationship between the community and the police
is sustained, and residents are mobilized. The research setting consists of two
communities in Shanghai, China. Sites are selected to reflect contrasting
socioeconomic characteristics of the community. Multiple research methods are
employed, including historical, documentary and policy analysis, field work, and
a survey of neighborhood residents to test and elaborate the theory of
reintegrative shaming In the: Chinese context %%%%