* 9632735
* Novel Tunable Light Source Based On A Laser Ionized         Capacitor Array -- An Electromagnetic Accordion
* ENG,ECCS
* 07/15/1997,06/30/2001
* Thomas Katsouleas, University of Southern California
* Continuing Grant
* James W. Mink
* 06/30/2001
* USD 310,000.00

Proposal Number: ECS-9632735 Principal Investigator: Thomas Katsouleas Title:
Novel Tunable Light Source Based on a Laser Ionized Capacitor Array- An
Electromagnetic Accordion The fundamental principles of a new radiation source
capable of high power, variable pulse length and broad tunability over orders of
magnitude will be investigated. The approach may be characterized as an
"electromagnetic accordion", in which a short laser pulse is used to ionize a
low pressure working gas between an array of alternately charged capacitor
plates. The moving ionization front produced by the laser creates a time varying
dielectric function that converts the static electric field of the capacitors
into electromagnetic radiation. In essence, the laser sweeps up the static
waveform and squeezes it like an accordion into a similar but shortened
propagating electromagnetic wavetrain. The frequency of the output radiation is
controlled by changing the gas pressures and/or the capacitor plate spacing; in
principle, the frequency output could be varied over three decades. Moreover,
since the input waveform can be arbitrarily shaped by varying the bias and size
of the capacitor plates, the output radiation can be designed to have arbitrary
frequency chirp, amplitude modulation, or number of cycles. The research will
lead to the development of a single compact device that would produce MW pulses
of coherent radiation spanning the spectrum from microwaves to visible light,
with arbitrarily shaped and chirped or encoded wavetrains. Such a device could
economically provide many of the light source requirements for research,
industry and medicine.