* 9633536
* A Formal Approach for a Specification-Based Software        Architecture of Real-Time Systems
* CSE,CCF
* 08/15/1996,07/31/1998
* Aravinda Sistla, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Frank D. Anger
* 07/31/1998
* USD 191,001.00

Real-time systems are becoming increasingly important to everyday life. Examples
include command and control systems, process control systems, telecommunication
systems, patient monitoring systems, flight control systems, robotics, avionics
systems, and so on. With increasing computing power and high demand for
multimedia applications, larger and more complex real-time systems are being
continuously developed. However, the development of real-time systems is
difficult and takes longer time than the development of a system without real-
time constraints, and a significant portion of the entire effort remains devoted
to the maintenance activities of the software life cycle. The concept of
software architecture has recently emerged as a new way to improve our ability
to effectively construct large- scale software systems. In spite of many
attempts to develop architecture specification languages, this area still lacks
a solid formal foundation. Without a solid foundation, it is difficult to
develop and apply rigorous analysis methods to assure the correctness of real-
time software systems as well as to analyze the impacts of changes on various
system properties such as safety, consistency, and reliability. This research
seeks to develop a formal foundation for an architecture specification language
using the integration of non-monotonic logic and temporal logic. The syntax of
the language is based on the concepts of object, frames and production rules.
This allows developers to easily describe the attributes and constraints of each
software component, and also the hierarchical relations among the software
components in the software architecture. The goal is to localize changes to
software components in the low- level architecture specification and avoid
modifying the high- level architecture specification. The semantics of multiple
inheritance and exception handling will be established using a non-monotonic
logic. Based on the formal foundation of the architec ture specification
language, it is expected that new possiblities will exist for analyzing software
properties such as liveness, safety, consistency, and temporal constraints. This
foundation is also expected to provide a basis for analyzing the impact of
changes to a real-time software system. ***