* 9633419
* Semantic Foundations for Composition and Interoperation of  Open Systems
* CSE,CCF
* 08/15/1996,01/31/2000
* Carolyn Talcott, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Frank D. Anger
* 01/31/2000
* USD 119,566.00

The objective of this research is to develop a semantic foundation for semantic
composition and interoperation of heterogeneous components of open systems.
Composition and interoperation occur at many levels (requirements,
specification, code, executables) and along multiple dimensions (functionality,
reliability, security, availability). Relations among the various levels and
dimensions must be preserved. Existing work on composition and interoperation
has largely focused on syntactic structure. It is essential to develop a
semantic basis in order to provide for safe, secure, and meaningful
combinations. Semantic structuring of complex systems should provide a firm
basis for determining what parts are interchangeable under given conditions, and
to predict effects of changes: of components on the whole, and of system
requirements on requirements for the parts. There is a wide range of
applications where such a semantic foundation for interoperation can be of
value. It is especially important in applications that combine components from
diverse domains such as: data bases, spread sheets, knowledge bases, multi-
media, mobile-agents, control theory, or event-based simulations. Metalogical
methods from the theory of general logics, and associated techniques of mappings
in and across formalisms, are used to achieve formalism-independent semantics
for system composition. This supports the multi-dimensionality of a system's
levels of description and formalization. Techniques from the theory of Open
Mechanized Reasoning Systems (OMRS) as well as work on the formal semantics of
actor systems are used to study interoperation aspects. Reflective techniques,
particularly reflective logics and multi-model systems are employed extensively.
This research is expected to lead to a new technology for composition,
interoperation and dynamic evolution of software systems. It seeks to treat
interoperability at many levels and along many dimensions: components,
languages, speci fications, formalisms/logics, and tools. This provides the
capacity to move in a mathematically rigorous way across the different
formalizations of a system, and to use the different tools supporting these
formalizations in a rigorously integrated way. The research is based on two key
technical ideas: module calculi (for integration) and open multi-model systems
(for interoperation). The module calculus is formalism-independent, and is
intended to have powerful new operations such as generalization. Open multi-
model systems formalize the multidimensional aspects of independent
interoperating parts. ***