* 9633547
* Epitaxial Microstructures and Metallic Interfaces on Siliconand Silicon Germanium Alloys
* MPS,DMR
* 07/15/1996,06/30/2000
* Robert Nemanich, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* LaVerne D. Hess
* 06/30/2000
* USD 346,200.00

9633547 Nemanich This research project aims for significant advancement in
fundamental understanding of metal-semiconductor interfaces, particularly with
respect to formation of Schottky barriers on GeSi surfaces, but also with
respect to broader issues such as the effect of strain on barrier height.
Specific goals include investigation of the effect of strain on barrier height,
combined experimental/theoretical investigations of Metal-Silicon-Germanium
phase formation, and the effect of surface roughening on contact resistance. The
general approach is to combine advanced MBE and CVD growth methods and in-situ
surface characterization techniques with high resolution TEM and other ex-situ
film characterization techniques to explore the chemical stability of model
ternary interfaces, examine the Schottky barrier at the interface of strained
and relaxed SiGe alloys, to explore materials and electrical properties of
morphologically rough epitaxial interfaces, and to initiate new studies of
epitaxial silicide/silicon nano-structures. %%% The project is multidisciplinary
combining fundamental materials physics and materials science synthesis and
processing studies with advanced characterization tools and analysis methods to
address forefront issues in a topical area of strong technological relevance and
high potential payoff. The research will contribute basic materials science
knowledge at a fundamental level to several aspects of advanced
electronic/photonic devices and integrated circuitry. Additionally, the
knowledge and understanding gained from this research project is expected to
contribute in a general way to improving the performance of advanced devices and
circuits by providing a fundamental understanding and a basis for designing and
producing improved materials, and materials combinations. An important feature
of the program is the integration of research and education through the training
of students in a fundamentally and technologically significant area. ***