* 9633769
* Polarization-Insensitive Double Quantum Wells for           Electro-Optical Applications
* ENG,ECCS
* 03/01/1997,02/28/1999
* Laurie McNeil, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Tien-Pei Lee
* 02/28/1999
* USD 36,473.00

9633769 McNeil The goal of this project is to develop polarization-insensitive
double quantum well (DQW) structures for applications in the modulation,
detection, and amplification of optical signals. Specifically, we will
investigate the growth and electron-hole interactions of tensile strained GaAs
quantum wells sandwiched between InxA11-xAs barriers. With this configuration we
are able to control the polarization characteristics of the optical response
while maintaining compatibility with GaAs-based processing. The potential for
the use of such structures in devices wherein polarization of the optical
response is important has been demonstrated by our recent work in single quantum
wells. In this 12 month project we will determine optimum MBE growth conditions
which enhance the optical response at room temperature, as is required for
device applicability. Using band-offset modeling in conjunction with optical
techniques to examine structures of different barrier/well widths and strains,
we will explore the DQW designs most suitable for further technological
development. The primary methods of growth and characterization to be employed
will be molecular beam epitaxy (MBE) and photoluminescence (PL) spectroscopy,
respectively. These will be supported by electrical analysis techniques such as
Hall and current-voltage measurements, X-ray diffraction, and both transmission
and scanning electron microscopy. Optimal growth conditions will be examined by
variation of MBE controlled (e.g.-substrate temperature, growth rate, V/III
ratio, As overpressure) and structurally based (e.g.-well/barrier widths,
strain, doping) parameters. As in our initial work, most of our studies will be
of structures grown as GaAs substrates. However, we will also compare the
optical characteristics of these structures to those of structures grown on
ternary substrates, which provide lattice matching with the InA1As barrier
layers. PL measurements, using temperature, excitation intensity and excitation
wa velength, and polarization state variations, will be used to elucidate
phenomena normally unobservable due to electron-hole transition selection rules
for quantum wells. Our parallel goals with respect to the MBE and PL efforts
will lay the necessary groundwork for development of practical devices based on
these DQW's and similar structures. This is a collaborate research project
between Theda Daniels-Race of Duke University and Laurie McNeil of the
University of North Carolina-Chapel Hill. ***