* 9633662
* Organizational Adaptation:  The Use of Simulated Annealing  to Study Organizational Adaptation
* CSE,IIS
* 12/01/1996,11/30/2001
* Kathleen Carley, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Continuing Grant
* C.  Iacono
* 11/30/2001
* USD 212,739.00

Global competition and rapidly changing technology make it critical that we
understand how organizations can adapt to a changing environment so that they
can maintain or improve their performance. Organizations respond to the
environment through redesign (downsizing, upsizing, or re-engineering various
tasks). Further, organizations frequently cope with changes such as journeymen
personnel who pursue their careers by moving among organizations. Organizational
adaptation presumably contributes greatly to organizational productivity, even
as individual learning contributes to personal productivity. However, little is
known about organizational adaptation, and particularly about whether such
adaptation even has the theoretical possibility of improving performance given
that individuals are themselves learning. A computational framework for
theorizing about organizational adaptation and performance will be developed and
used to explore the conditions under which adaptation leads to performance
improvements. This framework employs simulated annealing algorithms for locating
optimal organizational structures in fixed and volatile environments. The effect
of organizational adaptation, particularly when personnel are journeymen will be
examined. Questions to be addressed include: What adaptation strategies are most
effective? What types of organizations emerge as high performers, particular
when personnel are journeymen? Does the technology transfer that occurs when
personnel journey among organizations lead to organizational performance
improvements?