* 9633155
* CISE Minority Institutions Infrastructure:  Infrastructure  Improvements to Increase Access for Minorities to CISE      Career Paths
* CSE,EIA
* 08/15/1996,07/31/1998
* Owen Murphy, University Enterprises Corporation at CSUSB
* Standard Grant
* Rita Rodriguez
* 07/31/1998
* USD 42,715.00

9633155 Karant, Yasha J. Lin, Frank California State University - San Bernadino
(CSUSB) CISE Minority Institutions Infrastructure: Infrastructure Improvement to
Increase Access for Minorities to CISE Career The purpose of this NSF CISE MII
planning grant proposal is to provide minority students enrolled in the CISE
disciplines of Computer and Information Science at California State University,
San Bernadino (CSUSB), with facilities to pursue careers in the CISE fields. To
achieve this goal, this planning grant will develop an NSF MII proposal and
integrate the NSF funding with existing and newly developed funding sources
necessary for the proposed quality instruction and improved minority
opportunities. These funding sources involve vendor participation and support,
including minority owned small business vendors. A number of specific strategic
program areas have been identified : -improved minority recruitment and
retention into the CISE disciplines, using both the pool of students at CSUSB
and recruitment of otherwise unsupported minority students; -upgrades and
innovations in curriculum to produce minority graduates with both an industrial
and an advanced degree path open to them; -establishment of facilities to teach
modern data communications; measures to address the problems faced by minority
students with physical disabilities; -means to improve minority student access
to facilities from remote (home) sites; and -upgrades to general infrastructure
in terms of computers and communications to support these programs