* 9633745
* Dissertation Research:  The Role of Agricultural            Intensification in the Formation of the Tarascan State
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/1996,06/30/1997
* Gary Feinman, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 06/30/1997
* USD 12,000.00

Under the direction of Dr. Gary Feinman, Mr. Christopher Fisher will collect
data for his doctoral dissertation. Currently Mr. Fisher is conducting
archaeological research in the Lake Patzcuaro Basin in Western Mexico and
National Science Foundation support will allow radiocarbon analyses to date
cultural features, examination of botanical samples and the study of geological
sediments. The Lake Patzcuaro Basin figures prominently in Mesoamerican
prehistory because of the large prehistoric state which developed in that region
and which challenged the Aztecs for domination. At the time of European contact,
the area was the core of a Tarascan state which controlled most of Western
Mexico. Recent archaeological investigations in the basin have revealed large
tracts of relict raised fields, canals and small scale settlements located on
recently exposed lake bed. This land was inundated at the time of European
contact and both archaeological and paleo-environmental evidence suggest that
these features date to the Late Classic period. The intact nature of this
previously unknown wetland agricultural complex and the ability to date the
agricultural features and settlements provides an excellent research
opportunity. Mr. Fisher is currently excavating the field system to obtain data
which will allow placement of the water management features within a regional
archaeological context. Samples recovered during the excavation will be
radiocarbon dated to establish chronology. In addition, extensive botanical and
pedalogical analysis will be conducted to further characterize sediments. These
data will be combined with settlement pattern information and on this basis it
will be possible to elucidate the relationships between environmental
modification, demographic growth and the changing political organization in the
Lake Patzcuaro region. Archaeologists wish to understand how complex societies
develop and reach a state level of organization. They have noted that in many
areas of the world, the appearance of hierarchical social systems and large
scale agricultural projects such as irrigation systems seem to go hand and hand.
Yet the exact causal relationships and the factors which lead to both these
phenomena are not well understood. Traditional approaches to this question in
Latin American prehistory have tended to emphasize population pressure and
centralized bureaucratic management as necessary preconditions for the
construction and maintenance of intensive agricultural projects. However recent
archaeological investigation has challenged this perspective and suggested that
such management systems can be found in pre-state contexts. Much of this
research however is inconclusive and Mr. Fisher's work will contribute
information of direct relevance. This research is important for several reasons.
It will shed new light on the processes which underly the development of early
states. It will provide data of interest to many archaeologists and assist in
training a promising young scientist.