* 9633806
* Collaborative Research:  Pseudo-Nitzschia Species, Toxin    Production and Eutrophication in the Northern Gulf of       Mexico:  Past and Present
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/1996,08/31/2000
* F. Quay Dortch, Louisiana Universities Marine Corsortium
* Continuing Grant
* Phillip R. Taylor
* 08/31/2000
* USD 343,971.00

DORTCH 9633806 Understanding the relationship between environmental conditions
and Harmful Algal Blooms (HABs) in coastal areas is essential for predicting
blooms, protecting human health, and preventing economic losses. Recently,
considerable interest has focused on Pseudo-nitzschia, a diatom genus in which
some species produce domoic acid, a potent neurotoxin, causing, among other
things, death or short-term memory loss (Amnesic Shellfish Poisoning; ASP).
Preliminary data from the Louisiana coastal zone show that Pseudo-nitzschia spp.
(including potentially toxic species) reach very high abundances every spring in
the plumes of the Mississippi and Atchafalya Rivers, and high abundances occur
frequently, but less predictably in a Louisiana estuary. The hypothesized link
between HABs and eutrophication will be tested by 1) comparing the highly
eutrophic shelf environment with the less eutrophic estuary and 2) examining
changes in Pseudo-nitzschia preserved in cores taken from the shelf where
increasing eutrophication over time is well documented. Through a combination of
new sampling and analysis of archived samples, a nearly ten year record of
Pseudo-nitzschia species composition at a shelf site and a four year database of
species composition and toxin production at both the estuarine and shelf sites
will be related to a suite of environmental factors measured at the same time.
New biotechnological methods for measuring toxin concentration, using a
competitive receptor binding assay, and identifying Pseudo-nitzschia species,
using molecular probes, will be tested in comparison with other more standard
methods. The new techniques were developed as rapid and accurate screening
methods which will ultimately be used for a wide range of applications in both
the public and private sectors. Using these methods as part of this research
represents a mutually beneficial collaboration between academic and government
researchers and private industry.