* 9633299
* CISE Minority Institutions Infrastructure: Building an      Academic Pipeline for Miniority Scholars
* CSE,CNS
* 08/15/1996,07/31/2002
* Clinton Jeffery, University of Texas at San Antonio
* Continuing Grant
* Stephen Mahaney
* 07/31/2002
* USD 1,277,995.00

9633299 Hiromoto, Robert Boppana, Rajendra University of Texas - San Antonio
CISE Minority Institutions Infrastructure: Building an Academic Pipeline for
Minority Scholars This project builds a pipeline of minority students, focusing
on the retention of qualified undergraduate and graduate students by appropriate
financial support and mentoring activities. The goal is to involve students
directly in ongoing faculty research projects and thus prepare them for graduate
studies and research programs. Graduate minority students involved in the
program will help faculty in mentoring undergraduates, in addition to their own
studies and research obligations. The project encompasses two main thrust
designed to improve the pipeline of minority students prepared for graduate
programs. The first goal is to aggressively recruit and develop minority
students interested in computer science by providing preparatory training,
tutoring, and mentoring at the pre-college and lower-division undergraduate
levels. The second goal is to provide upper-division and graduate students with
funding support and increased involvement in faculty research in order to
improve minority retention and graduate enrollment. Students will be involved in
faculty research within five important areas: 1) parallel and distributed
algorithm design for applications in high-performance scientific computing 2)
software visualization, and program execution monitoring; 3) parallel compiler
technology; 4) network routing and scheduling algorithms; 5) parallel and
distributed simulation techniques.