* 9633045
* Dissertation Research:  An Empirical Assessment of          Gottfredson and Hirschi's General Theory of Crime
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/1996,07/31/1997
* Elton Jackson, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Patricia White
* 07/31/1997
* USD 600.00

9633045 Jackson There exist a multitude of theories which seek to answer the
question: Why do people commit crime? The most prominent theories can be
categorized under three headings: control theory, socialization/learning theory,
and stress (anomie) theory. This Doctoral Dissertation Improvement research
seeks to conduct a secondary analysis of data to test Gottfredson and Hirschi's
1990 theory of criminal behavior. In particular this research will test
Gottfredson and Hirschi's assertions that (1) self-control, combined with
opportunity, is the main independent cause of crime and delinquency, and (2) the
major competing theories of crime--control, socialization/learning, and stress--
have erroneously concluded that certain social variables (i.e., social bonds to
family and school, association with delinquent peer groups, unemployment or
social class, and dropping out of high school) are the independent causes of
crime and delinquency when in fact they are actually the result of low self-
control, and thus, are only correlated with crime. This research will conduct a
comprehensive statistical analysis of the Youth and Transition data set to test
each of the three major theories of crime, introducing self-control as an
independent variable. If Gottfredson and Hirschi's prediction is correct, then
the explanatory power of competing theoretical models should be reduced or
eliminated entirely. These results would suggest that self-control combined with
opportunity is a significant predictor of crime and various other correlates of
crime. *** ??