* 9633108
* SGER: Laser Aided Direct Metal Deposition of Three-         Dimensional Components: Dimension, Microstructure and       Mechanical Properties
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/1996,05/31/1997
* Jyotirmoy Mazumder, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Delcie R. Durham
* 05/31/1997
* USD 36,858.00

DMI-9633108 Mazumder This Small Grant for Exploratory Research will investigate
the surface finish, dimensional accuracy and residual stress in components made
of H13 tool steel by a process called Laser Aided Direct Metal Deposition
(LADMD). The innovation in this new approach to rapid prototyping technology is
fabrication by direct metal deposition of tool steel. This makes it possible to
produce tooling, for example, dies and molds, by deposition rather than removal
methods. Key questions for those using this technology for tooling are the
dimensional accuracy and residual stress state of tooling, because of their
affect on the life of the tooling and fit of components produced by it. Another
issue in die and mold manufacture is surface finish, a place where most of the
layered manufacturing technologies are weak, but surface finish is important to
the appearance of components and flow of material in a die or mold cavity. This
project will provide experimental data on dimensional accuracy, surface finish,
and residual stress, by producing and measuring a standard rapid prototyping
test part using LADMD. Materials evaluation will be done in cooperation with
Doehler Jervis and DCD Technology, firms that make and use dies. The impact of
this new approach will be reductions in lead-time for the manufacture of
production parts that need special tooling, leading to more competitive and
customized products to satisfy customer needs.