* 9633359
* GOALI: Methane Upgrading: Optimal Reactor Design
* ENG,CBET
* 09/15/1996,08/31/2001
* R.  A. Yetter, Princeton University
* Continuing Grant
* Maria Burka
* 08/31/2001
* USD 501,509.00

Abstract - Rabitz - 9633359 The objective of this research project is to employ
optimal control theory to maximize the yields and conversion efficiencies for
the upgrading of natural gas to C2+ hydrocarbons and/or methanol. Specifically,
a new type of chemical reactor will be designed and developed that will allow
for controllable addition of mass and energy fluxes along the length of a
continuous flow reactor. Modular non-catalytic homogeneous gas-phase reactors as
well as modular catalytic fixed bed reactors will be considered. The program
will consist of both experimental and modeling efforts interconnected by the use
of optimal control theory and sensitivity analysis. As part of the modeling
effort, optimal designs will be obtained to assist in the creation of the
reactor and to suggest optimal experimental operating conditions. e.g., the
temperature and mass flux distribution profiles required along the length of the
reactor, the selection of which chemical species should be injected along the
reactor, and methods to control the quenching process (rates of energy
extraction, dilution by chemical species, etc.). Finally, the reactor will be
constructed to allow for laboratory feedback to fully optimize the yields of
desired products and conversion efficiencies of natural gas under the actual
operating conditions. This project involves a collaborative effort between
Princeton University and Exxon Research and Engineering in Annandale, New
Jersey. The collaboration will involve conducting laboratory experiments and
modeling calculations at both Princeton and Exxon that complement each other,
provide confirmation of each group's work, and stimulate an active exchange of
technology between the two groups in order to expedite the development and
industrial implementation of new economic reactor designs for methane upgrading.
Optimal reactor designs will be considered for specific chemical systems that
include (1) conversion of methane to ethylene, (2) conversion of methane to
synthesi s gas, and (3), conversion of methane to methanol. Because of the
importance of developing an economic process, projected cost analyses for
implementation of the proposed reactor methodology into industrial practice will
be performed during the second and third years of the program.