* 9633712
* Nucleoid Visible vs. Non-Nucleoid Visible Bacterial Cells: A New Approach to Assessing in Situ Bacterioplankton         Dynamics
* GEO,OCE
* 09/15/1996,08/31/2000
* Barry Sherr, Oregon State University
* Continuing grant
* Phillip R. Taylor
* 08/31/2000
* USD 276,766.00

9633712 SHERR Heterotrophic bacteria process a large share of primary
production in the sea, and are responsible for a significant portion of
respiration and remineralization in marine food webs. Elucidating the roles of
bacteria is thus essential to understanding the structure and functioning of
marine ecosystems, particularly with respect to the role of marine biota in
sequestering atmospheric carbon dioxide. A new epifluorescence, DNA staining
method has revealed that bacterioplankton can be divided into two groups of
cells: those with, and those without, visible nucleoids (as visualized by the
method). Preliminary work suggests that cells with visible nucleoids (NV cells)
represent the component of the bacterioplankton assemblage that includes both
currently metabolically active and recently active cells. Cells without visible
nucleoids (non-NV) appear to be inactive/dormant; however under appropriate
conditions such cells can develop visible nucleoids, thus non-NV cells must
contain DNA. In coastal bacterioplankton assemblages,the fraction of NV cells
(20 ~ - 60%), and of cells separately identified as metabolically active (6% -
40%, was more variable than total bacterial abundance. The ability to identify
the currently active + recently active portion of bacterioplankton on a routine
basis may provide exciting new component can integrate the response of a
bacterial assemblage to environmental change over longer time scales (days-
weeks) than would the currently active fraction of the assemblage (time scale of
hours-days). In addition, the ratio of currently active:NV cells is a
potentially valuable index of the growth state of NV bacteria. This project
represents a combined laboratory and field sampling program to evaluate the
implications of NV versus non-NV cells in bacterioplankton assemblages. Ideas to
be examined include: 1) Non-NV cells can develop visible nucleoids by increasing
the amount of DNA/cell. 2) NV cells are subject to greater grazing mortality
compared to non-NV cells, which could explain in part the persistence of
inactive cells in bacterioplankton. 3) The NV component of bacterioplankton
assemblages is more tightly coupled to indices of bottom-up control
(chlorophyll-a concentration, bacterial productivity), and of top-down control
(abundance of nanoflagellates, rate of bacterivory) than is total bacterial
abundance in a coastal upwelling system. The results of this research project
should yield important new insights concerning how marine bacterioplankton
respond to factors controlling their growth and biomass in the sea. ***