* 9633706
* Mathematical Sciences:  In Celebration of the Centenary of  the Prime Number Theorem:  A Symposium on the Riemann       Hypothesis; August 12-15, 1996; Seattle, Washington
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/1996,06/30/1997
* J. Brian Conrey, Oklahoma State University
* Standard Grant
* Sidney W. Graham
* 06/30/1997
* USD 10,000.00

Conrey 9633706 This award provides partial funding for the conference "In
Celebration of the Centenary of the Prime Number Theorem: A Symposium on the
Riemann Hypothesis." One hundred years ago, Hadamard and de la Vallee Poussin
independently gave the final arguments in the proof of the Prime Number Theorem.
They followed a plan that had been mapped out by Riemann some 37 years earlier.
However, Riemann's goals for understanding the prime numbers are still not
realized as the famous Riemann Hypothesis remains tantalizingly unsolved.
Speakers at this conference will present many of the interesting developments
that have arisen from Riemann's original work, with an eye to understanding
future research directions regarding the zeros of the Riemann zeta-function and
related L-functions. This research falls into the general mathematical field of
Number Theory. Number theory has its historical roots in the study of the whole
numbers, addressing such questions as those dealing with the divisibility of one
whole number by another. It is among the oldest branches of mathematics and was
pursued for many centuries for purely aesthetic reasons. However, within the
last half century it has become an indispensable tool in diverse applications in
areas such as data transmission and processing, and communication systems.