* 9633731
* Thin Film Growth, Deposition and Interface Studies under    Energetic Process Conditions
* MPS,DMR
* 01/01/1997,06/30/2000
* Eugene Irene, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Continuing Grant
* LaVerne D. Hess
* 06/30/2000
* USD 298,340.00

9633731 Irene This research project, co-funded by the Electronic Materials and
Solid State Chemistry programs, aims for significant advancement in fundamental
understanding of ECR plasma deposition of dielectric films on GaAs and Ge single
crystal surfaces. Film growth will be monitored in situ by both spectroscopic
and single wavelength ellipsometry. Specific goals include investigation of the
electronic properties of the semiconductor-dielectric interfaces resulting from
the deposition by examining the I-V behavior of MIS junctions derived from the
interfaces formed. In addition, a variety of ex-situ characterization tools
including XPS, AFM, and FTIR will be employed to gain detailed information on
the deposition process and fundamental structure-property relationships. The
general approach is expected to provide new fundamental information and insights
into the creation of environmentally stable, defect-free terminations of Ge and
GaAs surfaces. %%% The project is multidisciplinary combining fundamental solid
state surface and interface chemistry and materials science synthesis and
processing studies with advanced characterization tools and analysis methods to
address forefront issues in a topical area of strong technological relevance and
high potential payoff. The research will contribute basic materials science
knowledge at a fundamental level to several aspects of advanced
electronic/photonic devices and integrated circuitry. Additionally, the
knowledge and understanding gained from this research project is expected to
contribute in a general way to improving the performance of advanced devices and
circuits by providing a fundamental understanding and a basis for designing and
producing improved materials, and materials combinations. An important feature
of the program is the integration of research and education through the training
of students in a fundamentally and technologically significant area. ***