* 9633267
* Circadian Rhythms of Gene Expression in Cyanobacteria
* BIO,MCB
* 04/01/1996,03/31/2000
* Carl Johnson, Vanderbilt University
* Continuing Grant
* Susan Porter Ridley
* 03/31/2000
* USD 229,000.00

Abstract Johnson 9633267 Organisms at all levels of biological complexity
manifest circadian (daily) rhythms which are controlled by an endogenous
biochemical oscillator. Many physiological and cellular processes, including
sleeping/waking, body temperature, homeostatic functions, gene expression, cell
division, and enzymatic activities, are regulated by these "biological clocks".
In addition, these oscillators are also the timers that measure the daylength in
photoperiodic timing of reproductive processes in plants and animals. Therefore,
understanding the biochemical mechanism of circadian clocks is of fundamental
biological interest . The biochemical nature of these biological clocks has been
elusive, but their salient properties (persistence, temperature compensation,
and entrainment) are conserved in all organisms in which circadian behavior has
been observed, from bacteria to mammals. This suggests that the biochemical
mechanism has also been conserved--if not in exact homology, then at least in
terms of the general components and composition of the clock. The approach to
unveiling the mechanism of circadian oscillators described in this proposal
focuses on the least-complex and most technically-approachable organism in which
a biological clock has been demonstrated, the cyanobacterium, Synechococcus sp.
strain PCC 7942. The technical advantages of this organism are that it has a
small genome which is easily manipulated genetically, and that a bioluminescent
strain has been developed in which the monitoring of circadian gene expression
is the most flexible and facile of any system presently available. Screening of
thousands of colonies for mutations that disrupt the clock or otherwise cause
aberrant rhythmic behavior is possible within a single experiment. Therefore,
this cyanobacterial system has excellent tools for detailed molecular/genetic
analyses and for clock investigations. This project will use this system to
address three aspects of biological rhythmicity: (1) identi fication and
characterization of genes that are involved in generating circadian rhythms, (2)
characterization of the mechanism by which the oscillator controls rhythmic
outputs, and (3) assessment of the fitness advantage that organisms derive from
their circadian oscillators. %%% Organisms at all levels of biological
complexity manifest circadian (daily) rhythms which are controlled by an
internal biochemical oscillator. Many physiological and cellular processes,
including sleeping/waking, body temperature, homeostatic functions, gene
expression, cell division, and enzymatic activities, are regulated by these
"biological clocks." In addition, these clocks are also the timers that measure
the daylength in photoperiodic timing of reproductive processes in plants and
animals. Psychiatric and medical studies have shown that circadian rhythms are
involved in some forms of depressive illness, "jet lag," drug
tolerance/efficacy, sleep disorders, and other aspects of human physiology.
Understanding the mechanism of these biological clocks has been elusive, but one
principle which has emerged is that their major properties are conserved in all
organisms in which circadian behavior has been observed, from bacteria to
mammals. The approach to unveiling the mechanism of circadian oscillators
described in this project focuses on using the least-complex and most
technically-approachable organism in which a biological clock has been
demonstrated (a cyanobacterium) to discover how the clock works at a molecular
level. Information gained from this work about the mechanism of circadian clocks
is of fundamental biological interest and may lead to insights which will be
useful in agriculture and in the diagnosis and treatment of mental health and
other human disorders. *** ??