* 9634747
* Geosynthetics for Foundation and Soil Isolation in          Earthquake Hazard Mitigation
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/1997,09/30/2001
* M. K. Yegian, Northeastern University
* Continuing grant
* Clifford J. Astill
* 09/30/2001
* USD 170,161.00

ABSTRACT: CMS-9634747, Mishac Yegian, Northeastern U Under dynamic excitation,
slip deformations occur along a smooth geosynthetic interface, thus reducing the
energy transmitted through the interface. As a result, geosynthetic liners
placed under the foundation of a constructed facility can absorb seismic energy,
and hence transmit smaller ground motions to the overlying structure. This
concept of using geosynthetics for Foundation Isolation is similar to mechanical
isolators used in structural engineering. In addition, using geosynthetic liners
at different depths within new slopes, embankments or hydraulic fills -- known
to be extremely vulnerable to liquefaction -- can reduce the soil amplification
effect on the ground motion, and the liquefaction potential of loose fills. This
concept is referred to as Soil Isolation. This research program investigates,
through experimental and analytical work, the technical feasibility,
practicality, and limitations of using geosynthetics for foundation and soil
isolation to mitigate earthquake hazard. The scope of this research includes
shaking table tests on geosynthetics that show the best promise for foundation
and soil isolation. The experimental results are used to develop and validate
constitutive models that describe the dynamic response of geosynthetic
interfaces. Model tests on buildings, fluid retaining structures and soil
profiles are conducted using a shaking table, and the results used to develop
procedures for the analysis of the dynamic response of structures and soil
profiles that are isolated using geosynthetic liners. The results are used to
identify areas of need for further investigation that will help to transfer the
research results to engineering practice. The innovative concept of using
geosynthetics to reduce earthquake ground motion intensity, and to reduce
liquefaction potential, can be extremely cost effective and a simpler
alternative to conventional earthquake hazard mitigation me asures.