* 9634268
* Nonlinear Optics in Single Crystal Microstructures of       Organic Materials
* ENG,ECCS
* 10/01/1996,09/30/2000
* Mrinal Thakur, Auburn University
* Continuing Grant
* Usha Varshney
* 09/30/2000
* USD 181,361.00

9634268 Thakur A major objective of this project is to demonstrate picosecond
all-optical logic and optical bistability using the large off-resonant nonlinear
refractive indices of specific organic single crystal films. The overall project
objectives include: i) preparation of single crystal films and device
microstructures of organic second and third order optical materials, ii)
detailed studies of the off-resonant nonlinearities of the films and, iii)
demonstration of devices including phase-matched SHG in waveguides, all-optical
and electro-optic switching and logic. The nonlinear optical studies will
include polarization dependent SHG and electro-optic effects in second order
optical films and time and wavelength resolved nonlinear refractive index
measurements for the third order optical films. The mechanisms involved in the
off-resonant third order processes will be elucidated and picosecond all-optical
logic will be demonstrated using specific organic materials and device
geometries. Utilizing organic films of very large second order nonlinearities,
electro-optic switching and logic will be demonstrated. Specific conjugated
polymers such as polydiacetylenes are known to have extremely large nonlinear
refractive indices along with low absorption coefficients in the off-resonant
domain. Such large nonlinearities are obtained only if the polymer chains are
organized as a single crystal. Specific organic molecular crystals (e.g. NPP,
DAST have very large and stable second order nonlinearities which can be
utilized in many applications (e.g. SHG for infrared diode lasers, electrooptic
switching), if single crystal films and waveguides can be prepared. A method
("shear method" and its modified version) that the principal investigator has
established, will be utilized for the preparation of single crystal films of the
organic second and third order optical materials. Subsequently specific device
microstructures in the Fabry-Perot etalon and waveguide geom etries will be
fabricated using the films. The nonlinear optical measurements in the films and
waveguides will be performed using established procedures. Recently, we have
demonstrated all-optical switching using the off- resonant nonlinearity of a
polydiacetylene film, placed in a Fabry-Perot cavity. The measured switching
time was limited by the pulse-width (30ps) that was used. Detailed measurements
involving all-optical logic and bistability will be performed in this proposed
work using ! picosecond and sub-picosecond pulses. Ultrafast all-optical
switching and logic in a compact device geometry should have a variety of future
applications in photonics. Single crystal films and waveguides of organic
materials having very large second order nonlinearities are expected to have
near-term applications in frequency conversion and electro-optics. The research
as proposed is important for fundamental understanding of these off-resonant
nonlinear optical effects and for realizing many practical applications. ***