* 9634843
* A Chemical-Free Deinking Method for Non-impact, Resin-Based Inks in Paper Recycling
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/15/1996,05/31/2000
* Melur Ramasubramanian, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Delcie R. Durham
* 05/31/2000
* USD 210,013.00

9634843 Ramasubramani Paper and paperboard products were the largest of
component accounting for about 40% of the total municipal solid waste (MSW). The
primary problem in recycling of paper is the quality of recycled products,
including strength and stiffness properties of paper and paperboard, which is
determined by the dirt count. The primary causes of dirt count is that the
xerographic and other non-impact printed inks tend to produce large ink
particles which are normally too large to be removed by traditional floating and
centrifugal cleaning techniques. This project investigates a novel technique to
address the problem of deinking xerographic and other resin-based inks in
recycled paper. This project will identify the process parameters such as the
effects on incorporating acoustic coaxing induced microcavitation (ACIM)
recycled fibers in the low-density paper structures through a systematic study.
A prototype deinking machine with a target deinking rate of 6 pages per minute
will be studied and developed for further implementation. This technique takes
advantage of the nature of ACIM to release the resin bonded ink flakes from
paper fibers in a completely chemical free environment, thus alleviating the
problems of recyclability of non-impact printed waste and its effect on the
environment. The outcome of the research project will provide valuable findings
for the recycling industry.