* 9634367
* CRI: Context-Dependent Mechanisms for Cortical Gain Control
* BIO,IOS
* 09/15/1996,08/31/1999
* Larry Palmer, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Diane M. Witt
* 08/31/1999
* USD 100,000.00

IBN: 9634367 PI: Finkel Gain control is a powerful process that is used in many
biological and engineering applications. In a videocamera, the photodetectors
can only operate over a limited range of light levels, so in order to be able to
record in bright daylight and dim internal light, the signal must be re-scaled
to stay within a limited range of intensities. A slightly smarter system, used
in more expensive devices, is to change the gain (how much the signal is
amplified) separately in each local region. Changing the amount of gain in an
adaptive manner allows signals to be extracted from ambient noise. The same
principles of gain control act in our visual system-- in a simple manner on the
pupil to control light entering the eye, but in increasingly more sophisticated
ways as one goes to higher levels in the visual cortex. Our goal is to
investigate these mechanisms of cortical gain control to better understand how
the visual sytem works, and as a means of uncovering new image processing
applications. The cortex has the ability to control gain not only based on
spatial location, but also in a context-dependent manner. The response to a
particular feature, say a short line segment, depends upon what other features
are present in the image. If the line segment forms part of a circle or an
extended line, the response is increased. Psychophysical studies have identified
the conditions under which certain features "pop-out" and become the focus of
visual attention. Recent physiological studies have shown that cortical cells
are exquisitely sensitive to small changes in the context of the scene. It is
believed that response changes are a result of a change in gain of individual
cortical cells, but the mechanisms controlling cell gain are poorly understood.
We are particularly interested in differential changes of gain among different
cells in a neural population. Most features are represented, in the cortex, by a
set of graded responses ove r a population of cells. The orientation of a line,
for example, is coded by a distribution of responses over cells that prefer
various orientations (vertical, horizontal, oblique). We hypothesize that inputs
from stimuli in the visual image act to differentially change the gain of cells.
A differential change in gain across a population would lead to increased
sensitivity--a better estimate of line orientation, or whatever feature is being
analyzed. This type of context-dependent gain control could lead to enhanced
discrimination of the salient features in an image. We will carry out a series
of physiological experiments in cat visual cortex to investigate this
hypothesis. We also will conduct a set of computer simulations of various
cellular mechanisms to test our model. Finally, we will build a prototype image
processing device, based on these findings, and apply it to real images.