* 9634974
* Bioengineering Analysis of Three-Dimensional                Electromechanical Interactions in the Heart
* ENG,CBET
* 10/01/1996,03/31/2001
* Jeffrey Omens, University of California-San Diego
* Continuing Grant
* Gilbert B. Devey
* 03/31/2001
* USD 268,990.00

9634974 McCulloch The heart is a complex three-dimensional muscular organ in
which electrical signals trigger coordinated muscle contraction to produce the
pumping action. Not only does the electrical system of the heart affect its
mechanical pumping, but mechanics also affect the electrical system. The cause
of these interactions has been studied in great detail at the level of the
individual heart muscle cell. But understanding how these cellular properties
affect the performance of the whole heart is made extremely difficult by the
complex anatomy and structure of the heart wall. Such an understanding is
essential if the new findings of cellular biological science are to be applied
to the prevention and diagnosis of cardiac disease and the treatment of heart
patients. Therefore, the objective of this research is to develop anatomically
accurate computer models of the heart that are based soundly on the underlying
physics and biology of the heart cells. To test these models, accurate
measurements in careful experiments will be conducted. Building on our work over
the past five years, we will conduct sophisticated new computer models of the
heart using methods of analysis similar to those used in the automotive and
aerospace industries. Our methods have been specialized to handle the unique
complexities of cardiac biology. The models vi II be based on detailed new
measurements of the shape and structure, mechanical, electrical and cellular
properties of the heart wall. Because these models will be extremely demanding
to even the fastest computers, we will run them on supercomputers at the San
Diego Supercomputer Center. The completed computer models will be used to
investigate unanswered questions about how the electromechanical properties of
individual heart cells affect the performance of the whole heart. To test the
reliability and accuracy of the computer models, new experimental methods will
be developed for simultaneously studying electrical and mechanical properties in
the heart. These measurements will be used to improve the models, which can then
be extended to analyze interactions between mechanics and other physiological
processes in the heart such as bloodflow. 'These new computer models will have
diverse applications in cardiac physiology, in the bioengineering design of new
cardiac diagnostic and treatment methods (such as cardiac ultrasound, MRI and
pacemakers) and as simulation tools for education and training of doctors and
patients, scientists, students and engineers. ***