* 9634485
* CISE Educational Innovation: A Distributed Collaborative    Learning Environment for Effective Intellectual Teamwork    Across the Curriculum
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/1996,08/31/2000
* Edwin Rogers, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Anita La Salle
* 08/31/2000
* USD 349,664.00

9634485 Glinert, Ephraim Champagne, Matthew Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
CISE Educational Innovation: A Distributed Collaborative Learning Environment
for Effective Intellectual Teamwork Across the Curriculum. This CISE Educational
Innovation award supports the integration of research into the undergraduate
curriculum through the development of a Distributed Collaborative Learning
Environment (DCLE), a hybrid physical and electronic space which will enable
teams of students to meet and learn in flexible configurations, across the
computer science curriculum. The project will include development and delivery
of courses that exploit the new capabilities, formal assessment of the
effectiveness of the new learning environment, and wide dissemination of
concepts, architecture, and prototype systems developed. In the DCLE
environment, the students comprising a team may be in one room, even seated
around the same table. At other times, they may be seated around two or more
tables, or some may be located elsewhere on campus (even geographically remote).
Whatever the physical layout may be, each student's computer is linked to those
of all other teammates, and innovative system software provides powerful support
for collaborative information development, sharing and exchange, through a
variety of flexible and natural interfaces suited to the task and the individual
user. This project is part of an overall effort jointly supported by the Office
of Cross Disciplinary Activities (CDA) in CISE and the Division of Undergraduate
Education (DUE) in EHR with the DUE funding supporting an emphasis on distance
learning, utilizing the developed DCLE in a virtual classroom and with
instruction delivered on an experimental basis from University of
California/Davis to RPI.