* 9634914
* ECM:  Supply Chain Management for Electronics Manufacturing with Product Recovery and Remanufacturing
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/1996,09/30/2001
* Reha Uzsoy, Purdue Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Janet M. Twomey
* 09/30/2001
* USD 195,823.00

9634914 Uzsoy As both environmental awareness and regulation increase in many
countries, industry is considering recovering products at the end of their
useful life for remanufacturing into new products or to reuse and recycle
materials and components, thereby significantly increasing the problem of
coordinating a company's supply chain. The goal of this research is to provide
solutions to supply chain coordination and design problems encountered by
companies with product recovery operations. The investigator will develop supply
chain models that include recovery of returned products, disassembly,
remanufacturing, purchasing of new components, assembly, and distribution. These
models are formulated as linear programs, and the research involves the
development of specialized solution procedures for these models. While these
models are intended to be used for supply chain operation once the basic
topology of the supply chain is given, the investigator will also develop models
to support the longer-term issues of supply chain design. Although much research
has been directed toward designing environmentally benign products and
processes, the economic viability of remanufacturing and recycling schemes is
also affected by the design and control of the logistics and production systems
in which they are realized. This research addresses a strong need for model-
based decision support tools for these systems, with high potential impact on
their economic viability. Increased economic viability of these systems will
contribute to more widespread adoption of remanufacturing and recycling, with
benefits not only to the environment but to the economy as a whole.