* 9634823
* Importance Sampling and the Impact of the Protection        System on Power System Reliability
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/15/1996,08/31/2000
* James Thorp, Cornell University
* Continuing grant
* Marija Ilic
* 08/31/2000
* USD 139,679.00

9634823 Thorp The study of North American Reliability Council reports over a
five year period indicates that protection systems frequently play a role in the
sequence of events that lead to power system disturbances. It is likely that
reliability will be treated as a commodity in the deregulated systems of the
future. For example the failure of the Independent Systems Operator (ISO) to
facilitate a negotiated sale of power between a producer and a load because of a
false trip of a key transmission line could result in the payment of a penalty
or otherwise effect the price of transmission services. In spite of its
importance, the impact of protection system malfunctions on overall system
reliability has not been well studied. The existing protection system with its
multiple zones of protection and redundant systems is biased toward
dependability, that is a fault is always cleared by some relay. Present day
relaying systems are designed to be dependable at the cost of security. While it
is generally believed that the self-monitoring and self-checking feature of
digital relays will reduce the probability of undetected or "hidden failures" in
relays, the number of installed microprocessor relays is still small. Further,
there has been no qualitative evaluation of the effect on system reliability of
the installation of large number of digital relays. The proposed research is to
develop techniques to evaluate the impact on system reliability of the
protection system and to appraise the value of the installation of new digital
relays with built in self-monitoring and self-checking or other modifications of
the protection system. It seems possible that the new paradigm for power system
operation will provide the impetus for a more modern protection system. That is,
the economics of transmission system reliability will require that the relaying
system be modernized. The two key elements of the proposed approach are the use
of "importance sampling" and th e generation of large data bases of power system
operating conditions such as those used for training of various artificial
schemes and evaluation of the performance of new control schemes. The
"importance sampling" technique is a simulation technique to study "rare" events
such as major power system disturbances. The generation of data bases of power
system operating conditions for training of various artificial intelligence
schemes has become a subject of recent study. They have been used for preventive
control for transient stability, for prediction of instability from real-time
phasor measurements, or the control of DC lines using real-time phasor
measurements. The essence of the proposed research is to combine the two
techniques i.e., to create a database biased toward the unlikely events as the
probabilities are based in importance sampling. Data base generation has been
recognized as a statistical approach where the data base could be generated by
randomly sampling the parameters that describe system operation. The work
proposed here would use the data base as a surrogate for the underlying
probability space. The data base would be biased toward the unlikely events just
as the probabilities are altered in importance sampling so that the impact of
reducing "hidden failures" can be studied through simulation. The specific tasks
involved in the proposed research are: * Investigation of probability models for
the dependence of hidden failures on system conditions.. * Modifications of
importance sampling to make it more appropriate for power system applications *
Examination of performance indices appropriate to the importance sampling
approach * Generation of data bases using the Cornell Production Super Computer
***