* 9634052
* U.S. JGOFS Southern Ocean Process Study: Zooplankton        Processes
* GEO,OPP
* 09/01/1996,08/31/1999
* Walter Nordhausen, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Continuing Grant
* Polly A. Penhale
* 08/31/1999
* USD 600,016.00

9634052 Huntley This research project is part of the US Joint Global Ocean Flux
Study (JGOFS) Southern Ocean Program aimed at (1) a better understanding of the
fluxes of carbon, both organic and inorganic, in the Southern Ocean, (2)
identifying the physical, ecological and biogeochemical factors and processes
which regulate the magnitude and variability of these fluxes, and (3) placing
these fluxes into the context of the contemporary global carbon cycle. The work
is one of forty-four projects that are collaborating in the Southern Ocean
Experiment, a three-year effort south of the Antarctic Polar Frontal Zone to
track the flow of carbon through its organic and inorganic pathways from the
air-ocean interface through the entire water column into the bottom sediment.
The experiment will make use of the RVIB Nathaniel B. Palmer and the R/V
Thompson. This specific project is a seasonal study of the mesoscale spatial
distribution of the carbon utilization by zooplankton in the Antarctic Polar
Frontal Zone and the Ross Sea. There is strong evidence to indicate that the
egestion of pellets by zooplankton can contribute significantly to a highly
variable and episodic biogenic carbon flux in the Southern Ocean. The research
approach used will quantify the rate of total fecal production by the meso- and
macrozooplankton community at scales that dominate the variability -- eddy-
resolving spatial scales and seasonal time scales -- in both the Antarctic Polar
Frontal Zone and the Ross Sea study regions. The process of quantification will
depend upon measurements of zooplankton abundance and distribution using a
SeaSoar-mounted Optical Plankton Counter (OPC) in the Polar Frontal Zone, a net-
mounted OPC in the Ross Sea study area, and underway acoustic current
measurements in both regions. Experimental measurements of ingestion rate will
be directed at developing empirical relationships to body weight, food
availability, and diel periodicity for the p rincipal species of Antarctic
zooplankton grazers. These relationships will then be combined with measurements
of biomass and distribution to compute the rate of total fecal production. The
approach addresses those factors that are most likely to give rise to the
greatest variability in zooplankton-produced biogenic flux: (1) variability in
zooplankton biomass, and the food available to that biomass, on scales of ten
kilometers in the horizontal and ten meters in the vertical, (2) seasonal
variability, and (3) variability that is attributable to the size-frequency
distribution of the zooplankton themselves. The results will quantify the role
of zooplankton in carbon flux processes of the Southern Ocean, leading to a
better understanding of the Southern Ocean carbon cycle. ***