* 9634763
* Integrity of Precracked Reinforced Concrete Retrofitted withComposite Laminates
* NONE,NONE
* 10/01/1996,03/31/2000
* Oral Buyukozturk, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Vijaya Gopu
* 03/31/2000
* USD 239,936.00

9634763 Buyukozturk The objective of this research is to provide a scientific
basis for the underlying mechanisms of fracture and delamination of precracked
reinforced concrete retrofitted using fiber-reinforced plastic (FRP) composite
laminates, and to develop design guidelines for efficient applications and safe
engineering designs of these systems. Laminated beams have been observed to fail
through several mechanisms, including yielding of the laminate, crushing of the
concrete, and brittle fracture through delamination of the composite from the
concrete. Available experience has shown that fracture through delamination can
occur at stress below material limits and under loads within normal service. The
emphasis of this study will be on delamination and its causes, specifically in
the presence of combined flexural and shear cracks in the retrofitted concrete
beam. Fracture mechanics based combined experimental and numerical studies of
failure initiating from the concrete-adherent-laminate interface region will be
performed on concrete beams laminated with fiber-reinforced plastics. Parametric
investigations involving different materials and construction techniques will
determine the optimum effectiveness of these combinations. The project will have
the collaboration of Swiss Federal Laboratories for Materials Testing and
Research (EMPA) in Switzerland where large scale tests will be conducted with
consistent parameters as will be used in this study. This research is expected
to provide a fundamental knowledge of FRP delamination, and be developing the
needed design guidelines to have a direct impact on engineering application in
the retrofitting field in an efficient, economical, and safe manner. ***