* 9634502
* First-Principles Investigation of Dynamical Electronic      Response and Many-Body Effects in Metals
* MPS,DMR
* 11/15/1996,10/31/2000
* Adolfo Eguiluz, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* G. Bruce Taggart
* 10/31/2000
* USD 180,000.00

9634502 Eguiluz This grant is to support work on calculation of collective
properties of metals, namely the influence of electron- electron interaction
using realistic band structure energies for electrons. The current understanding
of these properties is based on rather simple models such as Jellium or Hubbard
model. As the full complexity of the metal response is being explored in various
state-of-the-art electron spectroscopies, such a study is not only feasible, it
becomes imperative as well. The project includes: (1) calculation of inelastic
scattering cross sections for electrons and x-rays, (2) influence of charge and
spin fluctuations on the quasi particle states near the Fermi surface, (3)
magnetic response of atomically thin films and (4) temperature dependence of the
magnetic properties in a 3d ferromagnet. The work involves close collaboration
with experimental colleagues. %%% This grant supports theoretical work on
complex and subtle properties of metals using realistic models where the earlier
work has been done on specially developed simplified models. The work involves
calculation of specific quantities which can be compared to experiments. In
particular, this project will considerably enhance our understanding of
temperature dependence of magnetism and the magnetic properties of thin films.
***