* 9634351
* Conference:  Modeling in Biochemical Engineering,                        October 11 - 12, 1996
* ENG,CBET
* 05/01/1996,04/30/1997
* Friedrich Srienc, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* George B. Vermont
* 04/30/1997
* USD 10,000.00

9634351 Srienc The objective of this conference is to bring together a select
group of biochemical engineers and biologists from the United States and Europe
to discuss in depth the role mathematical modeling is playing in the area of
biochemical engineering and how its contributions to biotechnology can be
enhanced in the future. This conference will have four technical sessions which
include: 91) Characterization of biotic and abiotic phases, (2) Corpuscular
models of cell populations, (3) metabolic models, and (4) modeling of complex
cellular systems. The first session will scope the different variables used to
characterize: (a) the biotic phase with regard to their experimental measurement
as well as their suitability to describe the physiological state of the cell,
and (b) the abiotic phase with regard to their experimental measurement as well
as their suitability to describe the rate of change of physiological state of
cells in the biotic phase. The second session will raise issues related to
corpuscular models or statistical population balance models which account for
the segregation of biomass among distinct cells (or corpuscles). The third
session will involve a class of non- corpuscular models, i.e. metabolic models,
which view biomass as a structured entity. These models account for internal
regulation of metabolic pathways. This session will address problems in the
application of metabolic engineering. The fourth session will be devoted to
modeling issues connected complex organisms and supracellular systems.