* 9634617
* Microparticle Photonics: Frequency Control and Linewidth Quenching of Semiconductor Lasers Using Optical Feedback from Spherical Micro-Cavities
* NONE,NONE
* 03/15/1997,02/28/1999
* Giora Griffel, Polytechnic University of New York
* Continuing grant
* Tien-Pei Lee
* 02/28/1999
* USD 123,743.00

9634617 Griffel Frequency stability and the optical linewidth of semiconductor
laser are critical parameters, affecting a wide range of applications such as
coherent and optical communication system performance, wavelength division
multiplexing (WDM) based photonic switching and communication systems, room-
temperature spectral-hole-burning optical memory, interferometric sensing, path
length measurement, and high-resolution spectroscopy. For many applications the
operating frequency of a single longitudinal mode (SLM) laser such as the
distributed feedback laser (DFB), or the distributed Bragg reflector laser
(DBR), is not stable enough. It is susceptible to thermal fluctuations, and
intensity as well as spatial variations of carrier concentration cause chirping.
In addition, a typical DFB laser, operating at 1.5 microns has a linewidth of
the order of 3-10 MHz, while most coherent optical communication systems require
sub MHz linewidth. Several techniques have been used in the past to lock the
operating frequency and reduce the optical linewidth, among which are electronic
or optical feedback. Reduction of the optical linewidth to the kHz range has
successfully been demonstrated using bulk external cavity semiconductor laser.
Another approach is to couple the laser cavity to a properly detuned external
high finesse resonator. Frequency locking with dramatic linewidth reduction by a
factor of ~1000, using coupling of a semiconductor laser to high-finesse Fabry-
Perot etalon, has been demonstrated. However, in spite of impressive reduction
of the laser noise, most of these techniques are cumbersome, require a bulky,
laboratory-type optical set-up, and are sensitive to cantankerous parameters,
such as the phase of the reflected signal, which is strongly affected by
microphonic effects. In addition, due to the length of the cavity required for
the set-ups, the longitudinal mode spacing is small and SLM operation is
difficult to realize. As a result, these techniques were primarily used only for
ex perimental set-ups. In this project, we propose to develop and carry out
theoretical and experimental studies of a novel scheme for realizing frequency
locking and linewidth reduction of semiconductor lasers in a small scale
geometry. The approach involves the use of a new type of optical resonator
system, based on a very high Q micro-sphere cavity. It has been known for some
time that micrometer sized dielectric spheres act as high-Q resonators, with
electromagnetic energy stored in form of spherical cavity modes confined around
the sphere, near its surface. Employment of such modes in an axially-symmetric
dielectric body results in sharp resonance peaks named "morphology dependent
resonances" or MDR's. The Q-factor of these resonances is projected to approach
10^8 at T = 77=degrees K, and exceed l0^9=at T= 4 K. For comparison, a Fabry-
Perot etalon type resonator, comprised o= f two mirrors of 98% reflectivity
separated 10 cm apart would result in a Q factor of 3X10^7. These resonance
peaks of the micro-spheres occur at specific values of the sphere size parameter
X, where X = 2*Pi*a/lambda; a is the radius of the sphere, and lambda is the
optical wavelength. Using this phenomenon, cavity effects such as optical
bistability, and lasing have been reported. In our case, the micro-sphere can be
used as a detuned loading for a semiconductor laser, causing the oscillating
field to lock on to one of the MDR's and quench its linewidth at the same time.
This approach may achieve extremely narrow linewidth in a system that is stable,
cost effective, and not larger than the laser itself. In addition, the ability
to lock into and measure MDR's of single stationary micro-spheres opens up the
prospect of performing extremely sensitive adsorption and reaction measurements
between species bonded to the micro-sphere surface and reagents in a surrounding
solution. With modest Q's of 10^6, a layer having a subatomic thickness (~0.1
Angstrom) may be detected on a micro-sphere with r =3D 10 microns. Since th is
thicknes= s is considerably less than the molecular size of a typical antigen
molecule, the possibility of observing small fractions of a monolayer is
reasonable and thus paves the way to new immunological testing techniques. ***