* 9634453
* Dissertation Research:  Civil Justice Culture and ADR:      An Exploratory View Through a Neo-Institutional Lens
* SBE,SES
* 07/15/1996,06/30/1998
* Susette Talarico, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Patricia White
* 06/30/1998
* USD 4,262.00

9634453 Talarico Most social scientific research on civil courts has focused on
caseloads, dispute formation, court reforms and selected system actors such as
attorneys. No study to date has focused on the actors, institutions, and process
of civil justice as a system. This dissertation seeks to fill this gap in the
literature with a neo-institutional study of civil court processes and culture.
This theoretical framework emphasizes the importance of norms, rules, and
organizations as constraints on individual behavior. It focuses on three
questions. What is the effect of institutional change on civil courts? How do
civil system actors and institutions interact? Is there a distinctive civil
justice culture? To address these questions, the co-P.I. will analyze both
quantitative and qualitative data from a single Georgia court system (Hall
County). This site is appropriate because it features the state's most
comprehensive alternate dispute resolution program, which has a substantial
caseload and serves a diverse population. Case records for the quantitative
portion of the analysis will be randomly drawn for six years (1989-1994). They
will be coded for case type, participants, procedures (e.g. motions and
hearings), processing time, disposition type, and outcome and analyzed to
produce a statistical profile of general civil and domestic relations litigation
and a multivariate analysis of case processing time, disposition type, outcome,
and other variables over time. The qualitative portion of the research will
consist of elite interviews and direct observation of civil court processes.