* 9634672
* An Acoustic Boundary Control Method for Suppressing         Structural Sound Radiation
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/1996,03/31/2000
* Jian-Qiao Sun, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* Alison Flatau
* 03/31/2000
* USD 92,208.00

Reduction of interior sound radiation in enclosed environments such as in
helicopters, fixed-wing aircraft and land vehicles is a very important problem.
There are two mainstream techniques for dealing with this problem. One is the
active noise cancellation method (ANC) using loudspeakers, and the other is
sound radiation reduction strategy via structural controls (often called active
structural acoustic control or ASAC). This research project deals with the
development of a mathematical theory for the acoustic boundary control method
and to analytically and experimentally demonstrate the advantages of a new
acoustic boundary actuation method over the existing ones. The specific research
tasks include a study of the spatial characteristics of acoustic boundary
control; development of a neural network for selecting optimal spatial
configurations; development of hardware prototypes of sensing and actuation
devices for implementing acoustic boundary control; and evaluation of existing
feedforward adaptive and feedback control algorithms in conjunction with the
acoustic boundary control strategy. The results obtained from this research
project will lead to the development of technologies for eliminating interior
noise of the vehicles, and the generation of important theoretical groundwork
that will enable technology development for reducing exterior noise radiation.