* 9634610
* 1996-1998 Support for Research of U.S. Scientists Working inIndia, Award in US and Indian Currency
* O/D,OISE
* 08/15/1996,07/31/1999
* Frederick Asher, American Institute of Indian Studies
* Standard Grant
* Marjorie Lueck
* 07/31/1999
* USD 357,580.00

9634610 Asher Description: This proposal supports the American Institute of
Indian Studies (AIIS) for the management and funding of research activities in
the behavioral and natural sciences conducted by US scientists in India.
Candidates with background in India are screened and nominated by AIIS before
referral to NSF for final selection. The AIIS manages the required clearances
for the research, the logistics involved in travel, local arrangements and the
conduct of research in India. Areas of research typically include anthropology,
linquistics, sociology, economics, political sciences, as well as biology,
mathematics and engineering. The US-India program supports US scholarly research
in India in areas of interest to NSF where the research may be a vehicle for
improved bilateral understanding through science. Scope: The AIIS is a
consortium of more than forty-eight leading American colleges and universities
with South Asian or Indian Studies programs. The Institute's principal activity
is the awarding of fellowships to support scholarly research on India by senior
scientists, postdocs, and graduate students. Applicants are careful screened and
reviewed by panels of eminent scientists at AIIS, and then referred to NSF for
disciplinary review and final selection. The AIIS offices in New Dehli and other
major cities in India have well-established contacts with Government of India
departments and can facilitate US scientists collaborations with host
institutions. ***