* 9634542
* Optical Communication in the Quantum Limit: Noise-Free Optical Amplifiers and Taps
* NONE,NONE
* 04/15/1997,12/31/2000
* Atac Imamoglu, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Gernot S. Pomrenke
* 12/31/2000
* USD 629,880.00

9634542 Coldren The performance of fiber-optic communications systems is
fundamentally limited by quantum mechanical fluctuations in the processes of
amplification and tapping of light. The minimum attainable total noise is
limited by Heisenberg's minimum uncertainty product. The goal of the proposed
work is the development of optoelectronic devices that would circumvent the
quantum mechanical limits. This is done by the redistribution of the uncertainty
in the observables such that the quantity of interest for the system performance
exhibits a minimum noise. At the same time the noise of the conjugate observable
is enhanced. By means of photon number amplifiers and taps, the information
encoded in the intensity of an optical signal can be amplified and measured with
very little uncertainty at the expense of phase information which is destroyed
and becomes totally uncertain. The proposed work will emphasize the fabrication
of practical semiconductor devices that will allow for virtually noiseless
amplification and information tapping and generation. The success for this
project relies on the ability to fabricate and integrate different configuration
of high quantum efficiency semiconductor lasers. In addition to the fabrication
efforts, considerable work will reside in the experimental verification of the
low quantum noise properties of these devices. Noiseless taps and amplifiers
that we propose to demonstrate are expected to have a strong impact in
applications where information needs to be shared among many subscribers. This
is the case in optical interconnects and local-area networks: If the devices
developed here are implemented, each subscriber will be able to measure,
amplify, and regenerate the information of further use without degrading the
signal quality. Further, the versatility of these devices, which includes the
possibility of cloning a signal into many quantum correlated copies, and the
possibility of choosing freely the emission wavelength of the latter, may be
attractive in space- and wavelength-division multiplexing applications. ***