* 9634616
* High-Latitude Southern Ocean Paleontology Workshop
* GEO,OPP
* 05/01/1996,10/31/1996
* David Harwood, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Standard Grant
* Scott Borg
* 10/31/1996
* USD 10,800.00

Harwood 9634616 Abstract Information derived from the study of fossil plants,
animals, and protists provides valuable data on age and paleoenvironment in
geological studies. Paleontologists are actively studying the stratigraphic
record of evolution and environmental change in the Southern Ocean and Antarctic
area, in order to address questions regarding climate change associated with the
development of the Antarctic Ice Sheet more than 40 million years ago and the
response of life to progressive cooling and ice sheet advance and retreat. Many
gaps exist within the geologic record. Recent and future efforts are targeted at
filling some of the major gaps through stratigraphic drilling. The Cape Roberts
Project (CRP) is the most recent drilling effort, with a target to recover a
record from 100 to 30 million years ago. This will build on recent drilling
efforts on the margin of the Victoria Land Basin (CIROS &amp; MSSTS) and in the
Southern Ocean by the Ocean Drilling Program (ODP). The new CRP initiative will
focus on the early history of ice sheets in East Antarctica and the conditions
there prior to the development of the ice sheet, when this region was much
warmer. A workshop to address broad issues related to AntarcticaOs biota and
past environmental change in the southern high-latitudes will be held on 21 to
23 May, 1996 in Wellington, New Zealand. The workshop will review the current
state of knowledge and provide a forum for scientists to develop strategies and
approaches for future research. Of critical importance to this workshop will be
the development and integration of biostratigraphic zonal schemes. Reference
sections from the Southern Ocean and surrounding continental margins of
Australia, New Zealand and South America will be compared in preparation for the
1996 and 1997 drilling at Cape Roberts. This award provide travel support U.S.
paleontologists, covering a range of fossil groups and considerable DSDP and ODP
experience, to particip ate in the workshop and communicate directly with
paleontologists and stratigraphers from other countries involved with the Cape
Roberts Project. This effort will enable a more coherent approach to the
biostratigraphy and paleontological analysis of Cape Roberts Project cores and
provide a forum to address larger issues related to the record of life and
environmental change in the southern high-latitudes.