* 9634256
* The Wheel in Space
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/1996,08/31/1997
* Jeffrey Nelson, Sesame Workshop
* Standard Grant
* Hyman H. Field
* 08/31/1997
* USD 49,973.00

9634256 Joel Schneider This is a planning grant to Children's Television
Workshop (CTW) to develop further the science content in a proposed television
series for 8-12 year olds entitled, The Wheel In Space. This adventure series
would be set on an orbiting space station 100 years in the future which, by
definition is an enormous scientific and technological enterprise. The planning
period would be used to investigate how its complex systems and operations can
best be used to illustrate principles and processes science. Specific planning
tasks include: o Working with consultants in space science and other scientific
disciplines as well as with organizations such as NASA and the National Air and
Space Museum to explore the science and technology involved in the operation of
a space station and to project what living, working, and growing up on a space
station might be like a century from now. o Writing a content "bible" that will
serve as a technical guide to writers of the series. o Writing a treatment of
the series that outlines story premises that incorporate science topics. o
Investigating potential components of the project that may enhance the reach and
impact of the television series. o Examining the advantages and disadvantages of
a co-production arrangement with Southern Star, a television production company
in Australia interested in participating in the project. The PI's for the
project will be Joel Schneider who will serve as Content Director and Jeffrey
Nelson who will be Executive Producer. Both have worked on previous science and
mathematics media projects at CTW. A principal consultant will be Samuel Gibbon,
producer and/or executive producer for Sesame Street, The Electric Company,
3-2-1 Contact, and The Voyage of the Mimi.