* 9634241
* Collaborative Research:  Seasonal Contribution of Nano-     and Microzooplankton to Antarctic Food Web Structure        in the Ross Sea
* GEO,OPP
* 09/01/1996,08/31/1999
* Darcy Lonsdale, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Continuing Grant
* Polly A. Penhale
* 08/31/1999
* USD 46,990.00

9634241 Lonsdale This research project is part of the US Joint Global Ocean Flux
Study (JGOFS) Southern Ocean Program aimed at (1) a better understanding of the
fluxes of carbon, both organic and inorganic, in the Southern Ocean, (2)
identifying the physical, ecological and biogeochemical factors and processes
which regulate the magnitude and variability of these fluxes, and (3) placing
these fluxes into the context of the contemporary global carbon cycle. A major
role for nanoplankton (2-20 um) and microplanktonic (20- 200 um) protozoa in
pelagic food webs of the world ocean has been firmly established in recent
years. Neritic and coastal ocean ecosystems have been extensively studied in
this regard, and considerable information is also accumulating on the microbial
processes of tropical and temperate oceanic ecosystems. In contrast, the role of
nano-and microzooplankton in the flow of energy and elements through polar
communities is less clear because of the difficulties associated with sampling
and working in these environments, and because of the prevailing dogma that
microbial processes may be overshadowed by `classical' phytoplankton-
zooplankton-fish food webs in these environments. Clearly, there is now a great
deal of information that is contradictory to this dogma, and numerous studies in
recent years have documented an abundant and active protozoan fauna in polar
ecosystems. Nevertheless, there are still substantial gaps in our understanding
of the overall importance of the microbial loop in polar environments. This
research project will examine questions concerning the ecological role of nano-
and microplanktonic protozoa in the water column of the Ross Sea: (1) Do nano-
and microplanktonic protozoa constitute a significant fraction of the
zooplankton community in the Ross Sea? (2) Are these protozoa responsible for
maintaining low phytoplankton and bacterial standing stocks in this environment?
(3) Is mixotrophy (i.e., combined phototrophic and phagotrophic nutrition) an
important adaptive behavior for the survival of protists in this planktonic
Antarctic ecosystem? Studies will be conducted over an annual cycle in the Ross
Sea in order to examine the expected strong seasonal variability in these
features of protistan ecology. These studies constitute both "core" JGOFS
measurements and supplementary studies designed to establish the seasonal
contribution of protozoan biomass and grazing activity to the overall structure
of the pelagic food web of the Ross Sea.