* 9634336
* New Methods for Decision-Focused Integrated Assessment:     Multiple Objectives, Risk Evaluation and Visualization
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/1996,02/28/1999
* Benjamin Hobbs, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Hal R. Arkes
* 02/28/1999
* USD 199,964.00

SBR-9634336 Ellis Hobbs Johns Hopkins University This award was made as part of
the Methods and Models for Integrated Assessment competition. It provides funds
for the investigators to develop methods that will improve the capability of
integrated assessment systems to perform policy relevant modeling and decision
evaluation by incorporating: (1) explicit representation of alternative
policies; (2) credible physical models and/or the capability to easily modify
the system to incorporate alternative model structures and parameters; (3)
performance indicators or objectives that address the concerns of the
policymaker/user of the system; (4) characterizations of the level and sources
of uncertainty associated with model outputs; (5) a user interface that
encourages sensitivity analysis and exploration and that effectively
communicates tradeoffs among objectives and uncertainties; and (6) the ability
to show the implications of alternative value judgments concerning acceptable
risks and tradeoffs among objectives. These goals require research in three
research areas. The computation issues that will be studied include: (1) rapid
generation of nondominated alternatives; (2) identification of stochastically
nondominated alternatives when there are multiple objectives; (3) identification
of alternatives that perform well on regret-based criteria; and (4) the ability
to link a solution in objective space with the corresponding solution in
decision space and the value judgments implied by choosing that solution. The
visualization issues to be developed focus on effective presentation of
information on tradeoffs and risks. Finally, research into system-user dynamics
will compare methods for users to save and compare results. The investigators'
work in these three areas will be tested in a set of demonstration workshops
that are supported by this award. These workshops will use the new modeling and
display methods on actual integrated assessments, to see how policy-makers make
use o f the new methods. Overall, these improvements should increase the
potential for policy recommendations that consider a fuller range of integrated
models and possible outcomes.