* 9634722
* Conference in Mathmatical Sciences: Dynamical Systems in    Structured Population Dynamics, June 3-8, 1997 in Raleigh,  North Carolina
* MPS,DMS
* 05/15/1997,04/30/1998
* John Franke, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Lloyd E. Douglas
* 04/30/1998
* USD 25,511.00

ABSTRACT The NSF-CBMS regional conference on "Dynamical Systems in Structured
Population Dynamics" will be held at the Department of Mathematics, North
Carolina State University, June 3-8, 1997. Professor J. M. Cushing from the
University of Arizona will serve as the principal lecturer of the conference.
The conference will focus on a new and exciting area of research: structured
population models, their relationship to experimental data and their
implications for dynamical systems. Structured models span the gap between the
level of the individual organism and the level of the total population. This
direction of research is still in its formative stage and is currently under
intense investigation by many mathematicians and mathematical biologists. A
major breakthrough occurred last year when Prof. Cushing and his collaborators
established nonintuitive complex dynamics in real population data. By
controlling laboratory parameters of the flour beetle, they demonstrated complex
dynamics including period doubling. Since then, these results and their
mathematical implications have attracted the attention of many internationally
renowned researchers. Prof. Cushing is an excellent lecturer and a major
contributor to the area. With his presentation skills and broad view of the
subject matter, he is most appropriate person to give a well organized
presentation of the major ideas and recent results, and also set the future
direction of research in this field during the course of his lectures.