* 9634196
* Synthesis and Characterization of Functionalized            Polyethylene Surfaces
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/1996,08/31/2000
* David Bergbreiter, Texas A&M Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 08/31/2000
* USD 249,000.00

9634196 Bergbreiter This grant will explore several new aspects of polyolefin
surface modification. The initial stages of the proposed project will extend
prior studies on "responsive" surfaces - surfaces that reversibly change
hydrophilicity, adhesion and/or reactivity in response to external physical or
chemical stimuli. By incorporating several different sorts of spectroscopic
probes and by chemically tuning the structure of polymer grafts, it will be
possible to test how to chemically control and manipulate solvation and
reactivity at polymer surfaces. This chemistry will be explored with linear
brush-like grafts. Second, a new approach to surface grafting using
hyperbranched polymers will be studied. Preliminary work has already shown that
hyperbranched grafting chemistry can generate heavily functionalized thin (10 -
150 nm) films of polymer grafts at surfaces. This chemistry can also be used to
generate responsive surfaces and can, by design, incorporate spectroscopic
labels either in the graft phase, at the graft/solvent interface or at the graft
phase/substrate interface. Finally, known metallocene catalysts used in
polypropylene polymerization make terminally functionalized stereoregular
polypropylene oligomers readily available. Such oligomers can be synthetically
modified and characterized using chemistry previously used to prepare terminally
functionalized polyethylene oligomers. These terminally functionalized
polypropylene oligomers will then be used to prepare surface functionalized
polypropylene films by a blending approach whose utility has been established
using polyethylene oligomers and a polyethylene host polymer. %%% This grant is
in the area of polymer synthesis for design and modification of surfaces. This
new approach to polypropylene functionalization can be used with the new sort s
of chemical grafting chemistry to be developed in this proposal and in prior
work. The result will be a new way to efficiently surface modify polypropylene.
***