* 9634796
* Control Theory for Nonlinear, Distributed, Mechatronic      Systems with Applications to Overhead Crane Manufacturing
* ENG,CMMI
* 01/01/1997,12/31/2000
* Christopher Rahn, Clemson University
* Standard Grant
* Alison Flatau
* 12/31/2000
* USD 63,834.00

This project develops an overhead crane control system for precision transport
and assembly operations. The crane system provides an excellent testbed for the
development of advanced control theory for nonlinear, distributed, mechatronic
systems. The crane model includes a nonlinear, distributed cable and typically
an electrical drive motor. The theory can then be applied to many similar
systems, such as smart structures, flexible rotors supported by magnetic
bearings, and high speed material transport machinery. Overhead cranes have
higher load capacity, larger workspace, simpler position monitoring, and easier
obstacle avoidance than forklifts or Automatic Guided Vehicle. The poor payload
position and orientation control of overhead cranes has limited their
application in precision transport and assembly operations. Due to the flexible
cable, the payload of an overhead crane swings during transit, making manual
remote positioning difficult and damage or injury possible. In manufacturing
environments, high speed response, accurate tracking, and good stability margins
are desired. The lumped and distributed model controllers advanced in this
research are based on Lyapunov theory. This research studies the fusion of the
lumped and distributed Lyapunov techniques for the full nonlinear, distributed
model. Additionally, the `low-pass filter-like` electrical dynamics tend to
filter out part of the high-frequency component of the controller. While high-
gain current feedback tends to partially null out this filtering effect, this
research targets the design of backstepping-type controllers which exactly
compensate for the effects of the electrical dynamics. The specific research
objectives are to:i) develop saturation controllers for the electrically-driven,
nonlinear rigid cable model; ii) investigate implementable boundary controllers
for the linear distributed model; iii) accurately model the nonlinear, flexible
cable system; iv) develop control theory for nonlinear, distributed, mechatronic
systems; and v) implement the controllers on a small-scale experiment in the
Robotics and Mechatronics Laboratory and a fullscale overhead crane (DEMAG 5
ton) in the new Engineering Innovation Building at Clemson University.