* 9634211
* Dissertation Research:  The Ancient Hawaiian World-System   Through the Eyes of Russian Explorers
* NONE,NONE
* 08/01/1996,07/31/1997
* Christopher Chase-Dunn, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Patricia White
* 07/31/1997
* USD 7,500.00

9634211 Dunn This Dissertation Improvement research deals with the privileged
status of the scientific observer, which for the most part goes unrecognized
when the researcher is preoccupied with using aggregate data. The uniqueness of
the project is to study one small world-system at the moment of it's
incorporation into an expanding larger one through the eyes of explorers. The
small world-system of the ancient Hawaiian archipelago before that system was
transformed and incorporated in to the modern world-system in the early
nineteenth century will be examined. This will be accomplished through studying
the relative validity of different kinds of data and using these data to make
inferences about structural positions of different polities within the Hawaiian
world-system. The general hypothesis being tested is that what is "known" about
the social complexity of Hawaii at the turn of 19th century did not arise from
observation of facts alone, but the perceptions of the explorers were shaped by
social and historical circumstances. The data for this research is mainly from
accounts of Russian voyagers. Through examining particular individuals'
representations of events several theses of the world-system approach, e.g.
concerning the interplay between more and less hierarchical neighbors will be
tested. The study seemingly suggests a need to move away from broad studies of
total exchange distribution to more sensitive studies of contextual based
knowledge about the exchange acts. ***