* 9634419
* CRI: Automated Volumetric Analysis of the Auditory Cortex   Using Self-Organizing Principles
* BIO,IOS
* 09/15/1996,02/28/1999
* Christiana Leonard, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Fred Stollnitz
* 02/28/1999
* USD 109,915.00

IBN: 9634419 PI: Leonard Modern technical improvements have made it possible to
image fine details of the human brain during life. Unfortunately, the great
individual variability that characterizes all biological phenomena makes the
study of the brain extremely difficult and time consuming. Since the images are
digitized, it should be possible to extract features of interest automatically.
In this project, a neuroscientist, an applied mathematician and an electrical
engineer will initiate a collaboration designed to to develop such automation.
The first step will be to identify prominent skull landmarks to triangulate the
medial origin of the feature, using a technique that has been proved very
effective in ultrasound images of the heart. Once the feature is located, neural
network techniques originally developed for automatic target recognition will be
utilized to measure its shape and volume. The long term goal is to develop
automated methods for identifying major functional areas in the brain. Such work
is a necessary prerequisite for the interpretation of functional imaging data.
The project should produce techniques applicable in a wide variety of fields,
including cognitive neuroscience, education, industrial, developmental and
cognitive psychology, and medicine.