* 9634036
* GOALI:  Efficient Production of Correctly Folded tPA and    Other Complex Eucaryotic Proteins in Escherichia coli
* ENG,CBET
* 09/15/1996,08/31/2000
* James Swartz, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* Fred G. Heineken
* 08/31/2000
* USD 350,000.00

9634036 Georgiou This proposal is on research to improve the production of
correctly folded complex eucaryotic protein in E. coli. It is proposed to employ
thrombolytic enzyme tissue plasminogen activator (tPA) as the model protein for
optimizing the expression of secreted multidisulfide proteins in bacteria. It is
expected that conditions which maximize the formation of the correct disulfide
bonds in tPA will also be useful for the expression of simpler proteins with
fewer disulfide bonds. A three part strategy is proposed. This includes: (1)
Cellular Engineering: This approach utilizes a recent discovery by the
investigators that the mammalian protein disulfide isomerase (PDI) can be
expressed in a functional form in E. coli where it can mediate the expression of
low, but significant, amounts of active tPA. Conditions that enhance the
activity of PDI in the bacterial periplasmic space, and thus result in increased
yields of correctly folded tPA, will be determined. (2) Genetic Screening: The
use of genetic screens to isolate mutants producing high amounts of correctly
folded tPA will be employed since disulfide bond formation is a complex process
that may prove difficult to optimize solely by cell engineering approaches.
Mutants exhibiting the highest titer of active tPA will be isolated and
characterized to determine the genetic lesions that result in more efficient
disulfide bond formation. (3) Fermentation Engineering: A systematic study of
the effect of fermentation conditions which are known to have an influence on
tPA folding will be conducted. These include parameters such as dissolved oxygen
concentration, the redox potential of the growth medium, the presence of low
molecular weight thiols and disulfides and culture pH. The in vivo oxygen states
of the enzymes that catalyze disulfide bond formation will be determined so that
the effect of growth conditions on function of the disulfide machinery can be
understood. Also, fermentation c onditions that maximize cell density while
maintaining the optimal oxidation state for heterologous protein folding will be
investigated. This research is a cooperative activity with Genentech Inc. in
South San Francisco, California. Genentech will commit significant resources
including scientists' time fermentation equipment, expression vectors,
antibodies, analytical support, tPA samples etc. towards the completion of this
research. ***