* 9650737
* Reforming Mathematics Curriculum Through Computerized       Laboratories and Cooperative Learning
* EDU,DUE
* 08/15/1996,07/31/1998
* Jacquelyn White, Eastern Florida State College
* Standard Grant
* James H. Lightbourne
* 07/31/1998
* USD 70,000.00

Brevard Community College, a multi-campus, co-educational community college
located on the east coast of Florida, is establishing three computerized
mathematics laboratories at the Melbourne Campus and one at the College's
Institute for Space Technology. The laboratories will be part of a comprehensive
effort to reform the entire mathematics curriculum that addresses improving
teaching techniques and focuses on increasing students' understanding of and
success in mathematics at all levels. The target student audience includes all
students requiring an introductory college level mathematics course or greater
to complete degree requirements, and student employees of the Kennedy Space
Center requiring mathematics as a component of space technology related training
programs. Cooperative learning techniques will be implemented as small student
groups use the computer to simulate mathematical equations, explore related
mathematical concepts, and test possible solutions. As they perform computer-
based activities in their groups, students will organize their own mathematical
concepts, enabling them to learn more effectively and improve their mathematical
problem solving skills. Evaluation of the project will consist of comparing
student success rates, satisfaction, and retention in classes using the reformed
pedagogy to traditional lecture-based classes. Assessing project impact will
also take into consideration how improving mathematical competency will
contribute to enhanced job skills of Kennedy Space Center employees. The
proposed reforms can serve as a model for other institutions wishing to initiate
similar changes to their own curricula.