* 9650981
* Rapid Prototype Printed Circuit Board Work Cell to Support  Design Across the Curriculum
* EHR,DUE
* 09/01/1996,08/31/1999
* Randy Moss, Missouri University of Science and Technology
* Standard Grant
* Janet C. Rutledge
* 08/31/1999
* USD 45,000.00

The faculty of Electrical Engineering (EE) have started implementing a major
revision of their BSEE curriculum. The new program integrates engineering
analysis with open-ended engineering design projects at all levels of study.
Virtually all EE students are required to design, fabricate, evaluate, and test
a number of electronic circuits prior to graduation. The current practice of
using outside vendors to produce printed circuit boards (PCBs) for these
projects is becoming very costly. In addition, students have a very limited
amount of time to test their designs, while the high fabrication cost
discourages experimentation. The EE department is faced with the choice of
severely limiting the complexity of hardware projects or finding a cheaper
alternative for rapidly producing prototype PCBs. The equipment used in this
project makes possible the construction of an automated PCB fabrication work
cell. This rapid-prototyping system dramatically reduces the recurring cost and
turnaround time of PCB fabrication and enables students to experience a more
realistic design cycle. In addition to supporting the engineering design
component of various classes, the equipment can also be a test-bed for the
machine vision and factory automation courses. The new video equipment enables
students to develop algorithms for a PCB inspection application. The robotic
equipment can be used in an existing factory automation class for path control
experiments. The new equipment is compatible with commercial grade computer-
assisted design packages already in use. It would be reasonable to duplicate
this effort at a variety of universities for a reasonably modest cost; this
project should attract the interest of many institutions since there is a
simultaneous push to increase the amount of engineering design and shrinking of
budgets for EE programs.