* 9650377
* Computer Applications in Introductory Physics & Astronomy
* EHR,DUE
* 06/01/1996,05/31/1998
* Donald Kniffen, Hampden-Sydney College
* Standard Grant
* Duncan E. McBride
* 05/31/1998
* USD 18,900.00

It is the objective of this project to equip two laboratory courses in the
Department of Physics with new computers. The Department of Physics and
Astronomy has a policy that requires a separate co-requisite laboratory with
each Physics or Astronomy course. Most students who enroll in these courses are
significantly deficient in scientific, technological, and computer skills. In
addition, most nonscience students find the laboratory a burden. Therefore, one
must be creative in acquiring the student's interest and maintaining a
meaningful educational experience in the lab. With the development of the
Internet, it is possible to access scientific and technological databases
worldwide, for example, meteorological and astronomical images. With the
incorporation of computers and Internet applications into the introductory
Physics and Astronomy laboratory, this project can accomplish several
objectives. Firstly, students gain valuable exposure to computers. Secondly,
students are exposed to the latest science and technology. Thirdly, computer
projects properly integrated into a laboratory are a good mechanism to increase
the interest of nonscience students. Fourthly, the use of the Internet helps the
student realize that meteorology and astronomy are very active and dynamic
fields, even at the introductory level. Finally, the current approach to
computer simulations in the astronomy laboratory, in which the student is sent
to the computer center, can be replaced by in-class instruction where the
frustration of dealing with unfamiliar software and hardware can be mitigated.
Current estimates are that 225 students (23 percent of the total college
enrollment) would use these computers per academic year. The college is
expanding the summer session, increasing the usage by an additional 30 to 50
students. The department is also planning to generate a laboratory manual
entitled, `Incorporating the Internet in the Introductory Laboratory.` This
contains information concerning all aspects of using the Internet in a
classroom. It features information on the possible problems one might face,
solutions to those problems, and methods of locating remote databases. In
addition, the lab manual can include exercises designed to give the student a
better understanding of the images of interest (i.e., meteorological,
astronomical, etc.).