* 9650364
* Acquisition of Analytical Scanning Electron Microscope for  Undergraduate Education at Marshall University
* EDU,DUE
* 08/01/1996,07/31/1998
* Michael Norton, Marshall University Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Myra O. Smith
* 07/31/1998
* USD 85,000.00

This project is obtaining a scanning electron microscope (SEM) with
microanalytical (EDX) capabilities. This instrument is to be used by students
and faculty for instruction and undergraduate research. Previously absent from
the instructional resources is the ability to image and nondestructively analyze
samples at the micron and submicron levels. The department wants undergraduates
to understand how reductionism can be used to understand the structure,
function, and properties of materials encountered in the classroom and everyday
life. A user-friendly SEM system with tremendous flexibility has been chosen for
a diversity of applications within the College of Science. Undergraduates
encounter this technology in both introductory and advanced laboratory
exercises. Additionally, the SEM can be made available to the ever growing
number of undergraduates involved in scientific research. Through laboratory
exercises and independent studies, it is estimated that this equipment affects
approximately 950 undergraduate students each year. Additionally, community
involvement can be ensured by interaction with local schools and through special
programs for precollege, high school, and middle school students hosted by the
university.