* 9650594
* A Physics Computing Laboratory With an Interactive Digitized Video Component
* EHR,DUE
* 07/15/1996,12/31/1998
* Purna Das, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Duncan E. McBride
* 12/31/1998
* USD 23,330.00

This project is primarily one of laboratory curriculum development. We propose
to develop digitized video experiments for the general physics curriculum at
PU/NC. New experiments in mechanics and wave motion will be developed for the
general physics courses offered to science, engineering, and technology
students. The mechanics data would be captured and digitized at the start of
each laboratory by the students under the supervision of the laboratory
instructor. The digitized movie would be played frame by frame by the students
in a scripted Multimedia ToolBook Application which would allow the use of mouse
and cursor for data collection and subsequent analysis by comparison to
numerically modeled data or by curve fitting procedures. In addition, multimedia
lessons involving real world situations will be developed using the Multimedia
ToolBook authoring software. These lessons will help explore the connection of
physics principles to real life situations and aid in classroom instruction of
students majoring in elementary education as well as those in science,
engineering and technology programs. In this project, we also plan to study the
student's learning behavior and understanding of the concepts related to the
proposed experiments. A survey questionnaire will be devised to obtain feedback
from the students regarding the usage of the new laboratory equipment. The
results obtained from this project will be disseminated through articles and/or
laboratory manuals and through the Purdue Home Page on the World Wide Web.