* 9650591
* Linking Agricultural Curricula with Global Positioning (GPS)Total Station
* EHR,DUE
* 08/01/1996,07/31/1998
* Lon Shell, Texas State University - San Marcos
* Standard Grant
* Rogers E. Salters
* 07/31/1998
* USD 40,337.00

A Trimble SSi GPS Total Station System is being used to link Agricultural
courses, Agricultural Surveying, Machinery and Equipment, Fertilizer and Soil
Productivity, and Range Science. This curricular link is more than sharing
equipment; it requires the transfer of knowledge and the interaction of
students, faculty, and resources among courses with planned outcomes. The GPS
total station uses signals from a constellation of 24 NAVSTAR satellites to
provide three-dimensional point positions on the earth with accuracies of 1
centimeter, real time kinematic. This GPS instrumentation affects all students
in the department and also influences students in the departments of Technology,
Geography and Planning, and Biology. Course linking is accomplished through
teaching Precision Farming, which is dependent on GPS for georeferencing of soil
sampling, a soils and fertilizer application, variable-rate applications, and
real-time yield monitoring, an agricultural machinery and equipment application.
Range courses also have GPS applications. Data collected using GPS are stored
and referenced using Spatial Mapping, a Geographical Information Systems (GIS)
technology. For example, the Agricultural Surveying class stakes out the fields
to be used in Precision Farming, and those coordinates are saved to a database
to be used in the other courses. In agricultural surveying, GPS is being used in
topography, control, cross sections, and boundaries. The scientific equipment
used in this project reinforces basic mathematical and scientific principles.
Use of geodetic GPS receivers strengthens the current use of algebraic,
trigonometric, and geometric mathematics and adds the use of statistical
theorems. For example, error checking methods and theories dealing with
probabilities, least-square adjustments including stochastic and mathematical
models, along with propagation of mean and variance-covariance are being applied
to data collected in the Surveying Laboratory Exercises.