* 9650514
* Social and Behavioral Sciences Laboratory for Undergraduate Small Group and Focus Group Instruction, Training and       Research
* EHR,DUE
* 07/01/1996,06/30/1998
* Alfred Tuchfarber, University of Cincinnati Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Myles Boylan
* 06/30/1998
* USD 8,960.00

Rapid advances in social and behavioral science theories and methodologies pose
substantial challenges to undergraduate students, particularly those interested
in multidisciplinary fields combining elements from communication, economics,
political science, and sociology. One major area of growth in these social
sciences is in the use of small group and focus group studies and methodologies
to increase understanding of complex and subtle decision-making and group
interaction processes. This project provides students with a state-of-the-art
laboratory in which they can learn and develop research skills in small group
and focus group behavioral observations and instruction. The project makes
sophisticated video and audiographic recording and data processing equipment
available to assist students in their hands-on experiences in conducting small
group and focus group studies. In addition, in combination with the targeted
curriculum offered within each department, this cross-discipline Social and
Behavioral Sciences Laboratory provides students with the flexibility to take
more diverse opportunities for undergraduate research projects. This new
equipment makes possible substantial cross-departmental teaching collaborations
in the areas of communication, social interaction studies, and social and
behavioral methodology and is ideal for a variety of honors and directed study
programs to train undergraduates in modern and emerging research methods and
techniques.