* 9650285
* Improving Undergraduate Astronomy Education with Student    Acquired CCD Observations
* EHR,DUE
* 07/15/1996,06/30/1999
* Ronald Samec, Millikin University
* Standard Grant
* Duncan E. McBride
* 06/30/1999
* USD 40,468.00

Inexpensive, good grade charge-coupled-device (CCD) chips and associated
cameras and telescopes, with accurate field acquisition hardware and software,
slow motion controls, autoguiders, precision drives, and PC-based software for
calibrating observations, are now available off-the-shelf. This development has
astounding implications for the undergraduate astronomy program. Now, user-
friendly software and systems make it possible for students to acquire, reduce,
analyze, and interpret precision, real-time astronomical data in their
introductory astronomy laboratory. For the advanced student, this can form the
basis for their own undergraduate research project. It provides the general
education student with an opportunity for hands-on experience with a primarily
observational science. Precollege teachers, with this experience, bring a
natural excitement for science to their classrooms. New, stimulating
observational labs enable students to interpret lunar topography, measure
changing planetary features, and study the light variation of individual stars,
eclipsing binaries, image clusters, galaxies, and nebulae. Archiving of data
will allow for longer range studies not possible in one night's session, and
indoor laboratories can be used in the case of inclement weather. Thus, in this
project, the department plans to implement the CCD into an already popular
introductory Astronomy lab, the new Program for Student Learning, and the
undergraduate research program.