* 9650390
* Laboratory-Based Instruction in Speech Science
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/1996,08/31/1998
* Jodelle Deem, University of Kentucky
* Standard Grant
* Myra O. Smith
* 08/31/1998
* USD 21,034.00

Speech is a complex sound that can be described according to its acoustic
characteristics. During the past few years, digital technology has been
developed that enhances the ability to display, describe, and analyze speech.
This department is currently revising a speech science course and laboratory to
provide undergraduate students majoring in communication disorders with the
application of state-of-the-art digital instrumentation in order to learn about
the nature of human speech. In the past, students have not had access to these
instruments as part of an integrated laboratory. The instrumentation being used
in this project represents the most current technology for studying the
characteristics of speech and utilizes IBM-compatible microcomputer systems and
integrated hardware. With this instrumentation, students are able to capture,
display, analyze, and describe the parameters of speech and voice using detailed
experiments in a laboratory-based science course. This reflects a major revision
in the existing speech science course because previous information about speech
was available solely from lectures and in-class demonstrations. By changing the
emphasis to a laboratory-oriented course, the project provides undergraduate
students studying communication disorders with opportunities for improved
understanding of the scientific bases of speech. In addition, students are
introduced to the scientific process through a required research study involving
speech analysis. In order to communicate the results of the investigations, the
undergraduate students can develop papers and presentations and share them with
graduate students and professionals at state and national meetings.