* 9650919
* Improvement of the Earth Science Curriculum and             Undergraduate Research with X-Ray Diffraction
* EHR,DUE
* 06/01/1996,05/31/1998
* Parvinder Sethi, Northeastern Illinois University
* Standard Grant
* Robert W. Ridky
* 05/31/1998
* USD 25,818.00

The primary objectives of this project are to provide a hands-on research
experience to undergraduates in the high-enrollment Introduction to Earth
Science course and to foster more undergraduate research by engaging students in
thought-provoking, modern, laboratory experiences in the sophomore, junior, and
senior years. The department is doing this by introducing quantitative mineral
identification into the undergraduate curriculum in a sequential manner,
beginning with the high-enrollment Introduction to Earth Science course,
progressing with increasing sophistication into the intermediate level, and
culminating in the upper-level courses and independent research projects. The
Introduction to Earth Science students are spending 3 weeks working on a project
concerning swelling clays in the area soils and are generating data that can be
forwarded to the regional agricultural affairs office. Students in the
intermediate level course, Rocks and Minerals, are being provided with the
theoretical background and lab experience pertaining to instrumental analysis
and sample preparation. Students in this class apply their knowledge in a group
project, working on a different set of materials each year, eventually writing a
report for presentation. Lastly, students in the more advanced courses,
including Mineralogy, Petrology, Petrography of Fine-Grained Sediments, Advanced
Mineralogy and Crystallography, and Igneous Petrology, are able to engage in a
variety of independent research projects. This department is adapting its
programs by upgrading an old x-ray diffraction system, which is the most
suitable and versatile instrument for conducting mineral identification
analysis. The new laboratory experiences provide for both an overall improved
undergraduate curriculum and a more intimate science experience for the
introduction-level nonmajors, a need recently identified by the AAAS project on
Liberal Education and the Sciences.