* 9650258
* Acquisition of a Ground Penetrating Radar System for        Undergraduate Instruction
* EDU,DUE
* 05/01/1996,04/30/1998
* Marvin Speece,  Montana Technological University
* Standard Grant
* David W. Mogk
* 04/30/1998
* USD 18,210.00

Imaging of the shallow subsurface has been an area of intense research activity
in recent years, fueled, in part, by the need for detailed knowledge of the near
surface. This information is required not only for the environmental assessment
of the contaminated subsurface in the remediation of buried waste sites, but
also for shallow resource exploration and geotechnical engineering. Under
favorable conditions, Ground Penetrating Radar (GPR), an electromagnetic
sounding technique, provides detailed subsurface information to depths of 30
meters or more beneath the ground surface. This project details the acquisition
of a state-of-the-art GPR system to enhance the field laboratory capabilities of
the Geophysical Engineering Department. The acquisition of a GPR system provides
the following: a method for site investigation that provides high-resolution
images of the subsurface, a unique educational tool that enhances the teaching
of fundamental concepts of electromagnetic wave propagation and digital signal
processing, opportunities to apply basic field skills using the system in a
full-scale field project, and a facility to promote undergraduate research.
Students in the Geophysical Engineering and Geological Engineering Programs take
6 weeks of a combined geology/geophysics field course. Three weeks of this
course are devoted to geophysics. This course provides an opportunity for
students to gain field expertise using equipment commonly employed to make
geophysical measurements. As a result, this course represents a chance for
students to gain field experience using GPR. Moreover, GPR is a topic already
included in several other courses. The acquisition of a GPR system allows the
information discussed in these courses to become more relevant by providing
hands-on use of this instrumentation by the students.