* 9650025
* Enhancement of Undergraduate Education in Plant             Biology and Molecular Biology
* EDU,DUE
* 07/15/1996,06/30/1998
* Grace Ju, Gordon College
* Standard Grant
* Terry S. Woodin
* 06/30/1998
* USD 26,434.00

One of the more neglected areas in Biology education is Plant Biology.
Agricultural research universities have seen an increasing drop in enrollment,
especially in the plant sciences. Yet, the reality is that agricultural
research, crop management and improvement, land management, and environmental
problems are a growing concern in the world. The contribution of plants to
society is ubiquitous. For example, plants have always been a critical component
of the pharmaceutical industry. More recently, gasohol has quickly come to be
viewed as a realistic source of renewable fuel. However, the lack of education
in Plant Biology is sadly evident within Biology curricula in many colleges and
universities. The department proposes to elevate the importance of Plant Science
education in a Biology curriculum by adding a more hands-on approach to science
laboratories using plants as a model system. Plant metabolism studies provide a
good laboratory experience for students to observe a process involving
organismic, cellular, and molecular aspects. Research projects are being set up
that examine the effects of environmental stresses such as heavy metals and salt
on plant functions. The effects can be quantified using physiological and
biochemical measurements as well as being viewed at the level of gene
expression. A model Plant Biology program, using new equipment, can be used to
ask questions about important processes involving plant metabolism. This model
for investigative research can specifically influence undergraduate Plant
Biology education and investigative science education in general. The
instrumentation may also enhance other advanced courses and a Biology core
course for nonmajors.