* 9650873
* Classroom Microcomputer Laboratories for Calculus,          Differential Equations and Linear Algebra
* EDU,DUE
* 08/01/1996,07/31/1998
* James Campbell, University of Memphis
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Teles
* 07/31/1998
* USD 48,010.00

The Department of Mathematical Sciences at the University of Memphis is
utilizing this new instructional computer laboratory for instruction in the core
sequence of courses Calculus I, II, and III, Differential Equations, and Linear
Algebra. This sequence has a broad student clientele. Mathematics and Applied
Mathematics majors, including all pre-service secondary Mathematics teachers,
and all Mechanical, Civil, and Electrical Engineering, and Engineering
Technology students take the entire sequence. Other majors which take at least
two of the courses within the sequence include Computer Science, Statistics,
Physics, Chemistry, and Biology. The average combined enrollment is
approximately 500 students per semester. Approximately half of our students are
women, 20% are African - American. The purpose of this project is to enable the
department to integrate technology with instruction throughout the sequence, by
adding a PC lab component to each of the courses. The creation of two computer
laboratory rooms is allowing each section within the sequence to use the
laboratory weekly (or bi-weekly, as appropriate), and ensure that at most two
students share any one machine. Adding a lab component to the entire sequence of
courses is allowing the Department to (i) more fully incorporate the Rule of
Three in the calculus courses, (ii) modernize the linear algebra course along
the guidelines of the Linear Algebra Curriculum Study Group, (iii) modernize the
differential equations course through adoption of a modeling approach and (iv)
provide a solid base of technological literacy early in their academic careers
for this broad group of science students.