* 9650148
* Enhancement of the Undergraduate Science Curriculum at      Hamilton College through the Addition of an X-Ray           Microanalytical System
* EHR,DUE
* 07/15/1996,06/30/1998
* Kenneth Bart, Hamilton College
* Standard Grant
* David W. Mogk
* 06/30/1998
* USD 48,530.00

A quantitative X-ray microanalysis system with image enhancement and processing
capabilities will be acquired to add analytical and chemical mapping
capabilities to an existing scanning electron microscope. Our goal is to expose
students to modern techniques in the analysis of geological and biological
specimens, improve our instructional capabilities, and strengthen our program of
undergraduate research. The specific instrumentation we request is an EDAX MX10
X-ray system. The system consists of an energy dispersive spectrometer
interfaced to a Macintosh Power PC microprocessor with digital imaging software.
This system will be attached to the Biology Department's existing AMRAY scanning
electron microscope. The addition of this equipment to the science curriculum at
Hamilton College will allow: i) us to expand the current one-half semester
course to a full semester course with the addition of X-ray microanalysis to the
curriculum; ii) for considerable improvement in laboratory and in-class
exercises in both introductory and upper level courses; and iii) modernization
and improvement of student thesis research and independent study projects. The
significance of this equipment addition will be to enhance student interest in
scientific research, and to provide students with hands-on experience using
state-of-the-art equipment and techniques used in both graduate level research
and industry. Students will be encouraged to present the results of independent
research projects at professional conferences. In addition, the co-PIs will make
the instructional materials developed from this grant available to the
educational/scientific community through the Hamilton College Electron
Microscope lab's WWW-site.