* 9650149
* Adding DNA Sequencing, Protein Electrophoresis, and ScanningCalorimetry to Our Undergraduate Chemistry Curriculum
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/1996,06/30/1999
* Amy Glass, University of Dayton
* Standard Grant
* Frank A. Settle
* 06/30/1999
* USD 29,293.00

This project is expanding the education of undergraduate chemists, biochemists
(BCMs), and nonmajors, starting with biochemistry/physical chemistry
implementation. It enhances student independence and teamwork in advanced labs
and capstone research courses. Outcomes include department seminars and
presentations at scientific meetings. A very solid life science connection is
shown by near-doubled numbers of majors since the 1991 beginning of the BCM
program. The department hopes to pass students through a curriculum rich in
blended physical, biological, and organic chemistry techniques. This approach
stimulates student interest; interrelates the biological, physical, and organic
components; gives students largely unavailable expertise in relevant modern
chemistry techniques; and enlarges their desirability as higher education and
employment candidates. The first use of the DNA sequencer, scanning calorimeter,
and protein electrophoresis units will be biochemistry- and medicinal-chemistry-
based DNA exploration; reinforcement of the thermodynamic and kinetic concepts
related to polymers; and the study and purification of enzymes. Each planned
study aspect is set into broad, integrated lab experiments. The project also
trains undergraduates in related research methods. Other chemistry faculty can
also use the equipment in their courses and training agendas. So, the program
helps to enhance science infrastructure quality.