* 9650452
* Integrating Environmental Geosciences and Geophysics        Instruction by Means of Seismic Refraction and Reflection   Capabilities
* EHR,DUE
* 07/01/1996,06/30/1998
* Roswitha Grannell, California State University-Long Beach Foundation
* Standard Grant
* David W. Mogk
* 06/30/1998
* USD 19,742.00

This project centers around the purchase of a 24-channel seismic unit, vertical
and horizontal geophones, geophone cable, and seismic refraction interpretation
software (generalized reciprocal method). These items make possible the
introduction of a geophysical component into hydrogeology instruction for
aquifer characterization and basin analysis and the introduction of an
environmental/hydrogeological component into geophysics instruction. A large
project, in which both types of undergraduate student participate, allows all
parties to obtain hands-on experience in the design of experiments, data
collection, reduction, and interpretation. The use of joint field trips between
classes and joint work sessions allow each student to see the scope of the
project. The first project, representative of what could be accomplished, is
being performed at Pine Mountain Club, a rural resort community in the semi-arid
mountainous region north of Los Angeles. The community lies in the trace of the
San Andreas fault and produces its scanty water supply from fault gouge. The
project not only focuses on standard exploration techniques for additional water
supplies, but also on characterization of the aquifer and its enclosing
schistose bedrock. Peripheral projects include landslide investigations. Seismic
reflection, refraction, and shear wave studies are being undertaken in
conjunction with already-available gravity, magnetic, and ground penetrating
radar studies and conventional hydrogeological investigations (aquifer testing
and water chemistry).