* 9650844
* Instrumentation to Provide Detailed Nutrient Analyses in    Aquatic and Terrestrial Ecosystems
* EHR,DUE
* 06/01/1996,05/31/1997
* Randall Fuller, Colgate University
* Standard Grant
* Saundra H. Oyewole
* 05/31/1997
* USD 26,706.00

This project is designed to enhance students' understanding of nutrient
dynamics in both terrestrial and aquatic ecosystems by providing a more
comprehensive analysis of different ions using a Dionex ion chromatograph (IC).
Previously, many environmentally oriented courses have lacked detailed water
chemistry information because of the time-consuming nature of wet chemistry
techniques (e.g., titration and spectrophotometric methods). Therefore, students
have not always witnessed first-hand all of the more interesting nutrient
pathways present in a particular ecosystem. With the IC, students are able to
quantify many different anions and cations. This enables them to track more ions
as they enter ecosystems in precipitation and then observe how concentrations
change as water moves through a forest canopy (with comparisons between pine,
spruce, tamarack, and deciduous forests). Furthermore, through groundwater and
surface water sampling, students are gaining a better understanding of how
geology and abiotic processes affect nutrient cycles. They are also able to make
comparisons of vertical profiles of nutrients between productive and
unproductive lakes, as well as lakes in limestone versus granite regions. This
instrument is assisting in the formation of collaborative laboratories between
courses in biology, geology, and environmental studies, some of which involve
gathering data on environmental problems suggested by the Madison County
Planning Office. These collaborations demonstrate to students the relatedness of
science in different disciplines and the importance of an interdisciplinary
understanding and approach when studying the environment.