* 9650540
* An Integrated Laboratory Introduction to Inter-Media        Environmental Problems
* EDU,DUE
* 06/01/1996,05/31/1998
* Kimberly Ogden, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Janet C. Rutledge
* 05/31/1998
* USD 50,953.00

This proposal seeks funding to develop a series of experiments for a required
undergraduate laboratory offered to students in the department of Chemical and
Environmental Engineering at the University of Arizona. Specifically, these
experiments will be of both a bench-scale and a "unit operations" type, and will
provide ChE students experience in dealing with environmental problems from a
process orientation. These experiments will impact two undergraduate courses
which are required for a BS ChE degree. Affected will be the Science Lab, ChEE
307 and the Unit Operations Lab, ChEE 304. The two basic areas in which new
experiments are proposed are "Bioremediation" and "Air Pollution Control".
Within the bioremediation area, we propose to purchase ancillary equipment for
our current Bioprocessing Facility, as well as equipment to establish five
fermentation lab-stations. With these experiments, we hope to emphasize the
biological aspects of environmental engineering, while at the same time
introducing students to basic principles of biotechnology. Within the Air
Pollution Control area, we propose to purchase ancillary equipment for improving
current gas absorption experiments in the ChEE 304 lab (directing this
experiment towards an environmental application), and equipment to initiate a
detailed combustion experiment, also for use in the ChE Unit Operations Labs.