* 9650435
* Computerized Data Acquisition for the Physiology Laboratory
* EDU,DUE
* 07/15/1996,06/30/1998
* George Delahunty, Goucher College
* Standard Grant
* Herbert Levitan
* 06/30/1998
* USD 17,249.00

This project strengthens an experimental approach to physiology. Previously,
the physiology laboratory has employed equipment and experimental approaches
generally developed in the 1960's. Given the computer literacy of today's
students and the advances in modern instrumentation, the use of chart recorders
and manual calculations for data analysis is both simplistic and outdated. With
these approaches, an opportunity to generate student interest in science is
lost, and students graduate without being properly prepared to function in a
modern research laboratory. To correct this problem, the department is
purchasing the MacLab Physiology Recording System from ADInstruments and the
MacIntosh computers needed to support the instrumentation. This computer-
interfaced instrumentation, with modern data acquisition and analysis programs,
provides a new set of teaching tools for animal and human physiology experiments
in introductory and upper-level biology courses. The MacLab instrumentation
provides the ability to capture data in real-time and quickly analyze the
results through menu driven software. The immediate feedback provided by the
software enables students to draw conclusions about their work and to ask new
questions. Students can then redesign, retest, or extend their experiments
during the same laboratory period. This approach should reinforce the idea that
investigative work is truly an iterative process and provide an increased degree
of student ownership of the experimental work. In addition, the ability to store
and retrieve data provides for some new ways of conducting laboratory practicals
for the students. The new instrumentation also enables the department to conduct
new experiments in respiratory physiology and to expand its ability to study
exercise physiology.