* 9650833
* Human Factors Psychology:  Scientific Reasoning in an       Interdisciplinary Field
* EHR,DUE
* 07/15/1996,06/30/1998
* Harriet Shaklee, Seattle University
* Standard Grant
* Myra O. Smith
* 06/30/1998
* USD 29,795.00

Human Factors is a rapidly growing application of psychology in industry. As
products are developed, human factors psychologists assist in planning product
design to maximize the fit of product to user. Integrating human factors
considerations into design can yield such advantages as shortening the learning
period, enhancing reliability of performance, or minimizing accidents associated
with product use. The productivity of such interdisciplinary collaborations
between psychology and engineering has led to increased demand for people
trained in this field. Up to this point, human factors programs in psychology
have been concentrated at the graduate level. Undergraduate course offerings in
human factors are rare, and appropriate laboratory training in the field is even
less likely. However, laboratory-based training in human factors at the
undergraduate level offers a unique opportunity to develop skills in scientific
reasoning in an interdisciplinary field with clear application to everyday life.
This project focuses on building a human factors laboratory for training
undergraduate students. The lab consists of computer workstations, including
equipment and software specialized for human factors investigations. The human
factors course introduces students to issues and concepts in the field and
emphasizes lab work as a context in which students learn the hypothesis-testing
process relevant to human factors questions. Students who complete the course
are eligible to work with interdisciplinary design teams completing projects
under contract from local industries in the Science and Engineering Project
Center at Seattle University. The lab is an ideal location to test hypotheses
about designs generated in these team projects. Students trained in this program
will be especially strong candidates for either employment or graduate study in
this field.