* 9650099
* Field Equipment for an Interdisciplinary Course in          Environmental Hydrology
* EHR,DUE
* 08/01/1996,07/31/1998
* Hobart King, Mansfield University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* David W. Mogk
* 07/31/1998
* USD 21,506.00

In this project, current meters, portable water laboratories, and well
monitoring equipment are being used to enhance student experiences in
undergraduate hydrology. Within 5 years, the project may benefit over 125
students in environmental science and earth and space science education. This
curriculum improvement is providing students with important experience in
collecting and interpreting hydrologic data, using the data in decision-making
processes, and communicating technical information in practical writings. The
final course project is to characterize streams draining areas of variable land-
use and geology in a small drainage basin near the campus. Student teams design
a study, collect data, and interpret results, their goal being to determine
major factors that influence the quality of surface and ground waters in the
basin. Results can be communicated in the form of poster sessions and briefings.
With diverse backgrounds in biology, earth science, and geography, each student
can contribute a unique set of skills and knowledge to the team effort. These
laboratory experiences are of particular importance to the preparation of pre-
service teachers. Learning exercises in environmental hydrology will provide
training in both scientific content and the process of scientific investigation
that will serve these students throughout their teaching careers.