* 9650897
* Nanometer Scale Characterizaton in Undergraduate            Labs Using a Lateral Force Microscope
* EHR,DUE
* 07/15/1996,06/30/1998
* Toh-Ming Lu, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Duncan E. McBride
* 06/30/1998
* USD 26,375.00

The PIs request fund to purchase a lateral force microscope (LFM) and a control
station to create an upper level undergraduate lab course. This lab course is
entitled "Quantitative Nanometer Scale Characterization Using a Lateral Force
Microscope" and is aimed to significantly improve the present program of
undergraduate instruction in the area of modern nanometer scale characterization
of materials. The microscope will be housed in the existing junior Experimental
Physics Lab and maintained by a department technical staff. We estimate that
about 20 undergraduate students from both the School of Science and School of
Engineering will take the course each semester (total ~0 per year, including a
summer session). This lab course offers several experiments: scaling in rough
surfaces, electron mean free path in thin films, particle-surface interaction in
surface polishing, and structures of integrated circuit (IC) chips. The
materials and experimental projects developed in the lab course will also be
partially used by other lab courses on campus such as Experimental Physics Lab
(Physics Department), Structures and Properties Lab (Materials Science
Engineering Department), and IC Fabrication Lab (Electrical, Computer, and
Systems Engineering Department). The interdisciplinary lab course will broaden
the applications of a nanometer scale characterization tool invented by
physicists and be used by a wider range of undergraduate students. The knowledge
and skill that interested undergraduates learn in this new lab course will
better prepare them for entering a work place with modern technology. The lab
course will be offered spring and fall semesters annually. In the summer where
most other lab courses will not be offered, the LFM lab course will be offered
to interested URP (Undergraduate Research Participation) students and NSF
sponsored REU (Research Experience for Undergraduates) program participants (one
of the PIs GCW is the Program Director) who come from other colleges.