* 9650253
* A Computer Classroom for Electrical Engineering: Enhancing  Undergraduate Teaching and Learning
* EHR,DUE
* 07/15/1996,06/30/1998
* Mariusz Jankowski, University of Southern Maine
* Standard Grant
* Janet C. Rutledge
* 06/30/1998
* USD 28,293.00

Many students currently lack the high level of mathematical skill needed in a
modern electrical engineering curriculum. In many of the foundational courses in
the electrical engineering discipline, a student's lack of adequate mathematical
skills is one of the primary barriers to effective learning and, ultimately,
successful completion of degree requirements. Compounding the problem are many
such courses taught using the format of a traditional lecture in which students
are mostly passive listeners. The department's goal is to help the students
overcome the barriers of inadequate mathematics preparation and the difficulty
of understanding many of the fundamental concepts of electrical engineering.
This project pursues an active learning strategy in a dedicated computer
equipped classroom with on-line access to Mathematica. Such a facility can
significantly improve the level of classroom interaction between instructor,
student, and lecture material. By making mathematics more accessible to the
average student, the participants expect increased student participation and
improved learning. The formation of a departmental computer-equipped classroom
is a logical next step in a 3-year sequence of experiments with computer-
assisted learning in four undergraduate courses. The classroom can dramatically
improve present capabilities, allowing an increase in the number of sessions and
courses. Within its first 2 years, the project may have an impact on 10
electrical engineering courses and involve all engineering faculty.