* 9650804
* Industrial/Environmental Analysis; Analytical Chemistry     Across the Curriculum: A Case Study Approach
* EDU,DUE
* 06/01/1996,05/31/1998
* Joseph Bieron, Canisius College
* Standard Grant
* Frank A. Settle
* 05/31/1998
* USD 46,130.00

Experience with the structural determination abilities of infrared (IR) and the
trace elemental analysis capabilities of atomic spectroscopy (AS) are essential
parts of any chemist's training. Unfortunately, the obsolete condition and
unreliability of the college's instrumentation has made instruction difficult in
these areas. This project involves purchase of a modern Fourier-transform
infrared (FTIR) and an Inductively Coupled Plasma (ICP) source. These
instruments are being integrated into the laboratory components of several
analytical chemistry courses using modem teaching methodologies. The focus of
the project is to develop an industrial/environmental cluster of experiments
that run through the current freshman-, sophomore-, and junior-level chemistry
courses. Experiments within this cluster are based upon the case study method,
involve the use of one or both of the new instruments, and focus on issues
involving environmental quality. This approach better prepares chemistry,
biochemistry, and biology students by involving them in real-world problems and
by providing hands-on experience using modern analytical instrumentation. Case
studies can be written in a manner that allows other colleges and universities
to adapt these methods readily. The project's educational impact can be
evaluated by measuring students' attitudes. These measurements can be made using
psychological survey instruments that allow detailed statistical analysis to be
performed.