* 9650124
* Introduction of Spectroradiometry into the Undergraduate    Marine Science Curriculum and Special Programs at the       Shannon Point Marine Center
* EDU,DUE
* 04/15/1996,03/31/1998
* Stephen Sulkin, Western Washington University
* Standard Grant
* David W. Mogk
* 03/31/1998
* USD 12,964.00

Through the Shannon Point Marine Center and its marine science curriculum,
science majors who may pursue graduate education, community college students who
are assessing their interest in pursuing marine science as a major, and advanced
undergraduates participating in Shannon Point Marine Center National
Undergraduate Marine Education Center (NUMEC) programs are served. NUMEC
provides students from around the United States access to marine science studies
at a marine center within the context of their ongoing undergraduate programs at
their home institutions. Three programs operate within NUMEC: the Minorities in
Marine Science Undergraduate Program, the Research Experience for Undergraduates
Site program, and the Fall Quarter-in-Residence. All of the programs provide
undergraduates with unique opportunities to become educated in the most recent
concepts in marine science, to be trained in state-of-the art techniques used in
marine research, and to engage in supervised, independent research. With the
spectroradiometer, students can use advanced technology to quantitatively
address ecologically relevant questions ranging from UV-B effects on
invertebrate larvae to influences of light quality on microbial community
structure. The instrument has enormous value in teaching basic oceanographic
principles previously discussed only in lectures. It is being applied in the
curricula of Oceanography, Algae, Marine Ecology, Marine Invertebrate Biology,
and Current Trends in Marine Science courses. The benefits of this tool,
however, extend far beyond formal coursework. Given the current concern for
global issues, students are increasingly interested in problems such as ozone
depletion and global warming. This equipment places an exciting, computer-based
research tool in the hands of undergraduates who are using it to do meaningful,
imaginative research.