* 9650978
* Undergraduate Electronic Packaging and Materials Laboratory
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/1996,08/31/1998
* Chi Chan, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Janet C. Rutledge
* 08/31/1998
* USD 41,603.00

As electronic components decrease in size and increase in functional
complexity, packaging becomes a very important issue. The requirements of
electrical, thermal, mechanical, and material considerations in electronic
packaging make it a highly interdisciplinary subject, in both academia and
industry. This is one key technology in which U.S. industry must maintain its
competitiveness in the global economy. To provide technical training to
undergraduate students, this department is establishing an interdisciplinary
Electronic Packaging and Materials Laboratory (EPM Lab). The courses and
laboratory are highly interdisciplinary. The project covers not only several
subareas in electrical engineering, namely circuits and systems, microwave
engineering, reliability and testing, and measurement and computational
techniques, but also thermal and mechanical analyses of packaging and materials.
This curriculum is training a new breed of engineers that are capable of
integrating technologies from various engineering disciplines and enabling them
to contribute to U.S. economic competitiveness in the area of EPM, particularly
to the rapidly growing regional EPM industry. The laboratory can be housed in
the new Electrical Engineering/Computer Science and Engineering Building to be
completed in the fall of 1996.