* 9650399
* Improving Undergraduate Instruction and Research with       Multinuclear Fourier Transform NMR
* EHR,DUE
* 07/01/1996,06/30/1998
* Bruce Hathaway, Southeast Missouri State University
* Standard Grant
* Frank A. Settle
* 06/30/1998
* USD 89,997.00

This project is arranging the purchase of a 300-MHz multinuclear nuclear
magnetic resonance (NMR) spectrometer. This instrument is being used to upgrade
the educational program in organic chemistry, analytical chemistry,
biochemistry, and spectroscopy. Specific experiments and activities can be
performed by the students to increase their knowledge in these fields, as well
as to give them experience with modern NMR techniques. This instrument is also
being heavily used in our strong undergraduate research program. Five faculty
have needs that require a higher-field multinuclear NMR that cannot be met by
the current instrument, so instead they are forced to send samples out to former
colleagues and current collaborators. This slows down the pace of research for
the students and the faculty and does not enable undergraduate student co-
workers to gain experience with the type of instrument they will use in industry
or in graduate school. One of the educational results of this instrument may be
the development of new experiments to be published in journals such as the
Journal of Chemical Education and presented at professional meetings of the
American Chemical Society and the Missouri Academy of Science. The instrument
can also be demonstrated to high school students and teachers and made available
to them for advanced projects, if needed.