* 9650461
* Development of a Fluid Power Laboratory for Undergraduate   Education
* EHR,DUE
* 08/01/1996,07/31/1999
* Tsu-Chin Tsao, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Gregory B. Tait
* 07/31/1999
* USD 80,800.00

The problem being addressed by this project is the perception by industry that
graduating engineering students are missing a vital link between theory
presented in the classroom and actual industrial problems. Many industrial
employers acknowledge that most students obtain a high degree of analytical
expertise, but still maintain that they are not as advanced in applying these
analytical techniques to `real-world problems.` The objective of this effort is
to develop a unique Fluid Power Systems Laboratory aimed at giving engineering
students a unique laboratory experience with classes of `off-the-shelf`
industrial devices. This facility enables students to directly tie analytical
classroom theories with truly practical experiments. The methods being used to
accomplish this development include the integration of industrial, academic, and
governmental resources to provide support in their respective areas of
expertise. The laboratory is part of a unified approach to the Dynamic Systems
and Control laboratory environment in the College of Engineering. As a result,
the lab seeks to integrate Fluid Power Systems into all levels of the college-
wide engineering curriculum that deal with the modeling, analysis, and control
of dynamic systems. The scope of the lab audience includes demonstrations of the
technology to freshmen through senior-level design projects and undergraduate
independent research. The project stresses collaboration among departments
within the college by incorporating the lab into several existing courses. The
impact of this project is the development of engineers trained on industrially
relevant devices. These engineers have a solid grounding in both theory and some
of the relevant applications. Since many engineering systems contain some aspect
of Fluid Power, this project directly affects the nation's technological
workforce and increases its competitiveness.