* 9650509
* Instrumentation for an Integrated Laboratory Course on PhaseAnalysis in Materials Engineering
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/1996,06/30/2000
* Vijay Vasudevan, University of Cincinnati Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Margaret D. Weeks
* 06/30/2000
* USD 33,986.00

The Department of Materials Science and Engineering is introducing a new
integrated laboratory course sequence on Phase Analysis in Materials. To
implement this course, project leaders are obtaining an energy dispersive x-ray
spectroscopy system, with the associated NIST desktop spectrum analyzer software
for an existing desktop student scanning electron microscope, and an automation
and analysis package for the undergraduate Philips x-ray powder diffractometer.
These instruments can be used in conjunction with automated mechanical testing
(Instron) and thermal analysis (DTA/DSC/TGA) systems in a number of experiments
to provide an integrated program that applies equally to metals, ceramics,
polymers, and composites. The instrumentation enables the department to make
innovative and cost-effective use of existing resources to perform newer and
more extensive experiments, conduct more refined analysis of experimental data,
enhance the department's capacity to provide students hands-on phase analysis
experience using state-of-the-art methods, and better prepare those students for
the modern industrial environment. It can also augment the ongoing outreach
program with area high school teachers, students, and underrepresented
minorities. The integrated approach to materials problem solving is both novel
and crucial to materials engineering education. With this approach, students can
readily understand the trade-offs between ease of processing and performance in
terms of materials phenomena and differences in microstructure, which
contributes substantially to the design component of a materials program. The
proposed laboratory sequence on phase analysis adds a significant new dimension
to the curriculum and substantially affects student/graduate engineer
performance in the co-op/work environment, which should lead to overall
enhancement in industrial output. The course may serve as a model for other
materials engineering programs in the Nation.