* 9650583
* Geophysical Field Instrumentation for Undergraduate Teaching
* EHR,DUE
* 09/01/1996,08/31/1998
* Harve Waff, University of Oregon Eugene
* Standard Grant
* Jill K. Singer
* 08/31/1998
* USD 45,000.00

This project will utilize field geophysical instruments whose purpose will be to
provide students experience with state-of-the-art field data collection,
modeling and interpretation in undergraduate courses in geophysics, geology,
hydrology, environmental science, and geography. Geophysical instrumentation has
undergone a series of revolutionary improvements during the last decade. This
technological advance has been paralleled by similar advances in computer-based
data processing and modeling programs, and together they provide an
unprecedented opportunity to address a wide spectrum of scientific problems of
public and private concern with a sophistication not previously accessible. We
are designing a new, expanded course program around the requested equipment. It
includes modification of existing undergraduate exploration geophysics,
seismology and summer field camp courses, and introduction of three new courses
in geophysical instruments and digital signal processing, field geophysics, and
a geophysics project design course. The planned, extended course offerings, in
which these instruments will be essential, will fill the expanding needs of the
Geological Sciences Department and the Environmental Studies program The goal of
these improvements to our program is to provide undergraduate students in the
above disciplines with opportunity to become skilled in application of
noninvasive methods of subsurface investigation which pertain to their areas of
study. The field instruments will include: a multichannel seismograph plus a
small elastic wave generator, a total field magnetometer, a portable frequency-
domain electromagnetic depth sounding system, and a ground penetrating radar
system. When the instruments are not being used by the University of Oregon, we
plan to make them available for undergraduate instruction at other schools
within the state.