* 9650083
* Computers to Enhance an Undergraduate Program in Cell and   Molecular Biology
* EHR,DUE
* 07/01/1996,06/30/1998
* Harley Mortensen, Missouri State University
* Standard Grant
* Terry S. Woodin
* 06/30/1998
* USD 10,994.00

A new program leading to the bachelor of science degree in Cell and Molecular
Biology received state approval in December 1992 and began admitting students in
Fall 1993. The degree is offered through the Biomedical Sciences Department. The
program is directed toward students whose career aims include postgraduate
education and, therefore, require exposure to the subject matter at the most
sophisticated level possible. The project aims to improve the effectiveness of
the program curriculum by providing access to a variety of software packages
including the nucleic and protein databases and programs. A cooperative
arrangement has been established with the University of Missouri-Columbia (UMC)
DNA Core Facility to make available the University of Wisconsin Genetics
Computer Group programs. Two faculty at UMC and one at this university are
collaborating on this component of the project. Furthermore, faculty members are
upgrading three courses and initiating one new course in the Cell and Molecular
Biology major. The project provides funding for the purchase of six computers
and a printer needed to train students in the use of the databases and other
programs related to molecular biology. Subsequent to proving the project, the
system can be offered to other institutions throughout the state and region.