* 9650570
* An Instructional Lab for the Characterization of Advanced   Composite Materials
* EDU,DUE
* 06/01/1996,12/31/1998
* F. Ernesto Penado, Northern Arizona University
* Standard Grant
* Margaret D. Weeks
* 12/31/1998
* USD 53,858.00

The use of advanced composite materials in the aerospace, automotive,
electronic, marine, medical, and sporting goods industries has grown
considerably over the past 2 decades. Furthermore, it has been estimated that
composites growth will exceed 500 of 1990 usage by the year 2000. Although it
has become increasingly important for undergraduate students to be exposed to
the manufacture and mechanical behavior of these materials by the time they
graduate, the present curriculum does not address this important class of
materials. In order to address this problem, this project is expanding the
curriculum to provide undergraduate students with experience in state-of-the-art
methods for the analysis, testing, and manufacture of advanced composite
materials. This goal is being accomplished by the establishment of a composite
materials laboratory in the college of engineering and the development of an
associated course on the mechanics of composite materials. The laboratory not
only serves as part of the course, but it also provides a resource for our
students to conduct senior design and undergraduate research projects that are
related to the manufacturing and testing of these materials. In addition, this
effort supports a new area of emphasis in manufacturing engineering that is
being developed in the college. By serving as a model, this project is having an
impact on undergraduate education in general. In addition, undergraduate
research work in the lab is helping to further the state-of-the-art in
predicting the behavior of composite materials.