* 9650070
* Integrating Computerized Instruction and Learning into the  MWC Economics Curriculum
* EHR,DUE
* 07/15/1996,06/30/1998
* Margaret Ray, University of Mary Washington
* Standard Grant
* Myles Boylan
* 06/30/1998
* USD 29,000.00

This project supplies equipment for a 20-station computerized classroom for
teaching economics. The computerized classroom allows for the integration of
computer-aided instruction throughout the economics curriculum. The project
targets students taking courses for general education, interdisciplinary majors,
business, international affairs, environmental science and economics majors. In
recent years, both the pedagogy and practice of economics have increasingly
relied on and employed computer applications. Computer simulations and packages
for statistical analysis are highly effective for teaching economics. The use of
computers increases both student motivation and success. It gives real-world
relevance to material taught in class. Students are able to manage computer-
simulated firms and economies and see how economic principles affect the
outcomes of their decisions. They use computers to conduct their own analysis of
data. In addition, the practice of economic analysis in the real world now
requires proficiency with computer applications. Students planning careers
involving economic analysis and decision-making must learn how to use available
software. Finally, in both the classroom and in the real world, the use of the
Internet and World Wide Web is essential for investigation and research. The
goal of the project is to improve learning in economics classes by effectively
integrating computer applications in most, if not all economics courses. The
project focuses on five objectives: (1) incorporate computer laboratories into
general education courses, (2) introduce Internet-based curriculum into
introductory Principles of Economics courses and continue its use at higher
levels, (3) implement a "tools and methods" introduction to the major course,
(4) further integrate up-to-date statistical analysis packages into quantitative
economics courses, and (5) enhance interdisciplinary courses using computerized
economic applications and simulations.