* 9650726
* Improving Undergraduate Instruction Through the             Inauguration of a Multi-Disciplinary Computer Simulation    Laboratory
* EDU,DUE
* 08/15/1996,07/31/1998
* Gerhard Laule, Seminole State College
* Standard Grant
* Lee Zia
* 07/31/1998
* USD 55,000.00

The Division of Math, Science, and Engineering has, in the past, been operating
with an instructional deficiency in teaching 17 courses that span the physical
and life sciences and mathematics. Faculty have been working with an outdated
Mathematics and Science Computer Assisted Learning Center (MSCALC) still
equipped with original Apple II/e computers. The limited capabilities of the
MSCALC has severely hindered the faculty' s goal of going beyond the currently
used drill and practice exercises and adding an interactive laboratory
simulation component to the mathematics and science curriculum. The project aims
to remedy this situation by redesigning the MSCALC, equipping it with Power
MacIntosh computers that can run MacIntosh or IBM PC software. This new
instructional technology enables science faculty members to offer laboratory
exercises that can reinforce `wet lab` experiments and familiarize students with
modern analytical techniques using computer simulations. The computers can be
used for prelab orientation exercises, for simulations in areas where expensive
instrumentation or materials are required, for visualization of complex lecture
concepts, and for postlab exercises to reinforce and assess student learning.
Mathematics students can use software packages to strengthen mathematical
intuition and insight by representing mathematical ideas and objects (such as
functions, matrices, differential equations, and infinite series) in a variety
of forms that permit them to be experimented with and manipulated. The project
also specifically helps the majority_over 60 percent_of the college's students
who are women, a great number of whom are returning to school after years at
home or work. The project is helping these students gain further knowledge, help
in their retention, and increase their competency and familiarity with modern
computer systems.