* 9650712
* Rotations in Contemporary Biology Laboratory Techniques for Undergraduates: A Team Approach to Problem Solving
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/1996,06/30/1999
* Thomas Shea, University of Massachusetts Lowell
* Standard Grant
* Saundra H. Oyewole
* 06/30/1999
* USD 60,000.00

Collaborative research is central to solving real problems in contemporary
biology. Such experiences, however, are typically not part of undergraduate
curricula. Accordingly, this project is centered around the purchase of state-
of-the-art instrumentation to be used in a comprehensive 2-semester
undergraduate laboratory course for upper-level biology majors. The course is
designed to illustrate the collaborative, interdisciplinary nature of modern day
research by having 6 teams of 8 to 10 students investigate a problem of
biomedical significance using contemporary techniques from various
subspecialties of biology. The student teams rotate through different laboratory
settings as they follow the steps necessary to isolate, purify, characterize,
clone, and mass produce a product of therapeutic value. Each team of students is
mentored by a faculty Team Leader who is an expert in each particular
methodology. The goals of this course are to instill critical thinking skills by
expecting the students to apply to a real-world problem the concepts and lab
techniques they have so far encountered only in isolated, unrelated laboratory
exercises, i.e., to learn to think like scientists; to familiarize students with
state-of-the-art instrumentation that they are likely to encounter in a graduate
research lab or an industrial setting; to emphasize the importance of teamwork
and the fostering of strong collaborative relationships; and to encourage
students to pursue graduate studies. Students are being evaluated throughout the
course by the Team Leaders. Critical thinking skills are tested with practical
problem-solving exercises. The success of the course can be evaluated by
feedback from student participants and a panel of academic and industrial
scientists. The resulting course workbook can be published and posted on-line
for world-wide access.