* 9650355
* Enhancing Instructional Opportunities of Modern Molecular   Genetic Techniques in Biology at an Undergraduate Liberal   Arts University
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/1996,08/31/1998
* Brian Masters, Towson University
* Standard Grant
* Terry S. Woodin
* 08/31/1998
* USD 54,765.00

Molecular genetic tools are employed in an ever-increasing variety of fields in
both academia and industry. This department, like many others, has offered a
very good program in traditional cellular biology, but has been unable to offer
courses addressing the theory or application of molecular techniques. Thus, many
biology majors proceed to graduate academic programs and industrial workplaces
without the background necessary to take advantage of these important tools. The
Department of Biological Sciences is working to correct this deficiency by
offering two new courses in molecular biology with strong laboratory components
concentrating on modern molecular genetic approaches to basic biological
questions. Both courses emphasize a hands-on approach and accommodate students
from a wide range of biology education backgrounds. The first course deals with
traditional molecular subjects in the lecture and makes use of a project-
oriented approach in the laboratory. Students work in small groups using a
variety of modern molecular techniques to duplicate a published research
program. This approach enhances instruction by placing techniques within their
appropriate context, increases student interest, and encourages team working
skills. The second course exposes students to the theory and practice of the
different DNA fingerprinting techniques being used in many areas of biology.
These exercises provide students with a practical working knowledge of a wide
range of molecular techniques and a particular familiarity with DNA
fingerprinting. Students completing this course will be prepared to pursue this
highly practical technology in areas of biological science ranging from ecology
to forensics. Both courses are intended to enhance current upper-level biology
courses, prepare students for independent research projects, serve as models for
similar efforts at other undergraduate institutions, and provide the basis for
outreach programs to K-12 instructors.