* 9650773
* Improvement of the Undergraduate Chemistry Laboratory       Curriculum with High Field NMR
* EDU,DUE
* 05/01/1996,04/30/1998
* John Miles, Centre College of Kentucky
* Standard Grant
* Frank A. Settle
* 04/30/1998
* USD 61,092.00

The chemistry program is among the college's strongest areas, but its further
progress has been hindered by the lack of a high-field nuclear magnetic
resonance (NMR) spectrometer. The objective of this project is to enhance the
instruction and collaborative research of chemistry students by incorporating
extensive hands-on use of high-field NMR spectroscopy. The chemistry program is
revising six courses to accomplish this objective, exposing students to a
sequence of applications of increasing sophistication. At the sophomore level,
the introduction of NMR gives students more concrete examples of isomerism,
conformational changes, and electronegativity, as well as elucidates the
structures of unknown organic compounds and reaction products. In the junior and
senior years, students explore the quantum mechanical basis and fundamental
physical principles of NMR spectroscopy, as well as applications beyond
structural elucidation. They also use NMR to determine magnetic susceptibility,
to confirm intermediates in multistep synthesis, to calculate the diastereomeric
or enantiomeric excess of reactions, and to view interesting coordination
chemistry. In addition to enhancing laboratory instruction, the acquisition of a
high-field NMR dramatically improves collaborative research projects in
synthetic chemistry. The primary beneficiaries of this project are 140 students
in six chemistry courses and eight chemistry majors per year. Other
beneficiaries include 15 precollege teachers attending a summer institute in
spectroscopy at the college and member institutions in a consortium, that can
incorporate NMR in their chemistry curriculum.