* 9650384
* Interdisciplinary Earth Systems Modeling in Undergraduate   Geography Curriculum
* EHR,DUE
* 07/15/1996,06/30/1998
* Elen Cutrim, Western Michigan University
* Standard Grant
* David W. Mogk
* 06/30/1998
* USD 48,496.00

A networked computer laboratory will be developed to promote interdisciplinary
studies of earth systems in the undergraduate geography curriculum. This
technology will be used to Integrate earth systems modeling techniques with the
data-management and analytical capabilities of the UNIDATA meteorological
software and datastream, geographic information systems (GIS), and remote
sensing. These are important components of active learning in such fields as
global environmental change, resource analysis, and human-environmental
interaction. Traditionally, earth systems modeling and technique-focused courses
have followed separate sequences in undergraduate instruction. The objective of
this project is to integrate elements of conceptual modeling of geographic
phenomena into the "tools" courses through specially designed exercises within
an integrated laboratory learning environment. These exercises, implementing the
discovery method of instruction, enable undergraduate students to develop
systems thinking and analytical and group work skills through experimentation
with environmental models and working with real-world data. The traditional
style of laboratory instruction in climatology, as well as GIS and remote
sensing, is being changed to emphasize group and individual problem-solving and
decision-making through interaction with a modeling environment. Six courses are
being redesigned within this project. The laboratory can be used by at least 210
undergraduates each year in geography and related earth sciences programs.
Implementing this approach can be accomplished by integrating state-of-the-art
GIS, remote sensing, and climatology instrumentation with commercially available
simulation modeling software. The core of the Earth Systems Modeling Laboratory
consists of 18 Pentium and several SUN workstations linked by a local area
network. The integrated problem-solving and modeling experience can be evaluated
for learning processes and outcomes, and results can be prepared for publication
and presentation to geographic and educational communities.