* 9651079
* Gas Chromatography/Mass Spectrometry (GCD) for Improved     Undergraduate Instruction
* EHR,DUE
* 07/01/1996,06/30/1998
* Anthony Sky, Lawrence Technological University
* Standard Grant
* Susan H. Hixson
* 06/30/1998
* USD 26,374.00

The Department of Natural Sciences is enhancing the undergraduate chemistry
laboratory curriculum by offering all freshman engineering, science, and
chemistry students, at all levels, experimental work in the area of gas
chromatography/mass spectrometry (GCD). Two hundred freshmen in the freshman
chemistry laboratory, each year, are able to use this instrument in relevant
experiments. Acquisition of GCD equipment strengthens each of the laboratory
courses currently offered. It is important that students progressing through the
chemistry curriculum have the opportunity to use this modern instrumental
technique; therefore, training of chemistry majors on modern instrumentation is
being insured. The relevance of GCD in isotope analysis and environmental
studies of air pollutants such as freons is being introduced in University
Chemistry and is continued through Organic Chemistry and Advanced Synthesis,
where reaction product structure determination and identification is enhanced by
the use of this instrument. In Physical Chemistry, students use GCD for the
calculation of thermodynamic properties and Arrhenius reaction rate parameters.
In Instrumental Analysis, additional experiments in quantitative measurement of
trace contaminants in air, soil, and water are offered. Laboratory instruction
is being supported by the use of computers and software already available in
mass spectra interpretation. Students in the new environmental chemistry program
also benefit from the use of the instrument for environmental studies. Use of
GCD equipment in University Chemistry Lab, a key component of the introductory
course, encourages strong student interest and leads to improved recruitment,
retention, and training of motivated and qualified chemistry majors.