* 9651463
* Introduction of Microwave Decomposition into the            Undergraduate Analytical Chemistry Curriculum
* EDU,DUE
* 05/15/1996,04/30/1998
* David McCurdy, Truman State University
* Standard Grant
* Susan H. Hixson
* 04/30/1998
* USD 9,408.00

This project brings microwave sample preparation into the undergraduate
chemistry curriculum. While there is widespread use of microwave sample
preparation in industrial settings, there is limited evidence in the literature
describing its application to undergraduate education. The introduction of
microwave sample preparation to the analytical laboratory is giving students
training on a widely used instrument and expanding the types of laboratory
activities that may be reasonably conducted. For example, in Quantitative
Analysis classes, new and modified experiments are introducing the basics of
microwave sample preparation, using everyday samples to provide a greater "real-
world" feel. In the Instrumental Analysis class, a 4-week advanced lab component
is being added, where the time limitations of sample preparation have limited
the challenge of previous student projects. In the Advanced Analytical Chemistry
class, microwave sample preparation is being added as part of a laboratory
comparing new and traditional sample preparation methods. Students participating
in an interdisciplinary study-abroad environmental science class, and in the
growing undergraduate research program at the university also are employing this
equipment. The equipment is allowing the use of microwave sample preparation in
all analytical chemistry classes and improving undergraduate research
opportunities, which is better preparing students for industry and graduate
school. Because the project is modifying traditional experiments and developing
new ones, it serves other educators, by providing approaches for the adoption of
microwave digestion techniques in their classes.