* 9651385
* X-Ray Diffraction: A Common Interdisciplinary Experience forGeology, Chemistry, and Physics Students
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/1996,08/31/1998
* Karl Wirth, Macalester College
* Standard Grant
* David W. Mogk
* 08/31/1998
* USD 11,269.00

The purpose of this project is to establish a laboratory capable of supporting
an undergraduate program in Computational Science. A large number of students in
the natural and social sciences complete their undergraduate career without
experience in the application of advanced computational tools and techniques to
the problems of their respective disciplines. The objective of this project is
to create an interdisciplinary program within the Mathematics Department that
gives these students the needed background and experience. It expands and
articulates existing courses in numerical methods, large-scale data analysis,
and visualization techniques as it creates a program specifically designed for
these students. This program can create a group of mathematically sophisticated
students who can apply their knowledge of visualization and computation
techniques to problems in the natural and social sciences, especially geology,
biology, chemistry, physics, economics, geography, and psychology. All students
in this program are required to complete a major computational project in their
area of interest. These projects can be made publicly available. Faculty members
can also share what they have learned about implementing such a program with
other colleges and universities, especially with those similar institutions in
the Associated Colleges of the Midwest and the Great Lakes Colleges Association
with which the college has a record of close cooperation.