* 9651206
* Neural, Social and Electronic Networks:  A Cluster Course   Approach
* EDU,DUE
* 07/15/1996,06/30/1998
* Thomas Kelliher, Westminster College
* Standard Grant
* Myles Boylan
* 06/30/1998
* USD 17,232.00

The equipment requested is for two psychology and computer science cluster
courses: "Neural and Machine Intelligence" and "Social Networks on an Electronic
Network." Both cluster course pairs are addressed to the general
sophomore/junior level student and must meet the needs of majors and non-majors
alike. Students enroll in both courses simultaneously. Lectures are coordinated
or team taught, while labs are completely integrated. Ideally, approximately 24
students (8 computer science, 8 psychology, and 8 other majors) enroll in each
course, each semester. In the laboratory components students combine psychology
and computer science knowledge and skills to conduct experiments in neural,
social and electronic networks. The proposed UNIX server supports the preemptive
multi-tasking operating system that is essential to support both clusters.
Integrating psychology and computer science in these courses promises to
actively involve students with the course content and enable them to apply that
content through meaningful laboratory experiments and simulation. The equipment
requested is essential for two psychology and computer science cluster courses:
"Neural and Machine Intelligence" and "Social Networks on an Electronic
Network". Both cluster course pairs are addressed to the general
sophomore/junior level student and must meet the needs of majors and non-majors
alike. Students will enroll in both courses simultaneously. Lectures will be
coordinated or team taught while labs will be completely integrated. Ideally,
approximately 24 students (8 computer science, 8 psychology, and 8 other majors)
will enroll in each course, each semester. In the laboratory components students
will combine psychology and computer science knowledge and skills to conduct
experiments in neural, social and electronic networks. The proposed UNIX server
supports the preemptive multi-tasking operating system that is essential to
support both clusters. Integrating psychology and computer science in these c
ourses promises to actively involve students with the course content and enable
them to apply that content through meaningful laboratory experiments and
simulation.