* 9651461
* Curricular Enhancement Through the Integrated Use of        Microcomputers in Introductory Physics
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/1996,06/30/1998
* Maria Di Stefano, Truman State University
* Standard Grant
* Duncan E. McBride
* 06/30/1998
* USD 22,381.00

This project seeks to take advantage of the many ways in which computers can
enhance student learning in introductory physics courses, both algebra- and
calculus-based. Computers can do much more than act as fancy calculators; they
have been utilized as powerful tools in the design of teaching methodologies
based on the findings of research in physics education. The department is
implementing microcomputers and microcomputer-based laboratory tools that make
possible an array of approaches to be integrated into existing physics courses.
The objective is to empower students to use concrete experiences to revise
preconceptions, construct new understanding, and connect it with mathematical
frameworks. Students engage in modeling activities using spreadsheets, and in
some cases digitized videos, that reflect a realistic manner of physics
research. They explore experimental situations utilizing sensors or probes
connected to the computer, which facilitates the analysis by providing
instantaneous calculations and real-time graphics, clearly shown to improve
student conceptual understanding. They explore some topics through activity-
based investigations which help them acquire transferable skills of scientific
inquiry. The department is developing some new exercises, but is also adapting
many that are already available (mostly from Workshop Physics and Tools for
Scientific Thinking) to the specific environment, a midsize undergraduate
institution, with some flexibility for individual faculty variations
(instructional methods become more effective when they fit faculty styles and
when faculty have developed some sense of ownership). The project's efforts will
be useful to other institutions with similar characteristics. Students'
attitudes toward physics and self-perceptions regarding how their learning
abilities are affected by the integrated use of computers are also being
assessed.