* 9651204
* Curriculum Development for Interdisciplinary Field Courses  in Environmental Geosciences
* EDU,DUE
* 07/15/1996,06/30/1999
* William Boone, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Keith Sverdrup
* 06/30/1999
* USD 130,000.00

At the present time interdisciplinary, field-based, courses for the training of
environmental scientists are extremely rare; this is particularly true for the
lower level of undergraduate education. As part of the new Bachelor of Science
in Environmental Science (BSES) program at Indiana University, an
interdisciplinary field course for environmental scientists (G329) will be
created that emphasizes site characterization, hydrogeology, and ecosystem
analysis in addition to traditional geologic principles. A second course will be
created through modification of an existing course for advanced geologic study
(G429); the revised course (G429e) will include environmental components and
place more emphasis on surficial geology. These new courses will utilize the
Indiana University Geologic Field Station located in the Tobacco Root Mountains,
Montana as their base for instruction. The new curriculum will consist of a
combination of teaching exercises, independent evaluation exercises, and a Final
Study Area project. Together, G329 and G429e constitute a sequence of field-
based education open to students from other accredited colleges and
universities. One unique aspect of the new curricula will be the utilization of
an instrumented Demonstration Watershed for instructional purposes. The
Demonstration Watershed will contain state-of-the-art monitoring equipment
established as part of a cooperative effort involving Indiana University, State
and Federal agencies, as well as the local water district and ranchers. In order
to ensure dissemination of curricula materials we have proposed an on-site
visitation program for external faculty members.