* 9651170
* Creation of Economic Science Laboratory to Teach Classroom  Experiments at Multiple Sites
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/1996,09/30/1998
* Robert Piron, Bowling Green State University
* Standard Grant
* Myles Boylan
* 09/30/1998
* USD 30,000.00

At Bowling Green State University -- Firelands College, the installation of a
dedicated local area network (LAN) of personal computers will be used to create
an innovative economics curriculum in which new classroom experiments will be
conducted in international finance, public goods, and bargaining. With these and
other previously used economic experimental designs, undergraduate students will
use the scientific method to empirically verify economic theories. This lab may
also be useful in generating data for assessing whether using classroom
experiments in economics enhances retention of knowledge versus using only
standard lecture teaching methods. The lab will also be used for statistical
data analysis not only in economics, but also in statistics, psychology, and
sociology courses. The LAN will have a file server, instructor's machine, and 20
workstations with Pentium microcomputers. This LAN will be connected to the
university-wide TCP/IP backbone. Consequently, this LAN can be connected to the
pre-existing LANs at other locations within and outside the university. This
will allow for real time interaction between two or more LANs. This means that
two or more sections of students will be able to jointly participate in a market
experiment. In all, 500 students per semester will use the lab. Firelands
College serves a distinctive student body, with women comprising 67.1 percent.
The Humanistic Educational Learning Process Program assists over 120 women each
year who are recipients of Aid to Families with Dependent Children to receive
associate degrees and gain employment. Nearly all of these Program participants
will use the lab.