* 9651386
* The Introduction of Time-of-Flight and Coincidence          Techniques into the Undergraduate Physics Laboratory
* EHR,DUE
* 06/01/1996,05/31/1998
* Martin Johnston, University of St. Thomas
* Standard Grant
* Duncan E. McBride
* 05/31/1998
* USD 19,401.00

This project strengthens the upper-division physics laboratory program by
introducing fast-timing techniques and their applications using state-of-the-art
equipment. Event timing is central to a wide range of experiments in atomic,
optical, nuclear, and surface physics. Because of this, it is important to
incorporate these techniques, and the instrumentation they require, into the
undergraduate physics curriculum. To accomplish this goal, the department is
introducing two new labs: High Resolution, Low Energy Electron Scattering Cross
Section Measurements Using Time-of-Flight Techniques and r-r Coincidence Angular
Correlation Studies of 22Na. Both of the experiments require complex timing
instrumentation that illustrates the basics of fast-timing techniques with
standard equipment used in research and industry. Students are exposed to a
variety of technologies: high vacuum, NIM modules, multichannel analyzers, pulse
height and time-delay discrimination, charged particle optics, and y-ray
detection. A modular approach to the instrumentation allows for the performance
of a variety of experiments. By simulating research and industrial environments,
this approach gives students useful and practical experience to draw on when
they begin their careers. Project dissemination efforts include the American
Journal of Physics and American Association of Physics Teachers meetings.
Details of experimental procedures will be placed on the Department's World Wide
Web homepage. To assess long-term impact, graduates will be surveyed annually
for 5 years, with an emphasis on usefulness of skills and techniques acquired in
upper-division laboratory experiments.