* 9651324
* Ultrafast Laser Laboratory for Photonics Undergraduates
* EHR,DUE
* 09/01/1996,08/31/1999
* Dean Richardson, SUNY Institute of Technology Utica-Rome
* Standard Grant
* Margaret D. Weeks
* 08/31/1999
* USD 34,360.00

The project incorporates an Ultrafast Laser Laboratory (ULL) into the existing
Photonics B.S. degree program. The ULL adds a strong ultrafast laser component
to the program's Laser Physics and Applications core course and allows the
establishment of an elective entitled Advanced Photonics Lab Techniques,
providing undergraduate photonics technologists with the experience necessary to
help them confidently design, construct, operate, maintain, and characterize
ultrafast solid-state laser systems. Within the past 5 years, lasers have been
developed based on titanium-doped sapphire crystals that allow the generation of
extremely short pulses of light; these pulses can in turn be used to study the
time evolution of microscopic processes, including chemical reaction kinetics
and charge-carrier propagation in semiconductor quantum well materials. The
ability to create and detect light pulses as short as a few femtoseconds (femto
= one-quadrillionth) is rapidly transforming scientific understanding of the
microscopic world. Accordingly, photonics technologists and engineers who
understand ultrafast laser systems and can assist in their implementation are
needed by the research and academic communities. This Photonics program aims to
prepare its graduates to fill that need. Until now, the school has lacked the
state-of-the-art resources necessary to provide critical experimental learning
experiences with ultrafast laser systems to its students. Now, rather than
purchase an expensive commercial ultrafast laser for students to operate,
faculty can teach students how to construct one themselves from off-the-shelf
components. In the laboratory, students can also build a crucial
characterization tool (an `autocorrelator`) needed to measure the duration of
the pulses output by the laser they've set up and aligned. The experience gained
in developing this laboratory and its accompanying documentation can assist
other universities seeking to strengthen their undergraduate physics and optics
programs.