* 9651237
* A Virtual Reality and Scientific Visualization Laboratory   for Undergraduates in Computer Science
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/1996,06/30/1998
* Roger Webster, Millersville University
* Standard Grant
* Michael C. Mulder
* 06/30/1998
* USD 48,348.00

This project provides funds for focused investment in instrumentation for
undergraduate study in the area of Virtual Reality and Scientific Visualization
for undergraduates in Computer Science. A great deal of projects being performed
in computer science and in undergraduate and graduate programs in the sciences
center around collaborative scientific projects and the visualization of the
results. Many of these projects use simulation and virtual reality to model
virtual environments to help visualize scientific experiments. With so much
activity in the scientific community today composed of collaborative projects
that include and require computer scientists, a logical step at this time is to
build a specialized laboratory and expose undergraduate students to the software
techniques of virtual reality, virtual world modeling, and scientific
visualization. Virtual reality and scientific visualization is composed of high-
performance three-dimensional computer graphics for scientific modeling and
simulations for training and experimentation in the natural and physical
sciences. This project allows for greater graphical computational power,
flexibility, and more efficiency, which will lead to increased productivity of
faculty/student teams. This project may also provide a springboard for
collaborative student projects between Computer Science and Biology, Physics,
Chemistry, and Meteorology majors. Many science students, as well as computer
science students, can greatly benefit from this project, giving them
opportunities to engage in high-performance computer simulations and
visualization techniques at the undergraduate level. One of the primary
objectives of this project is to boost student interest in pursuing more
scholarly activities such as student publications, going on to graduate school,
and seeking employment in scientific research-oriented institutions. This
laboratory for experimentation in developing software for virtual environments
may be of potential interest to other institutions and may lead to the
development of new experiments and approaches in laboratory instruction in
computer science.