* 9651165
* Development of GIS Lab to Promote Interdisciplinary Student Environmental Research
* EHR,DUE
* 07/15/1996,06/30/1998
* John Anderson, College of the Atlantic
* Standard Grant
* David W. Mogk
* 06/30/1998
* USD 30,000.00

This project supports major improvements in the geographic information systems
(GIS) laboratory. GIS has proven to be an effective and versatile learning and
research tool enhancing student research, independent study, and senior (honors)
projects in environmental science and human ecology. The project addresses the
need to replace obsolete and less efficient equipment in order to strengthen and
revise current courses and to develop the capacity to design more advanced
curricula. Faculty and students from each academic resource area have the
opportunity to engage in advanced research and pursue digital environmental
modeling projects, applying the most powerful version of ArcInfo software. Six
Pentium-class PCs running X-terminal emulation software, networked to a
SPARCstation 10, replace six older PC computers. The new system provides courses
with access to data and software managed by the SPARCstation server. Current
courses are enhanced as new technical features are introduced through the lab,
including modeling and analytical tools for working with physiographic data and
satellite imagery and tools to create graphic user interfaces and customized
programs for specific applications. Measurable outcomes from the project include
substantially enhanced courses along with increased numbers of students doing
independent study and research; new and advanced projects undertaken; and
dissemination of distinctive applications of GIS technology in an
interdisciplinary science-oriented program.