* 9651137
* An Interdisciplinary Course in Quantitative and             Scientific Literacy
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/1996,08/31/1999
* Richard Ciocci, Harrisburg Area Community College
* Standard Grant
* Lee Zia
* 08/31/1999
* USD 86,950.00

At Harrisburg Area Community College, as in many community colleges, students
majoring in business and social sciences are required to take at most two
courses in mathematics or science disciplines. Often these students elect to
take college algebra which neither prepares them for a data oriented environment
in the workplace nor exposes them to scientific methodology. These students, who
typically comprise one-half of the enrollment in college algebra in many
colleges, need an interdisciplinary course which will provide them with the
requisite skills and knowledge. Further, such a course should provide a sound
foundation for continued course work in mathematics, including applied calculus,
and should address the learning styles of students historically underrepresented
in the sciences and technology. This project is developing a laboratory manual
and textbook for an interdisciplinary course in quantitative and scientific
literacy. In this laboratory course, data collected by the students is being
analyzed to determine both the scientific principles it illustrates and the
properties of the function category for which the data is a numerical
representation. The project is providing an avenue to ensure that an increasing
number of non-science majors will have the requisite skills and knowledge that
will enable them to be competitive in their careers and successful in their
lives.