* 9651312
* Improvement of the Chemistry Curriculum with NMR
* EDU,DUE
* 09/15/1996,08/31/1998
* John Almy, California State University-Stanislaus
* Standard Grant
* Frank A. Settle
* 08/31/1998
* USD 89,570.00

Without a functioning nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) spectrometer, students
do not have the opportunity to obtain physical evidence of those compounds that
they prepare in the laboratory and are discussed in the lecture. This project
introduces modern experimental NMR spectrometry into the curriculum in order to
reinforce important concepts. Extensive use of structure determination based on
NMR improves student development of scientific reasoning skills. Finally,
students gain the skills in operating the NMR first in its basic mode, then in
its more advanced applications and techniques. NMR theory and data
interpretation are introduced first in Organic Chemistry and follow an organized
program throughout the upper-division curriculum. Beginning with very simple
explanations and spectra, increasingly more complex NMR methods are then applied
to problems in Biochemistry, Physical Chemistry, Instrumental Analysis, and
Advanced Laboratory. Laboratory experiments make use of NMR data to actualize
complex concepts presented in the lectures. Hands-on student operation begins
after the introductory Organic Chemistry course. Two community colleges are
being included in the project, and two annual workshops are being presented in
collaboration with their faculty. A range of NMR methods can be introduced to
Organic Chemistry students from these colleges. For dissemination of this
program, information on NMR spectra and techniques in spectral interpretation
can be placed on the World Wide Web using the university's homepage. This
complements currently available lecture material and tutorials. The university
can also publish and present innovative teaching methods and student research
related to the project.