* 9651001
* Interdisciplinary Automated Manufacturing Laboratory for theElectro-Mechanical Engineering Technology Program
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/1996,08/31/1998
* Bruce Muller, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Margaret D. Weeks
* 08/31/1998
* USD 50,318.00

There is a need in industry for technology graduates who can use a combination
of electrical and mechanical concepts in the design, installation, and servicing
of products and production systems. Preparing Associate Degree graduates for
this role is difficult because 4 semesters is too short for extensive education
in both disciplines. The Engineering Technology Department has addressed this
problem by modifying three courses offered at the Associate Degree level to
include basic concepts that bridge the two technologies and introducing a new
4-year degree program, Bachelor of Science in Electro-Mechanical Engineering
Technology. The solution to the training problem created two major pedagogical
problems. The first problem was the method used to deliver the content in the
three courses. While the courses covered both product design and production
system design and had a mix of electrical and mechanical concepts, there was no
effort to use the same product examples in the courses. The second problem had
two components: (1) the department did not have an automated manufacturing
system on which students could learn to solve the electromechanical integration
problems associated with these systems and (2) if a system was built for
training, it would be difficult to teach standard 16-student laboratory sections
with single production machines and one-of-a-kind manufacturing systems. This
project includes two initiatives that overcome the instructional delivery
problems associated with cross training in electromechanical concepts and the
use of large automated manufacturing systems in traditional laboratory sections.
The project focuses on the integration of a product design problem into
manufacturing courses and the development of a laboratory system that permits
standard laboratory class sizes of 16 students to effectively use single
production machines and a one-of-a-kind manufacturing system. The second problem
is significant because many colleges add manufacturing systems to laboratories,
but few address the training issues associated with the one-of-a-kind hardware
in standard laboratory sections.