* 9651338
* Scanning Electron Microscope for the Materials and          Manufacturing Laboratory
* EDU,DUE
* 06/01/1996,05/31/1998
* Von Richards, TRINE UNIVERSITY, INC
* Standard Grant
* Daniel B. Hodge
* 05/31/1998
* USD 50,490.00

Undergraduate engineering majors need to develop a better understanding of
processing effects on microstructure and the properties of engineering
materials. Therefore, the two objectives of the proposed laboratory improvement
are (1) to develop a better understanding of the properties-structure-processing
triad for engineers and (2) to prepare students in engineering and the sciences
to be intelligent users or consumers of electron optical techniques. For the
first objective, the scanning electron microscope may facilitate term projects
in the upper-level metallurgy and manufacturing processes courses, which require
students to understand the relationships among materials, design performance,
and manufacturing processes. The department has begun to equip the metallurgical
laboratory for this type of project, but more thorough evaluations of fracture
surfaces and fine scale morphology of the phases present are required. For the
second objective, hands-on experiences enable engineering and science students
to recognize the appropriate capabilities of analytical tools. The development
of the materials in design exercise and manufacturing sequence projects can be
reported in papers and proceedings of the American Society of Engineering
Education. Also, students continue to participate in project work under the
sponsorship of the Steel Founders' Society of America, which is disseminated in
their technical reports series with student co-authors.