* 9651294
* Workshop Interdisciplinary Mathematics and Science Course
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/1996,06/30/1999
* Gifford Brown, University of Evansville
* Standard Grant
* Herbert H. Richtol
* 06/30/1999
* USD 26,663.00

Many students in the general education science and mathematics courses
understand little about how science is done or about the major themes and
concepts of science and mathematics. This project addresses these problems by
developing a hands-on, laboratory-based, integrated mathematics and science
general education course. The course is designed for all students who are not
majoring in science or mathematics and is especially appropriate for preservice
teachers. The course is a team-taught 2-semester sequence that meets 5 hours per
week in a workshop format that combines lecture, hands-on activities and
exercises, and laboratory. Each semester is 4 credit hours. The objectives of
the course are to emphasize relationships among the scientific disciplines, to
coordinate mathematics with science, to promote science literacy, and to enhance
the understanding of science by teaching it as it is practiced. The course is
truly interdisciplinary in nature, examining both unifying themes in the
sciences and the contributions of mathematics to our understanding of the
natural world. The course also examines science from historical, philosophical,
and contemporary social perspectives. Toward these goals, the course engages
students as active participants in learning through open-ended investigative
laboratory experiences, group projects both in the laboratory and the library,
and the presentation of ideas in oral and written form. Students completing the
course are expected to have improved their critical thinking skills and be
better able to navigate in the scientific and technological world. The course is
also expected to prepare the preservice teachers in its audience to convey the
nature and content of science and mathematics better in their own classrooms.