* 9651254
* Video and Image Analysis Activities for a Plant Physiology  Laboratory
* EDU,DUE
* 06/01/1996,05/31/1998
* Thomas Sasek, The University of Louisiana at Monroe
* Standard Grant
* Herbert Levitan
* 05/31/1998
* USD 6,295.00

Plant sciences is often one of the more neglected areas in biology education.
Students are usually less familiar with plants than animals and often are not as
stimulated by plant research, given plants' static nature and slow growth. This
project is designed to develop laboratory exercises for a plant physiology
course that can give students some unexpected and interesting insights into
plant biology. Once the exercises are implemented and refined in the plant
physiology course, some of them can be used in introductory courses to stimulate
interest there as well. The exercises involve video and image capture to analyze
patterns of growth and physiological behavior. One approach makes videotape
recordings of rapid plant motions, analyzing them in frame-by-frame sequences
and quantifying the observations. Similarly, slow plant motions can be analyzed
by time-lapse techniques that reveal fascinating patterns of motion not easily
visualized by real-time observation. For both techniques, videotape is analyzed
with a video micrometer system that allows precise measurements to be made for
analysis, or video sequences are digitized into a computer for more complex
image analysis and processing. A variety of student group projects can be
accommodated during the course of a semester, providing the students with an
opportunity to plan an experiment, carry it out, analyze the results, and make a
final presentation to the class.