* 9651218
* A Plan for Integrating CFD into an Undergraduate            Curriculum
* EDU,DUE
* 08/01/1996,07/31/1998
* William Lasher, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Janet C. Rutledge
* 07/31/1998
* USD 42,328.00

The use of advanced computer simulation technologies such as finite elements
has become increasingly common in engineering design. This is especially true in
linear and structural problems, where the computer tools have developed to the
point where most graduates of an engineering program can use them on a regular
basis. Because of the mathematical and physical complexities of fluid mechanics,
CFD software has not reached this same state of ease of use. In spite of the
complexities of using CFD, it is becoming increasingly clear that engineering
undergraduates must have some exposure to the technique. The objective of this
project is to develop a national model for appropriate integration of CFD into
an undergraduate curriculum to support the design process. This is being
accomplished through a series of projects in several different courses. All
students in the program are exposed to the fundamentals of CFD to learn its
strengths and limitations, and those who have an interest have the opportunity
to develop an expertise in using the software. This is done in conjunction with
experiments using both existing equipment and the proposed equipment. This
project is part of an overall plan to more intensively integrate computers into
the curriculum.