* 9651472
* A Robot-based Laboratory for Teaching Artificial            Intelligence
* EDU,DUE
* 06/15/1996,05/31/1998
* Deepak Kumar, Swarthmore College
* Standard Grant
* Michael C. Mulder
* 05/31/1998
* USD 28,879.00

There is a growing consensus among computer science faculty that it is quite
difficult to teach the introductory course on Artificial Intelligence (AI) well.
This is because AI lacks a unified methodology, overlaps with many other
disciplines, and involves a wide range of skills from very applied to quite
formal. This project addresses these problems by (1) offering a unifying theme
that draws together the disparate topics of AI; (2) focusing the course syllabus
on the role AI plays in the core computer science curriculum; and (3) motivating
the students to learn by using concrete, hands-on laboratory exercises. The main
theme is to conceive of each topic in AI (such as search, planning, learning,
vision) as a robotics task and then to have the students build their own robots
and program them to accomplish the tasks. By constructing a physical entity in
conjunction with the code to control it, the students have a unique opportunity
to tackle many central issues of computer science directly including the
interaction between hardware and software, space complexity in terms of the
memory limitations of the robot's controller, and time complexity in terms of
the speed of the robot's action decisions. More importantly, the robot theme
provides a strong incentive toward learning because students want to see their
inventions succeed. The goal of this project is to equip two identical robotics
laboratories for teaching AI. Each laboratory contains a collection of robot
building stations as well as one sophisticated off-the-shelf robot to
demonstrate more advanced topics to the students. The deliverable for this
project is a laboratory manual that is closely integrated with a semester-long
AI course syllabus. The manual is being developed collaboratively and tested
separately at the participating institutions. The overall effectiveness of this
project will be determined by student feedback and performance. The project
results can be disseminated through a variety of channels: a SIGART column on AI
Education, special conference tracks on AI Education, summer training workshops
for AI educators, and World Wide Web repositories on AI. This project offers a
remedy for the difficulties facing AI educators by offering a cohesive framework
for the presentation of the material that emphasizes AI's relationship with
computer science and motivates the students to learn.