* 9651399
* Using Technology to Enrich and Expand the Horizons of       Massasoit Community College Students
* EHR,DUE
* 09/01/1996,08/31/1998
* Richard Butterworth, Massasoit Community College
* Standard Grant
* SIMONEAU ROBERT W
* 08/31/1998
* USD 11,281.00

The Mathematics Department is enhancing the quality of instruction in the
Algebra, Precalculus, and Calculus courses by acquiring sets of graphing
calculators (TI-80s, TI-85s, and TI-92s) and a laptop computer for use in these
classes. From their research into current trends in mathematics education, their
communication with mathematics educators through the internet, and through
regional and national conferences, the members of the Mathematics Department
recognize that the lack of modern technology available to these classes
constitutes a serious deficiency in the mathematics education program at the
college and creates a disadvantage for its students. It is the goal of the
Mathematics Department to offer the most comprehensive and up-to-date program
available to meet the academic needs of a highly diverse student population,
including a high percentage of financially disadvantaged students (34 percent of
the student population is on financial aid). To implement this goal, the
department is purchasing the necessary technological equipment for student use.
The hope is that, at the end of one semester, `students will use appropriate
technology to enhance their mathematical thinking and understanding and to solve
mathematical problems and judge the reasonableness of their results` (Crossroads
in Mathematics, AMATYC).