* 9651363
* A Social Science Information Systems (SSIS) Laboratory for  Undergraduate Education
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/1996,08/31/1998
* Sue Marie Wright, Eastern Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Myles Boylan
* 08/31/1998
* USD 30,000.00

The computer equipment requested in this proposal will form the core of an
undergraduate Social Science Information Systems (SSIS) laboratory. This lab
will make possible the continuation of the newly established computer-based
education (CBE) in the Sociology Department, including the current Computer-
Assisted Data Analysis course, the development of a qualitative research course
using computers, and the updating of current courses with appropriate computer
applications. As conceived, social science research in a SSIS lab environment
will allow undergraduates the opportunity to become computer literate through
selecting and using computer programs, evaluating the validity of computer-
produced output, and learning to communicate about and through computers. In
addition to becoming computer literate, training in an advanced workstation
environment will further opportunities for student internships and other
cooperative work with the surrounding community, offer students a highly
marketable skill, and prepare them for graduate programs in the social sciences.
The SSIS lab will allow for the management of data that students can use to
carry out their own research. Students will become competent in quantitative
and/or qualitative analysis, training with some of the best industry software
(e.g., SPSS and Ethnograph). The SSIS lab will also give students the
opportunity to present professional quality reports through compatible graphics
and word processing software. Finally, familiarity with appropriate Internet
resources through the SSIS lab will allow students to expand their research base
and community.