* 9651280
* Computerized Data Acquisition, Computer Simulations, and theWorld Wide Web in a Unique Undergraduate Laboratory in      Physiology
* EDU,DUE
* 07/15/1996,06/30/1998
* Donald Hoagland, Westfield State College
* Standard Grant
* Herbert Levitan
* 06/30/1998
* USD 18,626.00

This small, liberal arts institution serves approximately 5,000 undergraduate
students. Each year approximately 300 students conduct physiology laboratory
experiments in one of five separate biology courses. Six to seven percent of
these students come from traditionally underrepresented groups in the sciences.
In these courses, students learn physiological concepts and techniques through
an inquiries-based approach and through cooperative and collaborative learning.
While the laboratory methods for collecting and recording data pertaining to
physiological events have progressed rapidly, the equipment available to
students has not kept pace. A series of experiments based upon those already
being performed is being developed to give students the opportunity to collect
and analyze data with state-of-the-art transducers and instrumentation and a
computerized acquisition system. Additionally, computer simulations of other
physiological events are used, allowing for practical lab experience, realistic
experimental design, and data analysis in a short period of time and at a low
cost. The inclusion of additional laboratory exercises designed to investigate
human physiology makes the lab experience more relative to a wider variety of
students and helps recruit more underrepresented students into biology. Finally,
all new laboratory exercises and student-collected data can be made available
through the World Wide Web. Posting the data enables students conducting the
same experiments throughout the world to share their data, refine the laboratory
exercises, and establish networks that can serve them throughout their careers.