* 9651056
* Improvement in Undergraduate Student Comprehension of       Molecular Biology
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/1996,06/30/1998
* Craig Tuerk, Morehead State University
* Standard Grant
* Terry S. Woodin
* 06/30/1998
* USD 41,223.00

The Department of Biological and Environmental Sciences is developing the
Undergraduate Molecular Biology Laboratory to improve undergraduate
comprehension of molecular biology. The equipment needed to develop the lab
includes eight student workstations composed of three micropipettors and rack,
250-volt power supply, horizontal submarine gel box, water bath, and vortex
mixer and a floor model refrigerated low-speed centrifuge and rotors, an
integrated vacuum centrifuge/gel drying system, four microcentrifuges, a shaking
water bath, a shaking platform incubator, a 37 C incubator, an ultraviolet
spectrophotometer, an ultraviolet transilluminator and photodocumentation
system, and a microplate reader and data capture/analysis software. The lab will
be an innovative learning environment in which students will gain hands-on
experience in exercises that utilize modern technologies. These experiences can
improve student comprehension of molecular biology and the process of science
and enable students to develop problem-solving and interpersonal skills. The lab
will improve the department's curriculum by including state-of-the-art equipment
and instrumentation to teach modern biological methodologies and demonstrate to
students the concepts of molecular biology. This laboratory can be used
primarily to teach two courses: Biotechnology and Laboratory Techniques in
Biochemistry. The laboratory can also share equipment with other laboratories to
add molecular biology laboratory activities to their respective courses,
including Principles of Biology, Genetics, and Cell Biology. The laboratory can
help the department prepare undergraduate students for careers in the health
sciences, research, teaching, and other professions.