* 9651477
* Data Acquisition, Manipulation and Presentation  in Physics and Physical Science
* EHR,DUE
* 10/01/1996,09/30/1998
* Bryan Long, Columbia State Community College
* Standard Grant
* Duncan E. McBride
* 09/30/1998
* USD 15,227.00

The goals of this project are to improve the quality of physics instruction at
this institution by enhancing and updating the laboratory equipment and
curricula; to increase enrollment and retention of students in mathematics- and
science-related programs of study; and to increase the enrollment of women,
minorities, and undeclared majors in careers in science by providing resources
to aid in the instruction and application of knowledge. The department is using
microcomputer-based laboratory experiments in data acquisition, analysis, and
presentation in undergraduate physics and physical science laboratories in the
areas of mechanics, heat and thermodynamics, electrical and magnetism, and
optics. Microcomputer-based laboratory experiments are being designed to enable
students to gain hands-on experience with new technology while reinforcing
traditional instructional methods. These enhanced laboratory experiences provide
students with effective learning to support lecture theory. In addition to
increasing learning, exposure to current laboratory instrumentation and
technology makes students more competitive upon transfer to a senior institution
or entrance into the workforce. Previously, there had been no classes in the
curricula of Elementary Education, Pre-Professional Engineering, or Science in
which students experience this type of computer utilization. The project
supports seven microcomputer workstations equipped with seven computers,
appropriate software, and supplementary laboratory equipment. This configuration
supports all of the redesigned and newly developed laboratory experiments. Up to
102 students enrolled in Physics and Physical Science courses may benefit and be
better prepared for the technologies of the 21st century.