* 9652870
* "Virtual Laboratories in Statistics"
* EDU,DUE
* 01/01/1997,12/31/1999
* Kyle Siegrist, University of Alabama in Huntsville
* Standard Grant
* Richard S. Martin, Jr.
* 12/31/1999
* USD 110,542.00

Statistics is one of the most important subjects in the undergraduate
curriculum. However, the subject is conceptually difficult because inferential
methods are based on probability theory, itself a difficult subject which cannot
be adequately covered in the introductory course. Thus, many students finish the
course having memorized some of the jargon and techniques, but with little real
understanding. The undergraduate statistics course can be improved by adopting a
rule of three, so that each major topic is explored from three points of view:
1. Mathematical. This term refers to the usual mathematical derivation and
formulation of the statistical methods. 2. Data Analysis. This term refers to
the application of the statistical methods to data, preferably from real
problems, yielding numerical and graphical results. 3. Simulation. This term
refers to simulations of the statistical methods that make the conceptual
foundations clear in a way that words, static pictures, and even data analysis
cannot. The mathematical and data analysis components are a well-established
part of the course, with many excellent texts and statistical packages as
teaching tools. The simulation component is not widely used throughout the
course, in part because well- designed, customized simulation tools are not
available. The purpose of this project is to develop a set of software modules
that function as virtual laboratories, allowing a student to replicate a
statistical procedure thousands of times in a matter of minutes with the output
displayed in customized tables and graphs that create a rich learning
environment. A special web site will be used to help with evaluation and
dissemination. The third year of the project is devoted entirely to teacher
preparation. The main activity will be a summer workshop to promote the "rule of
three" in statistics education and to disseminate the software developed among
the faculty who teach statistics, probability and technology courses to pre-
service teachers.