* 9652171
* Institution-Wide Reform of Undergraduate Education in       Science, Mathematics, Engineering and Technology
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/1996,08/31/1999
* R. Byron Pipes, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Herbert Levitan
* 08/31/1999
* USD 198,006.00

Students at many institutions of higher education are taught their undergraduate
courses (especially the introductory courses) in non-interactive lecture based
modules that allow for little faculty student interaction and little active
student involvement. Often the rationale for this mode of instruction is the
high cost of doing it any other way. We wish to replace many of the passive
lecture based courses with interactive, hands-on, student-centered environments.
The Studio Courses at Rensselaer (mathematics, physics, chemistry, biology,
engineering and others) have been developed to allow the replacement of the
traditional lecture/recitation/laboratory courses in science, mathematics, and
engineering with an alternative that promises a far higher quality course,
greater educational effectiveness, and cost containment. To do this we had to
break the old paradigm of high-cost/high quality courses as alternatives to low-
cost/low quality courses. We wanted high-quality/reasonable cost courses. While
traditional large enrolment lecture based courses can be low-cost, there is
ample evidence that they are usually low-quality as measured by effectiveness,
student attendance, and student satisfaction. This project is led by faculty
from each discipline working together to create these new environments. Reform
is taking place in all schools, all departments, and in numerous courses at the
same time. The curriculum reform is managed by the Curriculum Reform
Implementation Team (CRIT) under a mandate from the Faculty Senate. All changes
are reviewed and approved by the Faculty Senate curriculum Committee. The end
result is a better place for our students to learn and a better place for our
faculty to teach.