* 9652972
* Teaching Improvements through Mathematics Education 2000:   An Integrated Undergraduate Program to Improve the          Preparation of Mathematics Teachers (Time 2000)
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/1997,08/31/2000
* Alice Artzt, CUNY Queens College
* Continuing Grant
* Herbert Levitan
* 08/31/2000
* USD 250,000.00

Current teacher education programs do not sufficiently prepare mathematics
teachers to implement the current recommendations of national mathematics
groups. The TIME 2000 project proposes to address this problem by recruiting
prospective teachers from the pool of high quality high school mathematics
students, underrepresented minorities, women, and persons with disabilities,
into a newly designed, mathematics education program. TIME 2000 plans to develop
a freshman year program that will conceptually integrate the mathematics, the
psychology of learning, and mathematics pedagogy. The Mathematics Components of
the program will integrate such topics as calculus, probability, statistics, and
discrete mathematics and will employ the latest technology and teaching
strategies. In the Psychology-Mathematics Education Component of the program
students will be given the opportunity to confront their personal beliefs about
the nature of mathematics, the learning of mathematics and the teaching of
mathematics with respect to their learning experiences in the mathematics
component of the program. In addition to the coursework students will meet with
project staff on a regular basis for seminars, for special projects, for
advisement, and to obtain feedback regarding the project. It is expected that
the project will have impact on teacher education throughout the country. The
New York Collaborative for Excellence in Teacher Preparation in Mathematics,
Science and Technology will be the medium through which project staff will share
those ideas and activities that have been evaluated as effective. The materials
developed will be made available to facilitate replication throughout the CUNY
system and the United States.