* 9652828
* Pilot Project:  An Integrated Science Curriculum for        Undergraduate Non-science Majors
* EDU,DUE
* 06/01/1997,11/30/1999
* Barbara Howard, Catholic University of America
* Standard Grant
* Denise Martin
* 11/30/1999
* USD 185,000.00

Course distribution requirements normally lead undergraduates not majoring in
the sciences, including students preparing for careers in elementary and early
childhood education, to take several unrelated science courses, each of which
lies within the traditional boundaries of a single scientific discipline. As an
alternative to the standard approach, this pilot project will produce a four
semester sequence of integrated science courses focusing on the general theme of
environmental science. All four courses will be suitable for enrollment by
students not majoring in the sciences, including students enrolled in teacher
preparation programs. The courses to be developed include: 1) Ecosystems: Their
Formation, Function, and Impact on Life; 2) Environmental Health; 3) Global
Change; and 4) Quantitative Methods in Environmental Science: Non-linear
Dynamics, Fractals, and Chaos in Nature. These courses will be based on a
variety of combinations of biology, chemistry, ecology, engineering, geology,
mathematics, meteorology, and physics, and all will place emphasis on the role
of science both in students' everyday lives and in public policy. As part of
each course's requirements, students will work in small groups to carry out
research projects, and cooperative learning strategies will be employed. Each
course will include a laboratory component and three of the four will include a
series of all-day field trips to nearby sites. University resources will be
supplemented with personnel and facilities drawn from a variety of local
industrial and governmental organizations. The primary goal of the pilot project
is to demonstrate that this alternative approach improves the scientific and
environmental literacy of students, relative to traditional course offerings for
non- science majors. Evaluation efforts will include close monitoring of
relative outcomes for students majoring in early childhood and elementary
education, who will be assigned randomly to the standard curriculum and the
pilot courses. If su ccessful, the pilot project will serve as a model for the
development of thematically organized cross-disciplinary science courses for
non-science majors, including education majors, at the college level.