* 9652102
* Earth System Sciences (ESS) - An Example of Critical        Thinking Across Mathematical and Scientific Disciplines
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/1996,08/31/1998
* Alexander Fluellen, Clark Atlanta University
* Standard Grant
* Herbert Levitan
* 08/31/1998
* USD 220,000.00

Clark Atlanta University (CAU) will continue to build its comprehensive
academic, research, and outreach program in Earth System Science (ESS) through
enhancement of its curriculum for undergraduate students. The overall objective
of the ESS program at CAU is to expose a large segment of the University's
faculty and students to the interdisciplinary nature of the interactions among
the geosphere, hydrosphere, cryosphere and biosphere and their impact on policy.
Once this objective is achieved, it is envisioned that Clark Atlanta University
will, simultaneously, enhance the ability all students to critically think
across academic disciplines and increase the number of minority students
pursuing graduate degrees and careers in ESS and related areas. The proposed
program has four main elements. These are (1) faculty development in the
interdisciplinary area of Earth System Science, (2) a post freshman summer
research program, (3) the inclusion of interdisciplinary case studies in all
freshman orientation classes and (4) further development and enhancement of two
Earth System Science courses. Faculty members from the School of Arts and
Sciences, the School of Education, and the School of Business have and will
continue to collaborate regarding the development and implementation of the ESS
program. When the plans for the ESS program are finalized and fully implemented,
Clark Atlanta University will be assured of not only sustaining its program but
developing a more scientifically literate population prepared to be full
participants in a technology driven world.