* 9652839
* The Quantitative and Experimental Study of Human Nature
* EHR,DUE
* 07/01/1997,06/30/2000
* Eugene Galanter, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Myles Boylan
* 06/30/2000
* USD 196,495.00

The first segments of this project (NSF DUE 92-53980 and NSF DUE 94-55379),
began on 1 February 1993. Five modules have been developed: Biological Science
(Evolution), Biological Science (Genetics), Psychophysics, Social Psychology and
Personality, and Science and the Visual Arts. The construction of three new
modules and the development of new media form the body of this proposal to move
closer to completion of these introductions to quantitative and experimental
science. During the current period, the PI was invited to present the
Psychophysics module in an invited address at the SUNY Farmingdale 8th
Conference on Teaching Undergraduate Psychology on 16-18 March, 1994. The PI was
also invited to deliver the 2nd annual Lecture in Introductory Psychology to the
Eastern Psychological Association, 16 April, 1994. The Psychophysics module has
been evaluated for adoption by various American universities, and the University
of Strasbourg, Strasbourg. France, the University of Stockholm, Sweden, and the
Bar Elan University, Ramat-Gan, Israel. The Principle Investigator presented
this work to the Quality Education for Minorities Network on October 13, 1995,
and testified before the NSF's Review of Undergraduate Education in Science,
Mathematics, Engineering, and Technology on 1 November, 1995. The publication of
Psych Tech Notes (Galanter, 1994) provides auxiliary text for the module on
Psychophysics. The computer-based experiments have been revised, and a lab
manual, Experiments in Psychology (Galanter, 1995), was used during fall term
1995. These materials were incorporated into an open Laboratory Module, and
tested again during the spring term 1996 (1460-S96). The module offers
substantive knowledge in psychophysics, and psychophysical approaches to
cognition (Galanter, E., 1992). Assessment includes student feedback in the form
of categorical scales and open ended questions on the merits and limitations of
the module. These data are part of an independent study by the Office of the
Univer sity Provost, and have not yet been made available for our review. We
anticipate access in Summer 1996. We have provided examinations (including
multiple choice and constructive questions) on the Columbia Internet web site.
We are using these data to compare machine scored constructive answers to our
hand scoring. We continue to study the current literature on comparisons between
(multiple) choice and constructed responses in cognitive measurement (Bennett,
R. E. & Ward, W. C. 1993). To help us in this work Dr. Samuel Messick, Senior
Scientist and Vice President of the Educational Testing Service joined our
advisory board. We have also added Dr. John Swets, Vice President for Research
at BBN Cambridge, MA. and Dr. Lawrence E. Marks, of the John B. Pierce
Laboratory and Yale University to the board.