* 9652081
* Reform of Science and Math Education at New York University
* EDU,DUE
* 08/01/1996,09/15/1998
* Alice Huang, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Lee Zia
* 09/15/1998
* USD 199,993.00

New York University proposes to develop a novel program of science and math
education for nonscience students. The "Foundations of Scientific Inquiry"
(FSI), a math/science curriculum which was initially developed for NYU's liberal
arts students, will be adapted to meet the needs of other undergraduate student
bodies. The impetus for this project is the need to give these nonscientists a
basic understanding of the conduct of science and a familiarity with
quantitative, analytical reasoning that will allow them to function effectively
as responsible citizens in a highly technological world. Project objectives are
to: l)Improve the scientific and technical literacy of nonscience students,
particularly student teachers, who as a group are seriously under prepared for
science teaching; 2)Catalyze institution-wide reform and engage university
faculty from diverse undergraduate preprofessional programs in a productive
dialogue about the role of science in undergraduate education; 3)Develop a model
program relevant to a range of student bodies and educational institutions. The
FSI curriculum presently consists of a 3-course sequence that integrates
physical, biological and mathematical sciences. Each course is modular and
interdisciplinary, with each module drawing from several areas of science and
illustrating the nature of scientific reasoning. This project will modify the
curriculum to suit the interests, levels of preparedness, and programs of study
of diverse student bodies. Project outcomes will include teaching materials,
including instructor lecture texts, student workshop exercises, and computer-
based educational materials tailored to a range of audiences. The intent is to
export the NYU experience through institutional partnerships with the public
higher education system, small liberal arts colleges, predominantly black
colleges, and teacher training programs. The modular, flexible nature of the
project and the availability of published curricular materials mean that the
curriculum is easily portable and easily adapted to the student body and
training program.