* 9652993
* Tectonica Interactive: A Guided Interactive Hypermedia      Tutoring System For Plate Tectonics
* EHR,DUE
* 06/01/1997,05/31/2000
* Christopher Condit, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Rogers E. Salters
* 05/31/2000
* USD 139,997.00

Many of the critical problems facing our society, including limited resources,
global climate and environmental change, and natural disasters, can only be
addressed by leadership and a population that has a good grasp of the
fundamental scientific concepts involved, all of which are addressed in an
integrated and interdisciplinary manner in geology. Yet geology education is far
from what it should be. In this age of increasing technological sophistication,
rapidly evolving information, and the need for more global awareness, innovative
approaches to teaching geology are needed. We propose to develop a computer-
based exploration and learning system which will focus on plate tectonics, the
uniting paradigm of geology. The PI's include a geologist with experience
publishing interactive multimedia software for geology, and a computer scientist
with experience developing intelligent tutorials. The system, which we call
"Tectonica Interactive" (TI), will include adaptive ("intelligent") tutorials,
guided hypermedia exploration, interactive simulations, and visually rich
animations, graphics, and 3-D animation. The content in the program will have
two primary per- spectives: locations and phenomena. Locations are actual
geographic locations, and Phenomena are geologic principles, processes, and
conceptual models. TI's hyperlinks and navigation guid- ance will make it easy
for students to explore phenomena associated with a location, and locations
which exemplify phenomena. Several learning modes will be available, ranging
from more directed tutorials to student-controlled exploration. Because we store
a model of student progress and mastery, the program will be able to accommodate
users at many levels, from intermediate school earth science students through
those in introductory college-level courses, and make intelli- gent decisions
regarding hints, explanations, etc. Evaluation will occur at a number of
university and high school sites, and distribution of the software will be by
CD-ROM and the Worl d Wide Web. We anticipate that TI will be included by
textbook publishers along uith the text.