* 9652877
* A New Model Course in Quantum Mechanics for Scientists and  Engineers
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/1997,08/31/2001
* Edward Redish, University of Maryland, College Park
* Continuing Grant
* Duncan E. McBride
* 08/31/2001
* USD 305,126.00

Understanding quantum mechanics (QM) is of growing importance to engineers,
chemists, and biologists, as well as to physicists of all disciplines. Fields
where this understanding is of particular importance include mesoscopic systems,
photonics, molecular genetics, and medical diagnostics. However, QM is a
difficult and abstract subject and there has been little success in teaching it
at all levels. In response to this situation, we are conducting systematic
investigations into student understanding of QM and develop instructional
materials based on this research for courses. While most research is being
conducted in a course for scientists and engineers meant to follow introductory
caluclus-based physics, we are also interacting with projects at Kansas State
(Zollman) and Boston University (Garik). These collaborations allow us to
investigate the understanding of fundamental quantum concepts by students in
college courses on QM for non-scientists and in high school. The keys to our
instructional strategies are: 1. The iterative process of physics education
research, curriculum development, and instruction will be employed. This model
of curriculum reform is becoming increasingly valued. However, it has not been
applied to QM and no detailed investigations of student understanding of the
subject have been conducted. Research is being conducted into student
understanding of QM and into student understanding of prerequisite topics such
as mechanical waves and physical optics. 2. Materials that enable students to
work constructively in small groups will be developed. Numerous studies in
physics education have pointed to the need for students to work with one another
in a context where they can construct an understanding of important fundamental
principles instead of listening passively. Much work is needed in extending this
mode of instruction to QM. We hope to continue with successes we have already
had developing such materials. 3. Instructional strategies will employ advances
in educational technology. Modern technology has dramatically increased the
resources we have in physics education. Simulations allow students to "observe"
phenomena and probe the effect of different parameters in ways not otherwise
possible. Computer assisted data acquisition provides students with direct
kinesthetic learning experiences. Inexpensive simple quantum devices such as
solar cells and LED's are readily available. Although we will not develop any
software ourselves, we are developing lessons for using the software developed
at Kansas State and Boston University and will test its effectiveness for
improving student understanding of the subject. The products of this project
will include insights into student difficulties learning QM and a series of 12
lessons (tutorials) on fundamental concepts. We will also develop assessment
tools for QM classes (interview protocols, open-ended questions, and a multiple-
choice concept inventory) and evaluate relevant educational software. Once they
are vetted by research, our lessons and assessment tools will be distributed on
the World Wide Web. We expect that the impact of both the research and the
curriculum development will be substantial from the introductory to the advanced
level, for physicists, engineers, and other scientists. We also suspect that the
student-centered nature of the work will aid in reaching a more diverse
population than those that traditionally succeed in these fields.