* 9652095
* Infusing Quantitative Reasoning Across the Disciplines:     An Integrated Approach to Numeracy
* EHR,DUE
* 07/01/1996,06/30/2001
* Frank Cerreto, Stockton University
* Standard Grant
* Myles Boylan
* 06/30/2001
* USD 200,000.00

The need for increased numeracy among American undergraduates is well
documented. Students enrolled in mathematics courses rarely see the connections
between the quantitative principles they are studying and issues which arise in
the other disciplines. In Fall 1995, after a two-year planning effort, the
Richard Stockton College of New Jersey initiated a program designed to address
these problems. Building on the success of our writing-across-the-curriculum
program, the current project infuses quantitative reasoning across the
disciplines. Project objectives concern students, faculty, curriculum, and
research. Students develop strong quantitative skills, understand the important
role quantitative reasoning plays in a variety of disciplines, and learn
mechanisms to overcome mathematics anxiety and avoidance. Faculty members from
throughout the college become familiar with current research in mathematics
education, enrich their own mathematical backgrounds, deepen their
understandings of the connections between quantitative reasoning and other
disciplines, and develop classroom materials which promote student construction
of meaningful mathematics. New and revamped courses which emphasize the
significance of quantitative reasoning to the disciplines are added to the
curriculum. Faculty members conduct research studies at the individual,
classroom, and institutional level. In order to achieve these objectives, a
diverse group of 24 faculty participate in a series of course development and
research seminars, beginning with a series of sessions during the summer of
1996. From this group, four smaller disciplinary teams (each augmented by a
student) develop and test curricular materials and approaches during the
subsequent academic year. After summary sessions in May, the project culminates
with a regional conference on infusing quantitative reasoning across the
curriculum, hosted by Stockton in August, 1997. Besides preparing graduates to
be capable members of the work force and informe d citizens and consumers, this
project will contribute to a clearer understanding of the relationship between
mathematical ideas and the contexts to which they are applied. In addition, the
project serves as a model for other institutions who wish to integrate
quantitative reasoning throughout the curriculum.