* 9652801
* Project CLEA: Contemporary Laboratory Experiences in        Astronomy
* EDU,DUE
* 02/15/1997,01/31/2000
* Laurence Marschall, Gettysburg College
* Standard Grant
* Duncan E. McBride
* 01/31/2000
* USD 341,966.00

The project continues work to develop exercises for the introductory astronomy
laboratory. Through computer simulations using real data and computer
simulations, the modules address a pressing need for modernization. Heretofore,
laboratories in astronomy have had difficulty providing needed hands-on
experience because of the faintness of astronomical objects, the inconvenient
time scale of many phenomena, and the fickleness of weather. Until this project,
most exercises available to astronomy instructors relied on analysis of
photographs or canned data, and exemplified techniques that were increasingly
out-of-date. The current project, Contemporary Laboratory Experiences in
Astronomy (CLEA), has developed 8 Windows and 6 Mac exercises. Each module
consists of software, student guides, teachers' manuals, and technical
documentation. The material, designed for easy distribution and portability, has
been widely accepted by astronomy instructors. CLEA software is currently at use
throughout all the United States and 40 foreign countries, reaching at least
10,000 students per year. Four CLEA exercises won the 1994 COMPUTERS IN PHYSICS
educational software prize. In the next two years the project will complete the
set of 12 exercises which will serve as a resource for astronomy laboratories
into the next decade. An external evaluator has begun an extensive assessment of
the effectiveness of the materials, and the assesment will continue. A CD-ROM, a
unified manual, and additional data resources for eventual third-party
distribution to educational users are being produced.