* 9652931
* Sustaining Economics Education at Historically Black        Colleges and Universities
* EDU,DUE
* 04/01/1997,09/30/1998
* Patricia Frazier, Norfolk State University
* Standard Grant
* Myles Boylan
* 09/30/1998
* USD 27,439.00

The long-term supply of African-American economist is threatened by the latest
national decline in enrollments in economics and the longer established decline
in enrollments at Historically Black Colleges and Universities (HBCUs). Recent
research suggests that course content and pedagogy changes must be implemented
to reverse these trends. However, since most of this research has been conducted
in majority university environments, it is desirable to know if the reported
successes can be duplicated in the HBCU environment which differs considerably
because of mission, resource constraints, and diversity of student abilities.
Improvements in the undergraduate economics curricula have the potential of
increasing enrollments and the pool of graduates in these latter institutions,
and thus contributing to the long-term supply of African-American economists.
The overall objective of this proposal is to improve economics education at all
HBCUs. The specific objectives are twofold: (1) to determine the current status
of economics programs at HBCUs, and (2) to evaluate the effectiveness of an
alternative teaching strategy in an HBCU environment. The first objective will
be accomplished by conducting a survey of HBCUs with the primary purpose of
determining instructional methods used, the use of computer technology in
instruction, and other relevant curriculum content and pedagogy concerns.
Secondly, to evaluate the effectiveness or computer assisted instruction (CAI)
in improving student performance, understanding, and reception towards
economics, introductory courses will be used to compare this methodology with
the traditional lecture course. CAI is defined here to include various
supplemental teaching techniques as well as micro-computer simulations and
activities.