* 9653051
* Multimedia Neuroscience Education
* EHR,DUE
* 06/01/1997,05/31/2001
* Betty Zimmerberg, Williams College
* Standard Grant
* Myles Boylan
* 05/31/2001
* USD 228,987.00

"Multimedia Neuroscience Education" is a new project to bring advances in
digital technology to the teaching of a complex and growing interdisciplinary
field. Central to our approach is the conviction that the neurological,
molecular and electrical structures and processes that are fundamental to this
field constantly change in time and space. Two-dimensional representations fall
far short of communicating the complexity of these phenomena. Eventually we hope
to offer a complete set of animated and interactive multi-media resources to
support instruction not only of introductory neuroscience, but for use in the
related fields of biology and psychology. Now, however, we are seeking NSF funds
to produce, evaluate and implement a pilot program to cover one unit, "Synaptic
Transmission and Chemical Messengers." We plan to realize this goal by taking
advantage of several new advances in computer technology. The first is the
availability of moderately priced but extremely powerful 3- D animation software
for use on desktop computers. These same computers can run powerful new multi-
media authoring software that allows for another breakthrough: we will
distribute only the video from our laboratory simulations and process animation
on a CD-ROM. All the control of that video plus the related text, graphics and
3-D models for use with JAVA will be kept on our Neuroscience pages on the World
Wide Web. Among other things, this means we can update the programming of these
materials without ever making the video on the CD-ROM obsolete. The Project is
the collaboration of Betty Zimmerberg, Chair of the Neuroscience Department at
Williams College, and Lance Wisniewski, multi-media producer. Dr. Zimmerberg has
been a researcher and teacher in the neurosciences for two decades at
undergraduate and graduate levels, as well as being experienced in pre-college
science education outreach and training of pre-college teachers. Wisniewski has
produced educational television programs for 20 years, with a spec ialty in
computer animation and, recently, multi-media applications. This project will
have significant impact on undergraduate education because, in addition to the
informative content and its visualization in space and time, the virtual
laboratory component will enhance critical thinking, quantitative skills, and
science writing experience. The ultimate goal is to have these materials and
laboratory experiences available globally, and for a variety of educational
levels and setting, in order to convey our excitement in the process of
scientific discovery on the new frontier, the mind. NSF FORM 1358 (1/94)