* 9653027
* Enhanced Learning Through Goal-Based Multimedia
* EDU,DUE
* 05/01/1997,01/31/2001
* William Purves, Harvey Mudd College
* Standard Grant
* Herbert Levitan
* 01/31/2001
* USD 149,864.00

We are developing, producing, marketing, and evaluating novel CD-ROMs for use
in introductory and other lower-division college and university biology courses.
The new disks will be based on our product currently under development but will
afford greater interactivity and goal-based, problem-solving models of teaching.
The CD-ROMs will address significant problems that arise from large class size,
inappropriate sequencing of instruction, and individual differences in speed and
style of learning. The products will provide instant feedback, constant
opportunity (but not a requirement) for self-testing, and an exceptional number
of hyperlinks through the very large databases of information. Individual
entries in the database are concise but illustrated by outstanding animations
and still art created specifically for our products. Sound is available on the
disks. The tone is light, with considerable humor. We will develop and implement
"goal-based scenarios" as a major source of interactively. In these, the student
is invited to participate in a fictional or real-world study of interest to her.
To achieve her goal in this study, she must explore the large available database
to obtain specific information she considers essential, and she must acquire
necessary skills (e.g., learning to do genetic mapping). The student, in
pursuing a goal, is an active participate in learning. Dissemination and
marketing will be provided by our company, The Mona Group LLC, and its marketing
arm, Sinauer Associates. Information, including evaluation results, will be
disseminated by publication in appropriate journals. Evaluation will proceed in
several stages under the supervision of personnel from the Center for
Educational Studies of the Claremont Graduate School. Methods of evaluation will
include extensive use of focus groups throughout product development, beta-
testing, and controlled use and testing of the marketed products. 1