* 9653734
* A Scientific Research Project for the General Education     Program at Southwestern College
* NONE,NONE
* 08/01/1997,07/31/2001
* K. Charles Hunter, Southwestern College
* Standard Grant
* Terry S. Woodin
* 07/31/2001
* USD 186,810.00

Formulating meaningful public policy in a democracy is difficult if the voters
and their representatives cannot grapple effectively with scientific information
that pertains to the issues. Part of the solution to this problem lies in
revising our educational system so that science is taught as a process in which
all citizens are engaged at some level. In an across-the-curriculum research
project students will acquire many of the science process skills essential to
scientific literacy. While conducting library as well as laboratory or field
research, students will organize information; form and test hypotheses; decide
whether data supports a statement; separate correlation from cause and effect;
modify their hypotheses as the data demands; and regularly report on their
progress to peers and the community. The overarching goal is to model how
scientific research is conducted and used to address real problems. The research
project focuses on water quality and the effects on ecosystems of poor water
quality. Each course in the freshmen general education program is involved in
research activity. After a period of data collection, students formulate
hypotheses and design experiments to test those hypotheses. Student-generated
proposals form the basis of the research undertaken by the next class of
freshman. Student-designed research plans will also be tackled by advanced
courses. Regular symposia promote sharing and synthesis of results between
research groups. This proposal involves all first year students in scientific
research. We are especially excited about the impact on education students. The
science classes that our future elementary school teachers experience must
provide them models for how to integrate science into their curriculum, or they
will be handicapped as they attempt that task. In this approach, elementary
education students would experience science as related to many general education
courses. We hope to provide a model for transforming the role of sc ience in
general education curricula.