* 9653664
* Campuswide Reform Initiative for Undergraduate Education
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/1997,06/30/2000
* James Danziger, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Herbert Levitan
* 06/30/2000
* USD 199,529.00

The University of Calfornia, Irvine (UCI) proposes a Campuswide Reform
Initiative for Undergraduate Education that focuses on developing students'
scientific and technological literacy skills which are needed for the 21st
century. It is essential that al1 students -- not just science, mathematics,
engineering and technology (SMET) majors-are prepared to succeed in and
contribute to the changing context of life and work in this post-industria1
world. With NSF funding and leadership from UCI's Chancellor, Dean of
Undergraduate Education, and other key faculty the Campuswide Reform Initiative
will result in (1) major curricular and course content changes, especially in
mathematics, engineering, and computer science, (2) the infusion of educational
technolology throughout the undergraduate curriculum, and (3) .a change in the
campus climate regarding curricular innovation and reform. This project will
build on current efforts at UCI to improve undergraduate education, including
several funded by NSF, including: the California Alliance for Minority
Participation (CAMP) recently renewed by NSF for five more years; the Southern
CA Coalition for Education in Manufacturing Engineering (SCCEME) designed to
reform manufacturing engineering; UCI's new Interdisciplinary Minor in Global
Sustainability, a collaborative effort across five of UCI's schools; and Project
SMART (Science and Mathematics Articulated Roads Toward Teaching), funded by the
Pew Charitable Trusts and cited by NSF as a national model for teacher
preparation. The current project will provide the catalyst for developing and
implementing more pervasive, campuswide changes in undergraduate education at
UCI. Specifically, NSF funds will be used for several campuswide planning
retreats, the creation of multidisciplinary curricular committees, a mini-grants
program for faculty, instructional technology training for students and faculty,
and a Teaching Colloquy series focused on effective uses of instructional
technology. Additional curri cular components will include the development of
four new courses (an engineering literacy course, an expansion of the "Idioms of
Science" course for non-science students, and two teacher preparation courses),
new "dual competency" minors in computer science,, and new models of
instructional technology (e g, hypertext textbooks and a multimedia library
accessible from campus classrooms) The World Wide Web will be the primary
vehicle for dissemination and will contain documents, materials, and prototypes
generated by the project, plus links to other Web sites supported by this NSF
initiative. Additional dissemination activities will include presentations at
national meetings and papers written for educational and professional journals.
The project evaluation will consist of an Internal, formative evaluation as well
as an external, summative evaluation, using data collected from course
enrollments, student satisfaction surveys, focus groups, and interviews. The
Campuswide Reform Initiative for Undergraduate Education will have long-term
impact on the quality of undergraduate education at UCI enriching the scientific
and technological competencies of both SMET majors and non-majors More
importantly, it will ensure that all these changes occur within a framework that
is shaped by a campuswide perspective and an integrated approach to planning and
implementation.