* 9653375
* Packaging of Microelectronic Devices:  Short Courses for    Undergraduate Faculty Enhancement
* EHR,DUE
* 01/15/1997,12/31/1999
* Guna Selvaduray, San Jose State University Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Eric Sheppard
* 12/31/1999
* USD 99,721.00

Four one-week long short courses on Microelectronic Packaging will be offered
over a two year period, in June and July, during Years I and II. Microelectronic
packaging, which is the technology of encapsulating semiconductor devices, is an
interdisciplinary field which requires knowledge from several traditional
engineering and science disciplines. The subject matter of the short course will
be of interest to faculty in electrical, mechanical, materials and industrial
engineering. Hands-on laboratory exercises will be a major component of the
course, which will emphasize multi-disciplinary package design, long term
reliability and manufacturing operations. A field trip to a local Silicon Valley
industry will enhance the learning process. Examples of how the short course
material can be integrated into existing curricula will be provided. Follow
through support will be provided for participants to assist them in introducing
these concepts at their home institutions. This will be monitored on an on-going
basis, via questionnaires and direct email contact. Problems faced, solutions
developed - especially innovative ones - new laboratory exercises developed, and
other pertinent information will be compiled and distributed to all participants
in the form of a periodic newsletter. SJSU's College of Engineering will serve
as a depository for this material. A manual on "Laboratory Exercises in
Microelectronic Packaging" will be prepared and provided to participants. This
will also be made available to other interested university faculty. An
independent evaluator will conduct, compile and distribute course evaluations by
participants.