* 9653670
* A Parallel College to Pilot Test Institution-wide           Reform in Science, Mathematics, and Engineering Technology  Education
* EDU,DUE
* 03/15/1997,02/29/2000
* George Sehi, Sinclair Community College
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Teles
* 02/29/2000
* USD 200,000.00

Sinclair Community College (Dayton, Ohio) is creating a Parallel College to
pilot test institution-wide reform efforts in science, mathematics, and
engineering technology education. This effort builds upon eight existing
institutional change drivers at Sinclair: Distance Learning, Sinclair Assessment
Initiative, Corporate and Community Services Division, Sinclair Quality
Initiative, Miami Valley Tech Prep Consortium, Advanced Integrated Manufacturing
Center, National Center of Excellence for Advanced Manufacturing Education, and
Center for Interactive Learning. This effort also tests methods of correcting
common problems at community colleges across the country: (1) misalignment of
curriculum format with modern delivery systems; (2) misalignment of curriculum
outcomes with modem workplace requirements; and (3) misalignment of college
operating systems with modern operating systems. Using curriculum modules
created by the National Center of Excellence for Advanced Manufacturing
Education (an NSF ATE national center at Sinclair), the project is creating a
Parallel College to pilot test key changes in the day-to-day operating systems
(faculty workload and rewards, resource allocation, etc.). The pilot provides a
true indication of changes required in the day-to-day operating systems to
achieve goals of higher quality and greater responsiveness. It also leads the
institution to a stronger position for meeting customer (students and employers)
needs.