* 9653663
* Catalysts for Change:  Foundation Courses and Instructional Innovation
* EHR,DUE
* 04/01/1997,12/31/1999
* Henry Shipman, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* John S. Bradley
* 12/31/1999
* USD 200,000.00

In university science and engineering education, an emphasis on algorithmic
problem-solving and rote memorization of abstract concepts has been traditional.
This approach does not adequately prepare the majority of students for the real
challenges of life in a technological society. The passive role often relegated
to students stifles their interest and initiative; this provides scant
opportunity for the development of skills with lasting value, such as effective
communication, mastery in analytical thinking, productive teamwork, and
responsible, independent learning and resource utilization. Institution-wide,
systemic change in science education is being made by targeting freshmen and
sophomores; their enhanced learning skills and spirit of inquiry will instigate
further reform in upper-level courses, changing campus-wide expectations for
science is taught and learned. Longitudinal studies of student performance and
attitudes will assess the effectiveness of the change. A core of science and
engineering Foundation Courses are developed that aid students in the early
acquisition of the skills and habits of mind required for learning after college
and outside of the classroom. The Foundation Courses are developed by
interdisciplinary teams of faculty, supported by an annual Instructional
Innovation Institute that provides training in appropriate learning strategies
and computer technology. The Institute will sustain this drive for reform across
disciplines and throughout the university. The project builds on prior NSF-
supported projects at the University of Delaware: "Problem-Based Learning in
Introductory Science Across Disciplines" and Delaware's Innovative
Science/Mathematics Collaborative for Undergraduate Success". As a result of
this project, we expect to find that our students graduate with improved
learning and problem-solving skills an enhanced appreciation of and attitude
regarding science, and an improved ability to learn outside the classroom. We
expect to imbue in fac ulty a renewed interest in teaching and improving their
effectiveness, specifically an enthusiasm for actively engaging their students
in learning. Finally, we expect that our administration will hold in high esteem
our efforts in teaching science to and increasingly diverse student body. We
seek to catalyze a shift of additional institutional resources to science and
engineering departments for facilitating active learning and instructional
innovation.