* 9653080
* CPLP: A Chemical Professional Laboratory Program for        General Chemistry
* EDU,DUE
* 05/01/1997,01/31/2001
* Donald Wink, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Susan H. Hixson
* 01/31/2001
* USD 285,371.00

The Chemical Professional Laboratory Program (CPLP) is being initiated at the
University of Illinois at Chicago (UIC) as a new mode for writing and teaching
general chemistry laboratories. The program teaches chemistry with environments
that simulate the experience and workplace of chemical professionals. Assistance
is being provided by faculty from professional programs, including engineering,
nursing, pharmacy, and laboratory sciences. The program includes four Chicago-
area community colleges that are also major sources of UIC professional
students. These are the College of DuPage, William Rainey Harper College, Oakton
College, and Harold Washington College of the City Colleges of Chicago. Faculty
from those schools are consulting with those at UIC on the development of the
program, and they are acting as dissemination sites. The laboratories feature
one week where general chemistry concepts and techniques are studied in a
"normal" manner. In the second and, occasionally, third weeks the students apply
these techniques to a procedure that simulates or replicates the environment
where a non-chemist might need to use chemistry. Examples include control of
blood acidity after a heart attack; development and testing of a new catalyst;
and analysis of elemental composition of soil. The program includes an
assessment run by a faculty member from the UIC College of Education. The
assessment uses qualitative methods, to make it more useful in revising the CPLP
lab manual and in learning the response of students to non-traditional
procedures in the laboratory.