* 9653146
* Three-Dimensional Visualization in Undergraduate Earth      Science Courses
* EHR,DUE
* 02/01/1997,07/31/1999
* Clark Johnson, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Robert W. Ridky
* 07/31/1999
* USD 86,617.00

Providing undergraduate students with a deep appreciation of the geological
evolution of the Earth requires that they visualize in three dimensions.
Geological observations are intrinsically three dimensional, and yet we teach
students using two dimensional instructional materials. Add to this the fact
that the natural features observed in the Earth are the products of perhaps
billions of years of processes that have occurred in three dimensions, and it is
not surprising that the majority of non-science undergraduate majors leave
undergraduate Earth science courses with a poor understanding of the processes
that have shaped the physical features of the Earth, its resources, and its
global environment. Objectives of this project are to produce a variety of
computer-based three dimensional visualization products to address
incompatibility between learning styles of the non-science major and a highly
visual field such as Earth science. Two types of 3D visualization products will
be developed: 1) virtual reality fly-bys and landscape views that are
manipulated by the user, featuring geologic, satellite, age, and geophysical
information which are overlain on real world landscapes, and 2) true 3D models
that represent the subsurface geologic structures, illustrating how these
structures intersect the land surface to produce the observed features on the
Earth. Animation of such models, to show changes through geologic time, will be
an important component. In both cases, these products will feature real-world
examples of geologic features, from the global scale to detailed regions; in the
later cases, National Parks in the U.S.A. will often be used as examples. Some
of the products will consist of virtual reality, interactive multimedia
"tutorials" for student's use, but a major part of this program will involve
Group Learning environments where raw materials (data, interface templates,
instruction) will allow students to produce their own virtual reality lessons.
Students of widely varying learning styles can each make their own unique
contributions to such projects. The ultimate goal is to provide the student who
is a non-science major an engaging science experience. In addition to use in
undergraduate instruction, it is anticipated that these products will also be
used by the National Parks in their Visitor Centers, and by individuals with
interest in the National Parks.