* 9653732
* Developing a Communication-Intensive Undergraduate Program  in Science and Engineering
* EHR,DUE
* 07/01/1997,06/30/2000
* Kip Hodges, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Herbert Levitan
* 06/30/2000
* USD 199,998.00

MIT requests NSF support to develop and expand a variety of discipline-specific
instructional programs that integrate communication instruction and practice
into technical and scientific undergraduate programs. The objective of this
initiative by MIT's Faculty and Administration is to establish an undergraduate
technical curriculum that educates scientists and engineers to become as
proficient in communication as in analytical thinking and problem solving. The
need for this curricular reform is compelling. Scientists and engineers today
assume professional, managerial, and entrepreneurial roles, in which their
professional success depends on their ability to communicate effectively to a
wide range of audiences and within a variety of contexts. While undergraduate
programs in science and engineering are often successful in teaching students
key scientific concepts, general problem solving skills, and the knowledge and
abilities central to a particular discipline, they have often failed to develop
students' abilities to write, speak, and present information effectively. In
order to develop these abilities, undergraduates need to write and speak
throughout their undergraduate careers and in bodh technical and non-technical
classes. However, the continuing explosion of scientific and technical knowledge
has created new pressures on science and engineering departments to increase the
overall technical content of their undergraduate programs. To educate our
students as effective communicators widlin these constraints, MIT has developed
several successful pilot programs that integrate substantial instruction in
writing and speaking into technical classes without significandy reducing dhe
quality of technical instruction. Indeed, these programs offer some preliminary
evidence that, at least in some disciplines, integrated exercises in writing and
speaking enhance student comprehension of technical material. During the next
two years, MIT will build upon existing programs to develop scalable and
effectiv e communication-intensive technical classes both within dhe freshman
year and within major programs. Departments and faculty committees are also
developing mechanisms to integrate communication instruction into non-classroom
settings, such as undergraduate research projects and sumrner work cooperatives.
Both internal and external review panels will evaluate all phases of this
project and assess individual programs in terms of improvement of students'
communication skills, the effect of writing and speaking exercises on student
comprehension of technical content, the amount of additional time this
instruction will add to both student and faculty workloads, and other related
issues. MIT plans to share communication-intensive curricula we develop with
other educational institutions, and will explore possible partnerships for
further collaborative development. We hope that MlT's efforts will serve as a
national model for communication-intensive undergraduate programs in science and
engineering that will prepare students to be productive team members and leaders
by teaching them to write and speak clearly and effectively.