* 9653164
* Investigative Science at Alfred: How the World Works
* EHR,DUE
* 06/01/1997,05/31/2001
* Gordon Godshalk, Alfred University
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Teles
* 05/31/2001
* USD 114,930.00

Courses which satisfy the science requirements for non-science majors at Alfred
University are typically unrelated and compartmentalized. Techniques in one
science are not exploited and built upon in others. This confusing approach does
not efficiently provide Alfred University's students with a general science
education so necessary in our society. The current approach also makes science
education less attractive as a career. To address this problem, a new year-long,
introductory, interdisciplinary course entitled SCI 123-124: "How the World
Works", will be taught by the principal investigators. In this course, students
will experience the fun and creative side of science, so often missing from
traditional disciplinary courses. An overall theme for the course such as
"Living in Space" or "Survival on a Greenhouse Planet" will be provided each
year. Beyond this, the course will be designed by the students as they pose
questions related to the theme. Their questions will lead to experiments that
they will design, perform, and interpret themselves with guidance from their
instructors. As they participate in these self- designed activities, students
will rediscover the fun of science at the same time that they are learning to
think and analyze critically, broadening their scientific and mathematical
backgrounds, and appreciating the interrelationships that exist between
mathematics and all of the scientific disciplines. One of the largest potential
impacts of this proposal is its promise for improving teacher preparation. All
students at Alfred are required to take two semesters of science and to also
demonstrate mathematics competency. The PI's expect that this course sequence,
Science 123-124 (How the World Works) will be used by most students not majoring
in science to satisfy this requirement. Ninety-five undergraduates receive
degrees in elementary or secondary education from Alfred University each year.
Approximately 30 graduate students are also annually enrolle d in its education
programs. These future teachers of math and science will be learning (hands-on)
examples of teaching approaches, investigative experiences, cooperative
learning, interdisciplinary perspective, and quantitative analysis, which can be
applied to teaching at all grade levels. These teachers will be scientifically
and quantitatively literate, and able to pass that knowledge on to their
students. This course will have an impact on not only the non-science majors
taking the course but also on upper level math and science students. Upper level
undergraduates majoring in math, science, and/or education will be employed to
act as peer mentors to facilitate classroom activities and, in the process, they
will learn more about science and the joy of teaching science.