* 9653209
* The Beta Coalition: Regional Collaboration Between 2-Year   and 4-Year Engineering Colleges
* EHR,DUE
* 03/15/1997,02/28/2002
* George Catalano, SUNY at Binghamton
* Standard Grant
* SIMONEAU ROBERT W
* 02/28/2002
* USD 300,000.00

A regional coalition, the Beta Coalition, is being established to support two-
year community colleges and small four-year engineering and science programs in
transforming the innovations based on sophisticated information technology-based
programs developed by NSF coalitions such as SYNTHESIS and ECSEL into a form
they can use with limited resources. Furthermore, in small programs it is
difficult to justify integration of content-based subjects such as math and
science because requirements tend to be specific to a major. However,
integration of skill-based subjects such as writing, computer applications,
graphics, and design can bring students with different majors together in a
common course sequence. The Watson School of Engineering at Binghamton
University and Broome Community College have worked together on a variety of
programs, and faculty at both institutions have experience in developing
integrated course sequences. This proposal is based on their existing
collaborative efforts. Funding is sought to develop and present summer workshops
wherein faculty from other 2-year and small 4-year schools within a 150 mile
radius can be trained and supported in developing integrated courses for their
own institutions. A model will be created for the needed interdepartmental
cooperation, while recognizing the special institutional problems involved in
sharing faculty and resources. Ways will be evaluated in which integrated
courses can be used to increase access and retention of students in engineering
and science from under-represented groups, including non-traditional students
commonly present in community colleges. An assessment system will be developed
for measuring program effectiveness, particularly innovations springing from
Beta Coalition activities. Results and materials will be disseminated via
Internet as well as conferences and journals of ASEE and other appropriate
professional communications.