* 9653707
* Building Bridges in the First Two Years:  Making Connections Among Introductory Mathematics, Science, and Engineering   Courses
* EDU,DUE
* 06/01/1997,05/31/2001
* Nicholas Kildahl, Worcester Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* SIMONEAU ROBERT W
* 05/31/2001
* USD 199,940.00

Studies at WPI and many other institutions have identified a common set of
faults running through the first two years of science and engineering education:
students see introductory mathematics and science courses as having little
apparent relation to one another or to their professional goals, skills
essential to academia and to the workplace--communication, problem solving,
working in groups, information gathering and synthesis--are not consciously
nurtured. Individual disciplines at WPI have begun to address these shortcomings
through peer-assisted cooperative learning, academic success training tied to
individual courses, open-ended group projects within courses, and integration of
computational and instructional technology in courses. This initiative will
create connections among these successful individual efforts and produce a
unique interdisciplinary approach to mathematics, science and engineering
education. Cross-disciplinary connections will be established via bridge
projects that encourage students to carry basic concepts across disciplinary
boundaries. The program will rely on WPI's well-developed community of
interdisciplinary undergraduate Peer Learning Assistants. Although WPI's
innovative project-oriented curriculum gives our faculty a special motivation
for this undertaking, the outcomes of this work will be widely applicable
because they will be built upon a familiar foundation, the usual discipline-
based introductory courses. A fabric of enhancements and additions that provide
educational and intellectual unity among existing courses can be woven thread by
thread without the risk or expense of a wholesale re-fashioning of curricula and
courses.