* 9653464
* Developing Multimedia-Based Interactive Laboratory Modules  for Computer Science
* EDU,DUE
* 01/01/1997,06/30/2000
* Janet Hartman, Board of Trustees of Illinois State University
* Standard Grant
* Stephen R. Cunningham
* 06/30/2000
* USD 120,000.00

This project consists of a two-week summer workshop and a two-day follow-through
session during the following the spring semester in each of two years.
Participants will design and implement interactive, multimedia laboratory
modules for computer science courses. Topics include (1) designing and
constructing an interactive multimedia module for a laboratory exercise that
includes audio, still images, full motion video and/or algorithm animation, (2)
using hardware to capture audio, still images, and full motion video, (3)
requirements for implementation and delivery of multimedia-based laboratory
exercises in a laboratory setting, (4) presentations and discussions centered on
the impact of multimedia and laboratories on learning, (5) developing portable
multimedia-based laboratory exercises for the World Wide Web, and (6) software
for developing multimedia-based laboratory exercises. Tools to be used include
an authoring tool and Java templates (a tool midway between a programming
language and an authoring tool) for developing modules for the World Wide Web.
Templates will allow participants to construct modules for the Web with only a
small introduction to HTML, JAVA and CGIs needed. An expert in graphics design
and one who researched and developed the concept of templates will interact with
the participants during the workshop. Each participant is expected to design and
develop a working version of a laboratory module during the workshop. The
participants will enhance the modules during the follow-through session. The
modules will be refined and tested with students during the academic year
following the workshop.