* 9653394
* Stressed Stream Analysis:  Addressing Real Environmental    Problems to Stimulate Undergraduate Science Faculty and     Students
* EDU,DUE
* 01/01/1997,12/31/1998
* Joseph Makarewicz, SUNY College at Brockport
* Standard Grant
* Robert W. Ridky
* 12/31/1998
* USD 132,464.00

The Center for Applied Aquatic Science and Aquaculture will conduct a three-
week summer project for 20 undergraduate faculty that demonstrates environmental
problem-solving as an effective teaching strategy to stimulate undergraduates'
interest in environmental science. Using the theme of Stressed Stream Analysis,
participating facultv will learn NEPA-based environmental analysis concepts and
techniques and will work in teams to prepare an Environmental Impact Statement
for a new pollution source in a disturbed stream ecosystem. Concepts and skills
participants will learn and use hands-on include: hierarchical habitat analysis,
employing biotic indices and microscopic techniques to evaluate pollutant
effects on organisms, analyzing anthropogenically-induced landscape changes over
time with GIS (Geographic Information System) technology, and water quality
analysis of nutrients, metals and microbes in a stressed stream ecosystem. In
the year following the June 1997 program, participants will develop and
implement new curricula at their home institutions then meet for a three-day
workshop to report on and discuss successes and problems. Written reports by the
participants will be compiled into an edited report available at cost to other
educators and advertised in professional newsletters and on the Internet. We
seek applications from a diverse mix of new and experienced faculty who teach at
colleges that emphasize undergraduate science education and student research
opportunities.