* 9660417
* SBIR Phase I:  Advanced, Polycrystalline t'-Zirconia        Ceramics for High Temperature Applications
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/1997,06/30/1997
* Jan-Fong Jue, MATERIALS & SYSTEMS RESEARCH INC
* Standard Grant
* Darryl G. Gorman
* 06/30/1997
* USD 74,977.00

*** 9660417 Jue This Phase I Small Business Innovation Research project will
fabricate polycrystalline t'-zirconia ceramics for advanced applications.
Polycrystalline t'-zirconia differs from regular tetragonal (t-phase) zirconia
(TZP) in both fabrication procedure and properties. TZP ceramics are sintered at
~1500(C, exhibit high strength, high toughness, but exhibit low creep
resistance, and low temperature aging. t'-zirconia are sintered at higher
temperatures, exhibit moderate strength, high toughness, high creep resistance,
and no low temperature aging. Resistance to creep and low temperature aging
makes t'-zirconia ceramics superior to TZP for many low and high temperature
applications. Polycrystalline t'-zirconia ceramics of a fine surface grain
structure will be made by high temperature direct resistive heating above 2000(C
and surface cooling. Highly creep resistant, strong, tough and transformation-
resistant zirconia ceramics will be fabricated in Phase I. Heating elements of
t'-zirconia will be fabricated and evaluated The potential commercial
applications of polycrystalline t'-zirconia ceramics include: (1) heating
elements for furnaces, (2) refractories, (3) kiln furniture, (4) liners for
chemical reactors requiring resistance to attack by water, acids, alkalis, (5)
storage heaters, (6) substrates for superconductors, and (7) structural
components requiring high creep resistance.