* 9660755
* SBIR Phase I:  An Improved Method for High-Speed Solution   of Stiff Problems in Real Time
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/1997,06/30/1997
* George Hannauer, EAI Simulation Associates, Incorporation
* Standard Grant
* Sara B. Nerlove
* 06/30/1997
* USD 67,428.00

*** 9660755 Hannauer This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project is
to develop and evaluate a promising new integration algorithm for solving stiff
problems in real time. Such problems occur frequently in Aerospace, Chemical,
Nuclear, Electric Power, and Automotive applications. In such applications, a
common design technique is to combine a computer model of part of the system
under evaluation (usually consisting of ordinary differential equations) with
actual system hardware. Such "hardware in the loop" applications require real-
time operation; the simulation of one second of system operation may take no
more than one second of computer time. Some models contain very fast subsystems
(e.g. a "tight" controller in a mechanical system or a small parasitic impedance
in an electrical system). Such large eigenvalues (high frequencies, short time
constants) require a very short computational step for stability. If the
computer can't solve the entire set of system equations in this short time,
real-time operation is impossible. The proposed integration algorithm, called
the LIMP (Linearized IMPlicit) method, allows much larger steps to be taken for
a given system, enabling real-time solution of many previously "intractable"
problems. Potential commercial applications include the design of aircraft,
missiles, chemical reactors, power generators, and automobiles. ***