* 9660767
* SBIR Phase I:  Thermophotovoltaic Devices Based on II3V2    Compounds
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/1997,06/30/1997
* Anthony Catalano, APTX Incorporated
* Standard Grant
* Darryl G. Gorman
* 06/30/1997
* USD 74,515.00

*** 9660767 Catalano This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I program
will prove the feasibility of polycrystalline, thin film heterojunction infrared
photovoltaic devices based on the II3V2 class of semiconducting compounds.
Though these materials have not been extensively investigated, they possess
numerous properties which make them well suited for many electro-optic
applications, potentially rivaling III-V materials in importance. The devices
developed in this study are intended to be used in broad band thermophotovoltaic
(TPV) converters for a variety of commercial applications. This work will
develop the deposition processes, characterize the materials, and prepare, test
and characterize the appropriate II3V2 devices. Organometallic chemical vapor
deposition (OMCVD) will be used to deposit the material. Because these compounds
possess essentially the same crystal structure, and prior investigations have
shown little minority carrier loss due to grain boundary recombination, we feel
that polycrystalline devices have a high probability of success. Moreover, the
high light flux densities encountered in the TPV application, should help
overcome recombination losses via this mechanism. Several different device
geometries will be examined. The proposed technology is essential to producing
low cost thermophotovoltaic (TPV) converters. Such devices will lower the cost
of TPV systems to the extent they will be competitive with other forms of power
generation. The potential size of the market for these products is extremely
large. ***