* 9660861
* SBIR Phase I:  Three-Dimensional Sketchpad:  Geometry       Visualization Software for the Classroom
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/1997,06/30/1997
* Nicholas Jackiw, Key Curriculum Press
* Standard Grant
* Sara B. Nerlove
* 06/30/1997
* USD 74,850.00

9660861 Jackiw This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project builds on
the success of The Geometer's Sketchpad, a piece of educational software that
has had an important impact on the teaching and learning of mathematics in
secondary schools. The research will prototype a next generation of this
software--3-D Sketchpad--an integrated exploratory environment for creating,
analyzing, and investigating three- and higher-dimensional mathematics. The
Geometer's Sketchpad allows users to carry out geometric constructions using
standard 2-D tools and transformations (Euclid's compass and straightedge tools
augmented by reflection, rotation, and dilation). At any time, users may drag
one or more objects in the sketch using the computer's mouse, and all of the
other objects will dynamically adjust their position and size to maintain the
constructed relationships. This simple idea has profound implications in the
teaching and learning of mathematics. Generalized to three dimensions, the
revolution in geometry education brought about by Sketchpad has the opportunity
to broaden the geometry curriculum and to extend its relevance to other areas in
mathematics and science. The objectives of this Phase I research project are to
design and prototype critical elements of 3D Sketchpad and to describe and
prototype the support materials that will ease its introduction into classrooms.
The Geometer's Sketchpad has enjoyed substantial commercial success. If the
proposed research meets its goals, the resulting software and support materials
will have even greater application in middle schools, secondary schools, and
colleges.