* 9660727
* SBIR Phase I: Stable Fluorescers for Luminescent Solar      Concentrators
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/1997,06/30/1997
* David Ham, Envirochem Inc
* Standard Grant
* Darryl G. Gorman
* 06/30/1997
* USD 75,000.00

*** 96-60727 Ham This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project will
synthesize and test new polymer materials for application in luminescent solar
concentrators (LSC's). LSC's use a large area sheet to absorb solar radiation
and light-pipe fluorescence efficiently to solar photovoltaic cells on the much
smaller edge area. Thus, expensive solar cells can produce several times more
electric power by using inexpensive plastic or glass sheets. LSC's work well in
diffuse sunlight, do not need to track the sun, dissipate excess energy, and
shift light toward the red where solar cells are more efficient. LSC's have been
demonstrated to provide efficient energy converters but cannot be implemented
because no suitable fluorescent materials (e.g. dyes in plastics) have been
identified that do not bleach for long enough times to be cost effective. This
firm has identified specific materials that should have the performance required
for LSC.s to achieve competitive, levelized costs and proposes to prepare and
test these novel materials . This project will prepare polymer materials and
measure their absorption and fluorescence spectra and their fluorescence quantum
efficiencies. This firm will obtain preliminary longevity data for these
materials using an accelerated weathering tester. These results will be used in
a preliminary economic analysis to determine the feasibility of our approach.
*** ??