* 9660152
* SBIR Phase I:  Chemical Sensors Based on Dendritic Polymers for Detection of Environmental Pollutants
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/1997,06/30/1997
* Mark Kaiser, DENDRITECH, INC
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Hennessey
* 06/30/1997
* USD 75,000.00

*** 9660152 Kaiser This project is focused on development of a new class of
chemical sensors for detection of a variety of volatile organic carbon (VOC)
pollutants, including chlorinated hydrocarbons. The ability to accurately and
reliably achieve molecular discrimination between various VOC's will be based on
a polymeric monolayer utilizing a new class of polymers called Starburstd9
dendrimers. This project will systematically examine the relationship between
the dendritic structure and chemical composition of these nanoscopic-sized
spheroidal polymers and their ability to differentiate between chemical
molecules with a variety of functional groups. A designed series of dendritic
polymers will be synthesized and will be covalently attached to a gold surface
to form a self-assembled monolayer, and the suitability of the dendrimer to act
as a chemically sensitive interface will be determined by challenging dendrimer-
modified surface acoustic wave (SAW) mass balances with vapor-phase probe
molecules. This will facilitate development of new sensor technology by
elucidation of molecular mechanisms and response optimization. This technology
could permit development of reliable, application-specific detectors in areas
such as: health and safety monitoring, environmental remediation, industrial
process control and auto emissions. ***