* 9660930
* SBIR Phase I:  Numerical Simulation of Cavitating Flows     Using an Innovative Probability Density Function Model for  Phase Change
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/1997,06/30/1997
* Ashok Singhal, CFD RESEARCH CORPORATION
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Hennessey
* 06/30/1997
* USD 75,000.00

This SBIR project will develop, validate and demonstrate a cavitation model
suitable for multidimensional steady and transient simulations of cavitating
flows. The lack of prediction capability for cavitating flows is a critical road
block in the development of many engineering equipment and biomedical devices.
The proposed model will employ a transport equation for vapor with full account
of vapor generation/destruction and turbulent fluctuations in velocity and
pressure. The phase change rates will depend upon thermodynamic properties of
fluid, and the flow characteristics, particularly turbulent pressure
fluctuations. The pressure fluctuations will be related to the turbulent kinetic
energy of flow. A Probability Density Function (PDF) approach will be used to
calculate the local time-mean phase change rates from instantaneous pressure
values. In Phase I study, the model will be incorporated in a finite-volume,
pressure-based, CFD code and applied to three benchmark problems e.g., orifice,
venturi and hydrofoil. Phase II work will include several modifications (e.g.,
bubble dynamics and velocity slip), extensive validation and practical
applications. The developed cavitation model will enable improved designs of
engineering equipment using pumps, propellers, orifices, hydrofoils, and
hydrostatic bearings and biomedical devices such as mechanical heart valves. The
cavitation model will be useable with various (and codes. CFDRC will
commercialize it in conjunction with its commercial CFD code, CFD-ACE.