* 9660415
* SBIR Phase I:  Remediation of Pesticide-Contaminated Soil   with Sub-Critical Water
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/1997,06/30/1997
* Gale Mayer, Western Environmental Services & Technology, Incorporated (WEST)
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 06/30/1997
* USD 75,000.00

*** 9660415 Mayer Attention has only recently be given to the widespread problem
of pesticide contaminants. This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I
project will test a novel method for removing pesticides from contaminated
soils. Current methods for handling pesticide-contaminated soils include
disposal in hazardous landfills, which because of volume can be costly, or land
farming, which may impact future land use due to incompatible mixtures and/or
high concentrations of pesticides. Western Environmental Services & Technology,
Inc. (WEST) is proposing the use of "subcritical" water to extract pesticides
from soil. Water can be changed from a highly polar to nonpolar solvent by
simply increasing temperature under a few bars of pressure. While steam and
supercritical water (T>374 C and P>221 bar) have been studied, hot liquid-phase
water ("subcritical" water) has received very little attention as a solvent for
organic compounds. By heating water under low pressure (to maintain a liquid
state), solubilities of nonpolar organics can be dramatically increased. In
preliminary laboratory studies, it has been demonstrated that subaritical water
can be used as an analytical technique for extracting polar as well as nonpolar
organics from a variety of solid matrices. WEST will test the concept of
subcritical water extraction of pesticides on actual samples of contaminated
soil. The proposed technology has the potential to provide a cost-effective and
environmentally acceptable method for remediating contaminated soils. Numerous
other applications of this technology may be possible, including polychlorinated
biphenols (PCBs), chlorinated solvents, waste munitions, polyaromated halogens
(PAHs), and petroleum spills. ***