* 9660022
* SBIR Phase I:  Transport of Colloidal Size Particles Through Porous Media - A New Approach for the Formation of         Impermeable and Reactive Subsurface Barriers
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/1997,08/31/1997
* Dalibor Hodko, Lynntech, Inc
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Hennessey
* 08/31/1997
* USD 75,000.00

*** 9660022 Hodko This project describes an innovative method for the formation
of impermeable and/or reactive barriers in soil with possible applications in
geo-engineering and environmental cleanup technologies. The installation of
vertical subsurface barriers is standard practice in civil and mining
engineering, however, methods for in situ construction of horizontal (bottom)
barriers have not yet been satisfactorily developed. The primary weakness in all
applications of horizontal barrier emplacement Is the inability of grouting
contractors to completely define the extent and nature of the injected
materials, i.e., verification of where the barrier material actually went. It is
likely that the acceptance of any subsurface barrier technology in soil and
groundwater remediation will depend on the ability to verify the barrier
continuity. A novel approach for the formation of continuous horizontal and/or
vertical subsurface barriers is proposed. An example of the formation of
horizontal barrier which will be capable of containing and destruction of
organic contaminants in polluted soil will be investigated. The feasibility of
formation of cementitious impermeable subsurface barrier and two types of
reactive permeable subsurface barriers will be tested. The developed technology
will be of considerable use to the Federal Government, as a cost effective
method for the formation of both hydraulically impermeable and permeable
reactive horizontal surface barriers for containment and destruction of organic
pollutants in soil and groundwater. Initial markets for the proposed technology
could be repair and maintenance of subsurface landfill barriers, and treatment
of polluted groundwater and soil at both industrial and military sites. ***