* 9660548
* SBIR Phase I: Acoustic Beamforming for Process Monitoring
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/1997,06/30/1997
* David Cutler, TPL, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Ritchie B. Coryell
* 06/30/1997
* USD 74,993.00

*** 96-60548 Cutler This Small Business Innovative Research (SBIR) Phase I
project will investigate the collection and analysis of sound generated by in-
situ process equipment as a diagnostic of process state. The new technique will
combine acoustic beam forming for isolation and monitoring of specific sound
generation sites and analysis of sound signatures for determination of equipment
operational parameters. Sound and vibration generated by equipment is a reliable
indication of equipment state. This technique will allow focused monitoring of
system elements not typically accessed (such as piping) and high level,
supervisory monitoring of overall process state without extensive hardware
installation. Inclusion of valves and piping will permit automated detection and
localization of system malfunctions such as leaks, turbulence, and steam
hammering that are not treatable with traditional process monitoring equipment.
Phase I will develop a low cost, easily customizable instrument that will be
equally applicable to installation in new manufacturing plants and to non-
intrusive retrofit of existing plants. Commercial applications are expected in
large predictive maintenance market. Low cost installation, simple operation,
and small personnel requirements will be useful in the process monitoring and
predictive maintenance fields. ***