* 9660328
* SBIR Phase I: A Proton Exchange Membrane Fuel Cell Stack    With Improved Reactant Distribution and Stable Operation
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/1997,06/30/1997
* Hari Dhar, BCS Technology Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Cheryl F. Albus
* 06/30/1997
* USD 75,000.00

*** ABSTRACT 9660328 Dhar This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I
project deals with issues on the improvement of a proton exchange membrane (PEM)
fuel cell stack to obtain better reactant distribution and uniform performance
among individual cells of the stack. The traditional serpentine flow patterns
have drawbacks such as lengthy channels and non uniform reactant distribution
among the cells in the stack. The reactant flow path is of utmost importance in
determining continued trouble-free fuel cell operation. The research objectives
include designing flow patterns and manifolding for air and hydrogen,
demonstration of performance in single cells and multi-cell stack, and
establishing variables such as depth and width of a channel for optimum
performance. Single fuel cells of active area 50 cm2 will be assembled using
graphite bipolar plates with the designed flow-fields. The membrane-electrode
assemblies will be self-humidified types developed by BCS Technology. The fuel
cells will be operated with cathodic reactants air and oxygen, and anodic
reactant hydrogen. One four-cell stack will be evaluated to verify its
performance and the flow related hypothesis at the stack-level. The anticipated
results from this project are better reactant distribution among individual
cells, uniform performance of all cells in a stack, and improved management of
the product water. Improved stack operation and cost reduction are needed for
commercial viability of the PEM fuel cell. As the conventional energy sources
get depleted, the PEM fuel cell, with its quiet, clean, and renewable energy,
will make a strong impact as an alternate stand-by power source for numerous
applications. The PEM fuel cell may also be used as a propulsion unit in next
generation vehicles. ***