* 9660071
* SBIR Phase I:  A Non-Destructive Method for Examining BridgeFoundations
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/1997,08/31/1997
* Edward Mercado, North American Geotechnical Co
* Standard Grant
* G. Patrick Johnson
* 08/31/1997
* USD 79,842.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project will develop and refine
non-destructive methods by which the lengths and numbers of piles and drilled
shafts and the existence of severe structural defects in bridge foundations can
be determined through non-destructive and non-invasive seismic survey means. The
survey techniques proposed are the shear wave reflection profiling survey (SWRS)
method and the ambient vibration survey (AVS) method. A secondary objective will
be to determine through field experimentation any limitations that the methods
may have. A known limitation is that none of the currently available
conventional methods can determine pile widths. After the migration data
processing step, it is possible to determine the pile width or shaft diameter
and the number of piles in a pile group from the SWRS data Measuring pile
numbers/group, shaft separation and width/diameter is a function of the
horizontal resolution obtainable from the data, which is controlled by the field
data acquisition parameters of detector spacing and source peak frequency.
Specifically, shear-wave seismic reflection profiling surveys and ambient
vibration surveys will be conducted, using traffic on the bridge as the exciting
force, of bridge foundations along I-45 near the University of Houston in the
Houston District of the Texas Department of Transportation (TxDOT) as a means of
verifying the validity and utility of both methods. The Houston District of
TxDOT has indicated that they will assist the project in gaining access to the
test sites and to the as-built construction records. The Federal Highway
Administration estimates that over the next 20 years $164.9 billion must be
invested to address the tremendous rehabilitation backlog and improve accruing
bridge deficiencies. The benefits of the proposed research would be very
significant cost savings in the rehabilitation of bridge foundations by
identifying which bridge foundations are safe and which need rehabilitation. The
potential for such significant cost savings will make the commercial
availability of a survey system a profitable undertaking for both the system
supplier and the end user.