* 9660137
* SBIR Phase I:  An In Situ Process Control Device for AsphaltPavements
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/1997,06/30/1997
* Robert Pearson, Tri-Valley Research
* Standard Grant
* G. Patrick Johnson
* 06/30/1997
* USD 74,794.00

This Small Business Innovative Research Phase I project will demonstrate an in
situ process control device, based on nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR), for the
analysis of asphalt pavement used in the highway industry. This proposal is
based on the work the Principal Investigator did under contracts from the
Strategic Highway Research Program. That work showed how NMR can be used to
measure the physical properties of neat asphalt and the concentration of
asphalt/aggregate mixes including cores. This research will attempt to extend
this technique to the measurement and study of the reaction that occurs between
asphalt and aggregate when they are mixed. The study of this reaction plus the
development of NMR methods to measure the physical properties of the asphalt in
situ in a mix or core will allow the design and the construction of a flat
magnet NMR system that will determine the amount and physical condition of
asphalt pavements, in-place, on a roadbed. The device developed in this overall
project can be used in a number of closely related applications in the highway
industry. The determination of the amount of asphalt in mixes and cores is an
application that could result in sales of several hundred units in the United
States alone. The use of a flat magnet system for in situ analysis of asphalt in
pavement could also have a profound impact on pavement maintenance.