* 9660637
* SBIR Phase I:  Very Large Scale Integrated (VLSI)           Implementations of Neuromorphics Virtual Sensors for        Intelligent Diagnostics and Control
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/1997,06/30/1997
* Alexander Moopenn, Mosaix, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Cheryl F. Albus
* 06/30/1997
* USD 74,750.00

*** ABSTRACT 9660637 Moopenn This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I
project will develop a novel, compact, low-cost, and single chip adaptive
neuroprocessor. This bit-serial based digital CMOS VLSI electronic neural
network device will combine on-chip integration of a fully reconfigurable
feedforward/time-lagged recurrent neuroprocessor with a backpropagation weight
training module. Specifically, the technical objective of this research is to
develop a neuroprocessor chip suitable for direct insertion into Ford's advanced
concept vehicles. In operation, this stand-alone electronic neural network will
act as a co-processor to the engine computer's (EEC) central processing unit
(CPU). The neuroprocessor will be software programmable, enabling it to execute
multiple different neural network applications on-the-fly; be capable of event
rate computational throughput (< 100 microseconds) per application; be of a
single-chip design (neuroprocessor with on-chip weight training); and cost
effective (< $20/chip). The importance of on-chip adaptation is to address the
problems of fixed weight neural networks--namely that an applications synaptic
weights (as optimized at the factory for a generic model) be allowed to
tweak/self-calibrate themselves for optimal diagnostic and control performance
on the vehicle in order to handle most accurately all conditions under which the
particular system is deployed. This research is in direct collaboration with
Ford Motor Company. The end product of this research and development is
particularly relevant to all diagnostics and control applications in the
automotive industry, in aerospace, as well as process control in the electronics
commercial industry. ***