* 9660815
* SBIR Phase I:  A Novel System for the Expression of Integral Membrane Proteins Using Halobacterium Halobium
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/1997,08/31/1997
* John Halladay, HaloGenetics, Inc
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 08/31/1997
* USD 74,916.00

*** 9660815 Halladay This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project
will evaluate a novel method for the production of integral membrane proteins
using the halophilic archeon Halobacterium halobium. Two key requirements for
biochemical analysis of proteins involved in complex cellular processes are
their production in quantity and their amenability to simple and rapid
isolation. To circumvent limitations frequently encountered in native systems
where insufficient amounts of protein are produced, recombinant DNA technology
has been developed and used to produce soluble proteins in a variety of
heterologous expression systems. Generally, however, these systems are not very
efficient in expressing heterologous membrane proteins. Thus, a reliable
heterologous production system for this class of proteins is needed. Halogenics,
Inc. will construct the appropriate plasmid vectors and evaluate the usefulness
of an H. halobium based membrane protein expression system. Several attributes
of H. halobium indicate it will be an ideal system for production of membrane
proteins. First, tools necessary for the routine introduction, maintenance, and
expression of foreign DNA have already been developed for this organism. These
include both a reliable transformation system for the introduction of DNA
molecules, as well as plasmid vectors which can easily be modified and utilized
as expression vectors. Second, H. halobium naturally produces very large amounts
of bacteriorhodopsin, an integral membrane protein that is very similar in
structure to the G-protein dependent receptor family--a major class of membrane
proteins. H. halobium has a third advantage. It is readily , lysed by gentle,
gradual dilution with distilled water or buffers to release the expressed
proteins. In contrast, other recombinant systems inherently require denaturing
conditions such as sonication, manual disruption, or the use of detergents to
release expressed proteins. The proposed technology, combined with the low c
osts associated with growing H. halobium and its easy lysis, will allow the
inexpensive and simple production of integral membrane proteins in quantity.
Such capability is of intense interest to researchers both in academic and
applied disciplines. The purified proteins resulting from the use of this system
would be used in drug discovery and development processes, diagnostic test kits,
and therapeutic applications. ***