* 9660898
* SBIR Phase I: Development of Multilayer Ceramic Capacitors  Through Microfabrication by Coextrusion Melt Spinning
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/1997,08/31/1997
* Gregory Hilmas, Sensintel Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Darryl G. Gorman
* 08/31/1997
* USD 75,000.00

*** 9660898 Hilmas This Phase I Small Business Innovation Research project will
use a novel approach to fabricate multilayer ceramic capacitors (MLCCs) having
thin dielectric layers. The MLCCs will be fabricated through an adaptation of
the low cost Fibrous Monolithic (FM) processing technology, currently under
development by the proposer, to produce advanced structural ceramics. It is
based on the melt spinning of thermoplastic/powder blends to create novel
hierarchical architectures beneficial to the ceramic industry. The project will
incorporate BaTiOs and Ag-based powders as the dielectric and electrode
materials, respectively, to fabricate 'in-situ' MLCCs. Microstructural
characterization and electrical testing of these prototype MLCCs will be
performed to demonstrate the feasibility of the overall concept. Phase I success
will allow future iterations in order to optimize the desired electrical
properties. The demand for multilayer ceramic capacitors having high capacitance
and high volumetric efficiencies has led to increased challenges in the
manufacturing of MLCCs. The preferred method for increasing the performance of
MLCCs, both in the U.S. and Japan, is to reduce the thickness of the dielectric
ceramic layers below 10 m while maintaining a high dielectric constant. This has
posed some critical challenges to current MLCC fabrication methods, such as tape
casting, in order to meet these needs. The successful adaptation of the FM
processing technology from advanced structural ceramics to functional MLCC
materials will allow the manufacturing of the latter at a low cost with a
variety of architectures and incorporating a selection of dielectric layer
thicknesses. The optimization of this novel process will lead to higher volume
MLCC production over current fabrication methods. ***