* 9660975
* SBIR Phase I:  Polymer Diode Arrays and Image Sensing       Arrays: Large Area, Flexible Photon Sensors with High       Photosensitivity
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/1997,06/30/1997
* Gang Yu, UNIAX Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Michael F. Crowley
* 06/30/1997
* USD 74,932.00

*** ABSTRACT 9660975 Yu This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project
will develop a polymer diode photodetector device for use as a large area, high
sensitivity image sensor. Although linear diode arrays and small area,
monochromatic and full-color COD matrices have been developed (and used in
devices such as scanners and video cameras), there are special opportunities for
using large area, flexible image sensors. One possible application might be a
flexible or foldable, thin image sensor of book size that could directly and
rapidly read images into memory (without scanning) from either paper, computer
monitors, or TV screens. The stored image could then be copied over to another
piece of paper or even sent by fax to a remote site. Polymer diode photodetector
devices provide a novel and attractive approach to such large area, high
sensitivity image sensing. The proposed Phase I research will continue UNIAX's
ongoing development of photonic and electronic devices based on semiconducting
organic polymers and will focus both on identifying materials appropriate for
the spectral ranges of interest (such as full-color capability), and on
optimizing device parameters. Device operating life and environmental stability
are other parameters to be characterized during the Phase I effort. Polymer
diode photodetectors would address a strategic need for large area linear diode
arrays and image sensors for military applications such as strategic threat
warning and target identification and tracking in aerial reconnaissance
vehicles. These military applications would be balanced by a number of
commercial applications in the office automation and consumer electronics
industries, as well as in astrophysics/space technology and in medical
technology. ***