* 9661186
* SBIR Phase I:  Improved Microwave Absorbing Insulator-      Conductor Composites with Tailored Frequency Response
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/1997,06/30/1997
* Michael Read, Physical Sciences Incorporated (PSI)
* Standard Grant
* Darryl G. Gorman
* 06/30/1997
* USD 74,960.00

*** 9661186 Read This Phase I Small Business Innovation Research project will
develop novel microwave absorbing materials that effectively absorb microwave
radiation over wide ranges of frequency (typically an octave). The absorbers are
based on materials that have dielectric properties that are functions of
frequency in such a mariner as to create strong, wideband absorption from a
fixed thickness of material. The typical thicknesses are appropriate for cast,
flexible sheets and bulk forms, and compositions with higher dielectric constant
suitable for paints are also possible. The microwave loss and the majority of
the real part of the dielectric constant in these materials result from a
strong, non-exponential dielectric relaxation associated with the micro-geometry
of a tailored ceramic-conductor composite. The frequency response of the
absorbers is adjustable by chemical means during the processing of the
composite. Test samples of these materials will be synthesized and the favorable
frequency response and tunability will be demonstrated experimentally. Potential
applications include the suppression of spurious emissions and interference from
consumer communications and computer equipment, and suppression of oscillations
in microwave power tubes, and passive microwave strip line components. If very
thin materials can be developed, there are additional applications in military
systems. ***