* 9661592
* SBIR Phase I: Development of a Cell Controller for          Epitaxial Silicon Fabrication
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/1997,06/30/1997
* Peter Rosenthal, On-Line Technologies Incorporated
* Standard Grant
* Michael F. Crowley
* 06/30/1997
* USD 74,939.00

*** ABSTRACT Rosenthal 9661592 This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I
project will develop the technology for closed loop process control in
semiconductor device fabrication. In current practice, fixed set point control
is used for process steps. Here, reactor recipes are set so that a parameter
value (as determined by measurements on 1 in 25 or 1 in 50 wafers) matches a
target specification, and the process is run until the parameter value is
outside preset limits. Then the process is stopped and the reactor is retuned.
This practice results in down time for process retuning, scrapped material which
is produced before the process is stopped (often the measurements are not made
immediately), and wider variations in the product specifications than necessary.
Higher quality products, with tighter specifications produced at lower cost,
with reduced scrap can be achieved by the application of closed loop process
control in which measurements are made on every wafer, and recipe changes are
continuously made to keep the wafer state parameters on target. The objective of
this project is to develop the technology for wafer-by-wafer control in the
fabrication of epitaxial silicon. On-Line technologies, Inc. (On-Line) has
developed a thin film metrology (TFM) tool which integrates with the fabrication
tool for epitaxial silicon (epi), allowing the measurement of the quality of
every epi film produced without any delay in the process. Work at the
Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT) has developed the data analysis and
control algorithms which can be employed in a cell controller. Phase I will
develop a cell controller which integrates an Applied Materials, Inc. Centura
epi fabrication tool, an On-Line epi TFM tool, and MlT's analysis and control
algorithms. This system will be used to demonstrate improvements in the epi
thickness specifications using wafer-by-wafer control of the deposition time.
Phase I will provide the foundation for a cell controller to be constructed and
tested in Phase II which will control the complete fabrication recipe to ensure
both epi thickness precision and uniformity. The implementation of closed loop
control can provide parameter specification improvements of factors of 2 to 10
without requiring any improvements in the fabrication tool. This improvement in
product quality can be achieved with increased tool availability, reduced scrap,
and lower personnel costs. The proposed technology will be applicable to
fabrication tools with a total value of $9.6 billion/yr. in the year 2000. The
cost for metrology is predicted to be 10% of the fabrication tool costs, or $960
million/yr. A market of similar size is expected for the cell controllers which
will compliment and add significantly to the value of the metrology tools. ***