* 9661166
* SBIR Phase I: All-Digital Time-To-Digital Converter         Integrated with Visible Light Photon Detectors
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/1997,06/30/1997
* Oleg Mukhanov, HYPRES, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Sara B. Nerlove
* 06/30/1997
* USD 74,989.00

*** 9661166 Mukhanov This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project
will be to Dunlop the first semiconductor-superconductor hybrid technology time-
resolved photon detection system by integrating silicon Visable Light Photon
counters (VLPCs) and superconducting high-performance timing digitizers in one
cryopackage. This integration will allow one to take full advantage of the VLPCs
extremely fast response and superb single photon detection capability. In
addition as the density of the arrays increase, the complexity, size power
dissipation, and cost of traditional room-temperature time digitizing
electronics may become prohibitively high. This system will offer unparalleled
performance in many applications that require time-resolved single photon
detection. The VLPC package will be integrated with a novel time digitizer
circuit based on a 200 ps time resolution superconducting time-to-digital
converter (TDC). to provide the required sensitivity for the VLPC output signal,
the TDC will use a special low-noise SQUID amplifier integrated on the small
chip. Locating the amplifier with digitizer inside the crystostat of the VLPC
(the VLPCs operate at 6-10K) eliminates the bandwidth limitations of low heat
loss cables that would otherwise be required to bring the VLPC's analog signal
to room temperature electronics. The development of a compact low-cost all
digital TDC integrated with Visible Light Photon Counters is expected to benefit
particle detectors that require a Time-of-Flight detector subsystem The proposed
device will significantly extend the performance capabilities of particle
detector systems. The developed technology will also improve the performance of
fluorescence/phosphorescence lifetime measurement systems, military emitter
direction finding and commercial modulation domain instrumentation. ***