* 9661603
* SBIR Phase I: Software for Fast and Accurate Calculations on Transition-Metal Systems
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/1997,06/30/1997
* Murco Ringnalda, SCHRODINGER, INC
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Hennessey
* 06/30/1997
* USD 75,000.00

This project will advance the ability of quantum chemistry calculations to
predict many important chemical, biological, and materials processes involving
transition metals. Currently, quantum chemistry software is hampered in this
task by a poor integration of ligand field theory and other basic concepts of
inorganic chemistry. In this SBIR project, Schrodinger, Inc. will improve its
electronic structure software package, PS-GVB, to allow users to incorporate
their chemical intuition about organometallic systems and to make automated,
intelligent selections of electronic properties that are not userspecified. The
software will account for the effects of ligand fields, oxidation states, formal
charges on ligands, and intrinsic properties of metals, producing a high-quality
trial wavefunction for ab initio or density functional theory (OFT)
calculations. In Phase II, Schrodinger, Inc. will make the technologies
developed in Phase I available to non-expert users by incorporating the methods
into an expert system graphical user interface. The software will allow the user
full graphical control over the selection of specific electronic states of
organometallic complexes. This flexibility will make electronic structure
software widely useful for studies of molecular properties and excited states of
systems containing transition metals.