* 9661424
* SBIR Phase I:  Statistical Analysis and Software for Long   Memory Processes
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/1997,06/30/1997
* Andrew Bruce, Insightful Corporation
* Standard Grant
* G. Patrick Johnson
* 06/30/1997
* USD 74,940.00

*** 9661424 Bruce This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project will
develop time series methodology for treating long memory time series. The
methodology will use FARIMA (fractional autoregressive, integrated, moving
average) processes, a class of processes that expands the standard
autoregressive, integrated, moving average processes to include a long memory
component. The phase I research will extend existing FARIMA modeling methodology
in the following areas: (i) model selection; (ii) robust parameter estimation;
(iii) estimation for time series with missing values; and (iv) assessment of
assumptions behind FARIMA modeling by use of the wavelet variance. A
practitioner's casebook illustrating and guiding the use of FARIMA models in
science and engineering will also be developed. Time series commonly encountered
in geophysics, oceanography, astronomy, electrical engineering, economics,
physiology and other disciplines exhibit the properties of a long memory
process. The essence of such a process is that correlation between random
variables does not approach zero rapidly as the separation in time between the
variables increases. Use of standard time series methodology with long memory
time series can lead to incorrect statistical analysis; e.g., confidence
intervals for the mean can be too optimistic by orders of magnitude. Long memory
time series are fundamental to science, and a complete statistical methodology
for handling these series will make a major contribution to scientific progress.
If successful, the research will lead to a software toolkit offering a complete
statistical methodology for FARIMA modeling. The toolkit will be marketed as an
S-Plus module and licensed to other commercial applications. Based on the
practitioner's casebook, instructional material will be marketed both as books
and hypermedia. ***