* 9661260
* SBIR Phase I:  Microbial Volatile Organic Compounds (MVOC's) as Control Parameters for Engineered Antimicrobial Process in Indoor Air Environments
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/1997,08/31/1997
* Dr. Stacy Daniels, Quality Air Heating & Cooling of Midland, Incorporated
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 08/31/1997
* USD 74,750.00

*** 9661260 Daniels This Small Business Innovative Research Phase I project to
be carried out by Quality Air Heating & Cooling of Midland, Inc. will
demonstrate the feasibility of identifying microbial volatile organic compounds
(MVOCs) by high-speed gas chromatography (HSGC) for possible control of
antimicrobial engineered processes. Variations in sources, process conditions,
building activities, and environmental factors produce concentration patterns
that require rapid and continuous monitoring. Existing monitors are limited to
simple mixtures, and are restricted by high detection levels and slow analysis
times. HSGC can potentially speciate and resolve complex mixtures of MVOCs at
low detection levels (< 0.1 ppb) and short analysis times (< 10 sec. Microbes
and MVOCs which adversely affect indoor air quality (IAQ) are of interest to
industrial hygienists, research administrators, heating/ventilation/air-
conditioning (HVAC) system designers, and environmental health officials. MVOCs
are associated with outdoor air, building materials, occupants, and HVAC
systems. The proposed HSGC monitor would provide rapid detection of MVOCs from
microbes having potential health effects; more efficient operation of HVAC
systems; improved design and construction of IAQ systems; and better control of
engineered antimicrobial processes. The technology has utility in detection,
prevention, and control of MVOCs associated with hospital; remediation sites;
pollution prevention activities; production processes; and natural environments.
***