* 9661586
* SBIR Phase I: Development of an Accurate and Efficient      Radiative Transfer Model in a Body-Fitted Coordinate System
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/1997,06/30/1997
* Jiwen Liu, ENGINEERING SCIENCES, INC.
* Standard Grant
* G. Patrick Johnson
* 06/30/1997
* USD 75,000.00

*** 9661586 Liu This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project will
develop an accurate and efficient radiative transfer model suitable for any
complicated geometry in a body-fitted coordinate (BFC) system. Radiative heat
transfer is the dominant heat transfer mode in boilers, furnaces, rocket
engines, and other high-temperature combustion systems. Due to different
mathematical characteristics, entirely coupled and simultaneous solution of the
radiative transfer equation (RTE) and the governing equations for fluid
transport has been very difficult for complicated problems. In this proposal,
radiative heat transfer will be simulated by the even parity formulation (EPF)
of RTE in combination with the discrete ordinates method (DOM). Unlike the
conventional RTE, the EPF of the DOM is a second-order differential equation. A
central difference scheme and a upwind scheme will be utilized to discretize the
discrete ordinates equations spatially and performance from these two schemes
will be studied. To investigate the accuracy of the present radiation model in a
BFC system, several benchmark problems with irregular geometries will be
considered and the solutions from the present model will be compared with other
available solutions. Due to the same mathematical structure between the EPF and
the governing equations for describing the fluid dynamics, the present radiation
model is expected to be very accurate and efficient for problems with
complicated geometries. The radiative transfer model to be developed will have
the same mathematical structure as the fluid transport equations and they are
entirely compatible with each other numerically. This will facilitate
simultaneous solution of the RTE and other governing equations in a combustion
system. If the present model is successfully proven in Phase I, it will be
extended to a 3D in Phase II. Furthermore, it will be implemented into a
commercial computational fluid dynamics (CFD) code due to its tremendous
advantages .***