* 9661179
* SBIR Phase I:  Double-Layer Ultracapacitors Incorporating   Microtextured Metal Electrodes
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/1997,06/30/1997
* Edward Johnson, ION OPTICS INC
* Standard Grant
* Cheryl F. Albus
* 06/30/1997
* USD 74,959.00

*** ABSTRACT 9661179 Johnson This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I
project will explore the feasibility of using microtextured metal electrodes as
the basis of electrolytic ultracapacitors. For load leveling and sustained
function after many cycles, ultracapacitors promise to become an integral part
of many advanced power systems, particularly for hybrid electric vehicles and
remotely operated battery systems. Although lower in specific energy than
batteries, ultracapacitors potentially have a high specific power, enabling a
synergy with lower power, but higher energy capacity, batteries, flywheels, or
fuel cells. Present ultracapacitor designs use a highly porous structure of
carbon (activated, foamed, or aerogel) as a high surface area electrode. High
capacitance is achieved by the double-layer of polar molecules extracted from
the electrolyte, which follows the convoluted surface of the carbon-coated
electrodes. We propose ultracapacitors based on microtextured metal electrodes
made by ion beam sputtering. Microtextured metals should improve performance
through increased conductivity and wettability, while maintaining large surface
area and ease of manufacture. Such surfaces have previously demonstrated
remarkable changes in secondary electron emission, battery electrode
performance, and optical properties, all related to increased surface area.
Similar enhancements of ultracapacitor electrodes promise to enable them to
finally approach their theoretical performance limits. Ultracapacitors are, in
combination with relatively lower power but high energy sources, ideal
components of hybrid power supplies. In typical applications of current
ultracapacitor technology to electrical vehicles, analysis by the National
Renewable Energy Laboratory predicts a reduction in peak battery power demanded
by a factor of three or more, an increase in vehicle range of 50%, and a
doubling of cycle life. Similar, or even greater, benefits to communication
devices, computers, and motor-driv en systems could be expected from
microtextured metal electrodes. ***