* 9661652
* SBIR Phase I:  Process-Control Instrument for Multi-Chamber Platforms
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/1997,06/30/1997
* Matthew Banet, Active Impulse Systems, Incorporated (AIS)
* Standard Grant
* Michael F. Crowley
* 06/30/1997
* USD 74,884.00

*** 9661652 Banet This Small Business Phase I project will provide an improved
process-control instrument for increasing yields and identifying defective
product in microelectronic device fabrication. The proposed instrument will
monitor fabrication processes performed in multi-chamber environments that are
rapidly becoming the standard in microelectronics fabrication. Multi-chamber
platforms include a central wafer-handling housing connected at it facets to
different fabrication tools (e.g., CVD and etching chambers); the housing and
the connected tools are kept under vacuum. A single platform performs multiple
process steps. Unfortunately, the same features that make the platforms
advantageous also make it difficult to perform process control, For example,
most conventional metrology tools cannot measure wafers within the platform. To
meet the fabrication industry's demand for real-time process control instrument
s, it is proposed to develop and test an all-optical, smallscale process-control
instrument. This instrument will remotely determine: i) the thickness of opaque
(e.g., metal) and transparent (e,g., oxide) films; ii) adhesion vs. delamination
of opaque and transparent films; iii) viscoelastic properties of films and
substrates; iv) thermal diffusivity of films and substrates; and v) ion implant
levels of silicon wafers and epitaxially grown films. The proposed instrument
has applications in the microelectronics industry, particularly in the area of
metrology and process control. ***