* 9661537
* SBIR Phase I:  An Enhanced, High Density, High Surface Area, Monolithic Composite Storage Media for Natural Gas
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/1997,06/30/1997
* Bita Young, NEWMAN TECHNOLOGIES
* Standard Grant
* Cheryl F. Albus
* 06/30/1997
* USD 75,000.00

*** ABSTRACT 9661537 Young This Small Business Innovation Phase I proposal
addresses the essential problem facing commercialization of natura1 gas as a
transportation fuel. The goal of commercializing natural gas as an alternative
vehicular fuel has engendered intense research and development activities in the
various areas of alternative fuel components and systems, component and
vehicular dynamics, control systems, vehicular energy systems, and most
importantly in the adsorptive storage media itself. Despite this activity,
attempts to discover, fabricate and/or re-engineer existing natural gas
absorbents have not led to a successful commercial storage media for natural
gas. This proposal examines this problem and proposes a new and novel strategy,
supported by actual data, for forming an enhanced, high density, high surface
area, monolithic composite storage media for natural gas. The proposed storage
media is higher in density than absorbents previously evaluated for storing
natural gas as well as having a well define pore size that researchers have
predicted as optimum for natural gas storage. Natural gas is a precious resource
of major economic significance world-wide. The environmentally friendly aspects
of natural gas as a fuel make it likely to become even more important in the
world. This composite adsorbent approach is the first major step in natural gas
adsorbent technology in several decades and offers a real potential for
enhancing natural gas storage. If successful, this Phase I effort would have
direct application in automotive transportation as well as in its supporting
industries. The process is also potentially important across the spectrum of
commercial storage and separation and purification techniques for natural gas.
***