* 9661076
* SBIR Phase I:  High Surface Area, High-Capacitance          Electro-Chemical Double-Layer Capacitor (EDLC) Electrodes
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/1997,06/30/1997
* Arthur Fortini, ULTRAMET, INC.
* Standard Grant
* Darryl G. Gorman
* 06/30/1997
* USD 74,982.00

*** 9661076 Fortini This Phase I Small Business Innovation Research project will
develop high-capacitance electrodes that combine high surface area with the
electric double-layer effect and fast, reversible faradaic processes at the
electrode. This will be accomplished by infiltrating aerogels with precious
metal oxides via a unique process. The net result will be an electrode with the
surface area of an aerogel, but with the pseudocapacitance properties of
ruthenium oxide (RuO2). The primary drawbacks of current electrochemical double-
layer capacitors (EDLCs) are cost and power density. The EDLC electrode material
that allows for the greatest specific capacitance is RuO2 which is based on an
expensive platinum group metal. Thus, the cost of such capacitors is quite high.
Furthermore, because electrode surface area is the key parameter for
capacitance, and because current technology only allows dispersal of the oxide
electrode material to surface areas of ~120 m2/g, the bulk of the oxide mass
remains unused. The optimization of high surface area, high-capacitance
electrodes will have many applications in both the civilian and military
sectors. Civilian applications include electric automobiles, pulse power
supplies for high-power lasers, burst power for high-power signal generation,
and power conditioning for satellites. Military applications include space power
conditioning, laser weaponry, electronic fuses, safety and arming devices, and
missile guidance systems. ***