* 9661144
* SBIR Phase I: A Two Part Nonvolatile Random Access Memory   (RAM)
* TIP,TI
* 03/01/1997,06/30/1997
* Zhi Quan Chen, Rubicon
* Standard Grant
* Michael F. Crowley
* 06/30/1997
* USD 72,785.00

*** ABSTRACT 9661144 Chen This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I
project will develop a two part nonvolatile RAM. This memory device will be
fabricated as two separate components which will then be electrically connected
together. A "circuit component", consisting of MOS technology similar to DRAM
without storage capacitors, would incorporate address selection and data
input/output. A second "storage medium" component would house ferroelectric
capacitors, which would actually store information. By producing these two parts
separately, adverse mutual effects which occur during the fabrication process
can be avoided, and the characteristics of both parts can be optimized. A novel
approach to micro-mechanical joining will be used to connect each capacitor in
the storage medium component to a corresponding MOS drain electrode in the
circuitry component. The storage medium component is simply an unpatterned
ferroelectric film deposited on a common, metallic ground plane. The
ferroelectric storage capacitors are defined by the other electrode on the
circuitry component. Because of this simple structure, no alignment is
necessary, making for simpler connection of the two parts. This nonvolatile RAM
has immediate advantages over other nonvolatile memories because it possesses
true random access (bit-by-bit reading and writing), simple construction leading
to low cost, and a rugged design (no moving parts). Moreover, it can be packaged
as a "smart card" holding as much data as a CD. Due to the nonvolatility of this
new technology, computers would experience no data loss on power loss, would
have no boot-up time, and would not need a hard disk. This technology may be
also able to compete against DRAMs. ***