* 9661267
* SBIR Phase I:  Facilitated Transport Organic-Inorganic      Membranes for Olefin/Paraffin Separation
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/1997,06/30/1997
* Wenchang Ji, CeraMem Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Hennessey
* 06/30/1997
* USD 75,000.00

*** 96-61267 Ji . This proposal addresses development of cost-effective, highly
selective, high-pressure, and high-temperature gas separation modules by use of
low-cost, highly compact ceramic ultrafiltration (UF) modules as gas separation
membrane supports. The active separation layer will be a thin ceramic membrane
with pore size of 4- 10 nm modified with silver or copper ions and sealed with a
poly(dimethylsiloxane) (PDMS) thin film.. During Phase I, novel facilitated
transport organic-inorganic membranes will be developed. High selectivity of
these membranes for olefin/paraffin separation will be demonstrated. A reservoir
method will be employed to modify the top thin membrane of a ceramic module with
silver or copper ions. An innovative method will be used to apply a thin PDMS
film to the modified ceramic membrane to form a dense separation layer. These
membranes will be tested at temperatures ranging from 25 to 200 C for separation
of olefin/paraffin mixtures at a laboratory scale. The novel high-pressure and
high-temperature facilitated transport membrane modules to be developed in this
program, if successfully scaled up to production-scale ceramic modules (as
envisioned for Phase II work), would be a key element in the separation of
olefin/paraffin mixture in the chemical and petrochemical industry. They could
also be used to effectively separate carbon monoxide from a synthesis gas. ***