* 9661545
* SBIR Phase I: Novel Superglassy Polymer Membranes for       Hydrocarbon Separation
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/1997,06/30/1997
* Ingo Pinnau, MEMBRANE TECHNOLOGY & RESEARCH, INC.
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Hennessey
* 06/30/1997
* USD 75,000.00

*** 9661545 Pinnau This project addresses the development of a new class of gas
separation membranes based on superglassy polymers. Superglassy polymers are
characterized by high glass transition temperatures, high free volume, large
intermolecular chain spacing, connectivity of free volume elements, extremely
high hydrocarbon permeability and high hydrocarbon/permanent-gas selectivity. it
was recently discovered that poly(1-trimethylsilyl-1-propyne) PTMSP , the only
superglassy polymer studied to date, can show a mixed-gas selectivity of 30 for
e-butane over methane, the highest selectivity ever observed for this important
mixture. However, the potential use of PTMSP membranes is limited because its
chemical resistance to higher hydrocarbons and aromatic hydrocarbons is poor.
The project goal is to develop novel, chemically resistant superglassy polymer
membranes based on disubstituted polyacetylenes. Preliminary pure-gas permeation
studies with one such polymer show that its permeability and selectivity for the
e-butane/methane mixtures separation are lower than those of PTMSP, but high
enough to be promising. Unlike PTMSP, the polymer is completely stable in an
aliphatic and aromatic hydrocarbon environment. It is believed that the
permeability and selectivity of the polymer can be increased by proper
structural modifications. Membranes make from superglassy polymers could have a
significant impact on many important industrial vapor separations. Possible
applications include recovery of C3+ hydrocarbons from hydrogen in the
petrochemical industry. The superior selectivity and permeability of superglassy
polymers relative to state-of-the-art rubbery membranes should make membrane
systems competitive with conventional separation methods such as cryogenic
separation in these or other applications. ***