* 9661765
* SBIR Phase I:  Instrumentation for Controlled Fabrication & Characterization of Nanostructures: Assembly of 2-D Membrane Protein Crystals
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/1997,09/30/1997
* Fatemeh Mojtabai, Ultrathin Film Technology Limited
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 09/30/1997
* USD 75,000.00

*** 9661765 Mojtabai This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project
will develop a technology that will allow the growth of crystals and other
ordered micro- and nano-structures on a liquid in a fast and controlled fashion.
The technology will be integrated with real-time digital imaging laser
fluorescence microscopy to allow for in-situ characterization of structure
formation, throughout the fabrication process. The use of a robotics film
transfer system facilitates preparation of specimens for use in atomic
resolution measurements such as electron and scanning probe microscopies. These
modifications will substantially improve the existing state-of-the-art of the
technology. The experimental program in Phase I addresses a new, simple and fast
process for fabrication of ordered two-dimensional crystals of membrane spanning
proteins. Unlike conventional techniques, this new process allow for variation
of the experimental parameters to facilitate fabrication of crystals with both
long- as well as short-range orientation order, suitable for high-resolution
crystallographic analysis. In addition, the process is orders of magnitude
faster than conventional techniques, and maintains the native asymmetry of the
membrane protein. The success of the program will provide, for the first time, a
general approach for crystallizing membrane proteins. This may lead to new
discoveries of significant biotechnological importance, since structural
information at atomic resolution is indispensable for elucidation of the
mechanism of action of key membrane proteins, and thereby understanding the
nature of disease and for developing more effective drugs. The unique
performance characteristics of the technology provide many present and potential
applications which range from fields such as microelectronics to biotechnology.
In biotechnology the technology has potential for developing more effective
drugs, or screening drugs. Other applications include fabrication of
technologically useful tub ular microstructures that can be used as micro-vials
for controlled delivery of drugs, and for immobilization of DNA/RNA on new
materials for use in genetic screening. ***