* 9661140
* SBIR Phase I: CdZnTe Thin-Film Detector on TFT-Arrays: A New Digital Detector Technology for Macromolecular             Crystallography
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/1997,09/30/1997
* Rengarajan Sudharsanan, Spire Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 09/30/1997
* USD 74,752.00

*** 9661140 Sudharsanan This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project
proposes to develop a self-scanned, large-area, flat-panel, X-ray detector
technology more efficient, lower-cost, and larger area than charged coupled
device (CCD)-based X-ray detectors. The proposed detector will employ a
continuous photoconductive CdZnTe layer as a direct X-ray converter; this
detector win be monolithically integrated to large-area, active-matrix, thin-
film transistor pixellated arrays for readout. CdZnTe offers direct detection,
better detection efficiency, higher signal-to-noise ratio, and larger dynamic
range than CCD-based X-ray detectors. Phase I will seek to demonstrate the
feasibility of this detector technology by fabricating and testing a detector
array which employs CdZnTe thin films deposited on TFT arrays. CdZnTe thin film
will be deposited by thermal evaporation. A 4 x 4 array will be designed,
fabricated, and tested to determine CdZnTe suitability for X-ray detection.
Phase II, would be directed toward fabricating larger arrays and performing
imaging to demonstrate the feasibility of this detector technology for
macromolecular crystallography. If successful, the research could result in
X-ray detector technology will replace CCD-based detector systems in X-ray
diffraction studies of biological samples because of the direct detection, high
detection efficiency, and low-cost of the technology. In addition, these
detectors will be useful for X-ray imaging in industrial and medical
applications. Medical applications include digital mammography and diagnostic
X-ray radiology. ***