* 9661134
* SBIR Phase I:  Conducting Polymer Based Bipolar Plates for  Proton Exchange Membrane Fuel Cells
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/1997,09/30/1997
* Oliver Murphy, Lynntech, Inc
* Standard Grant
* Cheryl F. Albus
* 09/30/1997
* USD 75,000.00

*** ABSTRACT 9661134 Murphy This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I
project will demonstrate the feasibility of using conducting polymers to
fabricate bipolar plates for proton exchange membrane (PEM) fuel cells. To make
PEM fuel cell power sources for electric vehicles cost-competitive with
competing technologies, materials cheaper than presently used carbon/resin
composites for bipolar plates must be identified and more cost-effective methods
of manufacturing these plates compared to high temperature graphitization of
carbon/resin composites must be developed. The goal of this project is to take
advantage of recently developed electronically conducting polymer technology for
the development of superior and cost effective bipolar plates for PEM fuel cell
stacks compared to the conventionally used graphitized carbon-based materials.
The aim is to electrochemically synthesize net shape, high strength conducting
polymer structures that exhibit high electronic conductivity at elevated
temperatures in the presence of oxygen and that are not subject to
oxidation/corrosion processes in oxygen-saturated acidic environments at
elevated temperatures. The attractiveness of the approach is that it will allow
the room temperature preparation of high strength, highly conducting polymer
materials suitable for use not only as bipolar plates in PEM fuel cell stacks
but also in other acid fuel cell systems, such as the phosphoric acid fuel cell
(PAFC) system. Thus, developed technology arising from this project should be an
enabling technology leading to the manufacture of low cost fuel cell stacks. Low
temperature methanol/air and hydrogen/air PEM fuel cells have considerable
commercial potential as power sources for electric vehicles. Other commercial
applications include: electricity and heat production for residential and small
commercial buildings; portable power sources for communications and news
gathering equipment; portable medical instrumentation used by rescue teams; and
external electrical power sources for artificial heart and ventricular-assist
devices. ***