* 9661632
* SBIR Phase I: Regulation of Moisture and Thermal            Microenvironments to Improve Mycoherbicides
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/1997,06/30/1997
* Yvonne Bryant, Triangle Research and Development Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 06/30/1997
* USD 74,982.00

*** 9661632 Bryant This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project will
investigate the unique combination of microencapsulation techniques and
materials with biological herbicides (mycoherbicides) to offer a safe, host-
specific, affordable alternative to chemical herbicides. The project will study
ways to meet the critical environmental requirements of plant pathogenic fungi
used as mycoherbicides and thus to make mycoherbicides practical and
commercially viable for widespread agricultural use. A major limitation of
mycoherbicides has been the need for fastidious moisture and temperature ranges
in order for them to be effective in the field. This project will address the
temperature and moisture requirements (both vital to the effectiveness of
mycoherbicides) by extending (simulating) dew periods and regulating temperature
on the plant surface. Novel and innovative encapsulation techniques will combine
water and/or nutrient solutions with microencapsulated phase change materials
(microPCMs)- developed by Triangle R&D on multiple SBIR programs from 1984 to
1996 - in a form that can he successfully applied in the field. A fungal
pathogen/weed pathosystem will be selected as a model system and evaluated for
compatibility of microencapsulated materials with the fungal pathogen and target
weeds. The project will then design and fabricate water microcapsules to provide
a range of moisture coverage periods, design and fabricate microPCMs to provide
the optimum temperature range(s) and evaluate microencapsulated materials alone
and in combinations to improve the weed control efficacy of the mycoherbicide.
Many promising mycoherbicides have been abandoned because of their seeming
incompatibility with environmental conditions in the field. If successful, the
proposed work could significantly improve existing mycoherbicides, renew the
development of previously abandoned mycoherbicides, and create broad
applications in agriculture and environmental systems. This would lead the way
to capturing a portion of the herbicide industry, which currently has annual
sales in excess of 7 billion dollars. ***