* 9661504
* SBIR Phase I: Boundary Scan and Board-Level Built-In-Self-  Test Insertion into VHDL Designs with Commercial-off-the-   Shelf Components
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/1997,06/30/1997
* Casper Stoel, ALTERNATIVE SYSTEM CONCEPTS, INC.
* Standard Grant
* Sara B. Nerlove
* 06/30/1997
* USD 74,995.00

9661504 Stoel This Small Business Innovative Research (SBIR) Phase I project is
to meet the increasing need for commercial-off-the-shelf (COTS) components in
the ever shrinking time to market in the electronics industry. COTS components
are readily available, less expensive, and increase efficiency of the design
process, but negatively impact testability. It is proposed to develop a
methodology for enhancing testability of boards and systems implemented using
COTS devices, and to provide the supporting tools. The methodology will improve
controllability and observabilitv in such board testing through (1)
implementation of board-level JTAG boundary scan, (2) borrowing boundary scan
included on some chips to test surrounding COTS components without boundary
scan, and (3) integrating other test and diagnostic techniques such as board-
level built-in self test (BIST) and IDDQ test using the 1149.1 standard boundary
scan serial interface. Industry standards (VHDL and Boundary Scan) support
interoperabilitv with major EDA frameworks. During Phase I, a prototype tool set
will be developed for higher level (board, Multi-Chip Module, etc.) boundary
scan and BIST insertion into VHDL designs. In Phase II, tool set features and
capabilities will be expanded, and product commercialization will begin. The
proposed test insertion methodology provides a solution to pressing problems
faced by designers whose design requirements include high testability and use of
untestable COTS components. The new tool set will lower cost and save time in
the design phase through use of commercial parts without the attendant
compromises in testability.