* 9661336
* SBIR Phase I:  A Self-Balancing, Expansion Matched Flywheel Design for Power-Assist Hybrid Vehicles
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/1997,06/30/1997
* Dwight Swett, Helios International Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Cheryl F. Albus
* 06/30/1997
* USD 75,000.00

*** ABSTRACT 9661336 Swett This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I
project addresses the design of an electromechanical battery for power-assist
vehicle applications. Of the various candidate technologies for energy storage
on board a hybrid electric vehicle, flywheels require only an evolutionary rate
of progress in terms of materials science development. During Phase I, design
issues associated with rotor constitution out of three types of carbon fiber
will be addressed as will the design of the hub, the permanent magnet motor, and
the suspension/bearings subassemblies. Phase I also includes the design of a
containment housing with appropriate energy dissipation and release mechanisms
in the unlikely event of rotor failure. Phase II of this effort will address the
fabrication of engineering prototypes and the validation of the Phase I design
with the goal of having a producible and manufacturable prototype design. Also
during Phase II, the engineering feasibility of the prototype design will be
demonstrated through projections in reductions of materials costs due to
economies of scale as well as manufacturing costs by proper selection of
processes. The target cost of the electromechanical battery system to be
developed in this multi-phase research effort is $500-800 per kWh of energy. The
target performance is an electromechanical battery system with an energy storage
of 3 kWh, a maximum power of 88 kW, a specific energy of 50 Wh/kg, a specific
power of 1.4 kW/kg and a life over 1 million cycles. Successful development of
flywheels that achieve the targeted cost and performance will enable their
integration as power-assist devices into hybrid electric vehicles. ***