* 9661449
* SBIR Phase I:  Development of a Volatile Nitrogen-Containing Compound Pollution
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/1997,06/30/1997
* Joseph Rossin, GUILD ASSOCIATES INC
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Hennessey
* 06/30/1997
* USD 73,626.00

*** 96-61449 Rossin This project investigates the development of a novel
catalyst to control the emissions of volatile nitrogen-containing compounds
(VNC's) without the generation of chemical NOx. VNC's are both hazardous and
odorous, and therefore, their emissions must be controlled. Current technologies
used to control VNC emissions result in the generation of significant amounts of
NOx due to the atomic nitrogen associated with the VNC. The release of NOx into
the atmosphere is a significant problem, since it has been linked to both smog
and acid rain. Catalytic oxidation is a technology well suited for controlling
vapor phase emissions. However, no catalyst is commercially available which is
capable of destroying VNC's without the formation of NOx. A novel catalyst was
recently identified which has demonstrated the ability to destroy hydrogen
cyanide without forming NOx over a wide range of process conditions. The
objective of this Phase I proposal is to modify this novel catalyst in order to
enhance its reactivity and minimize its N20 selectivity. To meet this objective,
developmental catalysts will be evaluated for nitrogen-product selectivity and
performance stability over a range of process conditions. Technologies capable
of economically controlling the release of VNC's without the formation of NOx
are currently unavailable. Should the novel catalyst prove successful,
economical pollution abatement systems may be designed around the catalyst to
meet the needs of a wide variety of applications which include controlling plant
fugitive emissions and fume abatement. ***