* 9661539
* SBIR Phase I:  Microfabrication of Planar Accelerating      Structures for High-Frequency Electron Linear Accelerators
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/1997,06/30/1997
* David U. Yu, DULY Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* G. Patrick Johnson
* 06/30/1997
* USD 74,962.00

9661539 Yu This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project will develop
a planar structure for acceleration of a flat electron beam in a high-frequency,
linear electron accelerator. The structure, different from the conventional
cylindrically symmetric disk loaded structure, can be mass produced with modern
microfabrication techniques using deep etch x-ray lithography. Phase I research
will focus on the physics issues and fabrication techniques of the planar
accelerating structure (PAS), and the feasibility of their application to future
linear colliders and compact commercial linear accelerators operating at high
frequencies. The PAS can be designed with a nearly constant axial electric field
in the central region of the cavity through which the beam passes. Such a
structure would reduce wakefields, and accommodate a high-current beam while
maintaining a low current density. The PAS can also be used to accelerate
electrons emitted by an asymmetric photoinjection gun, possibly eliminating the
need of an expensive damping ring to control emittances. Asymmetric RF
quadrupole beam focusing in a PAS-based linac is also possible. Precision
microfabrication techniques are especially suitable for repeatable production of
small, high-aspect ratio structures with tight tolerances. These techniques
would replace tedious machining and brazing manufacturing processes for very
small and intricate structures, and substantially reduce the manufacturing cost.
If the research is successful, the resulting asymmetric planar accelerating
structure (PAS) would be a revolutionary design applicable to a new generation
of commercial linear accelerators and linear colliders. Microfabrication of PAS
using lithography techniques will save production cost and increase precision in
manufacturing tolerances. Microfabricated, PAS-based linacs can be used as
compact medical and industrial accelerators. They can also be used as compact
injectors to microfabricate free electron lasers to produce coherent, tunable
radiations.