* 1100905
* Strong LHC Physics on the Lattice
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2014
* George Fleming, Yale University
* Continuing Grant
* Keith Dienes
* 08/31/2014
* USD 120,000.00

This award funds the research activities of George Fleming, a Research Professor
at Yale University.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;When the interactions within a physical
theory are strongly coupled, many traditional analysis techniques are no longer
suitable and one must perform direct numerical calculations of quantities such
as scattering amplitudes and interaction rates. Such an approach typically
involves what is called "lattice gauge theory". In this project, Professor
Fleming aims to use lattice gauge theory techniques in order to study strongly-
coupled physics at the Large Hadron Collider (LHC) at CERN. Although the strong
interaction modelled by the theory of quantum chromodynamics (QCD) is well
understood, Professor Fleming seeks to understand how the nature of strongly-
coupled interactions changes as one explores more general classes of theories
beyond QCD. Such theories might ultimately be relevant if the LHC finds evidence
of strongly coupled dynamics underlying electroweak symmetry
breaking.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is also envisioned to have
significant broader impacts. Professor Fleming has an established record of
incorporating undergraduate students into his research program, with a strong
emphasis on mentoring students from underrepresented groups and from
predominantly undergraduate institutions. Lattice gauge theory calculations of
many physical observables essentially involve extracting exponentially decaying
signals from noisy time series data generated in Monte Carlo simulations. Many
other scientific fields, e.g. nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy and
signals processing, share common challenges in data analysis of exponential time
series. Undergraduates often choose this research topic because the skills they
learn remain useful even if they move into other scientific fields later in
their careers.