* 1100712
* GOALI: Direct High-Efficiency Production of Sheet and Foil by Single-Stage Deformation Processes
* ENG,CMMI
* 05/01/2011,04/30/2015
* James Mann, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Mary Toney
* 04/30/2015
* USD 328,673.00

This Grant Opportunity for Academic Liaison with Industry (GOALI) project will
develop the science of a hybrid machining-based process for producing metal
sheet and foil in which cutting and extrusion occur simultaneously in a single
stage of deformation. The approach is radically different from the conventional
multi-stage rolling processes currently used to produce sheet and foil, in that
the deformation can be controlled and confined to a small region, with localized
heating from the deformation itself and imposition of large hydrostatic
pressures. The result is a deformation condition that suppresses failure,
thereby enabling large shape changes even in alloys of low workability.
Deformation conditions (strain, strain rate and temperature) will be
investigated to determine how special stress/temperature states and strain paths
can be used to increase deformation efficiency, control microstructure and
properties, and eliminate defects. Experiments and analyses on scaling, energy,
tool wear and costs will be conducted in order to characterize process
efficiency and for benchmarking against conventional
processes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will enable metal sheet and foil
to be produced directly from ingot in a single stage of deformation, with
significant reductions in energy, cost and emissions. The machining-based
deformation approach will also have important advantages for processing alloys
of low workability such as titanium and magnesium, providing critical technology
for breaking down the cost barriers currently prohibiting these lightweight
alloys from large-scale application in commercial transportation systems. The
process imparts advantageous crystallographic textures, while simultaneously
controlling grain-size to achieve superior formability and properties. The
research will advance cost analysis of manufacturing processes and provide
opportunities for students to interact directly with industry partners and
develop entrepreneurial skills. The project is a collaborative study involving
Purdue University, M4 Sciences LLC, Ford, and tool manufacturers.