* 1100752
* GOALI:  Long-Term Thermo-Mechanical Performance and Group Effect Considerations for Design of Energy Piles
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/2011,05/31/2016
* Guney Olgun, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Richard Fragaszy
* 05/31/2016
* USD 603,856.00

There is a growing global trend to utilize alternative energy resources mainly
driven by rising energy demand, depleting natural resources and adverse effects
of carbon emissions from fossil fuel consumption. The earth's near surface
contains a huge potential of stored geothermal energy that can be used for
heating and cooling. Below a depth of about 10 m, seasonal ground temperatures
remain stable compared to outside air temperatures, typically lying between
10-18Â° C. This near surface heat energy can be efficiently accessed using heat
exchangers consisting of buried pipes (i.e., "geothermal loops") filled with a
glycol-water mixture that is circulated between the structure and the subsurface
using a ground source heat pump. Over the past 20 years, this ground coupling
concept has been expanded from mainly residential applications to large-scale
projects. Of particular interest is the application where geothermal loops have
been integrated into deep foundation elements, such as piles, piers, or drilled
shafts. These systems, referred to as Energy Piles, are used in soft soils where
deep foundations are already needed for structural support. The integration of
the geothermal loops comes at little additional cost. Energy Piles have the
advantage of being applicable in any climate or region, including those where
wind and/or solar power have limited effectiveness. In ideal conditions, Energy
Piles can significantly reduce carbon footprint and lower heating and cooling
costs and energy use for buildings by as much as 80%.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Although Energy Piles have seen exponential growth in
Europe and Japan over the last decade, they have received little attention in
the US. This is partly due to a lack of awareness about their benefits, along
with a lack of US case studies that demonstrate their cost-effectiveness. There
are also questions related to their thermal and thermo-mechanical behavior that
must be answered before their designs can be fully optimized. The main issues
involve a lack of standardized field testing procedures and a lack of long-term
operational studies that cover a wide range of climatic and soil conditions. The
main purpose of this study is to investigate long-term Energy Pile behavior and
to develop new Energy Pile design guidelines. The project will involve field
testing at five sites across the US, along with advanced numerical modeling, and
technology transfer and outreach. During the field tests, the tested Energy Pile
will be loaded to simulate the combined effect of the building load as well as
the temperature changes due to heat exchange operations. In addition to field
tests on individual piles, the heat exchange behavior of a group of 9 Energy
Piles will be tested at one of the sites to better understand the group
efficiency of Energy Piles. Experimental results from the field tests will be
used to calibrate the advanced numerical models that simulate long term Energy
Pile behavior in a series of parametric analyses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
study is conducted in partnership with several industrial participants as well
as non-profit organizations and government agencies. Several industrial
participants are providing in-kind contributions by building full-scale field
tests, donating materials, instrumentation and heat pumps. Three foundation
engineering contractors (Berkel, Thatcher and Layne GeoConstruction) are
installing Energy Piles and assisting with the field testing. Piping for the
geothermal loops and heat pumps for the field tests will be provided by REHAU
and WaterFurnace, respectively. Geo-Instruments, Inc. is assisting with field
instrumentation and data acquisition, and providing the necessary sensors for
the field tests. Several non-profit organizations and government agencies such
as the US Green Building Council, the Deep Foundations Institute, and the
Federal Highway Administration are participating by reviewing the findings,
providing guidance, and helping to broaden dissemination of the results to the
engineering community and beyond.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The main intellectual
merit is that, this university-industry collaboration will answer key questions
about long-term thermo-mechanical and Energy Pile group performance, and provide
new industry design guidelines and field testing procedures. In terms of broader
impact, the work would help promote the use of Energy Pile technology in the
United States, and thereby help reduce fossil fuel consumption, lower greenhouse
gas emissions, lower the cost of heating and air conditioning, and decrease our
reliance on foreign energy.