* 1100954
* Self-Stressing Shape Memory Alloys/Fiber Reinforced Polymer (SMA/FRP) Composite Patches for Rehabilitation of Cracked Steel Structures
* ENG,CMMI
* 04/01/2011,03/31/2016
* Kaspar Willam, University of Houston
* Standard Grant
* Yick Hsuan
* 03/31/2016
* USD 311,889.00

The objective of this project is to investigate the use of novel "self-
stressing" composite patches to retrofit such cracked steel structures. Steel
structures, such as bridge girders, are susceptible to fatigue cracking under
the effect of repeated loading conditions. These cracks grow with time and if
unchecked they can compromise structural integrity and potentially even lead to
complete collapse of the structure. The patches are made of fiber reinforced
polymer composites with embedded shape memory alloy strands which provide the
self pre-stressing properties of the patches. The patches will be bonded to the
surface of cracked steel structures using a structural adhesive to enhance the
fatigue lives of the retrofitted structures. To achieve this objective, the
project will be conducted in three phases. In the first phase, a series of shape
memory alloy composite patches will be tested to evaluate the effect of
different parameters on the patch pre-stressing characteristics. The second
phase will consists of testing small-scale and large-scale cracked structural
members reinforced with patches to quantify the fatigue life increase that can
be achieved in steel structures. In the third phase, a numerical model will be
developed to predict the behavior of cracked steel members that are repaired
using the self-stressing patches. The success of this project will lead to the
development of an innovative new approach for repairing cracked steel and other
metallic structures. The project will also establish a numerical framework to
predict the behavior of the retrofitted structures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
approach developed in this project to retrofit cracked structures has broad
applications in several fields including marine, aerospace, and offshore energy
structures. The research results will be broadly disseminated through the
development of course modules, presentation at national and international
conferences, and publication in archival technical journals. The project will
provide advanced training to graduate students through their involvement in the
project research work. The research team will work closely with existing
outreach programs at the University of Houston to recruit graduate students, and
provide mentorship to students from traditionally under-represented groups. The
research team will also interface with existing NSF-supported outreach programs
to provide educational opportunities and instructional materials to high-school
students and teachers.