* 1100430
* Collaborative Research:  Long Term Spatiotemporal Control to Investigate Dynamics in Xenopus Laevis Embryonic Development
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2015
* William Messner, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Jordan Berg
* 08/31/2015
* USD 340,255.00

This collaborative research project will develop a system for investigating
embryonic development. Specifically the team will develop a system for
controlling the chemical environment of nearly microscopic (~1/20th of an inch)
samples of embryonic tissues, such as from the African clawed frog, Xenopus
laevis, frequently used by biologists. By controlling the region of the tissue
that is exposed to different chemicals, and the time for which it is exposed,
the research team can gain unprecedented insight into the embryonic development
process. Our system will employ sophisticated independent control of five inlet-
ports supplying three different fluidic streams. This system will have a wide
range of applications for manipulation of the complex chemical environment of
engineered tissues. Deliverables include (1) the development of micro-fluidic
systems and control systems capable of regulating complex 2D and 3D flow
patterns, (2) a novel control algorithm design methodology for dealing with
uncertain dynamics, and (3) fluorescent biosensor tools for evaluating control
over the microfluidic environment of embryonic tissues.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will provide tools for tissue engineers to
precisely control chemical stimulation that may be useful for creating new
tissues for long term future clinical application. The work will combine
techniques that previously have been successfully implemented in
microfabrication and automatic control of disk drives. These tools may be used
to create complex patterns of chemical stimulation to growing cells for
manufacturing of engineered tissues. Dissemination of our results will also lead
to new devices with increased accuracies, reliability, and functionality for
commercial and basic science applications. In addition, this project will train
undergraduate and graduate students to become leaders in science and industry in
transdisciplinary fields including dynamic systems/controls, biology,
microtechnology, and engineering. The team will also reach out to
underrepresented K-12 students in academically challenged neighborhoods to build
their knowledge and their interest in STEM.