* 1100335
* Mechanics and Thermodynamics of Highly Compressed Lipid Monolayers
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/2011,05/31/2015
* Mark Borden, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* David Fyhrie
* 05/31/2015
* USD 310,000.00

The research objective of this award is to use a combination of biophysical,
colloid science and computational tools to investigate the mechanics of
condensed lipid monolayers and the underlying chemical and physical mechanisms
that control these properties. Lipid monolayers are nanometer-thick surfactant
membranes that reduce surface tension and enable the viscoelastic stabilization
of lung alveoli, a process necessary to produce rapid gas exchange in the lung
and reduce the work required to breath. Studies conducted under this award will
apply micrometer-scale gas bubble production and processing tools to manipulate
the molecular composition and dimensions of lipid membranes. Single microbubble
rheology experiments will be developed to investigate the contributions of lipid
chemistry and processing on monolayer microstructure, viscosity and elasticity
at high compressions previously unattainable with standard techniques. In
parallel, a surface rheology computational model will be developed to relate the
lipid molecular characteristics to overall monolayer thermodynamic and
mechanical properties.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If successful, these studies would
add significantly to the field's understanding of the molecular regulation of
alveolar lipid monolayer mechanics and illustrate the utility of computational
modeling in the design and analysis of experiments. The knowledge gained from
these efforts will also enhance the field?s ability to manipulate alveolar
structure and function by revealing design principles for lung surfactant
structure and function. This in turn may help drive the evolution of alveolar
mimics for biomedical applications employing microbubble contrast-enhanced
ultrasound imaging, ultrasound-guided drug delivery and intravascular gas
delivery. The education plan focuses on curriculum development in biocolloid
engineering at the undergraduate and graduate levels as well as creation of
partnerships between the awardee?s institution and state and local K-12 programs
geared to recruit and retain underrepresented minorities in the engineering
sciences. The education and research plans are integrated to expose younger
students to laboratory research and develop adaptive expertise in graduate
students.