* 1100648
* In situ Formation of Refractory Carbide Coatings with Protective Magneli Phases
* ENG,CMMI
* 05/01/2011,04/30/2015
* Thomas Scharf, University of North Texas
* Standard Grant
* Alexis Lewis
* 04/30/2015
* USD 293,992.00

The research objective of this award is to understand the mechanisms of how
defect structure in ceramic coatings (transition metal oxides and in situ formed
carbides) determines the thermal/oxidative and friction/wear properties in
cellular solids, such as carbon-based composites and foams. Specifically, this
project will explore (a) how interstitial carbide and oxide phases, such as ZrC
and ZrO2, provide thermal and oxidation resistance to carbon, and (b) how
lubricious, nanocrystalline layered ceramics, such as high basal stacking fault
density ZnO, and low crystallographic shear, oxygen deficient Magn√©li phases,
such as TiO2-x, mitigate friction and wear. In conjunction, classical molecular
dynamics simulations and ab initio Density Functional Theory calculations will
be implemented to study the interfacial behavior of C/ZrC/ZrO2 as well as to
characterize the defect chemistry, thermodynamic properties, and
mechanical/tribological behavior of the layered, low crystallographic shear
ceramic coatings. This research will help answer two important questions: (1)
Can the coating systems be processed with thermodynamically and kinetically
stable oxide and carbide phases and interfaces? (2) How will the defect
structure (planar stacking faults and vacancies/interstitials) of these phases
be able to accommodate interfacial shear while providing sufficient hardness and
elastic modulus?

If successful, the results of this research could also be applied and have
broader impact to other refractory oxide coatings that form in situ interstitial
carbide phases. Further enhancement in operating temperatures of carbon-based
composites and foams for aerospace and other industries is expected with these
protective coatings that require minimal processing and undergo in situ
modifications during use to improve mechanical and tribological properties.
Educational activities for graduate students will involve experimental and
modeling components aimed to understand the fundamental thermochemical
mechanisms of carbide and oxide formation and their oxidative, thermal and high
temperature properties. Additionally, undergraduate students will be actively
involved in this research through senior design projects. The project will
introduce ceramic science and surface engineering research to high school
sophomores attending the Texas Governor's School, a summer academic enrichment
camp at UNT. Broader impact will also be realized through contributions to an
NSF-funded cyberinfrastructure dedicated to friction: Atomic-scale Friction
Research and Education Synergy Hub (AFRESH).