* 1100537
* RUI: Response of Single- and Multi-Walled Fullerenes and Endohedral Fullerenes to Photons and Charged Particles
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2015
* HIMADRI CHAKRABORTY, Northwest Missouri State University
* Continuing Grant
* Ann Orel
* 08/31/2015
* USD 171,000.00

The encapsulation of an atom or an atomic cluster, or even a smaller fullerene
in a fullerene cage offers a unique natural laboratory in which to examine the
behavior of the guest system in confinement. Studies of these endofullerenes can
not only lead to intriguing effects at the atomic scale but also can probe
subtleties of quantum effects in the nanometer region. The endo-fullerenes also
hold the promise of exciting applications in areas including, quantum
computations, superconductivity, biomedical fields, drug delivery research,
magnetic resonance imaging, and organic photovoltaic devices. Further, the
discovery of endo-fullerenes in extraterrestrial environments indicates their
astrophysical relevance. Hence, understanding the influence of the confining
cage on the spectroscopy of the confined species and vice versa, are matters of
great scientific interest. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A theoretical study of the
response of these compounds to the external electromagnetic and charged particle
fields will be performed in the current research. By employing this, the roles
of (i) the collectivized plasmonic motion of electrons, (ii) the dopant-
fullerene hybridization, and (iii) the oscillations due to multipath
interferences between electrons liberated from various sites of the compound
will be investigated. Spectroscopy of fullerenes and endo-fullerenes by fast,
bare ion impact will also be considered to determine in detail the effects of
dipole and non-dipole collective motions, and the interference between various
multipole channels. Furthermore, calculations of the electron capture by
positron impact on fullerenes and endo-fullerenes, forming positroniums, will be
undertaken.