* 1100966
* Fully nonlinear elliptic and parabolic equations
* MPS,DMS
* 07/15/2011,06/30/2014
* Yu Yuan, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Bruce P. Palka
* 06/30/2014
* USD 240,000.00

This project concentrates on the study of special Lagrangian
&lt;br/&gt;equations, symmetric Hessian equations, Isaacs equations, complex
&lt;br/&gt;Monge-Ampere equations, and their parabolic versions (e.g.,
Lagrangian &lt;br/&gt;mean curvature flows). The theory of regularity and
solvability for fully &lt;br/&gt;nonlinear uniformly elliptic and parabolic
equations (with the convexity &lt;br/&gt;condition in general dimensions and
without the convexity hypothesis in &lt;br/&gt;dimension two) is well developed.
The concrete equations just listed &lt;br/&gt;either do not satisfy the
convexity condition or do not exhibit uniform &lt;br/&gt;ellipticity or
parabolicity. Only preliminary attempts have been made in &lt;br/&gt;the general
saddle cases. Substantial advances have been achieved for the
&lt;br/&gt;symmetric Hessian equations and the complex Monge-Ampere equations,
yet &lt;br/&gt;there is still no Schauder or Calderon-Zygmund theory for these
equations; &lt;br/&gt;and surprisingly the regularity problem for the quadratic
symmetric &lt;br/&gt;Hessian equations in general dimension still remains open.
This project &lt;br/&gt;seeks to address these fundamental
issues.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Investigations into the aforementioned equations
will further our &lt;br/&gt;knowledge of two closely related mathematical
fields, partial differential &lt;br/&gt;equations and differential geometry.
Moreover, the project will also have &lt;br/&gt;impact on the areas where these
equations arise. Special Lagrangian &lt;br/&gt;equations and complex Monge-
Ampere equations provide the mathematical &lt;br/&gt;foundation for mirror
symmetry in the string theory of modern physics, &lt;br/&gt;which is a unified
way to describe our physical universe. Solutions to &lt;br/&gt;Isaacs equations
lead to the optimal strategy for certain random &lt;br/&gt;processes, for
example, in engineering and finance. Hessian equations are &lt;br/&gt;also
related to nonlinear elasticity theory in mechanics, which studies
&lt;br/&gt;the mechanisms whereby a material that is stretched returns to its
&lt;br/&gt;original size and shape. Part of the research also involves
participation &lt;br/&gt;of graduate students.