* 1100135
* Multi-Scale Modeling of the Stochastic Micro-Mechanical Response of Fibrous Composite Materials Based on Local Estimation and Control of Modeling Errors
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/15/2011,09/30/2012
* Albert Romkes, University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* kara peters
* 09/30/2012
* USD 240,162.00

A multi-scale modeling methodology of the micro-mechanical response of fibrous
composites is established. The proposed work considers nonlinear elastostatics
problems in which there exists uncertainty in problem data such as material
characteristics, boundary data, and loading conditions. The approach is based on
the notion of model validation by controlling the modeling errors in terms of
stochastic micro-scale features that are instrumental in the initiation and
progression of micro-mechanical failure mechanisms. The research objectives are
to: 1) investigate several variations of multi-scale modeling techniques in
which easily computable homogenized material models are locally enhanced with
the stochastic micro-structure; 2) develop estimates of the modeling errors,
incurred by using the multi-scale surrogate descriptions; and 3) establish a
methodology that can address two types of uncertainty in the problem: those
governed by random variables with known probability distributions and those
provided in terms of worst-case scenarios.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader
societal benefits of the proposed work are evident from the realization that
heterogeneous media are encountered in many engineering disciplines such as:
electrical engineering (heterogeneous conducting media), biomechanics and
biomedical engineering (heterogeneities in soft tissue or bones), civil
engineering (concrete structures), or petroleum engineering (subsurface flow
through porous media). All those applications are inevitably accompanied with
uncertainty in the problem data, generally obtained through experimental
measurements (thus, inherently statistical in nature). Outreach initiatives on
the high school, undergraduate, and graduate levels are proposed.