* 1100427
* GOALI: Oxide Scale Development in Coated High-Temperature Alloys for Solid-Oxide Fuel Cell Interconnects
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/2011,09/30/2015
* Mark Aindow, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* Alexis Lewis
* 09/30/2015
* USD 310,274.00

The research objective of this Grant Opportunity for Academic Liaison with
Industry (GOALI) project is to elucidate the mechanisms that are responsible for
structural evolution in conductive oxide coatings on high-temperature alloy
interconnects for solid oxide fuel cells (SOFCs). The research will result in a
more fundamental understanding of the roles of interdiffusion, reaction layer
formation and applied electric field on the structural and electrical
characteristics of oxide coatings. The research approach utilizes pulsed laser
deposition to produce model coatings with the chemistries of current generation
SOFC coatings and interlayers but with morphologies that are better suited to
well-controlled mechanistic studies. Post-deposition structural development in
model coatings and interlayers will be characterized as a function of exposure
conditions using advanced ion- and electron-beam analysis techniques. The data
obtained from the model coatings/interlayers will be used as critical inputs to
multi-layer models of oxide scale development and properties. The successful
completion of this project will provide the basis for better predictive modeling
of lifetimes for existing coated alloy SOFC interconnects and of the properties
for new coatings with superior properties.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This GOALI
project is a collaboration between the University of Connecticut (UConn) and
United Technologies Research Center (UTRC) and will involve both full-time UConn
graduate students and UTRC employees pursuing UConn graduate degrees on a part-
time basis. These students will benefit both from formal graduate education and
from hands-on training through involvement in the research at both sites. The
students will also be involved in the broader educational outreach activities of
the group aimed at bringing an appreciation of MSE to local K-12 students. Key
results from the research will be disseminated through: publication in the open
literature, presentation at conferences, workshops held at UTRC, and integration
of examples into outreach materials.