* 1100900
* A Breakthrough Nanolithography Technique Using 'Electro-Fountain Pens'
* ENG,CMMI
* 04/01/2011,03/31/2016
* Indranath Dutta, Washington State University
* Standard Grant
* Khershed Cooper
* 03/31/2016
* USD 285,000.00

The research objective of this award is to develop a manufacturing process for
producing complex nanoscale circuits for future electronics and other
applications by "writing" with electrically activated nano-tip "fountain pens".
The process, termed "electro-fountain pen (EFP) lithography", takes advantage of
electromigration-induced flow of liquid metal, and enables continuous writing of
nanoscale patterns with a metallic liquid for making high quality electrical
circuits. The technique eliminates the main drawback of current tip-based
lithography techniques by being able to continuously deliver the writing
material to the tip without the need for frequent replenishment. Because the
flow is driven electrically, EFP lithography may be used to continuously
transport not only metallic liquids via electromigration, but also non-metallic
liquids by electrophoresis. The planned effort will develop the tool, optimize
the conditions for laying down adherent patterns of several materials on
different substrates, and study the physics of liquid electromigration and its
dependence on material and process parameters.

If successful, the benefit to society of this research will include the
development of a new nano-manufacturing process, which may eventually lead to
commercialization. The process has the potential to be a new and effective
method for making complex nano-patterns on substrates for applications ranging
from electronics to sensors to bio-molecular assaying, and is therefore likely
to have significant impact on the nation?s manufacturing base. In addition, this
effort will integrate research and education by advancing discovery and
understanding by graduate students. Undergraduate students will participate in
the research through the Research Experience for Undergraduates program, and
high school interns will be hired to assist with the aim of attracting them to
engineering. Results of the project will be broadly disseminated through faculty
and student participation at meetings of learned societies and grantees'
conferences of the Civil, Mechanical and Manufacturing Innovation division of
NSF.