* 1100890
* Protective Action Triggers
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2011,06/30/2015
* Thomas Cova, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Dennis Wenger
* 06/30/2015
* USD 419,784.00

The goal of this research is to improve our understanding of the factors and
thresholds that lead emergency managers to recommend protective actions to the
public in the face of an environmental threat. Three key questions need to be
addressed in this context: 1) who should take action, 2) what is the best
action, and 3) when should this action occur? As straightforward as these
questions may seem, the stakes can be extremely high and they are frequently
addressed under time pressure and uncertainty. The focus of this project is
"trigger points" (or triggers), a novel decision aid used by emergency managers
to combine an event (e.g. time, place, condition) with a recommended protective
action (e.g. evacuate, shelter-in-place, refuge shelter) for a threatened sub-
population, such that the action is recommended if the event occurs. Triggers
therefore provide a valuable framework for addressing the three questions noted
above, and their analysis represents a potential leap in improving our
understanding of emergency warnings. The objectives of this research are to: 1)
extend current theory on protective actions to include triggers; 2) identify the
factors that determine how a trigger is set in space and time, the relative
importance of the factors, and the decision rule(s) used to combine the factors;
and 3) develop and test cognitive and physical models of how triggers are set
and detected. The research is based on a three-step experimental design
comprised of: 1) interviews and observation to elicit knowledge about the types,
nature, and efficacy of triggers, 2) experiments with a web-based wildfire
scenario simulator to ascertain relevant factors in setting triggers and their
respective importance to decision makers, and 3) a comparative study between
triggers set by experts and ones derived through physical
modeling.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The results of this project will advance our
knowledge regarding a critical yet under-researched decision aid in protective-
action decision making. The project will strengthen ties between the disaster
research and management communities, and the results will be disseminated to
practitioners through presentations, workshops and trade journals with the goal
of improving protective-action training and ultimately public safety. This
project will also enhance graduate and undergraduate educational infrastructure
at the University of Utah while strengthening interdisciplinary collaboration at
the Center for Natural and Technological Hazards. In addition, undergraduate
educational modules will be developed using the wildfire simulator for classes
in Emergency Management, Naturalistic Decision Making, and Fire Human-
Environment Interactions. Finally, all software and data from this project will
be made available to the disaster research community via a project website.