* 1100791
* Effects of Immediate Biochemcial Environments on the Structure and Function of Aortic Elastin
* ENG,CMMI
* 05/01/2011,04/30/2015
* Yanhang Zhang, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* David Fyhrie
* 04/30/2015
* USD 380,000.00

The research objective of this award is to study the structural and functional
changes of elastin due to in vitro elastin lipid interactions and glycation. As
one of the major structural proteins of the body, elastin is essential to
accommodate physiological deformation and provide elastic support for blood
vessels. Elastin is remarkably long lived, but it can suffer damage from the
cumulative effects of chemical exposure. End products or side chain
modifications resulting from elastin lipid interactions and glycation compromise
the mechanical properties of elastin by altering elastin's mobility. Changes in
the elastic and viscoelastic properties of aortic elastin due to the effects of
immediate biochemical environments will be studied. The molecular basis of
possible intra- and extrafibrillar compartment changes will be explored using
Raman and FT-IR microspectroscopy. A multi-scale mechanobiological constitutive
model will be created to incorporate the effects of mechanical loading and
biochemical environment in predicting the macroscopic elastic and viscoelastic
properties of elastin.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Results from these studies will
advance our understanding of the role of elastin mechanics in vascular
remodeling. Changes in the mechanical properties of elastin have important
medical and physiological consequences. Many pathological conditions involve
significant remodeling of elastin and thus altered mechanical and physiochemical
functions of tissues. Knowledge of the relationship between molecular level
alterations and elastin's mechanical functionality is integral to understanding
its performance in living biological systems. The broad interdisciplinary nature
of this project will greatly benefit the undergraduate/graduate students trained
through this project. Research results will be disseminated through journal
publications and conference presentations, and will also be incorporated into
undergraduate/graduate teaching. We plan to integrate several engineering
activities into the outreach programs at Boston University. The goal is to help
young women students build self-confidence and a love for science and
engineering.