* 1100572
* Collaborative Research: Stronger than Glass Fibers; Stiffer than Steel Wires: A New Perspective into the Mechanics of Cellulose Nanocrystals
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2014
* John Simonsen, Oregon State University
* Continuing Grant
* Aleksandr Simonian
* 08/31/2014
* USD 54,000.00

ID: MPS/DMR/BMAT(7623) 1100806 PI: Shahbazian-Yassar, Reza ORG: Michigan Tech

ID: MPS/DMR/BMAT(7623) 1100572 PI: Simonsen, John ORG: Oregon State

Title: Collaborative Research: Stronger than Glass Fibers, Stiffer than Steel
Wires: A New Perspective into the Mechanics of Cellulose Nanocrystals

INTELLECTUAL MERIT: Cellulose nanocrystals (CNCs) are highly crystalline organic
polymers that can be extracted from natural materials. They are stiffer than
aluminum and theoretical calculations place their tensile strength at 7500 MPa,
higher than glass fibers or steel. Inasmuch as these crystals are biocompatible,
lightweight, low cost, and sustainable they offer potential for applications in
biomedical materials, energy technologies, electronics, and
microelectromechanical systems devices. To date, no experimental tests have been
utilized to investigate the strength properties of CNCs. This proposal aims to
fill these gaps. In order to evaluate such properties the underlying mechanisms
responsible for nanoscale mechanics should be determined. In-situ experiments
and multiscale models for deformations in small-scale components can open
possibilities for improved design and applications of CNCs. The objectives of
this research are (1) to explore the nanoscale mechanics of individual CNCs as a
function of the biological source, (2) to determine the dependence of CNC's
mechanical properties on cellulose crystal dimensions, and (3) to fully
characterize the elastic moduli of CNCs as function of their crystallographic
orientations. To meet these objectives, nanomechanical properties will be
investigated through the use of a novel in-situ characterization technique that
enables atomic force microscopy (AFM) experiments inside the chamber of a
transmission electron microscope. The in-situ data will then be used to develop
and validate the continuum mechanics and molecular dynamics models of CNCs.

BROADER IMPACTS: CNC-based materials are expected to have beneficial uses in a
variety of technical applications, such as composite materials, packaging,
tissue engineering scaffolds, drug delivery vectors, Li-ion batteries, and
electronic displays. Several exchanges of OSU and Michigan Tech students are
planned to promote multidisciplinary education (microscopy, cellulose
nanocrystals preparation, and computational mechanics). The PIs will recruit
female and minority undergraduate research students through the Michigan
Community College/University Partnership program at Michigan Tech and the
Saturday Academy's Apprenticeships in Science and Engineering Program at OSU.
The Michigan Tech PI will also participate in outreach activities for local high
school female and underrepresented students during the Engineering Scholars
Program at Michigan Tech. The Oregon State PI will increase local area awareness
by providing lectures/discussions on Oregon State Public Radio. In-situ videos
of microscopy experiments will also be made available to the community via
YouTube©, ACS Chemical and Engineering News, and the NanoHuB© network.