* 1100695
* Modelling and Analysis of Gene Duplication
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2011,08/31/2017
* Snehalata Huzurbazar, University of Wyoming
* Continuing Grant
* Junping Wang
* 08/31/2017
* USD 750,761.00

Gene duplication is the driving force behind evolution, and it is a central
topic in evolutionary bioinformatics. The project on modeling and analysis of
gene duplication will consider (i) biological modeling of gene duplication,
including processes for the birth and death of genes, and processes affecting
the retention of duplicate genes, and (ii) statistical modeling of the data on
retained gene duplicates. In addition, it will also address the incorporation of
both models so that inference can be made about aspects of the biological
mechanisms. The larger context for this project is to provide better modeling of
gene trees as part of the gene and species trees reconciliation problem.
Statistical modeling issues of measurement error, incorporation of data from
different sources, and the analysis of data on trees will also be addressed as
they arise practically.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI will train and mentor
graduate students and a post-doc in statistical modeling and practice as it
arises in the analysis of gene duplication data. Technical skills and
methodology needed for this analysis can be transferred to other applications in
the larger area of bioinformatics and other data-rich fields. The project will
also have broader impacts in the communication of statistical information,
especially in a biological context, to a larger audience. The audience will
include K-12 teachers who obtain professional development from the Science and
Math Teaching Center at the University of Wyoming, participants in the Wyoming
State Science Fair, students at the University of Wyoming and members of the
larger community surrounding the university who can participate in public
discussions of statistical issues in current biological/medical topics in the
news. Other student populations such as junior high and high school participants
in the Women in Science conferences at the University of Wyoming and
undergraduate participants in the ongoing summer Bioinformatics program at the
University of Wyoming will also be included in interactions as part of this
project.