* 1100622
* GOALI:  Continuous Coating of Ultrafine Drug Particles by Heterogeneous Polymer Nucleation in a Hollow Fiber Membrane Module
* ENG,CMMI
* 05/01/2011,04/30/2015
* Kamalesh Sirkar, New Jersey Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Khershed Cooper
* 04/30/2015
* USD 349,942.00

This Grant Opportunity for Academic Liaison with Industry (GOALI) Program award
provides funding for developing a new method for continuous film coating of
nano-sized drug particles to produce large amounts of individually coated
particles having a desired layer of a biodegradable polymer coating. The coating
method utilizes hollow fiber membrane devices employing either cooling
crystallization and/or antisolvent crystallization. Both designs will enable
controlled precipitation of a dissolved polymer from solution onto nanoparticles
in suspension by heterogeneous polymer nucleation. A model system consisting of
silica nanoparticles will be suspended in an organic solvent containing the
dissolved polymer such as Eudragit or PLGA. Such a solution, with or without
other additives such as surfactants to prevent agglomeration, will be subjected
to polymer precipitation onto the nanoparticle surface to form an appropriate
film coating. The hollow fiber devices should allow continuous processing of
polymer coating of the model systems and will be tested with pharmaceutically
relevant systems supplied by the industrial partner Bristol-Myers Squibb (BMS).
The polymer coatings will be characterized by SEM, EDX and TEM-EELS electron
microscopic techniques; mathematical models will be developed to predict the
heterogeneous nucleation-driven coating processes. The polymer coating enables
the drug release in a sustained/controlled manner, improves drug bioavailability
and patient compliance by reducing the drug administration frequency, allows
nano-sized drugs particles to overcome a mucus barrier and target specific body
organs, and prevents immune cells (macrophages) from engulfing and eliminating
nano-sized drug particles in the bloodstream.

If successful, this research will develop a continuous, scalable, nanoparticle
coating system that can produce large quantities of polymer-coated nanoparticles
while operating at temperatures and pressures far closer to ambient than those
relying on supercritical fluids. Such a process should find widespread
application in the pharmaceutical and other industries. Working in partnership
with BMS, these processes will be scaled-up and commercialization possibilities
will be explored.