* 1100383
* Stochastic Mixed-Integer Optimization: Polyhedral Theory, Large-Scale Algorithms and Computations
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2011,06/30/2014
* Suvrajeet Sen, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Edwin Romeijn
* 06/30/2014
* USD 230,000.00

This award focuses on a class of constrained optimization problems in which data
are uncertain, and some decisions need to be made before uncertainty about the
data clears (first-stage). The remaining decisions are made once the data
becomes more reliable (second-stage). In addition, these problems involve both
discrete and continuous decisions, and hence are referred to as Two-stage
Stochastic Mixed-Integer Programs (SMIP). The goal of this project is to
integrate recently developed integer programming tools based on multi-term
disjunctions, and stochastic programming ideas based on decomposition and
coordination. These tools will provide the basis for sequential convexification
of SMIP problems, and will allow their solution via a finite sequence of
approximations. These algorithms will be implemented and rigorously tested on a
wide variety of instances.

If successful, this project will allow engineers to add greater intelligence to
software that is used in engineering design, contingency planning in
manufacturing, military operations planning, and many more. For these and other
real-world engineering problems, the exact setting of future operations is
impossible to predict accurately, and SMIP provides a formal basis to cope with
the uncertainty. While these issues are ubiquitous in most operations, there is
a serious paucity of methodologies that can solve such computational problems.
The widespread applicability of the proposed methodology is expected to
transform the way in which discrete decisions are made in an uncertain
environment. Moreover, results from this project will build a unifying theory
for discrete and continuous optimization under uncertainty.