* 1100082
* Collaborative Research:  The Optimal Timing of Kidney Exchanges: A Markov Game Approach
* ENG,CMMI
* 05/01/2011,04/30/2015
* Mark Roberts, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Diwakar Gupta
* 04/30/2015
* USD 280,000.00

The objective of this collaborative research project is to provide much more
accurate valuations of potential paired kidney exchanges (PKEs). Given an
arbitrary-sized PKE, consider the question of when (in terms of patient health)
an exchange should occur. An exchange is only possible if every patient in the
exchange desires it. This problem is naturally formulated as an infinite-horizon
stochastic game. Analyzing this stochastic game reveals several unique features
(e.g. the exchange probabilities completely characterize the equilibria, and one
can restrict attention to equilibria in which only one patient randomizes). One
can then demonstrate a one-to-one correspondence between the equilibria of this
game and the feasible points of a certain mixed-integer program. Extensions
include iterative approaches to this game, as well as modeling extensions, such
as cadaveric kidney arrivals and altruistic donors. This goal will be
accomplished in three ways: 1) By comparing quality-adjusted life expectancies,
it will value exchanges where the patients and donors are well matched more than
others; 2) It will consider dynamic patient health; and 3) It allows patients to
determine when the transplantations should occur.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Given the
severe shortage of kidneys and the potential of paired kidney exchanges, this
research can lead to much better matching between patients and donors. Medical
researchers, graduate students and undergraduate students will benefit from this
research as it blends important aspects of operations research, medicine, and
economics.