* 1100409
* GOALI:  Fundamental  Understanding  and Suppression  of  Microcracking in Three Dimensional  Woven  Composites  During  Curing
* ENG,CMMI
* 04/01/2011,03/31/2015
* Todd Gross, University of New Hampshire
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Kramer
* 03/31/2015
* USD 437,899.00

This Grant Opportunity for Academic Liaison with Industry (GOALI) project will
provide fundamental understanding of how local stress concentrations and
formation of damage during curing are related to the weave architecture and
fabrication parameters of three-dimensional woven composites. Comprehensive
numerical modeling tools to predict microcracking during matrix cure and under
service conditions will be developed and validated by experiments. Experimental
studies will be performed on the specimens specifically fabricated in industrial
setting to support the modeling effort and gain a better understanding of the
mechanisms of resin pocket cracking. They will include microstructure
characterization using optical and SEM microscopy, microcomputed tomography,
traditional mechanical testing, residual stress determination by material
removal, and multiaxial stress tests on neat resin. Guidelines for safe design
of three-dimensional woven composites will be proposed.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Advances in understanding and modeling of microcracking in
3D woven composites during resin curing will lead to improvements in technology
of manufacturing and ?tailoring? of these materials for various applications.
Demonstrating that they can be produced free of microcracks with inexpensive
resins will greatly expand their utilization in aerospace, automotive, ground
transportation, wind energy, and recreational marine industries. The work will
be conducted in close collaboration between the University of New Hampshire and
Albany Engineered Composites, Inc., and will be disseminated through journal
publications, conference presentations and two industrial workshops.