* 1100166
* Janus Nanoparticle Nanocomposites
* ENG,CMMI
* 05/01/2011,04/30/2014
* Christopher Li, Drexel University
* Standard Grant
* Alexis Lewis
* 04/30/2014
* USD 352,319.00

The objective of this research project is to better understand the structure-
property relationship in polymer nanocomposites (PNCs). The results from this
project can then be used to guide future PNC design. PNCs have attracted
substantial attention since the first reports in 1980s. Nanofillers with at
least one dimension below 100 nm have been included in polymeric matrices at
relatively low volume additions (< 5%), leading to profound property
enhancements of the polymer. To better understand the structure-property
relationship in PNCs, it is critical to obtain controlled particle aggregates in
a PNC system with defined size and size distribution. In this research, the PI
aims to use novel Janus nanoparticles (JNPs) coated with polymer brushes as the
model particle system to form PNCs. Using JNPs instead of symmetrically
functionalized nanoparticles, well defined nanoparticle ensembles in the polymer
matrix can be achieved; hence JNP nanocomposites provide a unique and
unprecedented model system to decouple the interface and structural effects. The
correlation between particle ensemble structure and mechanical properties of
PNCs will therefore be unambiguously established. This research is the first to
systematically study the aggregation of JNPs in polymeric matrixes. Furthermore,
many other properties of PNCs such as electrical, optical properties are also
largely dependent on nanoparticle aggregation. Therefore, this research will
also benefit using PNCs in other advanced applications.

PNC is a fast growing field which has dramatic impacts on our daily life. PNC
can lead to stronger, lighter, less expensive materials for various applications
ranging from aircraft to sporting goods. This research, if successful, will
dramatically impact the nanoparticle and PNC research field because it could
help design and synthesize PNCs in a more controlled and efficient way. PNCs
with enhanced performance can therefore be fabricated. The educational component
of the project includes: (1) mentoring graduate, undergraduate students and
post-doc researchers; (2) updating/developing graduate courses; and (3)
involving high school students and teachers, particularly under-represented
populations, in the research activities.