* 1100872
* Mesoscale Printer
* ENG,CMMI
* 05/01/2011,04/30/2014
* Eugene Chow, Palo Alto Research Center Incorporated
* Standard Grant
* Khershed Cooper
* 04/30/2014
* USD 405,000.00

This grant provides funding for basic studies into fundamental techniques for
enabling a generalized microchip assembly process. The research strategy is to
learn from industrial xerography printing, which electrostatically assembles
~108 charge toner particles on a sheet of paper in &lt;1 sec for under 1
cent/page. Viewed as an assembly technology, xerography is a million times
faster than state of the art robotic pick and place. This work will explore,
through modeling and experimentation, how best to place charge on generic
microchips and then use dynamic electric fields to orient and transport the
chips into position. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If successful, the results of this
research could guide the future design of a generalized manufacturing tool for
bridging the gap between optimized nanoscale devices and meso/macroscopic
systems. The long term vision is to enable a "printer" where the "ink" is high
performance prefabricated active devices and the "paper image output" is a large
area functional system, not possible with existing manufacturing techniques. Ink
examples include nanotube/nanowire based sensors, other functional devices with
nano composition, low noise amplifiers, light sources, high speed circuit chips
with submicron features or ceramic blocks. Functional system examples include
nano based sensor arrays, high performance flexible electronics, phased arrays
(metamaterials), new thermoelectric composites, or smart paper.