* 1100146
* Collaborative Research: Dynamic Disproportionate Collapse in Flat-Plate Buildings
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/2011,05/31/2015
* Sarah Orton, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Yick Hsuan
* 05/31/2015
* USD 180,000.00

The goal of this collaborative research is to provide much needed experimental
data and effective modeling approaches for the disproportionate collapse
analysis of older reinforced concrete flat-plate buildings that are commonly
used for large residential and office complexes. Experimental and analytical
studies will be conducted to examine the performance of such flat-plate
structures under the scenario of a sudden loss of a column during an extreme
loading event. The experiments will be performed on laterally restrained slab-
column connections under static and dynamic loading and multi-panel specimens
subjected to sudden load release. The tests will be conducted to provide data to
define key parameters needed for analytical modeling, to identify the local
strength and deformation capacity of the flat-plate systems, and to study the
post-punching behavior of slab-column connections. Finite element simulations
will be employed to facilitate the design of experiments, to determine local
deformation demands, to define failure propagation characteristics, and to
examine the effects of other design parameters not considered in the
experiments. Simplified analytical tools will also be developed for quick
evaluation of the progressive collapse resilience of flat-plate buildings
without conducting a detailed finite element analysis. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
research in this project will lead to improved design guidelines for safer flat-
plate buildings under extreme loading events. The data obtained from this study
will also help in the development of appropriate rehabilitation approaches for
flat-plate structures that are vulnerable to disproportionate collapse. Research
findings will be disseminated to the structural engineering community through
publications, presentations, and websites created for this project. High school
students and undergraduate students will be engaged in this project to enhance
their research interests in engineering. Research results will be integrated
into the graduate level courses related to slab structures, and the project will
provide advanced training to graduate student through their involvement in the
project research activities. &lt;br/&gt;