* 1100964
* q-Series 2011: an international conference on q-series partitions and special functions
* MPS,DMS
* 02/01/2011,01/31/2013
* Andrew Sills, Georgia Southern University Research and Service Foundation, Inc
* Standard Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 01/31/2013
* USD 20,000.00

Georgia Southern University in Statesboro, GA will host q-series 2011: A
Conference on q-series, Partitions, and Special Functions over a three day
period from March 14-16, 2011. This conference will be the sixth in a series of
international conferences on q-series and related topics held in the
Southeastern United States. The previous five successful conferences were all
held at the University of Florida in Gainesville (1999, 2003, 2004, 2008, 2009).
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The conference immediately follows the AMS Southeast
Sectional Meeting at Georgia Southern March 12-13, to make it convenient for
interested parties to attend both events. There will be seven plenary speakers,
who will give 50 minute talks; and about twenty-three 20-minute speakers. One of
the main goals of the conference is bring together mathematicians from around
the world who are interested and q-series and related topics to learn about each
other's current research, and to facilitate collaborations among them. Talks
will be presented by mathematicians from the level of graduate student through
Professor Emeritus, and every level in between. The conference will also honor
the lifetime achievements of two distinguished mathematicians, Mourad E. H.
Ismail and Dennis W. Stanton.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The theory of partitions and
q-series lies in the intersection of number theory, combinatorics, and classical
analysis, and has applications in physics, computer science, and vertex operator
algebra theory. Speakers will present talks which collectively will cover the
breadth of this wide and deep subject area.