* 1100177
* Collaborative Research:  Enhanced Immersive Technology to Improve Collaborative Decision Making
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2011,06/30/2014
* Deborah Thurston, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Diwakar Gupta
* 06/30/2014
* USD 274,193.00

The research objective of this collaborative award is to explore and evaluate
new design processes, based on immersive technology, that support design team
interaction in ways that result in designs that could not be achieved with
traditional interfaces. These methods will be grounded in two distinct research
fields: analytic methods for tradeoff analysis under uncertainty (University of
Illinois) and the use of virtual reality techniques for product design (Iowa
State University). Using these new methods, designers will be able to see and,
where appropriate, feel the tradeoffs resulting from potential design changes in
multiple realms and over the entire product lifecycle. The three major realms
include: a visual and tactile sense of attribute tradeoffs, a sense of the
difficulty of operations such as disassembly or repair, and time-lapse
visualization of the effect of uncertainty. Test-beds for John Deere and Boeing
will by employed. The impact of this research will be to provide a powerful new
approach to complex product/system design which utilizes both analytical methods
and immersive design computer technologies.

If successful, these approaches will result in the creation of unique new
products, as the far reaching effects of potential design changes will be seen,
felt and experienced by members of the design team. Resources will be used more
efficiently, since their economic, technical and environmental value throughout
the product lifecycle will be visually represented for the design team. A set of
design case studies will be developed and made freely available on the web for
educational purposes. These case studies will be integrated into engineering-
oriented industrially sponsored senior design courses. With the case studies'
special emphasis on a realistic experience of the collaborative design process,
anticipated impacts include increased participation and retention of women in
engineering. New technology will be transferred to industry through
student/industry projects. Design of the educational materials will follow
current guidelines on "changing the conversation" to reflect the diversity of
engineering in all aspects.