* 1100260
* GOALI: Nonlinear Vibration Absorbers for Multi-Frequency Excitation
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2011,07/31/2017
* Steven Shaw, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Atul Kelkar
* 07/31/2017
* USD 356,000.00

The goal of this Grant Opportunity for Academic Liaison with Industry (GOALI)
project is to investigate dynamic interactions in systems composed of multiple
vibration absorbers that are tuned to different frequencies. Most tuned absorber
devices are designed to reduce vibrations near a given frequency, typically to
suppress the resonance of a troublesome vibration mode. If one uses a set of
absorbers tuned to different frequencies, for example, to address multiple
vibration modes, nonlinear dynamic interactions between absorbers can occur,
causing a significant reduction in the effectiveness of the absorber system.
Thus, optimal design of multi-frequency absorber systems requires a fundamental
understanding of these interactions, so that they can be avoided. The research
program is aimed at developing this knowledge base and implementing it to reduce
multi-frequency automotive powertrain torsional vibrations that occur, for
example, in engines that employ cylinder deactivation. The approach involves a
combination of physical modeling, analysis by perturbation methods and computer
simulations, experimental verification, and development of guidelines for
meeting performance specifications by selection of absorber system parameters,
specifically, tunings and inertias.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The results obtained
will extend the knowledge base for vibration absorbers to situations with multi-
frequency excitations, which will allow for improved effectiveness of absorber
systems over a wide range of operating conditions. The university and industrial
partners will work in close cooperation to develop absorber systems that will
facilitate the implementation of fuel-saving technologies for automotive
engines, by allowing them to operate in regimes with high efficiency that are
otherwise plagued with vibration problems. The results of the research will be
made widely accessible by technical publications and presentations. The research
activity will also be described, in the general context of energy conservation
technologies, by the university PIs and their graduate students in summer
outreach programs geared to middle and high school students.