* 1100807
* Multi-axis Parallel-Kinematic Motion Systems with a Large Dynamic Range
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2015
* Shorya Awtar, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Zhijian Pei
* 08/31/2015
* USD 330,694.00

The objective of this award is to create a machine design methodology that
simultaneously enables large motion range (10 millimeter) and nanometric
precision in multi-axis, flexure-based motion systems. The research approach
will include the use of constraint-based design methods to conceive novel
parallel-kinematic physical architectures that inherently take into account the
geometric constraints and limitations associated with flexure bearings,
actuators and sensors. Innovations in dual-winding voice coil actuation and
complementary sensing will be employed to overcome the traditional signal to
noise and distortion ratio limits in these components. Feedback control schemes
that address the unique challenges associated with large dynamic range, such as
non-linear behavior, non-collocated sensing and actuation, and noise and
disturbance sensitivity, will be investigated and implemented. A concurrent
optimization of the physical and control systems will be conducted to meet the
targeted performance in flexure-based motion systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Even
though existing flexure-based motion systems are inherently capable of high
precision, their small motion range (approximately 100 microns per axis)
restricts several applications including scanning probe microscopy,
nanometrology and direct-write lithography. The proposed large-range, high-
precision motion systems, when incorporated within scanning probe microscopy
techniques, will enable seamless imaging of large areas (10 by 10 millimeters)
without any stitching errors, while maintaining nanometric image resolution.
This will extend the use of such imaging techniques in practical industrial
settings, for example, inspection and process control in semiconductor, LCD
flat-panel, and magnetic disk-drive fabrication industries. The proposed motion
systems will also serve the field of nanometrology by enabling the creation of
coordinate measuring machines with nanometric uncertainty. The educational
outreach in this project will be carried out via professional tutorials on high
precision motion systems offered at engineering conferences, graduate and
undergraduate level curriculum development, and a new exhibit at the local
science museum for K-12 children.