* 1100131
* Collaborative Reserach:  Geotextile Tubes for the Sustainable Dewatering
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2017
* Shobha Bhatia, Syracuse University
* Standard Grant
* Richard Fragaszy
* 08/31/2017
* USD 387,753.00

The objective of this research project is to develop polysaccharide-based
alternatives to synthetic polyacrylamide-derived polymer flocculants, and to
explore the possibility of using natural fiber-based geotextiles for the
dewatering application. The dredging of sediments from harbors, lakes, canals,
tailings ponds, and other bodies of water has attracted a significant amount of
public interest in recent years. Dredged sediments are generally high in water
content that must be disposed of in environmentally and economically sustainable
ways. The handling and disposal of these materials typically require dewatering,
the process whereby liquid is removed from the materials to increase the percent
solids to acceptable levels. A decade ago, the dewatering of high water content
materials (1-10 percent dry solids) was performed almost exclusively with
settling ponds, mechanical presses, and centrifuges. More recently, geotextile
tubes have been successfully used for dewatering high water content materials by
many industries. The need to maximize the retention of materials and minimize
the time required for dewatering has led to the common addition of synthetic
cationic or anionic acrylamide-derived polymers in geotextile tube applications.
While these polymers have become an essential component of geotextile tube
dewatering, concerns exist regarding their safety. In addition, there is a wide
disparity in the performance indices and test methods that are currently being
used to evaluate geotextile tube performance. This project will be the first
systematic study of its kind which aims to develop polysaccharide-based
alternatives to synthetic polyacrylamide-derived polymer flocculants, and to
explore the possibility of using natural fiber-based geotextiles for the
dewatering application. The acute toxicity of natural and synthetic polymer
flocculants will be tested using the fish embryo toxicity test with zebrafish.
The study will also include bench-scale and pilot-scale simulation tests on
sediment with clay minerals and organic matter. The tests will be critically
evaluated and a new performance standard for the evaluation of geotextile tubes
for dewatering sediments will be developed. A mathematical model which
incorporates the fundamental properties of sediment, polymers, and geotextiles
will be developed to evaluate the long-term performance of geotextile
tubes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project addresses an important problem related
to the dredging, the dewatering of dredged materials in an efficient, safe and
sustainable manner. Webinars will be developed to provide an overview of the use
of geotextile tubes, their benefits, and the findings from this study. The
webinars will be advertised through national organizations, such as the North
American Geosynthetics Society (NAGS) and the American Society of Civil
Engineers (ASCE). The PIs will present their research results at the annual ASTM
D-35 committee meetings and will take an active role in developing performance
standards for the bench-scale tests used for the dewatering evaluation of
geotextile tubes. Two middle school teachers will be involved in the project.
The teachers will develop teaching modules, in collaboration with the PIs, which
will be used to disseminate information on geotextile tubes to middle-school
students.