* 1100755
* Workshop on Applications of Nanotechnology in the Water Sector:Emerging Opportunities and Challenges for Water Treatment and Reuse, Monte  Verita, Switzerland, May 15-18, 2011
* ENG,CBET
* 02/01/2011,01/31/2012
* Mark Wiesner, William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* Debra Reinhart
* 01/31/2012
* USD 27,389.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Title: Workshop on Applications of
Nanotechnology in the Water Sector: Emerging Opportunities and Challenges for
Water Treatment and Reuse&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Principal Investigator: Pedro
Alvarez&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Institution: Rice University
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Proposal No: CBET-1100755&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The IWA
Specialist group on "Nano and Water" will host a 3-day international workshop on
?Applications of Nanotechnology in the Water Sector?, to contribute towards
sustainable water management and global water security. This workshop will be
partially sponsored by the Swiss host institutions ETH and EAWAG. The workshop
will address issues of research &amp; education arising from the interface of
nanotechnology and water engineering in a meaningful and focused dialogue, and
provide valuable mentorship and international networking opportunities to
emerging leaders and young researchers in this rapidly growing field through an
integrated experience. The funding requested from NSF would be used to subsidize
travel by US researchers especially junior faculty and postdocs, who would
greatly benefit from this unique opportunity to share knowledge and technologies
in this emerging field and identify research priorities. Topics to discuss
include: (1) Nanosorbents; (2) Nanocatalysts, bio and redox -active NP; (3)
Dendritic polymers / Biopolymers; (4) Multifunctional membranes (including
nanostructured membranes); (5) Sensors / Monitoring systems; and (6) Safety
Issues.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts will result from the active
engagement of the workshop?s participants. This engagement will undoubtedly
enhance and strengthen the opportunities for and interest in international,
interdisciplinary as well as academic-industrial collaboration on environmental
applications of nanomaterials. In addition, the workshop will provide a solid
foundation for the academic community?s future: (a) involvement in supporting
and furthering CBET?s vision, mission, and goals; and (b) collaboration in
research and education programs, projects, and activities at greater and closer
levels. Thus, this workshop will not only help participants to craft better
proposals and compete more effectively, but it will also contribute to the
overall development of young faculty members.