* 1100356
* RUI: Controlled Biaxial Deformation in Lightweight Alloys at Elevated Temperatures
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/15/2011,06/30/2017
* Russell Warley, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* kara peters
* 06/30/2017
* USD 219,760.00

This Research in Undergraduate Institutions (RUI) project aims to advance the
current state of material characterization via a comprehensive experimental
approach that is based on biaxial loading. Metallic materials undergo biaxial
stretching during sheet metal forming operations, yet efforts on biaxial testing
are overshadowed by those based on the uniaxial loading case. A customized
apparatus capable of deforming test specimens at controlled biaxial stretching
ratios will be constructed. It will incorporate a heating system to facilitate
testing at high temperatures, and an optical strain measurement system for the
accurate evaluation of biaxial strains. Detailed biaxial stretching tests will
then be carried out on multiple materials, covering a wide range of testing
conditions. The collected data is essential to produce mathematical equations
that can accurately describe the behavior of the investigated materials. The
research will focus on lightweight alloys (Magnesium, Aluminum, and Titanium)
because their weight-saving properties make them increasingly critical to the
automotive and aerospace industries.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will be
executed at an institution of primary undergraduate education; it will therefore
offer a unique opportunity for promoting students involvement in state-of-the-
art research. The testing apparatus will support and enrich several courses and
laboratories, in multiple engineering programs. It will also promote
collaborative research activities within the college, especially within the
newly-established "Energy" and "Medical Plastics Research" Centers. Aided by the
current ties with General Motors, this research will serve the needs of the
automotive sheet metal forming industry, and contribute to the development of a
much-needed biaxial testing standard.