* 1100458
* An Adaptive Leak Detection and Risk Analysis Framework for Urban Water Distribution Systems
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/15/2011,07/31/2016
* E. Downey Brill, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* yanfeng ouyang
* 07/31/2016
* USD 291,122.00

The primary goal of this project is to understand how routine measurements of
pressure, flow and water quality data could be used to characterize leaks and
contaminant intrusion in urban water distribution systems and illustrate how
this information could be used to aid in the risk assessment of these systems.
Research will be conducted in adaptive simulation methods and optimization
algorithms enabled by high performance computing to develop a quantitative
framework for leak detection and contaminant intrusion characterization that
utilizes real time pressure, flow, and water quality data. In addition, this
framework will integrate new methodologies for incorporating spatially varying
macro indicators and demand uncertainty. The research will also provide a risk
analysis capability for analyzing economic and public health risks associated
with gradual leaks and contaminant intrusion during routine operations. This
quantitative prototype framework is envisioned for use by decision-makers to
generate and identify operational strategies as well as to develop long-term
maintenance and expansion plans. In addition, it will enable decision-makers to
evaluate the risk reduction potential of different response, retrofit and
maintenance actions. In collaboration with a major water utility in North
Carolina, this quantitative prototype framework will be applied and validated
using data from a mid-sized urban area. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If successful,
this project will address one of the nation's critical infrastructure security
priorities in a real setting and contribute to the development of adaptive
simulation methods and optimization algorithms that are enabled by harnessing
the power of high-end computing resources. The computational framework that is
formulated and implemented through this research project will set the stage for
using emerging automated data collection systems for real time water
distribution infrastructure condition assessment. The research methods and tools
will also be made available via web-accessible interfaces for instructional and
outreach purposes.