* 1100279
* A Unified Statistical Framework for the Identification of Rare Variants Implicated in Complex Diseases
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2011,06/30/2015
* Iuliana Ionita, Columbia University
* Continuing Grant
* Mary Ann Horn
* 06/30/2015
* USD 400,118.00

This research is to develop a comprehensive set of statistical methods
applicable to high-dimensional and sparse datasets as currently generated by
high-throughput genomic experiments. The PI proposes to introduce a novel
unified statistical framework to handle large-scale genetic data, and to study
its theoretical properties. Within this unified framework, a number of relevant
problems can be addressed. The PI will investigate a series of association
testing strategies with rare genetic variants that complement and generalize
available methods for case-control designs to general designs involving
individuals related in an arbitrary fashion. Moreover, the PI will develop an
analytic theory to investigate the most powerful statistical designs for
association studies with rare variants. The proposed methods will be tested on a
broad range of simulated data, and real data from the PIs'
collaborators.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The recent progress in genomic technologies
has lead to large amounts of genetic data being generated. The emergence of such
large-scale, sparse genetic data poses great statistical challenges that require
novel and powerful approaches to efficiently extract the information contained
in the data. While theoretical, the statistical methods proposed here have the
potential to directly contribute to the understanding of the genetic mechanisms
underlying complex human traits. To maximize their impact, the proposed methods
will be implemented into a software package to be made available to the larger
scientific community. Beyond its scientific importance, the project has the
potential to contribute to the higher goal of improving the public health. The
project also has a strong educational component, and will provide valuable
research experience for students and postdoctoral fellows.