* 1100085
* Integrating Multi-physicochemical Processes Induced Stresses to Study Structural Reliability for Solid Oxide Fuel Cells: Modeling and Experiments
* ENG,CMMI
* 05/01/2011,04/30/2015
* Xingjian Xue, University South Carolina Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Alexis Lewis
* 04/30/2015
* USD 288,690.00

The research objective of this project is to elucidate the mechanisms that are
responsible for delamination degradations of solid oxide fuel cells (SOFCs). The
SOFC is an environmentally benign energy technology with high efficiencies.
Long-term stability is an important requirement for the commercial applications
of such a technology. While the delamination phenomena have been widely
attributed to the thermal stress mismatch between different layers of SOFCs, the
hypothesis proposed in this project is that the lattice parameter variations
induced by oxygen ion transport across the interface could play an important
role in delamination degradations. The results of both experiment and modeling
have provided preliminary evidence supporting this hypothesis. The research to
be performed includes the basic parameter characterizations related to oxygen
ion transport process, systematic experiments to study multi-process induced
stresses, and new modeling approach to quantify the individual roles of multi-
processes influencing structural reliability under comprehensive multi-
physicochemical conditions, as well as delamination mitigation strategy studies.
The deliverables include a catalog of basic mechanisms, modeling and analysis
tools, experimental methods, and attainable strategies for delamination
mitigations, documentation of research results, as well as engineering student
and pre-college student educations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If successful, the
results of this research will bring a new paradigm for structural reliability
studies of SOFCs and have significant impacts on a series of SOFC related
issues, including material synthesis and selections, design and fabrication,
operating condition determination to mitigate structural failures. The research
will help transfer SOFC technology to US industry. The results will be
disseminated to allow for a wide variety of applications in other oxygen ion
conducting solid state devices. Graduate and undergraduate engineering students
will benefit through classroom instruction and involvement in the research.
Outreach to high school students and the general public will promote the
awareness and interest of the clean energy technologies.