* 1100321
* Data Fusion of Heterogeneous Sensor Measurements for Enhanced Structural Modeling
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2011,06/30/2015
* Andrew Smyth, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Yick Hsuan
* 06/30/2015
* USD 286,678.00

The objective of this project is to effectively combine the qualities of
different sensor types of a dynamic monitoring network to capitalize on the
intrinsic redundancies of the measured data to identify the structural model
parameters. Currently there is increasing activity in the area of structural
health monitoring using newly emerging, dynamic sensor technologies. There is,
however, no clear framework to best combine these heterogeneous measurement
quantities for health monitoring purposes. In this project, this dual parameter
and state estimation problem with different types of sensor measurements is
formulated as a nonlinear estimation problem. In this study, the challenges that
will be addressed in dealing with this nonlinear dual state and parameter
estimation problem are: 1) the implementation of the approach to large
structural problems with many unmeasured states and parameters to be identified
and 2) determining the required sensor configurations and resolution to ensure
"observability" such that the measured quantities are, indeed, useful and usable
for this nonlinear estimation problem. The theoretical developments and the
proposed identification approach will be experimentally validated with the
laboratory model of a building structure and also with a leveraged data set from
a major long-span bridge collected by the principal investigator.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study is expected to provide a validated approach to
maximize the return on the use of the heterogeneous sensor networks and an
important practical tool to the structural engineering community for better
health monitoring, management and maintenance of critical civil infrastructure
system with improved life safety. The PI has an industry/agency outreach plan,
and will rapidly introduce the dual state-parameter estimation concepts in a
graduate course under development. The project will also provide advanced
training to graduate and undergraduate students through their direct
involvements in this project.