* 1100281
* Mathematically Guided Experiments of Lung Mucus Transport Properties
* MPS,DMS
* 06/15/2011,05/31/2016
* M Forest, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Continuing Grant
* Mary Ann Horn
* 05/31/2016
* USD 1,317,487.00

This project integrates a set of experiments, guided and analyzed by
mathematics, to probe and infer diffusive and flow transport properties of lung
airway mucus. The set of experiments and corresponding instruments are necessary
to span the spectrum of biologically relevant length, time and force scales for
lung mucus flow and particle diffusion within. Mucus layers are propelled by
individual cilia, coordinated waves of cilia, as well as by laminar and
turbulent airflow. The diffusion of inhaled viruses, bacteria, environmental
particulates and drug carrier particles in lung mucus is observed to depend,
indeed dramatically so, on particle size relative to the mesh size distribution
of mucus and on particle electrostatic interactions with the mucus gel.
Furthermore, the biophysical properties of lung mucus vary across populations
and with disease progression in an individual. This project lays out a strategy
to overcome the myriad limitations of current approaches to mucus transport
characterization. Individual projects will advance experimental design and
diagnostics, inference methods from experimental data, and direct modeling and
simulation tools. Flow transport projects combine wave-theoretical methods,
inertial extensions of standard creep rheology, and stochastic bead-bead
fluctuations in order to span the requisite length, time and force scales.
Diffusive transport is inherently stochastic, for which new models and
simulation tools are outlined to model and predict the transient anomalous
diffusive properties that are experimentally observed. All projects are designed
consistent with the functions that mucus performs in lung biology, and the
integrated experimental-mathematical tools are designed for clinical
applicability to mucus samples. The tools and approach are developed and tested
on two mucus simulants, hyaluronic acid solutions and agarose gels, whose
properties can be tuned a priori and independently tested with standard
rheological instruments and theory. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project develops
the underpinnings of a new approach to lung health assessment and treatment of
disorders and diseases. The present approach is to treat symptoms based on the
statistics of clinical trials and accumulated empirical evidence. Mechanically,
lung infections are the result of a failure of airway mucus to trap, transport
and clear pathogens or environmental particulates. Thus the flow of mucus layers
by the action of cilia and airflow, and the diffusion of diverse particles
within the mucus layer, are the fundamental mechanisms that underlie lung
health. Contrary to popular belief, antibodies provide a secondary line of
defense. The tools and mathematical theory for assessment, prediction, and
understanding of flow and diffusive transport of lung mucus layers in
biologically relevant conditions do not exist. This project incorporates
existing experimental methods, instruments, and mathematical theory with the
design and construction of new instruments, mathematical theory and numerical
algorithms. When integrated, these tools will provide the capability to infer
flow and diffusive transport properties of mucus samples from an individual
patient, and the capability to test physical and drug therapies to reinstate
mucus clearance.