* 1100232
* Unified Model and Robotic Implementation of Bio-Inspired Walking and Running
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2015
* Jonathan Hurst, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Massimo Ruzzene
* 08/31/2015
* USD 531,320.00

The research objectives of this award are to develop and implement a
biomechanically relevant, unified theory of legged dynamics that spans walking
and running, and to demonstrate this theory on a new bipedal robot, ATRIAS. To
date, a legged machine whose dynamic behavior can approach the performance of
human walking and running, including transitions between these two gaits, does
not exist. The research will result in principled models of gait and gait
transitions with human-like leg dynamics, in generalized models for manipulating
cyclic hybrid dynamic systems to achieve different goal behaviors, and in the
verification and demonstration of this new scientific understanding with a
bipedal robot. The research progresses from analyzing simplified gait models
that capture the essential dynamics of human locomotion to integrating these
modules in a core dynamics model of human gait. Goal behavior manipulations will
be approached using the influence of parameters on the shape of the Poincare map
in these cyclic dynamic systems. Experimental verification on the robot will
demonstrate and refine the theoretical progress. Deliverables include modeling
and simulation software, experimental verification and demonstration on robot
hardware, documentation of research results, and engineering student education
and research experience. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The results of this research will
provide the opportunity to create control algorithms for powered legged systems
that enable functionally versatile behaviors similar to animals and humans.
Examples include prosthetic legs and exoskeletons that provide human users with
human-like leg dynamics during walking, running, and the transitions between
these gaits. Other examples include legged robots that achieve robust and
efficient dynamic turning behaviors. The results will be disseminated to
encourage commercial applications and further development. A simulation of the
robot implementation of the results will be posted online to engage healthy
competition in the development of control algorithms for powered legs. Graduate
and undergraduate students will benefit through classroom integration, research
involvement, and a "tree of mentoring" where the supported personnel will advise
and mentor undergraduate robotics club students.