* 1100528
* Rapid Identification, Control, and Uncertainty Analysis of Structural Models
* ENG,CMMI
* 04/01/2011,03/31/2014
* Erik Johnson, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Kishor Mehta
* 03/31/2014
* USD 299,938.00

The main goal of this research project is to study and develop validated
approaches which can accurately and efficiently determine the responses of
mostly linear but locally nonlinear and uncertain structural systems. The
structural systems in civil, mechanical and aerospace engineering often
encounter nonlinearities that are localized. For designs, control, and
identification and health monitoring, such locally nonlinear systems are,
however, numerically analyzed as if the whole systems were nonlinear. The
numerical analyses of such nonlinear systems can be computationally demanding.
To accomplish this goal, a novel model reduction strategy utilizing the Volterra
convolution integrals will be examined to include time-varying local features
and feedback characteristics, and the use of emerging computing architectures
such as Graphics Processing Units will be investigated for efficient data
processing. The computational approaches developed in the research will be
validated through applications to a series of germane benchmark problems
involving dynamic analyses, identification and control of base-isolated
buildings, bridge with nonlinear bearings, and bridge stay
cables.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research results will enable engineers to
efficiently design, identify, and optimize passive and semi-active nonlinear
response control devices that are used for the mitigation of the impact of
natural hazards. The research will also facilitate more efficient
characterization of the impacts of structural system degradation. The project
will give advanced training to graduate and undergraduate students at the
University of Minnesota and University of Southern California through their
involvements in the research project. The internal programs at both institutions
will be utilized to recruit students from underrepresented backgrounds to work
on this research project. For their wider utilization in future research and
practice, the project findings will be disseminated to the broader technical
community through demonstration modules developed for formal courses, conference
presentations, and journal publications. The research will be integrated in the
investigators' ongoing outreach activities involving elementary, middle and high
school students to expose them to structural dynamics and engineering design
problems involving uncertainty.