* 1100926
* Collaborative Research:  Understanding Mechanical and Thermal Properties and Their Coupling at Nanomolecularly Modified Metal-Ceramic Interfaces
* ENG,CMMI
* 05/01/2011,04/30/2014
* Michael Lane, Emory and Henry College
* Standard Grant
* Alexis Lewis
* 04/30/2014
* USD 58,586.00

This project aims to investigate and develop models to describe the effects of
molecular chemistry, chemical environment, interface topography, and thermo-
mechanical cycling on interfacial fracture toughness and thermal conductance at
model metal-ceramic interfaces modified with molecular nanolayers. Tailoring
adherent metal-ceramic interfaces using near-zero-thickness nanolayers is an
attractive method to preserve the functionality, stability and reliability of
materials systems for many emergent applications, e.g., nanoelectronics, device
packaging and wiring, and biological implants. The effects of nanolayer
chemistry on interfacial toughness will be studied in model metal/ceramic
interfaces subject to different loading conditions to obtain insights into the
nanoscale mechanics of interfacial fracture. The results of these studies will
be applied to investigate and exploit the coupling between molecular bonding and
interfacial heat transport. The resultant understanding of the interface-
chemistry-physics-mechanical-thermal property relationships is anticipated to
enable new ways for rational molecular-level tailoring of interfacial properties
for tailoring a wide variety of materials systems.

This research will provide a molecular-level understanding for tailoring the
stability and thermomechanical properties of soft-hard hetero-interfaces, and
paves way for rational design of a wide variety of composite materials and
archictectures for engineering applications. On the educational front, this
project will serve as a platform for cross-disciplinary training of graduate and
undergraduate students from a PhD-granting research university (RPI) and an
undergraduate-only college (E&H), respectively, through collaboration on a
problem of key importance at the cusp of materials science, chemistry and
mechanical engineering. The complementary execution of two research thrusts
through summer visits and periodic meetings will enrich the research and
educational experience of graduate and undergraduate students in both groups.
The research will be integrated into extant courses at both institutions. Site-
visits and a summer internship for a high-school teacher are planned to K-12
students to the latest developments in the field of nanomaterials interfaces and
their importance in emerging engineering applications.