* 1100343
* Complex Integer Rounding Cuts for Mixed Integer Programming
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/2011,05/31/2014
* Kiavash Kianfar, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Edwin Romeijn
* 05/31/2014
* USD 200,000.00

The research objective of this award is to create and evaluate new cutting plane
methods for mixed integer programming using a new approach here called Complex
Integer Rounding. Cutting planes are a crucial part of the algorithms used for
solving mixed integer programming problems. Mixed integer programming is an
optimization framework with numerous applications in science, engineering, and
business. The proposed approach consists of deriving novel forms of three major
elements and making innovative use of them: one or multiple facets of base
polyhedra and/or one or multiple sub-additive functions are utilized within a
relaxation/combination procedure which is applied on the original constraints
and a series of intermediate inequalities to eventually obtain a cut generator
function. Both single-constraint and multi-constraint cuts will be considered
and facet-defining properties of the developed cuts will be investigated. The
customization of the cuts to a collection of important special-structure
problems will be studied. In order to evaluate performance of the developed
cuts, efficient separation methods will be developed and comprehensive
computational experiments will be performed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Mixed integer
programming is a powerful and flexible optimization paradigm with ubiquitous
applications in science, engineering, and business ranging from flight crew
scheduling to molecular biology. Yet solving mixed integer programs is generally
very difficult. Through introduction of new strong cutting planes, this
research, if successful, will result in faster solution algorithms for mixed
integer programming and will increase the size of the problems that we are able
to solve. Consequently, it will have a significant impact on all aforementioned
areas. Moreover, the methodological developments in this research open doors to
several new research avenues regarding cutting plane methods.