* 1100313
* Synthesis of Zintl Phases for Thermoelectric Applications
* MPS,DMR
* 04/01/2011,03/31/2015
* Susan Kauzlarich, University of California-Davis
* Continuing Grant
* Michael J. Scott
* 03/31/2015
* USD 500,000.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY: This project, supported by the Solid State and Materials
Chemistry program focuses on the synthesis of new Zintl phases, incorporating
transition metals in order to target a high density of states (DOS) at the Fermi
level (through partially filled d orbitals) to obtain high Seebeck coefficient
(Power factor) and therefore high zT. Nanostructuring will be employed to
further reduce the thermal conductivity. Phases will be synthesized via flux and
metallurgical routes. Utilizing a suite of physical characterization techniques
including single crystal and powder X-ray diffraction, SEM and TEM, elemental
wave dispersive microprobe and ICP-MS analysis, parallel electrical and magnetic
measurements, the structure and phase composition will be correlated with
electronic and thermal transport properties. The ultimate goal of the project is
to discover new materials with high zT for the direct conversion of waste heat
into electricity. Building upon recent results of demonstrated high zT in Zintl
phases, this proposal closely links synthetic strategies with characterization
of physical and chemical properties, thus providing efficient feedback to guide
improvement of these thermoelectric systems.

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY: Thermoelectric devices for power generation convert
thermal energy directly into electrical energy, require minimal maintenance, and
can be operated over a large temperature range (room temperature to 1000 degrees
C). Thermoelectric materials are described by a figure of merit, zT, which
relates to how well a material converts heat flow to electricity - the higher
the value, the greater the efficiency. Recent discoveries of Zintl phases with
zT of 1.0 or greater highlight the importance of continued exploration of new
materials. A Zintl phase is a compound which contains both cations such as
alkali, alkaline earth, and rare earth elements which donate electrons to
polyanionic units composed of main group elements such as those from groups 13,
14, and 15 of the periodic table. These types of compounds naturally provide low
thermal conductivity which is a requirement for thermoelectric devices. With
higher zT, the potential for solid-state power generation from waste heat
recovery provides a framework for investigating new Zintl phase materials with
stability and optimal properties at high temperatures (>300 degrees C). This
project supports minorities and women at the initial stages (high school to
college and college to graduate school), along with training graduate student
for scientific careers. Students develop scientific, social, and professional
skills through hands-on training, exploration, and dissemination of research to
the broader scientific community. The topics under study include materials
synthesis and property measurements, fundamental training in materials synthesis
and structure-property correlations, providing an important foundation for the
development of thermal to electrical energy conversion and the advancement of
multidisciplinary research aligned with technology. The research will be
presented at national and international meetings and the findings published in
peer-review journals. Additionally, the PI supports students through the ACS
SEED program (high school), MURPPS (undergraduate), and AGEP (graduate) programs
focused on increasing underrepresented groups in science on campus. The ChemWiki
will be employed to enhance student learning through writing and critical
evaluation.