* 1100208
* IDBR - Development of an Ultrafast Phase-shaping Contrast Microscope
* BIO,DBI
* 05/01/2011,04/30/2015
* Jennifer Ogilvie, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Christopher Sanford
* 04/30/2015
* USD 465,368.00

Project Abstract&lt;br/&gt;The project will develop an Ultrafast Phase-Shaping
Contrast Microscope (UPSCM) to provide enhanced imaging capabilities and new
modes of imaging contrast for biological research. The UPSCM will exploit the
amplitude and phase-shaping of a broadband laser in a versatile instrument that
will have three modes of operation to meet a wide range of imaging needs. The
first imaging modality will permit rapid and quantitative multiphoton
fluorescence resonance energy transfer (MFRET) imaging. The proposed MFRET
imaging modality is orders of magnitude faster than current technology, opening
up new opportunities for studying protein-protein interactions in animal and
tissue models and will be readily extended to video-rate imaging speeds. The
second imaging modality of the UPSCM will be two-color pump-probe contrast
microscopy. This modality will exploit pump-probe contrast mechanisms including
stimulated emission, excited state absorption and ground-state bleach to enable
sensitive imaging of nonfluorescent and weakly fluorescent endogenous species.
Finally, the third imaging modality will employ a single shaped laser pulse
designed to provide molecular contrast as well as insight into the energy
landscape of the molecule.&lt;br/&gt;Multiphoton microscopy has revolutionized
our ability to visualize the biological world. Multiphoton excitation markedly
enhances the depth of imaging into tissues, and provides novel modes of
contrast. Multiphoton fluorescence microscopy has been widely used and has been
shown to increase signal-to-background for fluorescence while reducing
photodamage and photobleaching, permitting more sensitive detection of
fluorescence signals over extended periods of time. However, in a typical
multiphoton fluorescence microscope, a tunable femtosecond laser is used to
image a single fluorescent probe, making the simultaneous observation of
multiple chemical species difficult. The proposed UPSCM will employ an extremely
broadband femtosecond laser to allow selective and simultaneous multiphoton
fluorescence imaging of commonly used fluorescent probes. This methodology will
facilitate studies of protein-protein interactions in transgenic animals,
enabling new studies of cellular signaling in healthy and diseased animals. In
addition to enhanced multiphoton fluorescence imaging, the UPSCM will provide
novel, sensitive and selective contrast for nonfluorescent endogenous species
that will be broadly applicable to imaging studies aimed at improving current
understanding of basic cellular processes and methods for disease diagnosis.