* 1100903
* Working Stress Behavior of Tall Steel Mechanically Stabilized Earth (MSE) Walls
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2011,06/30/2016
* Armin Stuedlein, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Richard Fragaszy
* 06/30/2016
* USD 326,768.00

This research seeks to transform the way Mechanically Stabilized Earth (MSE)
walls are analyzed, resulting in a broad impact due to: (1) the improvement in
the understanding of the impact of fundamental soil behavior on the assessment
of reinforced soil, mitigating the economic costs of inefficient wall design;
(2) the dissemination of field performance data and implementation of advanced
numerical models to assist students, practitioners, and researchers in studying
the behavior of tall MSE walls; and (3) the generation of an advanced
interactive visualization tool developed in collaboration with students designed
for education and engineering recruitment. Tens of thousands of MSE retaining
walls have been constructed in the United States since their introduction in
1972. MSE walls are being constructed to greater heights, in non-linear
geometries, and with multiple tiers and tight reinforcement spacing. The use of
these cost-effective reinforced soil structures will continue to grow in the
U.S. due to increasing urbanization, diminishing right-of-way, and/or wetland
mitigation. Despite the proliferation of wall construction and advances in
materials and methods, our ability to predict the working stress behavior and
displacement of tall, single and multi-tier walls is unsatisfactory. The
behavior of steel MSE walls constructed to 15 meters in height, which require
typical reinforcement spacing of 0.5 to 0.75 m, is not significantly affected by
curvature of the Mohr Failure envelope, nor the potential for frictional
interference possible with more closely spaced reinforcements. However, as steel
MSE walls are constructed with much greater heights and closer reinforcement
spacing, the role of soil dilation and potential frictional interference between
reinforcement strips become critical. Recently, some MSE wall heights have
exceeded 40 m. This research aims to determine the role of soil dilation and
confining stress, and frictional interference on the development of
reinforcement strains through a coordinated experimental program and numerical
modeling study. These results will be used to model the field behavior observed
in instrumented MSE walls reported in the literature, as well as improve design
models for the determination of internal stability and
displacement.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The impact of this research will be
experienced worldwide as the design and construction of tall MSE walls
proliferates to meet society's needs. An improved understanding of the effect of
soil dilation and frictional interference on the working stress behavior of
steel reinforcements represents an important step towards the revolution of the
analysis of tall reinforced soil walls. The dissemination of high-quality
performance data, numerical model codes, and educational tools will serve
society by allowing researchers, educators, and professional engineers to
directly access and evaluate tall wall behavior.