* 1100046
* Syzygies
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2011,10/31/2014
* Irena Peeva, Cornell University
* Continuing Grant
* Victoria Powers
* 10/31/2014
* USD 218,486.00

This project is in the field of commutative algebra. The main research goal is
to understand the structure of minimal free resolutions over complete
intersection ring. The idea is to describe the asymptotic structure of the
generic Eisenbud operators, and then use it in order to obtain the
differentials. The proposed research also includes a topic involving
interdisciplinary approaches connecting commutative algebra with the fields of
combinatorics and topology. The PI will co-organize two conferences in
commutative algebra, which will provide a forum for discussion of recent
developments and foster research in new
directions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Research on free resolutions is a core and
beautiful area in commutative algebra. It contains a number of challenging and
important conjectures and open problems. The idea to associate a free resolution
to a finitely generated module was introduced by Hilbert in two famous papers in
1890 and 1893. He proved that over a polynomial ring (over a field) every
finitely generated module has a finite resolution. In the local and the graded
cases there exists a minimal free resolution; it is unique up to an isomorphism
and is contained in any free resolution of the resolved module. Its properties
are closely related to the invariants of the resolved module. For many years,
minimal free resolutions have been both central objects and fruitful tools in
Commutative Algebra; they also have applications in other mathematical fields.