* 1100736
* GOALI: Nanomanufactured Flexible Chemical Sensors: Collaborative Investigation of Nanotructural Properties in Relation to Device Flexibility
* ENG,CMMI
* 05/01/2011,04/30/2015
* Chuan-Jian Zhong, SUNY at Binghamton
* Standard Grant
* Khershed Cooper
* 04/30/2015
* USD 336,658.00

This Grant Opportunities for Academic Liaison with Industry (GOALI) award
provides funding for the development of a nano-manufacturing process on flexible
devices. The development of this process will couple Roll-to-Roll (R2R)
manufacturing process with molecularly-engineered nanoparticle thin film
transfer technology to produce flexible chemical sensor arrays. The process
parameters controlling the chemical and physical properties associated with the
nanostructured flexible devices, and the factors controlling the interfacial
interactions between the nanostructured thin films and the flexible substrates
will be determined. An effective processing route for transferring nanoparticle-
structured thin films onto flexible array devices with controllable adhesions,
address precision, and interparticle spatial properties will be demonstrated.
The electrical properties of the nanostructured flexible devices under various
structural, mechanical, flexibility, and environmental manipulations will be
characterized. The sensor response characteristics of an integrated flexible
sensor array system will be evaluated in terms of performance and reliability
for the detection of VOCs. If successful, the results will lead to advancement
in understanding the design criteria between nanostructure engineering and
large-scale R2R manufacturing for producing nanostructured flexible devices. The
primary goal of this work is to establish the correlation between the device
electrical properties and the flexibility parameters under various environmental
conditions in the fundamental front, and demonstrate the nano-manufacturing
process for transferring molecularly-engineered nanoparticle thin films onto
flexible sensor array devices in the application front. The accomplishment of
this goal will help achieve low-cost and scale-up integration of nanostructured
materials and flexible functional devices. The capability of the nanostructured
flexible chemical sensor arrays for reliable and multiplexing detection of VOCs
and toxic gases will benefit the society in addressing the increasing
environmental concerns over air pollution and quality.