* 1100842
* RUI: Novel Phenomena in Photonic Structures Induced with Engineered Coupling
* MPS,PHY
* 09/15/2011,08/31/2014
* Zhigang Chen, San Francisco State University
* Standard Grant
* John D. Gillaspy
* 08/31/2014
* USD 184,000.00

Small refractive-index variations induced as periodic arrays of evanescently
coupled 1D and 2D waveguides have served as a platform for exploring many
phenomena beyond optics. In this RUI research project, some fundamental issues
and novel phenomena in specially-designed photonic structures with engineered
coupling are being studied, including light tunneling inhibition and image
transmission via coherent destruction of tunneling, negative coupling and
associated phenomena, Shockley-like and topologically induced surface states in
honey-comb photonic lattices and superlattices, and bandgap phenomena and light
transport in disordered lattices. This project is being carried out in an
optical setting of reconfigurable periodic structures, especially optically
induced 2D lattices with intelligent design of coupling or longitudinal
modulation and 3D photonic lattices.

Although performed in a simple optical setting, the research are expected to
have direct impact on other areas of sciences, ranging from solid state physics
to photonic crystals, and from hydrodynamics to atomic physics such as Bose-
Einstein condensates trapped in periodic potentials. A major emphasis of this
project is placed on mentoring undergraduate students, particularly those from
the ethnically diverse San Francisco Bay Area population. A strong educational
component of this work is that the research project is being used as a form of
teaching as well as discovery, and the students are actively involved in
learning research methods and in sharing discoveries and interpretations.