* 1100207
* Characterization of  the Mechanical Environment of Bone Marrow During Skeletal Loading
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2011,06/30/2015
* Glen Niebur, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* David Fyhrie
* 06/30/2015
* USD 355,261.00

The objective of this award is to understand how the pressure and motion of bone
marrow within the trabecular - or spongy - bone in the hip are affected by
forces during walking. The bone marrow in the hip is one of the main sites where
hematopoietic (blood forming) and mesenchymal (skeletal tissue forming) stem
cells are found in adults, although their numbers decline with age. Studies have
demonstrated that mesenchymal stem cells, while few in number, are highly
sensitive to mechanical stimulation, but the types and magnitudes of stimuli
they experience in the body are largely unknown. An experimental study will be
conducted to measure the pressure at different locations within the hip during
simulated walking. Data from the experiments will be incorporated into
computational models to estimate the pressure throughout the bone. A second set
of models will employ these calculated pressures to determine the motion of the
marrow at the microscopic scale, and the distribution of mechanical stimuli in
the marrow. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If successful, these studies will provide
insight into the mechanical environment of bone marrow and the range of stresses
that are imparted to adult stem cells on a daily basis. These results will
improve interpretation and design of cell culture experiments and tissue
engineering constructs by providing baseline stimulus levels. They may also
provide insight into changes in the bone marrow, such as the decline in the
mesenchymal stem cell population with age. Finally, the computational models can
be used to predict the behavior in response to abnormal loading or disease
conditions. To extend the impact of this project to the wider community, a high-
school teacher will participate in the research, and the project team will help
them incorporate the methods and findings into courses and projects.