* 1100735
* A Bayesian Approach for Modeling and Simulation of Non-Stationary Ground Motions
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2015
* Jale Tezcan, Southern Illinois University at Carbondale
* Standard Grant
* Yick Hsuan
* 08/31/2015
* USD 269,027.00

The research objective of this award is to develop a probabilistic ground motion
model that takes into account the time-varying characteristics of earthquake
ground motions to better describe their damage potential. This research will
result in new methodologies to identify the most relevant seismological features
affecting the severity of ground motions, to describe the manner in which
seismic energy is distributed in the joint time-frequency domain, and to
quantify the prediction uncertainty in a unified and structured manner. The
research approach is to use a combination of signal processing, feature
selection, and machine learning tools that will be customized for ground
motions. Deliverables include new methodologies and software tools for analysis
and simulation of ground motions, research reports and publications, and
education of undergraduate and graduate students.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Successful completion of this project will help establish
improved guidelines for selection and simulation of ground motions to be used in
seismic design of structures, which in turn will help reduce the cost of damage
due to future earthquake occurrences. The methodology established in this
project will be applicable to other real world processes such as wind and ocean
waves. The research findings will be disseminated to broader audiences through
journal articles, conferences, and a project website. All the software tools
developed in this project will be made available to engineers, researchers,
educators and students. Graduate and undergraduate students in engineering and
computer science departments will benefit from this project through enriched
curricula and research experience. Two graduate students will be trained to
perform the research tasks. Students at K-12 levels will be exposed to
earthquake engineering through outreach activities.