* 1100810
* 21st Century Learning in Natural History Settings: A Conference to Initiate Research-Driven Innovation in Informal Natural History Learning
* EHR,DRL
* 07/01/2011,06/30/2014
* William Watson, Smithsonian Institution
* Standard Grant
* Julie Johnson
* 06/30/2014
* USD 248,083.00

The Department of Education of the National Museum of Natural History,
Smithsonian Institution, with broad participatory support from free-standing,
university-based and regional natural history museums across the nation will
conduct a 3-day national conference on informal science learning in natural
history settings. The goal of this conference will be to develop and disseminate
a sustained, collaborative learning research agenda that begins to address the
role of natural history museums in natural history learning and establish an
infrastructure for communication and collaboration to pursue the research
agenda.

The conference builds on recent meetings among museums and informal learning
professionals to this topic. Executive and Leadership Committees will implement
a scaffolded project design involving a sweep of evaluation reports and audience
research from the field, a foundational literature review, Committee workshops
to review the field, conference planning and call for participation, and pre-
conference dialogue through professional organizations and activities. The
conference, to be held in Washington, DC in Spring-Summer 2012, will be followed
by broad post-conference dissemination of findings and a call to action around
the conference-generated research agenda. The conference will be evaluated by
Oberg Research, an external audience research and evaluation firm. Oberg will
develop an evaluation process that measures the quality, relevance, and impact
of pre-conference, conference, and post-conference activities using an
ethnographic fieldwork methodology involving in-depth interviews and participant
observation of conference activities.

The intended outcomes and impacts of this national conference are to develop,
initiate, and disseminate a collaborative and sustained learning research agenda
about how the 800 natural history museums in the United States can best use
their resources for STEM learning. Among the topics to be considered by the
Conference are new models for interaction among educators, curators, collection
managers, exhibit professionals and museum leadership; audience research to more
fully understand audiences and their needs; new technologies for discovery and
learning regarding rapid response and current science; public participation in
scientific research (citizen science); and collaboration in learning research
across the Natural History field.