* 1100949
* Collaborative Research:  Multi-Level Data Fusion for Real-Time Prognostic Health Management of Hierarchical Systems
* ENG,CMMI
* 04/01/2011,03/31/2015
* Jian Liu, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Diwakar Gupta
* 03/31/2015
* USD 249,843.00

The research objective of this award is to develop a new real-time prognostics
and health management (PHM) methodology for hierarchical engineering systems.
This new methodology is based on the fusion of data collected from components
and subsystems on different levels of a system. The first effort is to establish
an offline model system mathematically integrated from separate component-level
survival models, each of which represents the impacts of factors, such as
environments and stress, on a component's failure hazard. The offline model
system is then incorporated with the online system performance measurements to
formulate a state space model that describes the system performance degradation
as an observation of conventionally unobservable hazard state evolvement. Based
on the state space model, methodologies of online monitoring and prognostics
will be developed by combining statistical process control and nonlinear
filtering techniques. In addition, real-time decision of maintenance scheduling
and resource allocation will be optimally conducted according to the monitoring
and prognostics conclusions. These methodologies will be validated and
implemented with the real data, case studies and testbed provided by industry
supporters. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If successful, the results of this research
will advance the state-of-the-art methodologies by contributing new concepts,
criteria and algorithms to the course of real-time PHM of hierarchical
engineering systems. The developed methodology can be applied to systems that
are designed to meet certain highly complex and advanced functional demands in
mission-critical industries, such as transportation, energy, infrastructure, and
manufacturing. The dissemination of the research results will significantly
improve the understanding and prediction of failures of such systems.
Consequently, improved real-time PHM practice can be expected, achieving
increased system availability and reduced maintenance cost. In addition, the
interdisciplinary nature of this collaborative research will benefit students by
exposing them to new course modules and research opportunities that involve
learning and applying advanced methodologies in reliability, data mining and
statistics.