* 1100339
* Nanomechanics of Ferroelectric Fractures: Phase-Field Simulations and Piezoresponse Force Microscopy Characterizations
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2015
* Jiangyu Li, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* kara peters
* 08/31/2015
* USD 277,872.00

The research objective of this grant is to elucidate the fracture of
ferroelectrics, a complicated process that involves interplay between crack
propagation and ferroelectric domain switching at nanometer scale. A
computational phase-field method will be developed to simulate crack propagation
and domain switching in ferroelectrics, and piezoresponse force microscopy will
be applied for in-situ observation of such microstructure evolution in
ferroelectrics under electrical, mechanical, and thermal loadings. These two
techniques will be combined to investigate the fracture behavior of various
ferroelectric crystals and ceramics, enabling direct comparison between
computational simulations and microscopic characterization at a length scale
that is most relevant to the underlying physical
processes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Ferroelectrics is an important class of
technological materials that are widely used as sensors, actuators, capacitors,
and nonvolatile memories, and many of their applications depend on ferroelectric
domain switching triggered by external fields. Ferroelectric fracture process is
closely coupled with domain switching, and has important influences on the
failure of ferroelectric devices. The project will shed insight on the
complicated fracture processes in ferroelectric materials that is not well
understood, and will help improve the performance and reliability of
ferroelectric devices and systems. The project will also train graduate and
undergraduate students, improve graduate and undergraduate curriculums, and
offer outreach activities for K-12 school teachers and students.