* 1100541
* Bessel Models and the Transfer of Siegel Cusp Forms of Degree 2
* MPS,DMS
* 10/01/2011,09/30/2015
* Ralf Schmidt, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Pollington
* 09/30/2015
* USD 285,068.00

A proposal is made for a detailed study of Bessel models for the group GSp(4)
over a nonarchimedean local field, and the application of the results to
analytic properties of L-functions, the non-generic transfer of Siegel modular
forms to GL(4), and special values of L-functions. The importance of Whittaker
models in the theory of Automorphic Representations is well known. For certain
groups such as GSp(4) Bessel models can serve as a substitute for those
representations that have no Whittaker model. While general facts for Bessel
models are known, such as the uniqueness of Bessel models, certain important
questions remain unanswered and prevent a widespread deployment of these models.
Amongst the unknown facts are the determination of test vectors for a given
representation and a given Bessel model, and the calculation of explicit Bessel
functions. This research will close these knowledge gaps, allowing for several
new applications of Bessel models.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The activity of this
proposal will promote teaching, training, and learning via the inclusion of
graduate students as participants in the proposed research. The activity of this
proposal will broaden the participation of under-represented groups. The PI and
the Co-PI plan to continue their close contacts with the OU McNair Scholars
Programs well as the Sooner Traditions Scholars program of the University of
Oklahoma. These programs are comprised of undergraduate students which are
either first-generation and low-income, or from underrepresented groups, or from
traditionally disadvantaged high-schools in the Oklahoma City and Tulsa area.
The activity of this proposal will enhance infrastructure for research and
education. As part of the Automorphic Forms group at the University of Oklahoma,
the PI and the Co-PI have participated, and will continue to participate, in a
number of scientific activities involving researchers and students from other
institutions. Amongst these activities are joint seminars with neighboring
universities and conferences with a largely regional appeal. Other activities
will include short- and medium-term visits from researchers from other parts of
the country and also from overseas. Finally, the activity of the proposed
research will lead, within the framework of the Automorphic Forms group of the
University of Oklahoma, to the creation of a website with resources for students
and researchers in the area of Automorphic Forms. Amongst other things, the web
site will contain a comprehensive list of activities in Automorphic Forms.