* 1100227
* Simulation of Integrated Urban Infrastructure Systems using Component-based Modeling
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2011,06/30/2017
* Juan Caicedo, University South Carolina Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Cynthia Chen
* 06/30/2017
* USD 279,908.00

This grant provides funding for research on the standardization of system
integration protocols for the purpose of simulating and managing civil
infrastructure systems. This research studies the applicability of model
integration standards that are based on the concept of component software
architectures for modeling the integration of civil infrastructure systems. The
project tasks focus on the design of a component-based modeling environment that
is appropriate for modeling the integration of coupled urban infrastructure
systems, and the application of the developed framework to evaluate a real-time
flooding event using a case study system in Columbia, SC. The scientific
questions addressed by this research include: (1) Are the component-based system
integration concepts developed for integrating water resource models applicable
for the representation of the integration of civil infrastructure systems? (2)
What are the appropriate component interface and data exchange standards for
integrating various modeling components representing civil infrastructure
system? (3) Do simulations of integrated civil infrastructure lead to effective
decisions for the management and operation of urban infrastructure systems?
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If successful, the results of this research will lead to
improvements in our ability to manage large, complex urban infrastructure
systems as an integrated system that improves their reliability, resiliency, and
sustainability. This research work could have implications for both day to day
operations of civil infrastructure systems, as well as their management during
extreme events. In addition to the aforementioned research objectives, this
grant will also provide funding to advance civil engineering education by
incorporating ideas and concepts from systems analysis into the civil the
engineering curriculum using an Environment For Fostering Effective Critical
Thinking (EFFECTs) pedagogical structures.&lt;br/&gt;