* 1100579
* Collaborative Research: A Complementarity-Free Contact Model for Robotics Applications
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2014
* Dylan Shell, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Massimo Ruzzene
* 08/31/2014
* USD 86,600.00

The main goal in this collaborative research project is to advance the state of
the art in realistic robot simulation by developing reasonably accurate contact
models for rigid body dynamics that are both robustly and efficiently solvable.
Since the times of Newton and Leibniz, the modeling of rigid body dynamics has
been a tremendous success story. However, when rigid bodies come into contact
and when that contact includes Coulomb friction, standard force-acceleration
models sometimes fail. In such cases, a smooth solution is theoretically not
even possible. A set of contact models that address this problem has been
developed, derived from the well-established Signorini-Fichera (S-F)
complementarity conditions. However, there is some evidence that these
conditions are not accurate for impacting (rather than smoothly contacting)
rigid bodies. This project will investigate situations in which the
complementarity conditions are called into question, and will develop a new
approach to address three critical shortcomings, present in varying degrees in
state of the art contact models: (i.) their exponential worst-case solution
times; (ii.) their inability to find solutions even though one exists; (iii.)
their numerical brittleness. This project will investigate and evaluate new
contact models that, by virtue of eliminating complementarity conditions, may
not suffer from these shortcomings; in tandem, the project will use
elastodynamic finite element analysis and physical experimentation in order to
evaluate model accuracy for impacting rigid bodies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project will impact a broad range of technologies, including aerospace,
manufacturing, and civil engineering. In the near term, the project will enable
the simulation of complex robot environments that help roboticists fine-tune
both mechanical design and control algorithms. The computational models
developed will be made public via the open-source Moby dynamics library.
Additionally, participation in STEM is broadened through mentoring of students.