* 1100651
* GOALI: Reliability-Based Design and Operation of Metal Rolling Mills using Bayesian Theory and a New Rolling Model
* ENG,CMMI
* 04/01/2011,03/31/2015
* Mark Zipf, Saint Louis University
* Standard Grant
* Zhijian Pei
* 03/31/2015
* USD 364,474.00

The research objective of this Grant Opportunity for Academic Liaison with
Industry (GOALI) award is to apply a new simplified, mixed finite element roll-
stack deflection model as evidence with Bayesian Theory to calculate
probabilities of attaining important criteria in metal rolling, including strip
thickness profile and strip flatness distributions. The probability predictions
will be used to study propagation effects of rolling process uncertainties, and
to create new reliability-based mill simulation and control models that lead to
higher quality, more efficient rolling schedules. The metal rolling industry's
traditional way of addressing process uncertainties is to use statistical
process control to simply monitor resulting variations in quality and efficiency
criteria. This "backward-looking" approach is limited in that it neither adjusts
nor optimizes the process set-up parameters based on predictive probability
estimates of the rolling requirements. In contrast, the approach of this
research award is to introduce an entirely new "forward-looking" method to
optimize rolling parameters based on probability predictions for strip thickness
profile and flatness.

If successful, this research will economically benefit the many companies
producing steel, aluminum, and copper sheet. These companies will be able to
roll metal products at higher speeds, and with superior flatness and thickness
profiles. The manufacturers of metal rolling mills and associated control
systems will also benefit from the capability to design more competitive rolling
equipment and systems. The broader societal and educational impacts of this
research involve summer workshop programs for inner city teens offered by the
Lewis & Clark Educational Institute of Saint Louis. These workshops, entitled
"Math and Manufacturing", will spark the interest of fifth to eighth graders as
to the exciting roles that math, science, and engineering play in industry.
Furthermore, research-driven classroom projects, mentored by engineers from the
industry partner, will provide undergraduates engineering students with an
enriched learning experience.