* 1100020
* A Lattice Boltzmann Based Model for Predicting Unsaturated Flow through Soil Macropores and Capillary Pores
* ENG,CMMI
* 04/01/2011,03/31/2014
* Muhammed Kutay, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Richard Fragaszy
* 03/31/2014
* USD 211,645.00

The key objective of this project is to couple the Richards Equation based
unsaturated flow in capillary pores of soils with flow through macropores using
the Navier-Stokes Equations solved using the Lattice-Boltzmann (LB) Method for
two phase (liquid and gas) flow. Because computationally efficient
mechanistically-based models do not exist, groundwater recharge, or deep
drainage estimates, or gas emissions from landfills are often carried out by
ignoring preferential flow or by modeling it empirically. Dual permeability
models simulate macropore flow by specifying separate sets of unsaturated
properties to the micro and macro pores. However, the flow through macropores
does not follow Darcian flow and assumes all macropores are connected as a
continuum while often macropores are discrete and disconnected. The central idea
behind the model to be developed in this project is that flow through macropores
is similar to flow in conduits having irregular shapes and hence Navier Stokes
equations are more appropriate and are numerically stable when solved using the
Lattice-Boltzmann method. With the advances in digital X-ray CT imaging
techniques, it is now possible to have pore structure of soils characterized
relatively quickly and economically. Hence, a model that can take advantage of
such high resolution pore structure data can revolutionize the way we estimate
long-term liquid percolation into landfills or gas emissions from landfills. The
macro pore and micro pore structure in the soil system will be digitally input
to the model using X-ray Computed Tomography (CT) image data for soil samples
collected from instrumented field-scale clay caps to validate the modeling
approach. High-resolution water balance data has been collected over a period of
three years from two field-scale clay cap test sections located at a landfill in
Detroit. The conventional physically-based numerical models can capture the
unsaturated flow through capillary or micropores relatively accurately. However,
they cannot model flow through macropores which are formed and continuously
evolve due to inadequate compaction, desiccation cracking, freeze/thaw, root
penetration, and rodent activity. The model that will be developed will overcome
the challenge of modeling liquid or gas flow through macropores.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A numerical model that takes advantage of recent advances
in X-ray imagining of soil structure for modeling flow through soils will
provide practitioners and regulators a tool to accurately predict long-term deep
drainage into ground water systems of environmental significance or green-house
gas emissions from landfills. A course module on migration of liquids and gases
from waste sites will be prepared for an undergraduate landfill design class and
a course module containing theory and lab experimentation to demonstrate
preferential flow through soils will be prepared and introduced in a graduate
level course. Outreach to high school students during summer training camps will
carried out with hands-on demonstrations at Michigan State University.