* 1100109
* Near Frictionless Surface Acoustic Wave Active Bearing for Disk Drive and Other Applications
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2013
* David Ricketts, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Eduardo Misawa
* 08/31/2013
* USD 352,726.00

This research investigates a novel mechanical interface which utilizes surface
acoustic waves (SAW) for lubrication. In this concept, SAW?s are used to realize
a direct contact interface with zero effective friction between two surfaces
sliding at high relative velocities. If a traveling SAW is excited on one of the
two surfaces moving relative to one another, and the contact points, which are
the peaks of the traveling SAW, have the same horizontal velocity as the
relative velocity between the two surfaces, the contact points will not
experience any friction. The creation of zero-sliding-velocity contact points
minimizes effective friction without applying any lubricants and, as a result,
enables a host of new applications. This is the converse effect to ultrasonic
motors, which use SAW?s to create friction forces between two surfaces. This
concept in essence is an active mechanical bearing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
main objective of this research is to gain new understanding about the dynamics
of SAW?s and their effects on the tribological properties at interfaces. These
new understandings are expected to lead to revolutionary new techniques for
suppressing friction and wear between moving surfaces. In this research, custom
experimental apparatuses are used to study the dynamics of SAW on various
complex geometries, such as acoustic transducers, wave guides, couplers, etc.
Also, various interactions of the acoustic field with materials are studied.
These studies should lead to fundamental new knowledge about SAW dynamics,
functional acoustic component design for various applications and
dynamical/tribological properties of elastic
materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;While general applications as a new form of
bearing are obviously important, there are several specific applications that
may be enabled by such a new technology. One of the most striking examples is in
the hard disc drive (HDD). In a HDD, a magnetic head, which reads and writes
data, flies above a rotating magnetic disc supported by an air bearing. A finite
separation is needed to prevent friction and wear between the head and the disc.
At the same time, the separation has to be as small as possible for good write
efficiency and read sensitivity, because the magnetic fields decay exponentially
with increasing separation. To meet future data storage needs it is necessary to
reduce this separation to &lt;5nm, an immense challenge since controlling the
head height and preventing contact is difficult at these distances. Moreover,
the creation of air flow for the air bearing technique consumes significant
power in HDDs, and HDDs are a significant portion of the total power consumption
in the IT infrastructure. Their power consumption accounts for 1.5% of the total
electricity usage in US (2006, EPA). The proposed concept provides a new,
revolutionary means to couple the head to the disc with zero friction to achieve
higher recording density, and also has the possibility for a HDD to operate with
reduced internal air pressure, which should significantly reduce HDD power
consumption.