* 1100514
* Flexible Decision-making in Response to Disruptive Events on Construction Sites
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2014
* Cindy Menches, Illinois Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* elise miller-hooks
* 08/31/2014
* USD 324,577.00

The purpose of this project is to advance understanding of the improvisational
decisions and actions of construction workers in response to workflow
disruptions. Disruptions create turbulent conditions that challenge the
industry's capabilities for management and control. As a result, flexibility
remains critical for the successful response to unexpected incidents on the
jobsite. One flexible approach that addresses disruptions is improvisation: the
simultaneous generation and execution of a new course of action requiring
creativity and skill under tight time constraints. Yet, in spite of more than a
decade of research supporting its beneficial uses, skepticism still surrounds
the acceptance of improvisation as a flexible way to address disruptions because
it evokes images of a lack of structure to the decision making process. Contrary
to such beliefs, improvisation is a structured process that involves purposeful
human behavior driven by intuition, experience, competence, and context. The
proposed investigation will be underpinned by the emerging theory of
organizational improvisation, and, accordingly, the PIs will develop and test
scientific theory about how, under what conditions, and with what results
improvisation can complement detailed planning and plan-following on the
jobsite.

If successful, the results of this research will facilitate a better
understanding of the interplay between plan-following and improvisation on
turbulent construction sites and will allow the research findings to be
translated into a theory of improvisational actions in construction. The
research has the potential to transform the way craft workers, foremen, and
construction managers plan for, accommodate, and manage disruptions on the
jobsite. The results of this research will enable a shift in philosophy that
supports greater flexibility in decisions and actions. In turn, this will
ultimately lead to changes in practice that accept, encourage, and cultivate the
use of ?intuition, experience, competence, and context? to overcome daily
workflow disruptions.