* 1100632
* Design for Understanding:  Methodology for Efficient Biomechanical Modeling of the Knee
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2015
* Amy Lerner, University of Rochester
* Standard Grant
* george hazelrigg
* 08/31/2015
* USD 442,177.00

The objective of this award is to develop methods to improve biomechanical
modeling by providing greater understanding of the effects of variations and
uncertainty in model inputs. The study will focus on the process of developing
computational models of the knee joint to study conditions such as risks for
osteoarthritis. The approach will more efficiently account for uncertainty in
model inputs such as tissue material properties and loading conditions and
anatomic variations between individuals. By adapting robust design tools
commonly used in other disciplines to the types of unknowns and variations seen
in biomechanical models, the study will clarify how to identify the relative
importance of different sources of variation in achieving a model that
accurately predicts the clinical conditions. The method will be tested by
comparing various simplified models to a set of highly subject-specific models.
The award will also develop interactive teaching modules related to
biomechanical modeling, statistical methods and experimental design for two
engineering courses and a high school outreach
program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Successful completion of this study will allow
investigators to more efficiently decide where to focus their attention in the
development of computational biomechanical models. Although the goal will be to
provide a process for development of any biomechanical model, our test cases
will be models for the investigation of factors such as obesity, in the risk for
osteoarthritis. With this method, it will be possible to select the minimum
clinical measurements necessary to adequately test specific hypotheses. This has
the potential to reduce time, cost and risk to the subjects or patients. The
educational impact of this program will be to introduce students to the impacts
of uncertainty in the context of interesting biomechanical questions, and to
broadly disseminate interactive teaching modules for others to use in
undergraduate and high school outreach programs.