* 1100722
* Collaborative Research: Nonlinear Design and Development of Multi Degree-of-freedom Broadband Energy Harvesting Systems
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/2011,05/31/2015
* Lawrence Bergman, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Massimo Ruzzene
* 05/31/2015
* USD 210,000.00

This project addresses the harvesting and conversion of mechanical energy from
low-level ambient vibration into usable electrical energy. Utilizing the unique
properties of "essentially" nonlinear vibrating systems, it develops multi
degree-of-freedom, passive, broadband devices that will increase the efficiency
and performance of energy harvesting systems acting on low-level ambient
vibrations. Three research tasks are undertaken: 1) analysis of the system-level
dynamics including nonlinearity in both the mechanical resonator and the
electrical charging system; 2) design and application of multidegree-of-freedom
resonators to enhance harvesting; and 3) experimental verification of proposed
designs. Furthermore, collaboration with a group at the University of Bristol
(UK) seeks to incorporate state of the art energy conversion strategies that can
work efficiently in conjunction with the broadband resonator to produce a
reliable, consistent source of power. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research is
anticipated to lead to an enabling technology for next-generation portable
devices and wireless sensors and provide a novel framework for the design and
optimization of systems that incorporate nonlinear elements. Finally, this
project enhances the diversity of the engineering community through targeted
outreach, undergraduate research programs, and the support of students from
underrepresented groups.