* 1100402
* Fabrication of Double-Layer Cellular Spheroid using Acoustic Excitation-Assisted Compound Jetting
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2011,02/28/2013
* Yong Huang, Clemson University
* Standard Grant
* Zhijian Pei
* 02/28/2013
* USD 270,000.00

The objective of this study is to test the hypothesis that the formability of
viable double-layer cellular spheroids during acoustic excitation-assisted
compound jetting can be predicted using scale analysis and a method-of-line
numerical approach. The proposed research activities involve: 1) development of
an acoustic excitation-based compound jetting apparatus with imaging capability,
2) modeling and validation of the double-layer cellular spheroid fabrication
process using scale analysis and numerical simulations, and 3) size and
viability evaluation of fabricated cellular spheroids. In this proposed compound
jetting system, concentric core fluid (cell suspension), shell fluid (sodium
alginate) and carrier stream (air) jets break into double-layer core-shell
structure microcapsules under the effect of acoustic
excitation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study will contribute to biofabrication
technology. Specifically, controllable fabrication of double-layer cellular
spheroids will lead to robust organ printing, enabling on-demand organ
manufacturing and other microcapsule-related healthcare technologies such as
drug delivery. Broader impacts also include a pipeline of well trained,
motivated students ready to undertake careers in Science, Technology,
Engineering, and Mathematics disciplines through various summer programs for
research interns and promote the biomedical manufacturing curriculum
development.