* 1100205
* In-Situ Experiment and Modeling of Electrode Failures in Li Ion Nano-batteries
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2015
* Jianyu Huang, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* kara peters
* 08/31/2015
* USD 350,000.00

The research objective of this grant is to elucidate the mechanisms of
electrochemically driven mechanical failures in silicon nanowire electrodes for
Lithium ion batteries. In-situ experiments and modeling of nanoscale batteries
will be performed to investigate the failures in single nanowire electrodes. The
proposed research involves three tightly coupled thrusts: (i) A nanomechanical
testing device will be used to quantitatively measure the mechanical properties
of lithiated silicon nanowires. (ii) The in-situ electron microscopy imaging
will reveal the real-time processes of electrochemical reaction induced
deformation, amorphization, and cracking. (iii) Atomistic and finite element
modeling will enable the understanding of stress generation, crack initiation
and growth on the time and size scales of battery experiments with atomic scale
fidelity.

Advanced battery technologies are critically important for applications from
portable electronics to electric vehicles. Lithium ion batteries are presently
the best performing ones, but they are limited in capacity and reliability.
Silicon is being considered as a promising electrode for Lithium ion batteries,
due to its highest theoretical charge capacity. However, Silicon electrodes
often suffer from mechanical degradation, leading to capacity fading. Currently,
there is a lack of understanding of the stress generation and failure mechanisms
in lithiated Silicon. This project will show and explain when, where, and how
the crack initiates and propagates in lithiated silicon nanowires. Results will
provide insights into electrode failures that cannot be offered by traditional
battery testing. This research will provide the basis for understanding,
controlling, and mitigating materials degradation in high capacity Lithium ion
batteries.