* 1100554
* Stress Distributions Determined in Short T2 BioMaterials by MRI-based Finite Strain and Mathematical Modeling
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2011,06/30/2015
* Corey Neu, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Mary Toney
* 06/30/2015
* USD 360,000.00

The research objective of this award is to use a combination of medical imaging
and mathematical modeling to determine and characterize the mechanics of
biomaterials. Medical imaging modalities, such as magnetic resonance imaging
(MRI), can noninvasively visualize internal strains throughout the volume of
materials and tissues. Mathematical modeling extends the strain data to
determine spatially-dependent stresses and material properties. Studies
conducted under this award will determine the extent to which rapid MRI
techniques can characterize the mechanics of a broad range of biomaterials that,
in particular, exhibit short spin-spin (T2) relaxation times and are challenging
to image. Mathematical modeling will further be developed to relate strains and
stresses through the incorporation of MRI data with mixture theory and nonlinear
constitutive relations.

If successful, these studies would significantly advance the characterization of
materials and enhance the design of novel bio-inspired materials. The knowledge
gained from results would additionally enable the evaluation of tissue damage
and degeneration, and the characterization of tissue remodeling and implanted
biomaterial integration. Research will be disseminated through publications and
presentations. Integrated education and outreach activities arise as a natural
and creative outgrowth of mechanics studies, and are designed to provide an
interactive and problem-solving approach toward learning. Undergraduate courses
in tissue mechanics will be augmented with new imaging-based modules.
Emphasizing education and outreach activities will promote higher education in
science and engineering from an early age through interactions with the
Indianapolis Children's Museum.