* 1100179
* Antiferromagnetic Spinor Bose-Einstein Condensates
* MPS,PHY
* 09/15/2011,08/31/2017
* Chandra Raman, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Alexander Cronin
* 08/31/2017
* USD 466,000.00

Our experimental program explores spinor Bose-Einstein condensates (BECs) of
sodium atoms. Unique properties of the quantum fluid derive from its
antiferromagnetic interactions, features that lead us to explore the rich
frontier area between ultracold atoms and correlated electronic materials.
Unlike its ferromagnetic cousin, rubidium-87, the sodium BEC in an optical trap
possesses a nematic order parameter. A novel non-destructive imaging scheme is
proposed to uncover the spatial dependence of this order, based upon detection
of spin alignment rather than orientation. The spatial distribution of
nematicity will be measured in the vicinity of a quantum phase transition
mediated by the quadratic Zeeman Effect. The method will be used to examine both
the dynamics of spatial fluctuations, including the nucleation of quantum half-
vortices, as well as the structure of the equilibrium ground state. The
antiferromagnetic interactions motivate us to experimentally realize and explore
the limits to motional decoherence in a perfectly miscible two-component BEC.
Finally, in a two dimensional antiferromagnetic BEC a Berezinskii-Kosterlitz-
Thouless transition is predicted that is mediated by bosonic pairs of atoms with
non-trivial spin (anti)-correlations.

Magnetism is intimately connected to spin. In a gas of atoms cooled to near
absolute zero the spins of the individual atoms interact with one another to
create ordered states - ferromagnetic if the magnetic moments are aligned with
each other, or antiferromagnetic if the moments tend to oppose one another. In
an antiferromagnet, the spins choose an axis in space and arrange themselves to
point both positively and negatively along that axis, so that the total magnetic
moment is zero. The energy difference between antiferromagnet and ferromagnet,
if it were expressed as a temperature, is only a few billionths of a degree
above absolute zero. Remarkably, we can experimentally distinguish between these
two states, so the atoms are expressing their preference very strongly indeed.
Our research will examine how an antiferromagnet reorders its axis of alignment
in response to an external magnetic field. This is known as a phase transition,
analogous to what happens to a liquid as the temperature increases to near its
boiling point. In our gas, however, the transition is not mediated by thermal
effects, but by quantum mechanics. Quantum phase transitions, as these are
known, occur in many solid state materials, including superconductors, and our
research can shed light on their properties. Apart from fundamental interest,
they could lead to new devices that exploit the laws of quantum mechanics such
as topological quantum computers.