* 1100868
* Distribution and Moment-Robust Optimization Models and Algorithms
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2016
* Sanjay Mehrotra, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Georgia-Ann Klutke
* 08/31/2016
* USD 200,000.00

Optimization models and methods are widely used in decision problems.
Incorporating parameter uncertainty is important in constructing representative
optimization models. This parameter uncertainty may be described by a
probability distribution, the moments of a probability distribution, or using
bounds and confidence intervals on moments. When estimating uncertain
parameters, information is also available on the error distribution of the
estimated parameter. The research objective of this award is to study properties
and develop algorithmic methods for solving multivariate optimization models
that incorporate parameter uncertainty using limited knowledge on their
distribution, and the parameter estimation errors. The optimization models will
be based on using parameter distribution moment estimates. The models will
incorporate moment estimation errors using a suitable penalty approach.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If successful, the results of this research will lead to
the development of a new class of decision optimization modeling tools with
associated algorithmic techniques for solving these models. This award will
contribute to better handling of parameter uncertainty in single and two-stage
inventory planning models, the classical least squares model, and the models
involving objectives described by quadratic functions. A better understanding of
algorithmic implications of parameter uncertainty in these problems will provide
foundation for handling parameter uncertainty in other application models that
use the planning, the least squares and quadratic objectives as basic building
blocks. The award will also contribute to the development of computational tools
implementing the algorithms solution techniques. Experiments will be performed
to validate the algorithms, and to compare the properties of the solutions
generated from the models incorporating distributional knowledge with those that
ignore this information.