* 1100309
* Mathematics of Synthetic Gene Networks
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2011,07/31/2016
* Yixin Shi, Arizona State University
* Continuing Grant
* Mary Ann Horn
* 07/31/2016
* USD 684,621.00

This project uses the combination of mathematical, engineering, and biological
techniques to construct, monitor, and analyze novel engineered gene networks.
The objective of the research is to expand the mathematical framework used in
the modeling and analysis of synthetic gene networks. First, the investigators
systematically study stochasticity at separatrices of bistable synthetic gene
networks. Recently developed yeast bistable gene networks are used for the first
time to initialize gene networks on their separatrices. In particular, the
difference between Gillespie algorithm and Chemical Langevin equation (CLE)
based algorithms in simulating stochastic processes near bifurcation points is
investigated, both analytically and experimentally. With the experience in
studying bistable systems, the next step is to mathematically and experimentally
analyze nonlinear stochastic dynamics in three potential well systems. Nonlinear
stochastic dynamics in multi potential well systems have not been well studied.
This network is constructed using available, well-characterized components and
techniques and by combining microfluidics devices, single cell live imaging and
stochastic modeling to observe and study noise induced random state switching.
Finally, methods of high dimensional analysis of gene networks are developed.
Tools for dynamical analysis of high dimensional gene networks have been
lacking. This project develops mathematical methods to expand the analysis of
gene networks from two dimensions into higher dimensionalities. High throughput
network identification methods that utilize parallel computing are developed.
Bifurcation analysis of high dimensional dynamical systems with applications in
gene networks is tested. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Novel systematic understanding of
cell differentiation and reprogramming derives from the study of synthetic
multistable gene networks. Synthetic multistable systems provide unique
opportunities to study the core mechanisms of cell pluripotency and
differentiation because highly connected small transcription networks regulating
cell differentiation have topological similarities with the synthetic gene
networks under consideration in this project. Constructing and analyzing small
multistable gene network deepens our understanding of multistability, which can
arise from similar topologies in stem cell gene regulations. Additionally,
mathematical theories and tools to study high dimensional nonlinear dynamics and
stochasticity in the context of gene networks are developed. Currently,
theoretical efforts to study cellular multistable systems are lacking. This
research fills the gap between technological progress and available analytical
tools to facilitate future biotechnological development. In addition, both
undergraduate and graduate students carry out synthetic biology experiments and
analysis. By participating in the international Genetically Engineered Machine
(iGEM) competition, these students promote developments of modern biological
technologies at Arizona State University. K-12 students and teachers in the
Phoenix metropolitan area will also have opportunities to participate in
cutting-edge research activities with scientific and infrastructure support from
the principal investigators and the university.