* 1100742
* Developing Bridge Weigh-in-Motion (B-WIM) Health Monitoring Systems for Bridge Infrastructure Safety
* ENG,CMMI
* 04/01/2011,03/31/2016
* Nasim Uddin, University of Alabama at Birmingham
* Standard Grant
* elise miller-hooks
* 03/31/2016
* USD 350,000.00

This grant provides funding for research on the Next Generation Bridge Weigh-in-
Motion (B-WIM) system. This system addresses the bridge safety problem using a
two-fold approach: the control of overloaded trucks and the safety
assessment/monitoring of bridges. The research will be based on the mathematical
modeling of a coupled system of differential equations that represent the
dynamic interaction of a moving truck with a bridge while accounting for
uncertainties that are due to the unknown road profile and dynamic truck
properties. The road profile can be measured but, as it is likely to change over
time and the exact transverse location of the truck in its lane is unknown,
there is a stochastic component of the system. Therefore, the spring and damping
properties of the truck tire and suspension will be treated probabilistically,
using a Bayesian Updating approach for the properties of the truck fleet. The
difficulties associated with this system when it detects the presence of other
smaller vehicles that interfere with the signal will be addressed using a new
field of statistics known as the "Classification with a Reject Option". In this
way, fleets of vehicles can be simulated to represent a range of situations and
the simulations will be complemented by independent field trials for validation
purposes.

This project seeks to develop a bridge monitoring and protection system that is
effective without being manpower intensive. This project, jointly funded by UK
and Ireland funding agencies that leverage the NSF investment, will generate a
broad spectrum of spin-off technologies. The potential payoff of this program
could be the rapid technology insertion into existing bridge maintenance systems
that are needed for much of the bridge stock in the USA and Europe. Moreover,
wide deployment of this system has the potential to greatly improve the
effectiveness of overload enforcement and to increase road safety for all users.