* 1100730
* Twenty-Fourth Cumberland Conference on Combinatorics, Graph Theory, and Computing
* MPS,DMS
* 01/15/2011,12/31/2011
* Andre Kezdy, University of Louisville Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 12/31/2011
* USD 13,280.00

The Twenty-Fourth Cumberland Conference on Combinatorics, Graph Theory and
Computing will be held May 12-14, 2011 at the Shelby campus of the University of
Louisville, Louisville, Kentucky. This is an annual conference that has been
held every year since 1988 at varying venues; it brings together students and
researchers from across the South Eastern U.S. region to discuss the latest
advances in discrete mathematics and computer science. The conference theme is
``building bridges between the old and the new'', a theme that reflects our
commitment to the support of the next generation of discrete mathematicians and
computer scientists. This conference plays a unique role as a regional exchange
for researchers of all levels, but young faculty and students are especially
encouraged to participate. The conference topics are partially ordered sets,
hypergraphs, extremal combinatorics, and applications of these, particularly to
theoretical computer science and computational complexity. Applications of these
topics span a broad spectrum of natural and social sciences, and form the
theoretical foundation of modern information infrastructure. Combinatorial and
graph-theoretic methods are used in problems of biology, computer science,
ecology, statistical physics, chemistry, and logistics, including problems
concerning transportation and communication networks such as cellular phone
networks and the Internet. Computational complexity theory is a branch of
computer science that seeks to categorize problems according to the resources
required to solve them. In many cases, combinatorial tools are used to determine
the optimal use of resources.

The conference is expected to attract roughly 100 participants and scores of
contributed talks. Four internationally-renowned researchers have accepted
invitations to be principal speakers: Maria Axenovich (Iowa State University),
Jeno Lehel (University of Memphis), Dhruv Mubayi (University of Illinois at
Chicago), and William T. Trotter (The Georgia Institute of Technology). The
conference is organized by a committee of seven people from the Department of
Mathematics at the University of Louisville; the chair of the committee is André
Kézdy.

More information can be found at the conference web site:
http://www.math.louisville.edu/Cumberland/