* 1100818
* GOALI: Multi-Scale Deformation and Failure Modeling of Magnesium Alloys for Impact Analysis and  Forming Process Simulations
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2011,07/31/2016
* Raja Mishra, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* kara peters
* 07/31/2016
* USD 340,000.00

The objective of this Grant Opportunity for Academic Liaison with Industry
(GOALI) project, in collaboration with General Motors (GM) R&D Center, will
develop a novel system of experimentally validated, physics-based multi-level
computational models for simulating multi-scale deformation and predicting
ductile failure in Magnesium alloys. Simulations will focus on high strain rate
impact loading and forming processes. The multi-scale model will develop modules
at three relevant scales, viz. (i) macroscopic scale of structural components,
(ii) microscopic scale of individual grains and polycrystalline aggregates, and
(iii) atomic scales of crystal lattices for postulating crack evolution. Both
homogenization and localization strategies will be incorporated in a
hierarchical-concurrent framework. Specific developmental modules include: (i)
image-based three-dimensional microstructure generation of polycrystalline
aggregates, (ii) image-based crystal-plasticity FEM modeling of microstructural
deformation and failure, (iii) homogenized continuum plasticity-damage laws for
incorporation in macroscopic models, and (iv) macroscopic simulations. GM will
be responsible for experiments at different scales to validate and calibrate the
computational models. The program will provide an unprecedented understanding of
the role of microstructure on deformation and failure characteristics in
Magnesium alloys.

Magnesium alloys have a huge potential for enhancing fuel efficiency and energy
economization in the automotive industry, which will be facilitated. The program
will aid the materials industry, where materials development is stymied by not
knowing how variabilities at different scales affect performance and processing.
Graduate students will have a strong interaction with eminent industrial
researchers. The program will educate next generation of engineers on the
challenges of emerging technologies, with a unique academia-industry
perspective.