* 1100507
* GOALI/Collaborative Research:  Electrically-Enhanced Precision MicroRolling
* ENG,CMMI
* 04/01/2011,01/31/2016
* Robert Gao, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* Mary Toney
* 01/31/2016
* USD 268,022.00

The research objective of this Grant Opportunity for Academic Liaison with
Industry (GOALI) award is to significantly enhance the formability of thin sheet
metals and the dimensional accuracy of formed features at the micrometer scale
by integrating high-density electrical current with mechanical deformation
through an instrumented desktop rolling mill. Two fundamental questions will be
addressed in achieving the objectives: (1) how electrical current affects the
plasticity and residual stress of metals subjected to deformation; and (2) how
to realize in-process measurement for effective microrolling process control.
The planned research tasks are: (1) Experimental characterization and
constitutive modeling of material behavior subjected to mechanical and
electrical loading; (2) Multi-physics modeling of mechanical stress, thermal and
electro-magnetic fields in the microrolling process and mill structure; (3) In
process sensing and data mapping for process characterization; and (4) System
integration. &lt;br/&gt;If successful, the new hybrid process will reduce
process design complexity, reduce energy consumption, and reduce chemical wastes
in achieving thin metal foils with desired surface finish. The new sensing
methods and instrument design will push the current limits of the rolling
process in terms of size, precision, cost, and energy efficiency. One of the
many uses of the metal foil is micro-electrodes and contacts for the next
generation of bio-implants, such as pacemakers for treating heart disorders,
deep brain simulation electrodes for potentially treating Parkinson?s disease,
depression, dystonia or chronic pain, and artificial pancreas for monitoring and
developing new therapeutics that regulate Type 1 Diabetes. Device
miniaturization enabled by microrolling will benefit patients by improving their
quality of life. The collaboration between academic institutions and industry
will inspire the innovations and talents needed for U.S. manufacturing companies
to remain competitive. The project will provide training to graduate and
undergraduate students and practitioners through research opportunities, class
projects, short courses, and internships.