* 1100489
* A Novel Photovoltaic Device Using Type II Tunable Core-shell Nanowires
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/2011,07/31/2015
* Jan Yarrison-Rice, University of Cincinnati Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 07/31/2015
* USD 350,000.00

This project is jointly funded by the Energy, Power, and Adaptive Systems (EPAS)
Program in the Division of Electrical, Communications and Cyber Systems (ECCS)
and the Electronic and Photonic Materials (EPM) Program in the Division of
Materials Research (DMR).

Research Objectives and Approaches: The objective of this research is to design,
fabricate and characterize unique solar cell devices based on strained core-
shell semiconductor nanowires. The approach is to design the strained core-shell
nanowires so that spatial separation of the electrons and holes occur quantum
mechanically on a very short time scale which results in longer charge
lifetimes. Photovoltaic devices will be fabricated from these nanowires and
electronic structure and performance will be confirmed through optical and
transport measurements.

Intellectual Merit: Most existing solar-cell technologies use electric fields to
separate electrons and holes which can be inefficient and slow. Design of
strained core-shell nanowires can enable the rapid separation of electrons and
holes through quantum confinement into different layers which should
dramatically increase the efficiency for converting light into usable power.
Control of the strain allows tuning of the band structure and offsets, which
provides a route for optimizing the resulting solar cells.

Broader Impacts: This research has strong societal impacts because of the
potential for designing high-efficiency solar cells for reducing dependence on
fossil fuels. The increased fundamental knowledge of electronic structure and
transport in strained core-shell nanowires also significantly impacts nanowire
electronics and nanowire-based chemical or biological sensors. The proposed
research will train undergraduate and graduate students in advanced theoretical
and experimental nanotechnology techniques. In addition, a summer workshop for
select high school teachers will guide new educational materials development to
allow future students to share in the excitement of and knowledge behind this
alternate energy research.