* 1100700
* Novel Lightweight Syntactic Foams Made of Nanoengineered Microballoons: Synthesis, Processing and Characterization
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/15/2011,07/31/2015
* Hareesh Tippur, Auburn University
* Standard Grant
* kara peters
* 07/31/2015
* USD 300,315.00

This research project aims to identify the related material processing
parameters, feasibility of scaling up CNT coated filler production to create
relatively large samples and develop/extend suitable mechanical characterization
methods to study the behavior of the composites under static and dynamic loading
conditions. Creation and characterization of novel, cost-effective, lightweight,
structured, particle-filled polymer foams is the primary goal of this research.
The resulting composites based on microwave radiation could offer hierarchical
materials where carbon nanotubes (CNT) grown directly on hollow microfillers
improve the ability of the filler to anchor to the matrix by enhancing
tensile/fracture characteristics without compromising the compression
properties, circumventing agglomeration effects, and/or improving electrical
characteristics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If successful, it is conceivable that a
new class of engineered particulate composites can be introduced based on this
research. Multifunctional lightweight structural foams and composites are of
great value in a variety of engineering applications including aerospace,
transportation and marine industries. Additional societal benefits of the
proposed research include education of graduate students in multidisciplinary
areas of processing and characterization of materials. Students from
underrepresented groups will be attracted to this research through existing on-
campus programs at Auburn. Also K-12 outreach resources will be utilized to
expose students to aspects of microscopy and mechanical testing. A display will
be presented during graduate recruitment events to attract domestic students to
engineering programs at Auburn. The findings of the research will be
disseminated through topical symposia as well as archival publications.