* 1100101
* Degradation and Fault Detection of Rotordynamic Machinery Using Real-Time Experimental Modal Analysis
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2011,06/30/2014
* Itzhak Green, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence Bank
* 06/30/2014
* USD 200,000.00

This research study aims to develop an in-line real-time diagnostic capability
for turbomachinery combining rotordynamics, fracture mechanics, and tribology to
predict when equipment should be taken out of service. The concept is to use
system condition metrics derived from the application of experimental modal
analysis to operational response data. The research will begin with data derived
from an analytical model of a rotor-shaft system having moderate sized fatigue
cracks, bearing wear, and lubricant deterioration and starvation in any
combination. Synthetic response measurements matching current technology for
rotordynamic systems will be derived from the model, and processed by a
technique for experimental modal analysis to accurately indicate the condition
of the system single or multiple faults and their criticality. The signal-to-
noise ratios required to implement concepts as in-line diagnostics for
operational systems will be identified. Viable concepts will be subjected to a
preliminary experimental validation using the onsite rotordynamics laboratory.

Turbomachinery is important to many aspects of our society, especially for power
generation, water supply systems, aviation and naval systems. Avoidance of
catastrophic failure is presently performed primarily on a scheduled basis.
Development of a technique that identifies when systems actually require
maintenance, thereby avoiding unnecessary shutdowns, would have tremendous
economic impact, because it would reduce the frequency with which expensive
inspection procedures are performed, as well as lessen requirements for excess
capacity. This study focuses on the presence of cracks in the shaft and
impending bearing and lubrication failure. It would use current technology for
response measurement, so it would not require major alterations to existing
systems. Further development would make it implementable as an in-line
diagnostic and prognostic tool, which could be employed in parallel with other
in-line diagnostic techniques.