* 1100664
* LTREB: Experimental monitoring and manipulation of a Chihuahuan Desert rodent community
* BIO,DEB
* 02/01/2011,01/31/2015
* Morgan Ernest, Utah State University
* Standard Grant
* Saran Twombly
* 01/31/2015
* USD 87,289.00

Diverse ecosystems are changing in response to shifts in climate and species
composition; and understanding how communities, populations, and species will
respond to these changes is a major challenge in ecology. Progress has been
complicated because some climate changes are directional while others are cyclic
in nature. Furthermore, responses to climate can be affected by species
interactions and by time lags in how species respond to changes in climate. This
project will use a long-term study of small mammals near Portal, Arizona, to
understand whether recent changes in desert communities result from directional
anthropogenic global change or from a natural, decadal-scale climate cycle, the
Pacific Decadal Oscillation. Long-term experimental manipulations removing a
keystone group of species, kangaroo rats, will be used to assess whether and how
species composition influences ecological responses to climate.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will further scientific understanding of
climate change impacts on desert ecosystems, and whether shifts in deserts are
due to anthropogenic global change or natural decadal scale climate
oscillations. Results will also indicate whether species composition can direct
ecosystem-level responses to climate change. This project will integrate
research and education by training undergraduate and graduate students and by
disseminating research results broadly through web-based fora such as blogs.