* 1100920
* Dynamics of the Neutral Thermosphere
* GEO,AGS
* 08/01/2011,07/31/2014
* John Noto, Scientific Solutions Incorporated
* Continuing Grant
* Anne-Marie Schmoltner
* 07/31/2014
* USD 477,225.00

This is a 3-year instrumentation project to refurbish and upgrade an existing
Fabry-Perot interferometer (FPI) at the Arecibo Observatory into a modern
capable facility. Resulting from the effort will be a dual line imaging FPI with
new hardware and software that will have greater sensitivity, will be automated
and remotely operable, and will be able to simultaneously measure E-region and
F-region neutral winds. The upgrade will allow thermospheric neutral winds and
temperatures to be measured routinely and continuously with high accuracy at the
Arecibo Observatory. Ground-based FPIs constitute a crucial source of wind
information and the activity would secure and improve the capability of the
Arecibo instrument, which is located at a key location with respect to
electrodynamic processes. Specifically, the upgrade will allow for a
continuation of an ongoing thermospheric climatology that has been collected at
Arecibo for more than 30 years. The automated data collection will increase the
amount of storm time data, needed to understand how the thermospheric wind field
is modified during periods of high magnetic
activity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Community infrastructure building and service is
at the heart of the activity. Processed data will be made readily and freely
available via the existing aeronomy community Madrigal database and will
facilitate a wide range of upper atmosphere dynamics and thermodynamics science
investigations. Such studies fit within the larger context of Global Climate
Change research. The facility and data will also be used in support of various
educational activities.