* 1100257
* A Tractable Computational Framework for Dynamic Coverage and Clustering
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2011,07/31/2015
* Carolyn Beck, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Jordan Berg
* 07/31/2015
* USD 381,015.00

The research objective of this award is to develop a computational framework
addressing dynamic clustering and classification problems defined over large-
scale networks. This framework will specifically address combinatorial
computational complexity and scalability, variability in coverage and
coordination cost functions, area-specific constraints on dynamics of
constituent elements, their communication network structures, and their
interactions or interdependencies. The dominant methods in our framework are
deterministic, but have a strong stochastic conceptual basis where a probability
density function is ascribed on the space of decision variables in such a way
that the most probable value for the decision variable is an approximate
solution to the combinatorial problem. This probability density function is
derived using the maximum entropy principle. In this research, we bring together
tools from control and dynamic system theory, optimization theory, and
information theory to formulate a flexible framework that can be used for many
application domains. In particular, we will demonstrate the framework through
clustering and classification problems related to Intelligent Building Systems
and Disaster Relief Operations. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If successful, the
proposed research will directly impact analysis and design of combinatorial
optimization algorithms and application areas of great significance to medical,
infrastructure, and cyber industries such as bioinformatics, chemoinformatics,
sensor networks, combinatorial drug discovery, and data mining. In particular
our results will (1) enable simultaneous coverage and routing in sensor networks
found in intelligent building systems, (2) facilitate optimization of search and
rescue operations in disaster relief scenarios, and (3) generate scalable
algorithms for combinatorial drug design. Graduate and undergraduate engineering
students will benefit through classroom instruction and involvement in the
research. A graphical user interface (GUI) based software module will be
integrated with the web to generate interactive communication, capabilities with
experts, students and the community at large.