* 1100968
* Management and Operations of the Arecibo Observatory (AO)
* MPS,AST
* 06/01/2011,05/31/2018
* Michael Nolan, SRI International
* Cooperative Agreement
* Ralph Gaume
* 05/31/2018
* USD 0.00

SRI International (SRI) teams with the Universities Space Research Association
(USRA) and Universidad Metropolitana (UMET) to form the Arecibo Management
Partners (AMP) to manage and operate the Arecibo Observatory (AO). AMP will
operate on-site at AO as a unified organization reporting to Director Robert
Kerr. USRA brings expertise in astronomy and planetary science, while UMET
brings expertise in education, public outreach, and facilities management.
UMET's large employee base and extensive on-island resources will provide career
paths and employment opportunities for new and existing AO staff.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Twenty-seven supporting institutions will collaborate with
AMP to advance a common vision of AO's future in science and education. In
addition to these academic institutions, AMP will partner with the Puerto Rico
Department of Education and two Puerto Rican economic development agencies.
Through its facility development plan, AMP will provide broad technical,
equipment, and logistic resources to AO's science and education missions. This
includes expanding the AO user base and creating staffing resources and
professional development opportunities for AO staff. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;AMP's
plan for radio astronomy will focus on science endorsed by the Decadal Survey
process: gravitational-wave astronomy through pulsar timing, studies of cosmic
structure formation and galactic energetics through neutral-hydrogen surveys and
molecular-line spectroscopy, and probes of star formation and collapse through
Very Long Baseline Interferometry (VLBI). The planetary radar plan provides
invaluable characterization of near-Earth object orbits and physical properties,
for mitigation of both potential impact hazards and risks to future robotic and
crewed missions. The planetary radar program will also map planets and
satellites to uncover surface features, sub-surface geologies, and interior
structures. AMP's space and atmospheric sciences plan will integrate the NSF
Coupling, Energetics, and Dynamics of Atmospheric Regions (CEDAR), National
Space Weather, and Climate Change communities as primary stakeholders, and
exploit important new programs in ionospheric interactions and conjugate
studies. The plans for SAS development include improved 430 MHz transmitter
reliability via installation of a solid-state modulator, installation of a
magnetic conjugate Incoherent Scatter Radar (ISR), instrument automation and
remote control, new helium and metal resonant lidars, a new infrared camera in
the optics lab, and a phased-array radar surrounding the AO telescope.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed management plan weaves AO into the fabric of
scientific, educational, and economic development in Puerto Rico. The
educational plan will reinstitute a program to bring 42,000 K-12 students to AO
for tours and workshops emphasizing STEM education, create a summer research
academy for high-school students, train 20 STEM high-school teachers each year,
maintain the existing REU program, create undergraduate intern positions in all
aspects of AO operations, and, for the first time, create PhD opportunities for
Hispanic students with mainland universities. The outreach plan will update the
Angel Ramos Foundation Visitor Center to expand the visitor experience with
tours of the entire site. Virtual tours of AO and our universe will be developed
on an interactive video gaming platform for distribution world-wide. AMP will
enhance technical literacy for economic development in Puerto Rico and to train
a new generation of astronomers and space scientists from a traditionally
underrepresented Hispanic population.