* 1100830
* Coaxially Coated Vertical Carbon Nanofiber Arrays as 3D Multifunctional Electrodes for Battery-Supercapacitor Hybrids
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/2011,05/31/2015
* Jun Li, Kansas State University
* Standard Grant
* Khershed Cooper
* 05/31/2015
* USD 280,293.00

This award provides funding for the study and development of materials and
methods for the creation of a set of hierarchical nanostructured electrodes. The
approach combines dissimilar functional nanomaterials into a unique three-
dimensional architecture based on vertical nanowire arrays. The targeted
electrode comprises a ternary nanostructure consisting of: 1) a coaxial coating
of a thin film of a lithium storage material such as a metal oxide (for cathode
use) or silicon (for anode use) layered on 2) a brush-like carbon template
(i.e., a vertically aligned carbon nanofiber array grown on a copper foil) onto
which 3) an electrically conductive polymer layer is further deposited as an
outer sheath. The highly conductive carbon nanofiber core serves both as a
reliable current collector and as a stable structural support, enabling fast
lithium reactions with the storage materials (metal oxides or silicon) for
applications in supercapacitors and Li-ion batteries. The combination of the
stable carbon nanofiber core and conductive polymer sheath makes it possible for
the sandwiched lithium storage materials to accommodate the inherent large
volumetric expansion and contraction during charge-discharge cycles.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If successful, the results of this research will lead to
Li-ion based battery-supercapacitor hybrids with significantly improved power
density, greater energy capacity, and prolonged cycle life, overcoming drawbacks
that limit the utility of many other such electrical energy storage devices. The
ternary composites can be used as either cathodes or anodes through the
deposition of appropriate lithium storage materials. The approach to fabricating
these materials is based on scalable processing technologies that are suitable
for industrial manufacturing. This research addresses high-performance
electrical energy storage solutions that form an essential part of the
development and utilization of renewable energy resources.