* 1100263
* Dynamical Mechanisms Influencing the Population Structure of Airborne Pathogens: Theory and Observations
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2014
* David Schmale, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Massimo Ruzzene
* 08/31/2014
* USD 429,931.00

The goal of this project is to understand the nonlinear dynamics underlying the
mixing of airborne populations of microorganisms, via testing of hypotheses that
blend theoretical considerations of dynamical atmospheric structures with
aerobiological sampling and analysis. The research program is built on the
observation that in environmental flows, chaotic dynamical structure makes
efficient movement and dispersal of agents possible, whether these agents are
pathogens of plants and animals, chemical pollutants, or engineered devices like
sensor platforms or delivery vehicles. We focus on understanding the atmospheric
transport of fungi in the genus Fusarium, which are causal agents of a number of
devastating plant and animal diseases. Using dynamical systems methods such as
Lagrangian coherent structures and almost-invariant sets, we will compute,
track, and predict atmospheric transport barriers governing the motion of
microorganisms such as Fusarium between habitats. By comparison with results of
microbiological analysis, we expect to reveal how dynamical structures partition
and mix airborne populations of microorganisms, and relatedly, how mixtures of
microorganisms encode their recent history of large-scale atmospheric
mixing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The resulting new framework will likely provide a
new approach to aerobiological modeling and may assist farmers by providing an
early warning system for high risk plant pathogens in the future. To this end,
students working on this project will intern at a company conducting
aerobiological modeling related to agricultural and environmental decision-
making. Moreover, the developed framework could aid in improving modeling of
transport of pathogens in more general geophysical environments, paving the way
for more effective management strategies for the spread of infectious diseases
affecting plants, domestic animals, and humans. Online materials will be
generated in the form of multimedia tutorials to instruct the public on the
relevance of chaotic dynamics to ecology, as well as computational tools for use
by other researchers.