* 1100930
* Establishing the Shear Constitutive Laws of Fiber-Reinforced Polymer (FRP)-Strengthened Concrete Elements
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2011,08/31/2015
* Abdeldjelil Belarbi, University of Houston
* Standard Grant
* Mary Toney
* 08/31/2015
* USD 297,065.00

The objective of this research study is to establish new constitutive laws for
Fiber-Reinforced Polymer (FRP)-strengthened reinforced concrete elements
subjected to pure shear. The use of FRP materials in civil engineering as an
economical method for strengthening of deficient concrete structures dates back
to the 1970s. Development of material constitutive models for FRP shear-
strengthened concrete elements has not been previously conducted due to lack of
experimental data. An element-based approach will be adopted in which
constitutive relations of panel elements making up the composite structure are
developed then integrated using the finite element method to predict the overall
behavior. In order to generate these relations, large-scale tests of a series of
FRP-strengthened reinforced concrete panels subjected to pure shear will be
conducted using the University of Houston unique Universal Panel Tester machine.
The NSF-supported program OpenSees will be used to develop the new finite
element models.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research study is expected to improve
the accuracy of available design guidelines. This research study will have
broader impact through the development of new educational modules that aim at
expanding the knowledge of FRP composite materials to K-12, undergraduate and
graduate students, as well as practicing engineers. Recruiting of under-
represented students will be conducted through coordination with existing
outreach programs at the University of Houston. A technology transfer plan will
be implemented, in which the research results are disseminated to the practicing
engineering community through a series of seminars and presentations at national
and international conferences, and publications in refereed technical journals.