* 1100185
* Novel Coaxial Cable Bragg Grating Sensors for Large Strain Measurement in SHM
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2011,07/31/2015
* Hai Xiao, Missouri University of Science and Technology
* Standard Grant
* Massimo Ruzzene
* 07/31/2015
* USD 280,000.00

Abstract 1100185 Jun Fan & Hai Xiao Missouri University of Science & Technology

This project aims to carry out investigation for a tangible breakthrough in
sensing technology for large strain measurement with high resolution for
structural health monitoring (SHM) applications, based on the feasibility-
proven, novel concept of coaxial cable Bragg grating (CCBG). The CCBG sensor
inherits many advantages from its optical counterpart, such as high resolution,
remote operation and multiplexing capability, but has much improved robustness,
reliability and survivability for SHM. Two innovative approaches, the segmented
transmission-line approach and the coupled mode theory for coaxial cable, will
be investigated to understand device physics and to guide device design and
fabrication. In addition, both the low-cost, controlled deformation method and
the high-precision, laser hole-drilling method will be studied to fabricate
high-quality CCBG devices. The strain-induced frequency shifts of multiplexed
CCBG sensors will be processed using the cross-correlation method. These
innovations will be well integrated leading to the development and demonstration
of the new, robust CCBG sensor platform for large-strain measurements. The
research will be effectively integrated into education through carefully planned
educational and outreach activities, including course enhancement, involvement
of undergraduate and graduate students into research, recruitment of women and
minority students, and outreach to middle/high school students through hands-on
workshops and science projects.