* 1101836
* CAREER: Parasites and the Evolution of Mating Systems: Do Parasites Drive Complex Behavior in Animals?
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2010,07/31/2014
* Vanessa Ezenwa, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Michelle Elekonich
* 07/31/2014
* USD 615,488.00

Parasites and infectious diseases can have profound effects on their hosts, yet
relatively little is known about how parasites influence animal behavior. The
work will address three fundamental questions: (1) Does individual infection
risk vary with mating status and behavior? (2) Do parasites drive variation in
mating tactics by influencing individual mating decisions, behavior, and mating
success? (3) What are the mechanisms underlying associations between mating
behavior and parasite infection? To answer these questions, associations between
behavior, physiology and gastrointestinal nematode parasitism in the African
antelope, Grant's gazelle (Gazella granti), will be studied. Taking advantage of
natural variation in the behavior of male gazelles, the study will examine
whether higher parasite infection levels are associated with differences in male
mating behavior. In addition, experimental manipulation of male parasite loads
will test the effect of parasites on individual mating decisions and mating
success. Finally the work will use field and physiological studies to
investigate whether reproductive behavior modifies male exposure and
susceptibility to parasites. The study results will reveal the extent to which
parasites shape behavioral strategies observed in host populations, shedding
light on the evolutionary significance of complex animal behaviors. The results
of this study will also make a timely contribution to knowledge of how animal
behavior may change in response to increasing parasite pressure. The project
will provide numerous educational opportunities for undergraduate and graduate
students. Biology students from both the U.S.A. and Kenya will gain hands-on
training in the fields of disease ecology and behavioral ecology. American
students will obtain international research experience working at the study site
in Kenya; and students from both countries will have unique opportunities for
academic and cultural exchange. This award is co-funded by NSF's Office of
International Science and Engineering.