* 1101627
* ICES: Small: Institutions for Cooperation in Large Economies of Strangers
* CSE,CCF
* 05/01/2011,05/31/2013
* Gabriele Camera, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Balasubramanian Kalyanasundaram
* 05/31/2013
* USD 230,889.00

Developed economies are largely based on impersonal exchange; trade does not
require high levels of information about others' past behavior. Consequently,
lack of trust, social distance, the possibility to break promises and other
trade frictions all hinder economic activity. This project employs theoretical
and experimental methodologies to study individual and group behavior in
economies populated by individuals who do not know each other and may not trust
each other. These strangers interact in pairs with randomly changing opponents
whose identities and past behaviors are unknown. In each trade encounter,
individuals can either cooperate or behave opportunistically. The sequence of
encounters is indefinite, so many outcomes are possible. Theoretically, self-
regarding individuals can overcome opportunistic temptations, and attain the
best outcome, by adopting community-based punishment schemes. The research will
pursue a systematic study of small and large laboratory economies based on these
indefinitely repeated matching games. It will advance knowledge in the social
and economic sciences by identifying behavioral elements and endogenously-
arising institutions that are associated to the emergence, sustainability, and
breakdown of cooperation among individuals who may neither know nor trust each
other. New insights about cooperation will have applications to disciplines in
which the study of social decision problems is an active area of research, such
as political science, accounting, and sociology.