* 1101465
* ICES: Small: The Structure of Signals: Causal Interdependence Models and Bayesian Inference
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2011,06/30/2015
* Lu Hong, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Tracy Kimbrel
* 06/30/2015
* USD 400,000.00

This interdisciplinary project investigates the detailed structure of
information sources and processing that underly strategic interactions in games
of incomplete information. Traditional economic models typically treat private
information, or signals, as generated from some underlying state. However,
multiagent interactions often pivot around situations where signals are actually
based on alternative interpretations of available information, and such
processes often produce qualitatively different results for the game. By
developing a common language using probabilistic graphical models, the effort
seeks insights about alternative models of signals, and computationally
effective representations in support of strategic analysis. Specific technical
developments will include extension of qualitative probabilistic reasoning
methods, tailored to capture important distinctions in signal structure. The
project further develops an expanded view of signals, that encompasses
deliberate choices about what information to consider in complex decisions under
uncertainty.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Results from this project will have
applications to many situations of economic significance. An example is the
domain of auctions, which encompasses markets in electronic commerce (e.g., eBay
and B2B exchange), internet advertising (keyword search, social media),
financial securities (equities, commodities), and energy (electricity, fuels).
Auctions are conventionally modeled in the game-theoretic framework employed in
this research, but typically using much more restricted models than necessary.
By bringing to bear new computational methods and extending the scope of
analysis, the project may lead to innovative new market designs, and a better
understanding of human and automated market behavior. The techniques employed
bridge across computational and economic disciplines, and open the door to more
comprehensive and operational models of decision making.