* 1101150
* RUI: Cocycles and rigidity for hyperbolic systems and actions
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2011,05/31/2014
* Boris Kalinin, University of South Alabama
* Standard Grant
* Bruce P. Palka
* 05/31/2014
* USD 45,271.00

The main objects of the proposed research are smooth dynamical systems such as
diffeomorphisms and flows, as well as smooth actions of higher rank abelian
groups. The main goal of the project is to study various rigidity properties for
hyperbolic, partially hyperbolic, and non-uniformly hyperbolic systems and
actions. Higher rank actions exhibit remarkable properties including rigidity of
invariant measures and smooth rigidity. In rank one case, rigidity occurs for
some non-typical systems, such as those with high smoothness of invariant
foliations or strong pinching. An important role in both areas is played by
cocycles. Investigating cohomology of non-commutative cocycles over hyperbolic
systems is a major part of the proposed research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The field
of Dynamical Systems studies evolution of mechanical, physical, and mathematical
systems over time. It provides applications to other areas of mathematics as
well as to many natural sciences such as physics, mechanics, computer science,
and biology. This field originated from differential equations and celestial
mechanics. It uses mathematical tools from analysis and topology to study
qualitative behavior of systems "in the long run". A major part of the project
is the study of more complex systems consisting of several individual ones that
commute with each other. Such complex systems appear naturally in algebra,
geometry, and physics. The PI works for the main regional university which is
primarily undergraduate and educates most of the local school
teachers.&lt;br/&gt;-----------------------------------------------------