* 1101197
* EAGER:    Porous Plastic-Based Cementitious Materials for Pervious Pavements
* ENG,CBET
* 01/01/2011,12/31/2012
* Naji Khoury, Temple University
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 12/31/2012
* USD 57,029.00

Proposal Title: EAGER: Porous Plastic-based Cementitious Materials for Pervious
Pavements

Principal Investigator: Naji Khoury

Institution: Temple University

Proposal No: 1101197

This EAGER project will test the hypothesis that plastic waste mixed with soil
and aggregates can be used to produce durable and clog-resistant porous
materials (porous plastic-based cementitious material, P-PBC) which can be used
for pervious pavements. Plastic waste disposal has become a major concern for
both the public and scientific communities alike. The manufacture of P-PBC
utilizes a large quantity of plastic bottles that are currently sent to
landfills, littered and/or incinerated. There are three research goals in this
project: (1) Evaluation of durability and clogging characteristics of P-PBC
materials. (2) Micro-structural investigation of P-PBC materials and (3) Life
cycle assessment and cost analysis of P-PBC materials. The findings from this
work will advance the state-of-knowledge of porous materials in pavement
engineering. This study will also open the door for further research on the
recycling of plastic waste into useful construction materials. The study will
support one graduate student from Temple University. It will also provide summer
internships to two students from Temple?s neighboring high school (Carver High
School of Engineering and Science, i.e., CHSES) to conduct research in the PI?s
laboratory. The student body at CHSES is 81% African-American, 8% Asian and 5%
Caucasian. The primary risk in this project comes from the fact that P-PBC has
not been tested for its longevity and resistance to clogging, a necessary step
before it can be used as pavement slabs on roads, sidewalks or even parking
lots. This work will provide necessary preliminary data on durability and
clogging characteristics of P-PBC needed to submit full research proposals.

Bruce Hamilton Program Director Environmental Sustainability 10/16/10