* 1101237
* Random Combinatorial Structures
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2011,07/31/2015
* Boris Pittel, Ohio State University
* Continuing Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 07/31/2015
* USD 210,000.00

Around 1960 Erdos and Renyi undertook a systematic study of what they called a
randomly evolving (re) graph. Starting with an empty graph on n vertices, at
each discrete moment a new edge is added, its position being chosen uniformly at
random among the re alternatives. The basic question is what does the random
graph look like after some m edges have been inserted? They were able to give a
remarkable concise asymptotic description of this evolving graph, and opened the
gates to a flood of research on this and many other random graph processes.
Today random graph theory is a thriving area of probabilistic combinatorics that
has found many applications in statistical physics (percolation), physical
chemistry and theoretical computer science. Quite remarkably, random graph
models have become indispensable for the analysis of probabilistic models of
growing information (social) networks. The proposer will continue his work on a
model of random graph (network) in which the new edges (links) tend to join the
more "social" vertices (nodes), those with higher than average number of already
existing links. However simple-minded, mathematical models of such graphs have a
potential to become useful quantitative tools in the statistical analysis of
real-life networks and they have proved to be valuable in other areas, such as
polymerization theory. The proposal includes problems on other classes of random
graphs, such as directed graphs in which each edge has a direction, chordal
diagrams--a key notion in knot theory, threshold graphs in which the nodes are
assigned weights and the edges develop only between the nodes with the total
weight exceeding a threshold value, and random graphs in which each vertex
degree exceeds 3. (The latter condition is basically necessary for the random
graph to have a Hamilton cycle.) He will also use random graphs with restricted
degrees to analyze solvability of a random system of Boolean equations. This
problem belongs to a rapidly developing area of combinatorial probability and
theoretical computer science that has turned out to be receptive to strikingly
diverse approaches, including models and methods of statistical physics.

This research may contribute to development of theoretical models and
mathematical techniques that can be used by researchers in various areas who
confront a challenge to describe (to predict) the structural behavior of huge
networks based on assumptions regarding rules of local (pairwise) interactions
between the individual nodes. The proposer will use this research program to
engage his graduate students and to guide their studies toward completion of
their PhD degrees.