* 1101721
* Existence of Solutions to Hyperbolic Differential Equations in Mathematical Physics
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2011,04/30/2012
* Hans Lindblad, University of California-San Diego
* Continuing Grant
* Bruce P. Palka
* 04/30/2012
* USD 159,714.00

This project is concerned with basic mathematical questions about systems of
nonlinear hyperbolic differential equations in mathematical physics. These
include many important equations in classical field theory and continuum
mechanics (e.g., Einstein's equations of general relativity, Euler's equations
for fluids). The basic questions are: (i) Do we have existence and uniqueness of
solutions, and continuous dependence on data, in a certain class? (ii) Can
solutions blow up (e.g., black holes in general relativity)? (iii) What is the
long-time behavior of solutions? More specifically, the principal investigator
is working in two main areas. One part of the project is to study the problem of
existence of global solutions of Einstein's equations and of other related
equations. The first goal is to simplify, generalize, and refine the existence
results for Einstein's equations. A long-term objective is to study the
stability of large solutions like black holes in general relativity. This is
related to one of the central problems in mathematical relativity, namely, the
cosmic censorship conjecture of Penrose. The question of stability or blow-up of
large solutions is also the main question now in the area of nonlinear wave
equations. A second component of the project involves studying a class of
problems that occur in fluid dynamics and general relativity, in particular,
proving the well-posedness for the free boundary problem of the motion of the
surface of a fluid in a vacuum. The first goal in this area is to prove local
existence. A longer-range goal is to study the long-time behavior of
astrophysical bodies such as gaseous stars, along with other problems related to
the interfaces between fluids and solids. To solve these problems the principal
investigator and his collaborators are developing new techniques that could be
useful for studying many other problems as well. In particular, they are using
geometric methods to study hyperbolic differential
equations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The principal investigator and his collaborators
have recently simplified greatly the existence proof for solutions to Einstein's
equations and their generalizations. The continuing refinement of those ideas
that constitute part of the current project could have a significant impact. To
name just one, the new approach should make it much easier for graduate students
to study mathematical relativity. Moreover, the detailed asymptotic behavior
that these methods reveal through the introduction of so-called harmonic
coordinates will be useful to the physics and astronomical communities.
Physicists are in the process of constructing large gravitational wave detectors
to observe the universe. In order for the scientists to know what to look for
with these instruments, there is a need for a large-scale effort in doing
numerical calculations and simulations based on Einstein's equations. The only
successful attempts hitherto to do so have been with the aid of harmonic
coordinates. It is also conceivable that understanding the properties of and
controlling the interface between two fluids could have industrial applications.
In particular, there is a version of the problem for plasma physics in magneto-
hydrodynamics. As is well known, the ability to control a plasma is essential to
the construction of fusion reactors.