* 1101798
* Low energy magnetic domain wall logic
* ENG,ECCS
* 06/01/2011,05/31/2014
* Caroline Ross, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Usha Varshney
* 05/31/2014
* USD 319,445.00

Heat dissipation is the most serious problem confronting modern electronics, and
limits the clock rates and chip performance of microprocessors. The proposed
work develops a magnetic logic device with zero static power losses and a
projected dynamic power-delay product below that of contemporary digital logic.
Low power operation is enabled by operating at a very low supply voltage, which
reduces both the dynamic power when the devices are switched and circuit-wide
dissipation in the interconnects. These benefits are obtained without increasing
the ?off state? leakage current. The device relies on the integration of two
proven technologies, current-induced domain wall propagation in a narrow soft
ferromagnetic wire for the storage element, and a magnetic tunnel junction for
the output element.

The intellectual merit of this proposal is to understand the scaling limits in
the technology, and to solve system-level issues such as fanout, clocking and
circuit architecture. The scaling limits will be examined by studying domain
wall propagation as a function of wire dimensions, both experimentally and
computationally, to understand the reversal behavior as a function of current
pulse amplitude and width and the geometrical and materials parameters of the
wire. Circuit architecture and clocking schemes will be developed to enable
integration of multiple devices, so that one device can drive one or more other
devices, enabling complex logic operations to be performed, making use of the
programmability and non-volatility of the device. The results from the project
will not only demonstrate a new strategy for realizing logic, but will develop
tools and architecture that can be applied to other nontraditional devices.

The broader impacts of the proposal include the training of a graduate student
and approximately two to four undergraduate students in a highly
interdisciplinary materials science and electrical engineering field. In
addition to training of personnel, the concepts and findings of this project
will be incorporated into classes taught by the PIs, which will be available to
the public through the MIT OpenCourseWare initiative, to high school teachers
through summer experiences, and through a textbook and an associated teaching
module for graduate students on magnetic tunnel junctions and spin transport.
The goal of class development is to summarize the key device physics of post-
silicon devices in a manner that is accessible to both graduate and
undergraduate students.