* 1101712
* Moduli of curves in positive characteristic: stratifications and filtrations
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2011,06/30/2015
* Rachel Pries, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Pollington
* 06/30/2015
* USD 98,613.00

The PI proposes to study stratifications and filtrations associated with curves
defined over an algebraically closed field k of characteristic p. The p-rank and
a-number are invariants of the p-torsion group scheme of the Jacobian of a
k-curve; these invariants induce stratifications of moduli spaces of curves. The
first part of the proposal is to analyze the geometry of such strata, including
questions about irreducibility, dimension, and boundaries. The second part of
the proposal is about Galois covers of the affine line over k and the
ramification filtrations of the wild inertia groups. These filtrations play a
key role in answering questions about lifting and deformation of wildly ramified
covers of curves. These projects all require geometric techniques (degeneration
to boundaries of moduli spaces, deformation/lifing/formal patching). Yet all
parts of the proposal are about the arithmetic of p-group covers of k-curves and
involve arithmetic objects (group schemes, action of Frobenius, Galois groups,
norm groups, formal groups). In addition, the projects yield concrete
applications about the existence of curves over a finite field of characteristic
p with given automorphism group or p-torsion invariants.

Galois theory arose classically as a means of understanding symmetries of
equations and of classifying subfields of the complex numbers. Number theory
arose classically as a way of finding integer solutions to polynomial equations.
The PI's research is about functions on curves defined by polynomial equations
with coefficients in a finite field. This topics has some applications to
cryptosystems and data-transfer codes. The PI will lead several summer research
workshops for graduate students about curves and Galois covers. The goal is to
give the students experience with collaborative research and to increase
knowledge about problems relevant to this proposal. The PI is also involved with
other initiatives that have broader impacts including: co-organization of WIN
(women in numbers) initiatives to increase the research training of women in
number theory; co-organization of the Arizona Winter School; and a new liaison
between the math departments of CSU and the Universidad de Costa Rica.