* 1101212
* Travel Support for the 8th Workshop on Bayesian Nonparametrics (BNP 2011)
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2011,05/31/2012
* Abel Rodriguez, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Standard Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 05/31/2012
* USD 8,000.00

Travel Support for the 8th Workshop on Bayesian Nonparametrics (BNP
2011)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal seeks to secure travel support for
junior U.S. researchers (graduate students, postdoctoral &lt;br/&gt;researchers
and junior faculty within three years of completion of their terminal degree) to
participate in the 8th Workshop on Bayesian Nonparametrics, to be held in
Veracruz, Mexico, from June 26 to 30, 2011. The objective of the meeting is to
bring together experts and young talented scientists devoted to the study and
application of Bayesian nonparametric techniques. The workshop is organized
under the auspices of the International Society for Bayesian Analysis (ISBA) and
counts with a scientific committee formed by renowned international scientists.
The meeting will include four tutorials on special topics, a series of invited
and contributed talks, and a contributed poster session. This is the 8th in
series of (mostly) biannual meetings held internationally since 1997, and is the
premier venue for dissemination of research in Bayesian nonparametrics.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Bayesian nonparametric (BNP) methods constitute an
extremely important area of research in the statistical &lt;br/&gt;sciences,
which has recently generated enormous interest and has become one of the fastest
growing areas of &lt;br/&gt;research within Bayesian statistics. Applications of
BNP methods include areas as diverse as genetics, finance, sociology and machine
learning. Providing support for junior researchers who do not have access to
other sources of funding to attend the most important international gathering of
scientists working on one the fastest growing areas of statistical sciences is
key to maintaining the current leadership of American institutions in this
field. The conference will include a series of activities specially designed to
maximize the active participation of young researchers and to provide them with
as many opportunities for interaction with other young researchers and with more
senior colleagues. In addition, the conference will provide opportunities for
these young researchers to disseminate widely the results of their work, not
only through contributed talks and posters, but also by facilitating the
publication of peer-reviewed papers. Due to the location of the meeting, and the
opportunity for travel award recipients to participate for free in the Mexican
Workshop on Bayesian Statistics (TAMEB). It is expected that the workshop will
attract junior Hispanic/Latino U.S. researchers, providing them the opportunity
to engage colleagues from Latin American and the rest of the world.