* 1101574
* Spectral Methods, L-functions and Primes
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2011,05/31/2016
* Henryk Iwaniec, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Continuing Grant
* Andrew Pollington
* 05/31/2016
* USD 292,818.00

The spectral methods of automorhpic forms are basic tools of analytic number
theory for more than three decades. Recently new possibilities have been opened
in the area of metaplectic forms. The Proposal offers to make substantial
expansion of the classical results to this territory, such as for example the
large sieve for cusp forms. Applications of the spectral theory of metaplectic
forms to the distribution of roots of quadratic congruences are in progress.
Here the point is that the resulting estimates are valid in great uniformity
with respect to the discriminant. Less direct, yet motivating are applications
of spectral estimates in conjunction with sieve methods to the distribution of
prime numbers. In particular these could yield a very good bound for the first
prime which splits completely in the Hilbert class field. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;
The proposal also includes (jointly with B. Conrey and K. Soundararajan) study
of zeros of L-functions, proving that a respectful percentage of such zeros lay
on the critical line. This very basic problem (a progress towards the celebrated
Riemann Hypothesis) will definitely attract graduate students. An interaction of
the PI in the related research with students and postdoc is an indispensable
part of the activity under the Proposal. In fact a current student Jorge
Cantillo at Rutgers already began to work on improving the density theorems for
the zeros of automorphic L-functions.