* 1101368
* Combinatorics and Number Theory V
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2015
* Wen-Ching Li, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Pollington
* 08/31/2015
* USD 120,000.00

This proposal aims to investigate problems from two diverse areas in number
theory and&lt;br/&gt;combinatorics.&lt;br/&gt;The first project concerns
arithmetic properties of modular forms on&lt;br/&gt;noncongruence subgroups. To
these forms Scholl attached motivic Galois&lt;br/&gt;representations, which are
expected to be connected to automorphic forms&lt;br/&gt; according to Langlands
philosophy. These Galois representations, unlike&lt;br/&gt;their classical
counterpart, cannot be broken into pieces in general,&lt;br/&gt;and should be
related to automorphic forms on symplectic and orthogonal
groups.&lt;br/&gt;Building upon her past work, PI will investigate the
(potential) automorphy&lt;br/&gt;of Scholl representations with special
symmetries, exploit consequences&lt;br/&gt;of automorphy, and study congruence
properties of&lt;br/&gt;Fourier coefficients of noncongruence forms as proposed
by Atkin and Swinnerton-Dyer.&lt;br/&gt;The second project is to study the
interplay between combinatorics,&lt;br/&gt;group theory and number theory
through associated zeta functions. Zeta functions of varieties defined over
finite fields are well-understood.&lt;br/&gt;Their most well-known properties
are described by Weil conjectures, established in early&lt;br/&gt;1970's. Finite
simplicial complexes are combinatorial analog of such varieties. They are
expected to have zeta functions enjoying similar properties, except that Riemann
Hypothesis will hold only for complexes which are spectrally optimal. One-
dimensional&lt;br/&gt;complexes are graphs, whose zeta functions have been
studied since the work of Ihara in 1966.&lt;br/&gt;The zeta functions for higher
dimensional complexes became known only recently&lt;br/&gt;when PI and her
students obtained closed form expressions for zeta functions
of&lt;br/&gt;complexes arising as quotients of the buildings of certain rank-2
Chevalley groups over p-adic fields. The approaches are mostly representation-
theoretic. The PI proposes to find zeta identities for complexes arising from
other groups. She also intends to explore combinatorial interpretations of these
identities using the Selberg trace formula, with an eye towards establishing a
connection between complex zeta functions and automorphic
forms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;It has been the
PI's long term research goal to do fundamental&lt;br/&gt;research in number
theory and to seek applications of number theory&lt;br/&gt;to combinatorics and
to solve real world problems. The study of interplay between these areas has
turned out to be quite fruitful. This proposal is a continuation
of&lt;br/&gt;the PI's effort to pursue the same general theme. Part of the
research will be carried out by PI's Ph.D. students. The results from this
proposal will be disseminated&lt;br/&gt;broadly through the talks given by the
PI in seminars, colloquia,&lt;br/&gt;conferences, short courses, and workshops.
They will also be&lt;br/&gt;incorporated in the graduate courses to be offered
by the PI. Weekly&lt;br/&gt;informal seminars will be conducted to integrate
research with&lt;br/&gt;education and teaching. The PI also plans to co-organize
a conference in 2013 at Banff&lt;br/&gt;to disseminate results related to this
proposal obtained by her and her students.