* 1101290
* Analysis of singular structures in elliptic and parabolic PDE with curvature effects
* MPS,DMS
* 07/15/2011,06/30/2016
* Peter Sternberg, Indiana University
* Continuing Grant
* Bruce P. Palka
* 06/30/2016
* USD 245,011.00

This project focuses on the investigation of singular structures characterizing
the solutions to various partial differential equations and variational problems
that arise in significant physical models. There are two types of singular
structures to be studied here: vortices (i.e., zeros of complex-valued order
parameters) and phase boundaries (i.e., nodal sets of real-valued order
parameters). Much of the work concerns the setting where the physical model--
Ginzburg-Landau, Gross-Pitaevskii, Allen-Cahn, or Kawasaki-Ohta--is considered
on a curved surface. The general goal is to further our understanding of what
role curvature plays in the stabilization or destabilization of vortices and
phase boundaries. The principal investigator plans to attack these problems
through a combination of techniques including gamma-convergence, renormalized
energy methods, second-variation arguments, constrained minimization, and
parabolic nonlinear partial differential equations
methods.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigations to be pursued in this project
arise from mathematical models for superconductors and superfluids, grain
boundaries in alloys, and di-block copolymers. The main thrust of the research
is to gain a better understanding of how curvature may play a role in affecting
the behavior of these physical systems. For example, in recent years physicists
have succeeded in producing superconductors in the shape of spherical shells,
rather than just being flat, but at this point there is little theoretical work
devoted to understanding how this shape may affect the response of the
superconductor to an applied magnetic field. There may be hidden benefits or
surprising behavior induced by the curvature of the superconducting surface that
can be revealed through a careful mathematical analysis of the underlying
models. The principal investigator will carry out much of this research in
collaboration with Ph.D. students who will gain valuable experience studying
these applications of mathematics as part of their dissertation work.