* 1101860
* Biophysics Society Subgroup Symposium to be held during the Biophysical Society Annual Meeting on March 5, 2011 in Baltimore, MD
* BIO,MCB
* 02/01/2011,01/31/2012
* Margaret Cheung, University of Houston
* Standard Grant
* Michele McGuirl
* 01/31/2012
* USD 4,000.00

This award lends support to solidify a new self-organized group "Biopolymer
Biophysics Inside a Cell" to hold a subgroup symposium at the upcoming Annual
Meeting of the Biophysical Society. This group emerged at the last Annual
Meeting of the Biophysical Society in March 2010 in San Francisco. The emerging
group is composed of biophysicists interested in communicating ideas about using
interdisciplinary biophysical approaches in better understanding of biopolymer
biophysics inside a cell. Understanding the properties of macromolecules under
volume constraints is viewed as an important and developing area that is likely
to attract top-young biophysicists in the future and have a wide-range of
intellectual impacts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact:&lt;br/&gt;The
speakers are top researchers from around the world. The level of the talks will
be accessible to attendees of the Biophysical Society Annual meeting in 2011,
Baltimore, Maryland, including graduate students and undergraduates. This new
subgroup will promote research on biopolymer biophysics inside cells tackled
from fields including experiment, theory and computer simulation. Presently,
this emerging and important field does not have good representation by women and
minorities. One of the nine speakers is a woman. In an effort to reach out to
junior researchers who are an important group of future scientists in this
emerging field, particularly women and minority students, travel awards will be
presented to junior researchers who submit the best abstracts and posters.