* 1101994
* Kinetics of Non-Equilibrium Fast Ionization Wave Plasmas in Gas Phase and Gas-Liquid Interface
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2011,07/31/2014
* Walter Lempert, Ohio State University
* Continuing Grant
* Steven J Gitomer
* 07/31/2014
* USD 270,000.00

Nonequilibrium plasma chemistry has been extensively studied recently due to its
importance for a variety of engineering applications such as fuel reforming,
hazardous emissions reduction,plasma assisted combustion, and plasma flow
control. The use of nonequilibrium plasmas for these applications requires both
understanding of fundamental kinetic processes involved, and the ability to
generate, control, and characterize these plasmas at high pressures, high energy
loadings, and in large volumes (over large surface areas). A promising method of
generating large-volume, diffuse nonequilibrium plasmas in a wide range of
pressures is what is known as the Fast Ionization Wave (FIW) discharge. In this
approach, high peak voltage (approximately 10-100 kiloVolt),approximately 10-100
nanosecond duration voltage pulses are used to generate an ionization wave (wave
speed of a few cm/nsec) propagating over large distances, up to several tens of
centimeters. High electron energy achieved in the wave front dramatically
accelerates key plasma processes such as molecular dissociation, thus generating
reactive radical species. The project focuses on a comprehensive and fundamental
experimental study of the physics and chemistry of FIW plasmas, featuring
incorporation of a comprehensive suite of laser-baseed optical diagnostic
techniques.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In addition its technical goals, the program
will also reflect many of the stated NSF criteria for broader impact. In
particular, the program will advance "discovery and understanding" by i), direct
involvement of graduate and undergraduate students, and ii), incorporation of
the diagnostic methods, modeling tools, and principal findings into the
undergraduate and graduate Mechanical Engineering curriculum at OSU. Every
effort will also be made to broaden the participation in the research program of
individuals from groups traditionally underrepresented in mechanical engineering
and chemistry. The continued development FIW technology will also serve to
enhance the high pressure plasma infrastructure of the U.S (and the world),
potentially enabling a wide variety of applications such as: ignition and flame-
holding in next generation high speed jet aircraft; high power gas dynamic
lasers; and plasma aerodynamic flow control. The co-PIs are actively engaged in
the transfer of plasma and advanced optical diagnostic technology as it is
continually developed, to the government and industrial sectors through
collaborations with the U.S Air Force, NASA, and a variety of small businesses.
Finally, by maintaining an active web site, and by student and PI participation
in national and international meetings, the principal findings will be rapidly
disseminated to the scientific and educational communities at large.