* 1101477
* Complex and Harmonic Analysis in Spectral Theory; Cyclic and Subcyclic vectors of Rank One Perturbations and Anderson-type Hamiltonians
* MPS,DMS
* 07/15/2011,10/31/2012
* Constanze Liaw, Texas A&M Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Clancey
* 10/31/2012
* USD 103,564.00

This proposal consists of several parts. Part one concerns Aleksandrov-Clark
Theory, which relates rank one perturbations to functional models, the Hilbert
transform, holomorphic composition operators, rigid functions and the Nehari
interpolation problem. A formula (a generalization of the normalized Cauchy
transform) for the adjoint of the Clark operator has recently been proven by the
principal investigator in collaboration with Salem Prize winner S. Treil. It
should be possible to gain some control over the embedded singular spectrum for
rank one perturbations, a long standing problem in the field. Part two pertains
to the interpretation of a wide class of singular integral operators, including
those of Calderon-Zygmund type, in the two-weight situation with very general
measures (in particular, non-doubling). Singular integral operators play an
essential role in modern Analysis. The last two parts are devoted to aspects of
cyclicity. Cyclicity is related to the question for which measures the
corresponding Hardy space is dense in that of square integrable functions with
respect to the measure, to the backward shift operator, and a classical result
of Douglas, Shapiro and Shields connects cyclicity with pseudocontinuation; and
thus opening a new area of complex function theory. In part three, the goal is
to prove that (assuming cyclicity of the operator) any non-zero vector yields
cyclic vectors for rank one perturbations for almost all parameters. This may be
useful in practice. It should be mentioned, that for a cyclic operator, it may
not be easy to find a cyclic vector. Two interesting new notions are introduced
for the setting of an operator on a separable Hilbert space: Subcyclic vectors
(a refinement of the definition of cyclic vectors) and a certain graph. Apart
from studying their properties, a deep relationship between them in the context
of Anderson-type Hamiltonians has preliminarily been proven by the principal
investigator in collaboration with E. Abakumov and A. Poltoratski. The last part
of this project is connected to the famous problem of Anderson localization,
which was suggested by Nobel laureate P. W. Anderson in 1958. The PI will study
the cyclicity of vectors for Anderson-type Hamiltonians (a generalization of
most Anderson models, e.g. random Schroedinger operators) via analytical as well
as numerical methods.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The underlying goal is to develop the
mathematical tools necessary to understand the dynamics of physical systems.
Such systems are often described by second-order differential equations, like
the Schroedinger equation from quantum mechanics (the governing mechanics at the
molecular level) and the string equation which is the cutting edge attempt to
unite quantum mechanics with general relativity (the theory describing gravity).
One of the objects of study - 'singular integral operators' - have become a
useful tool in perturbation theory. The latter is concerned roughly with the
following question: Given certain information about a physical system, can one
predict what happens in the case where one parameter, for example in the initial
condition, is changed/perturbed? Cyclicity, for physicists, means that the
spectrum (e.g. of light) is simple or non-degenerate. In many problems it is
important to know whether this is the case or not. For example, the above-
mentioned Anderson localization addresses the question whether or not an impure
crystal allows the diffusion of waves or, roughly speaking, whether all
electrons stay within a bounded region in space. The results obtained in the
scope of this project will be published in scientific journals and reported at
research conferences. The proposed subjects provide a wealth of accessible
research questions for undergraduate and graduate students. The principal
investigator will write expository articles, give seminars at the student level,
and mentor young researchers interested in the many open problems she will make
available.