* 1101202
* ICES: Small: Impartial decision making in distributed systems
* CSE,CCF
* 06/01/2011,05/31/2014
* Herve Moulin, William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* Tracy Kimbrel
* 05/31/2014
* USD 199,693.00

Conflicts of interest pervade collective decision-making among peers. Such
conflicts can be modeled as the tension between two distinct components of an
agent's evaluation of the final outcome: her selfish interest and her
disinterested opinion. When those two orderings are logically separated,
sometimes a rule can be designed that aggregates individual opinions while
preventing an agent's message having any impact on her selfish welfare. Such a
rule is called impartial. This project focuses on two simple problems, the award
of an indivisible private good (a prize) and peer ranking, when agents care
selfishly only about winning the prize, or their own ranking. There exist fairly
simple voting rules where your vote cannot make you win or lose the prize, yet
it influences who wins if you do not. It is also possible to design a peer
ranking system where an agent has no influence on his own ranking, but
contributes to that of his peers. Some of the impartial decision rules to which
the project is devoted resemble familiar voting rules such as qualified
majorities, or the median vote on a line. One output of the research consists of
practical mechanisms as universally applicable as any other voting rule. Another
direction is to ask which general patterns of selfish interest versus selfless
opinions allow for impartial rules, and which do not. The project contributes to
the broad stream of economics research on mechanism design concentrating on the
strategic distortions of information revelation. Peer evaluation is a central
institution in business partnerships, academic communities, and virtually any
community sharing specialized knowledge. Evaluating specialized work requires
knowledge that can only be found among those experts; it cannot be entrusted to
an impartial but clueless outside observer. Academics pick some of their own for
Nobel prizes, and movie professionals award the Oscars. Peer evaluations are
vulnerable to conflicts of interest: a participant may be tempted to corrupt her
disinterested opinion (a valuable piece of information to determine the correct
decision) to serve her selfish interests, which by contrast are often useless to
the group. Some examples of such corruption are easy to avoid: judges in sports
competitions should not rank athletes of their own countries, spouses cannot
testify for or against each other, etc. More subtle ones, such as the
multiplication of fake (favorable or critical) reviews on the Internet can only
be avoided by the clever design of the evaluation process. This project aims to
construct a handful of decision mechanisms immune to conflicts of interest,
applicable directly to the division of money between business partners, the
award of a prize among peers, and the ranking of Universities by their own
students and alumni. This foundational research has potential for much broader
impact in the setting of the Internet, where peer evaluations are ubiquitous-
from reputation scores for electronic traders (on EBay or Amazon), to the users
of social networks (Epinions, Twitter), and the scoring and ranking systems of
web pages by search engines, relying exclusively on the pattern of mutual links
between pages.