* 1101618
* Texas Algebraic Geometry Symposium
* MPS,DMS
* 02/01/2011,01/31/2012
* Anthony Varilly-Alvarado, William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* Tie Luo
* 01/31/2012
* USD 14,700.00

This grant supports the Texas Algebraic Geometry Symposium (TAGS). TAGS is a
weekend regional meeting held each spring since 2005, hosted in turn by Rice
University, the University of Texas at Austin and Texas A&amp;M University. The
workshop brings together many senior mathematicians from Texas and neighboring
states. Although many participating institutions have Algebraic Geometry
seminars that run through the academic year, the audience at each location is
small. TAGS provides regional concentration benefits: we have many speakers in a
short time who can reach many listeners in one place. We aim to bring a diverse
collection of excellent speakers who are doing cutting-edge research across the
many subfields of Algebraic Geometry. Background talks are given for the benefit
of students and young researchers; there is a poster session for graduate
students to afford them both feedback from and exposure to
experts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Algebraic geometry is a broad field of mathematics
concerned with the study of solutions to systems of polynomial equations. It has
amply documented connections to many areas of mathematics (number theory
symplectic geometry, representation theory, mathematical physics, etc.), and its
applications reverberate in a variety of contexts (robotics, coding theory,
complexity theory, etc.). Conferences like TAGS help algebraic geometers stay
abreast of current developments in this rapidly-evolving area of mathematics.