* 1101345
* On locality and randomness in non-relativistic systems
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2014
* Robert Sims, University of Arizona
* Continuing Grant
* Bruce P. Palka
* 08/31/2014
* USD 158,000.00

The investigator of the project: "On locality and randomness in non-relativistic
systems" will focus on two major topics of interest. The first explores a quasi-
local structure of the dynamics corresponding to non-relativistic systems. Due
to the fact that such systems have no equivalent to a finite speed of light, the
dynamics associated with, for example, a nearest neighbor Hamiltonian does not
generally preserve locality in the strict sense. An approximate form of
locality, or quasi-locality, has been demonstrated for many systems governed by
Hamiltonians with short-range interactions. Recent developments have shown that
these estimates, known as Lieb-Robinson bounds, are valid in a variety of
contexts and useful in a number of important applications. The investigator
proposes the study of several systems for which there are no known quasi-
locality results. Given these estimates, certain intriguing questions may be
within reach of rigorous and detailed analysis. The next area of focus concerns
random perturbations of specific quantum spin systems. For single particle
systems, it is well known that disorder leads to localization: a metal with
sufficiently many impurities loses its conductance properties. This phenomenon
should persist in many-particle interacting systems, and the investigator
proposes to analyze the emergence of localization in random quantum spin
systems. In fact, a dynamical form of localization, in terms of explicit Lieb-
Robinson bounds, is proposed as a possible means of quantifying and thus further
investigating this predicted behavior.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In condensed matter
physics, a wealth of intriguing, physically relevant phenomena is described in
the context of quantum many-body systems. For example, the oscillations of atoms
in a crystal and the alignment of spins in a magnet can both be quite
effectively described by quantum lattice models. These quantum lattice systems
also provide a framework for more theoretical considerations. In fact, discrete
versions of quantum field theory and the basic models in the theory of quantum
information and computation can be expressed in this setting. The main goal of
this proposal is to further develop the theory of quantum lattice systems by
analyzing a number of specific models. A crucial ingredient in this proposal
will be the investigation of locality estimates which demonstrate that
disturbances do not propagate arbitrarily fast through the systems under
consideration. Several important applications of these locality bounds have
already appeared in the mathematics and physics literature. As a new example,
the investigator proposes a detailed analysis of locality properties for random
systems. Random systems are particularly interesting because they are predicted
to exhibit a metal-insulator phase transition with increasing disorder.
Sufficiently detailed analysis may suggest design specifications for materials,
e.g. fiber-optic cables, that necessarily have impurities dispersed throughout.
In this case, the potential impact of this proposal, beyond the scope of
mathematics and physics, may be substantial. Moreover, interested graduate
students working on the project will learn the language and techniques used by
scientists in a number of fields. After completing their thesis, they should be
well prepared for either an academic position in the sciences or a more
technical role in industry.