* 1101470
* ICES: Small: A Revealed Preference Approach to Computational Complexity in Economics
* CSE,CCF
* 05/01/2011,04/30/2014
* Federico Echenique, California Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Balasubramanian Kalyanasundaram
* 04/30/2014
* USD 400,000.00

One of the foundational tasks for the emerging interaction between computer
science and economics is to incorporate "computation" into classic economic
theories. As results have emerged, it has become clear that many of the standard
economic models involve solving, in the worst-case, computationally hard
problems. These results are often viewed as harsh critiques of the economic
models, since it seems unreasonable to model agents as solving computationally
hard problems. However, economists have, in general, resisted such critiques.
The core of the current proposal is that this resistance stems not from a
refusal to consider computational restrictions, but instead from a different
perspective on the models themselves -- an "empirical" perspective as opposed to
an "algorithmic" perspective. Specifically, an algorithmic view of the model
assumes the model is fixed and literal and then proceeds to ask about the
demands placed on the agents by the model. In contrast, an empirical view of the
model does not presume agents actually follow the model, only that the model
provides a way to explain the observed behavior, i.e., the data. A model still
loses credibility if the agents must solve computationally hard problems;
however, standard worst-case complexity is no longer the relevant concept. This
proposal seeks to formalize and study this empirical view of how to incorporate
computation into economic models. This new view is strongly motivated by the
revealed preference literature in economics, which seeks to understand how
generally a model is applicable. Our proposed empirical view of computational
complexity adds to revealed preference theory the constraint that the instance
revealed does not require agents to solve any computationally hard problems.
Thus, the question becomes: Do computational constraints have empirical
consequences for economic models? We propose to address this question across a
range of classic economic models, including consumer choice theory, Walrasian
(general) equilibrium theory, Nash equilibrium theory, and the theory of stable
matchings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal sets an ambitious goal, and it is
one that presents true opportunities for interdisciplinary dialogue. Such a
dialogue presents an opportunity to rethink traditional economic models with an
eye toward computation, which will shed a new light on the predictive power of
the foundational theories of economics. In addition to the research components
of this work, the PIs have a history of, and will continue to, facilitate the
increasing interaction of computer science and economics through a variety of
educational activities including (i) teaching new interdisciplinary courses at
the undergraduate and graduate levels, (ii) advising interdisciplinary research
at the undergraduate, graduate, and postdoctoral levels, and (iii) organizing
annual joint workshops with other universities in southern California and with
industry partners.