* 1101107
* SHF:  EAGER: A first empirical test of low ceremony evidence for assessing quality attributes
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2011,09/30/2013
* Christopher Scaffidi, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 09/30/2013
* USD 62,101.00

Every aspect of modern society, ranging from health care to national defense,
depends on the availability of affordable, reliable software. The availability
of this software, in turns, depends on helping software engineers to find high-
quality components that they can assemble into finished software. Web sites
currently provide access to millions of components that perform vital operations
related to networking, graphics, data processing, and thousands of other
functions. However, software engineers lack a validated, reliable method for
selecting high-quality components that they can reuse in new software
applications. Lacking such a method, software engineers sometimes use components
that turn out, in retrospect, to be extremely difficult to reuse. This
difficulty, in turn, increases the time required to create software, the cost of
that software, and the potential for subtle bugs.

This research project is expected to provide a validated, reliable model for
quickly assessing the reusability of components. This method will make use of
"low-ceremony evidence" (LCE): information that characterizes different aspects
of component quality yet is incremental, often informal, potentially context-
dependent, and frequently contradictory. Examples of LCE include reviews, bug
reports, and download counts of components. While each piece of LCE provides
only an incomplete perspective into a component's quality, preliminary work
suggests that the synthesis of LCE can be highly informative about component
quality. This new research project (1) will use factor analysis to determine
which pieces of LCE are mutually consistent, yielding scales for assessing one
or more aspects of quality such as reusability, and (2) will statistically test
how well these scales are correlated with the actual empirical difficulty that
software engineers report with reusing those components. The resulting validated
scales are expected to be useful for automatically assessing the quality of
components in online websites. This would make it possible in future work to
develop enhanced search engines enabling software engineers to quickly find
high-quality components that they can use to create the software that society
needs.