* 1101386
* Twin Cities Urban Sustainability Forum
* ENG,CBET
* 01/15/2011,06/30/2013
* Lawrence Baker, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 06/30/2013
* USD 50,000.00

The Twin Cities Urban Sustainability Forum (TCUS Forum) will include a main two-
day symposium to be followed by a series of follow-on workshops that would occur
over one year. The main symposium would include a mix of local, national, and
international speakers, focused around five cross-cutting themes: (1)
organization of a translational research framework for urban sustainability; (2)
adaptation of governance for cross-disciplinary approaches to long-term
sustainability; (3) use of technology; (4) forms of collaboration among
academics and practitioners from multiple sectors; and (5) integration of urban
ecosystems research and urban sustainability practice into a translational
research framework. Both speakers and participants (120-160 total) will be a mix
of academics and practitioners from diverse fields, including but not limited to
urban planning, landscape architecture, ecology, engineering, and water
resources. The follow-on workshops will explore these themes to further
articulate a framework for translational research, while at the same time
turning the framework into practice. The workshop process itself will also be
studied to gain insights to develop the translational research framework.
Evaluation will include pre- and post-surveys of workshop participants, key
interviews, content analysis of workshop notes, and participant observation to
conduct a rigorous analysis of the workshop outcomes for publication. The
proposed TCUS Forum and follow-on activities to develop a translational research
process would have major practical significance in facilitating the goal of
attaining sustainable cities. In addition to the intellectual merit of
developing a translational research framework for publication, the TCUS Forum,
including follow-on workshops, would be would itself be a major outreach
activity, with considerable potential benefit to sustainability efforts in the
Twin Cities region and potentially other urban regions as well. Findings from
the TCUS Forum will be integrated with the National Academy of Sciences regional
urban sustainability series. Findings will be presented at one or more national
conferences and will be incorporated into an Urban Ecosystems Brown Bag Seminar
and a Freshman Seminar on sustainable urban
living.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Bruce Hamilton&lt;br/&gt;10/16/10