* 1101495
* ICES: Small: Contribution Games in Social Networks
* CSE,CCF
* 08/01/2011,07/31/2016
* Elliot Anshelevich, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Continuing Grant
* Tracy Kimbrel
* 07/31/2016
* USD 386,896.00

This project focuses on network formation by self-interested agents.
Specifically, it studies contribution games in social networks, where
players/nodes not only form connections/relationships with others, but also
determine the intensity of their connections. This project will analyze the
quality of equilibrium solutions, convergence properties of local dynamics, and
mechanisms to improve these properties. This work will result in efficient
algorithms for computing various reasonable outcomes of contribution games, and
algorithms for "nudging" the players to form better outcomes by giving them
small incentives, using approximation algorithms for otherwise intractable
problems. More concretely, this research will consider the following topics. (1)
Analyzing a model of Network Contribution Games that captures the essence of
players optimizing their local relationships. Concepts such as Nash equilibrium
are of limited usefulness for such models, so the project instead focuses on
pairwise equilibrium, strong equilibrium, and convergence dynamics. (2) General
Contribution Games are an important extension of network contribution games:
instead of pairwise relationships, players contribute to many-person projects.
(3) Centrality, Friendship, and Altruism. Other than the desire to maximize
total success of all projects/relationships players are involved in, they may
also desire to form connections that make them well-positioned in the social
network, and so attempt to maximize some notion of "centrality" or they may care
about the quality of the network as a whole, as in games with public goods. This
project will analyze games where the utility of a player is a combination of
such considerations, and derive general results on the structure and quality of
equilibrium solutions depending on the types of player utility functions.

Social networks pervade most aspects of human life, and affect everything from
the spread of epidemics to the ability to find a job. Now that data on social
networks has become easier to collect, understanding the structure, properties,
and incentives of social network formation has become a crucial research topic.
By explicitly taking into account the strength of bonds in a social network, and
not just their existence, this work will add a new dimension to game-theoretic
models of social networks, and obtain new insight into participant behavior, and
into the structure of social networks. This work may also suggest efficient
methods for "nudging" the participants of a social network to form better
outcomes by giving them small incentives. In addition, this project will
contribute new techniques for analyzing systems with limited collusion. The
study of contribution games where participants care about centrality,
friendship, and altruism in addition to their local success, will be the first
major attempt to understand the structure of social networks under such a
combination of player incentives. This project will include collaborations with
both theoretical and applied researchers working on social networks, including
researchers from complex systems, epidemiology, sociology, and the school of
management. Because of wide-spread interest in social networks, this project may
inspire new approaches in many of the fields mentioned above. Finally, this
research will be strongly complimented by the PI's education plan, which
includes teaching several courses with research components, forming a workshop
on this topic, and recruiting several graduate and undergraduate students to
work on this project.