* 1101382
* Group Representations and the Baum-Connes Assembly Map
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2011,07/31/2015
* Nigel Higson, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Bruce P. Palka
* 07/31/2015
* USD 291,000.00

This project will explore new connections between the emerging area of
noncommutative geometry and the representation theory of Lie groups. The first
part of the project was inspired initially by explorations in mathematical
physics. It revives a proposal of George Mackey to correspond representations of
a semisimple Lie group with those of its Cartan motion group, but it does so in
the light of more recent developments in noncommutative geometry. The second
component of the project seeks to develop links between the index-theoretic
approach to representation theory incorporated into the Baum-Connes theory and
the geometric representation theory of Beilinson and Bernstein. A third segment
of the project aims to investigate more deeply the connection between the Baum-
Connes theory and the Langlands classification of irreducible representations.
The goal of the final major portion of the project is to frame the "quantization
commutes with reduction" phenomenon in symplectic geometry within noncommutative
geometry. It is expected that this will lead to a clearer understanding of the
range of the phenomenon. Although the project initially involves the relatively
well-understood representation theory of compact groups, a long-term aim of the
project is to apply insights gained more broadly within representation theory,
guided by the outlooks of the individual components.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Group
representation theory is a recurring theme in modern mathematics. Its origins
lie within algebra, but the subject has important ties to geometry, to
differential equations, and to many other mathematical areas. This project
focuses on the groups that capture mathematically the concept of continuous
symmetry (such as the continuous, rotational symmetry of a circle, which may be
rotated about itself by any angle, as opposed to the discrete symmetry of a
square, which may be rotated about itself only by quarter turns). These groups
are basic to the mathematical expression of the laws of physics, thanks to the
continuous symmetries (rotations, translations, and others) intrinsic to
physical space and time. The fundamental observable quantities in physical
science such as energy and momentum are paired with these symmetries. For
example, the law of conservation of energy is a restatement of the expectation
that the laws of physics remain unchanged as time passes. In quantum theory, the
symmetries of space and time imply that fundamental particles correspond to so-
called irreducible unitary group representations, and it becomes a matter of
interest and importance to determine these representations. Within mathematics,
the same representations have been found to be intimately linked to the theory
of special functions, to number theory, and to differential equations, among
other areas. It is the common objective of the various components of this
project to bring new mathematical techniques to bear on representation theory.
The long-term goal is to conceptualize and deepen our understanding of an area
that has been central to mathematics and its applications for more than a
hundred years.