* 1101139
* Certain Problems with Lower Dimensional Free Boundaries
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2011,07/31/2015
* Arshak Petrosyan, Purdue University
* Continuing Grant
* Bruce P. Palka
* 07/31/2015
* USD 225,539.00

The main objective of this project is to study problems that naturally exhibit
free boundaries of codimension two that live in an apriori given manifold. Free
boundary problems of this type appear naturally in many applications, ranging
from the theory of elasticity (the Signorini problem, or the thin obstacle
problem), mathematical finance (American options), combustion, boundary heat
control, and more generally, in problems with boundary phase transitions. An
important source of such problems that has emerged recently is the study of free
boundary problems governed by nonlocal integro-differential operators, such as
the fractional Laplacian. There has been a significant progress in recent years
in some problems with lower-dimensional free boundaries. However, there are
still a number of fundamental questions that have yet to be addressed and the
current project aims to do just that. Particular questions include monotonicity
formulas for nonlocal operators, appropriate generalizations of the boundary
Harnack principle, and the partial hodograph-Legendre transform, both in
stationary and time-dependent situations.

Free boundary problems are problems for partial differential equations that are
defined in domains whose boundaries are not known beforehand (i.e., are "free").
A further quantitative condition must be then provided at the free boundary to
prevent indeterminacy. Problems of this sort arise in a large number of areas of
applied and industrial interest. The paradigmatic example is the classical
Stefan problem, which is to model the melting and solidification of ice: the
free boundary here is the moving interface between the regions occupied by the
water and the ice. Other important examples occur in filtration through porous
media (e.g., an oil field), where free boundaries occur as fronts between
saturated and unsaturated regions, and others come from combustion (propagation
of the flame front), mathematical finance (optimal time for exercising an
option), biology (regions occupied by different species), and so forth. Because
of the abundance of applications in various sciences and real world problems,
free boundary problems are considered today to be one of the most important
directions in the mainstream of the analysis of partial differential equations
and offer opportunities for collaboration between mathematicians, physicists,
engineers, materials scientists, financial practitioners and other industrial
researchers, and biologists.