* 1101129
* Young Engineers &amp; Scientists Symposium 2011: A US/France/UK Collaboration in Alterntative Energy Research
* O/D,OISE
* 01/01/2011,12/31/2011
* Yassin Hassan, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Maija Kukla
* 12/31/2011
* USD 20,000.00

This award creates unique opportunities to bridge US and European technical and
policy communities to foster the development of critically needed next-
generation alternative energy technologies. It provides 18 travel grants to US
students and postdoctoral researchers, including women and under-represented
minorities, to attend the Young Engineers and Scientists Symposium 2011 entitled
"Alternative Energy: A Global Perspective", a three-day meeting aimed at
bringing together a select group of early-career engineers and scientists from
the US, France and the United Kingdom. The symposium will facilitate the
establishment of new long-term interactions and research partnerships through an
agenda crafted to allow participants to discuss a combination of key technical
issues, societal and educational topics, and public policy matters related to
regulations and funding in the non-fossil energy sector in the US and Europe.
Technical sessions will address the core areas of solar, wind, geothermal,
biofuel, and nuclear energy with consideration of energy storage and smart
energy grids. Other sessions will focus on the following policy issues:
international relations in the field of fossil-free energy; economic
perspectives regarding new energy supplies; regulation of fossil free energy and
government incentives; and education and teaching needs to train the workforce
for the development of non-fossil energy. This symposium proposes a schedule of
diverse plenary lectures, focused parallel technical sessions, and poster
sessions with contributions from industry, academia, and government labs. The
workshop is jointly organized by the Texas Engineering Experiment Station at
Texas A&amp;M University (TAMU), the TAMU European Union Center, the British
Consulate and the Office of the Scientific Attach√© of the French Consulate in
Houston.