* 1101912
* Strongly Correlated Quantum Phases
* MPS,DMR
* 09/15/2011,08/31/2014
* Matthew P.A. Fisher, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 08/31/2014
* USD 390,000.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY

This award supports theoretical research and education focused on strongly
interacting quantum many-body systems. Of primary interest are narrow band
electronic materials wherein electron interactions can have a dramatic impact.
Most striking are half-filled band materials that are Mott insulators because of
strong interactions, at odds with Fermi liquid theory. While many Mott
insulators order, in several new materials the electron spins remain in a liquid
state down to very low temperatures. Such spin-liquids are believed to harbor
many exotic properties

Spin liquids come in many varieties, some fully gapped with a hidden topological
order, others with gapless spin-carrying excitations. Of the latter class,
perhaps the most challenging are ?spin-Bose-metal? phases which exhibit highly
entangled gapless excitations along surfaces in momentum space - loosely
analogous to the Fermi surface in a metal. A main thrust of this project is to
develop an understanding of such spin-Bose metals by attacking model
Hamiltonians with a combination of analytical and numerical approaches -
variational Monte Carlo, gauge theories, density-matrix-renormalization group,
and Bosonization.

The unusual behavior of the cuprate "strange metal" state at optimal doping was
one of the first striking departures from Fermi liquid theory, and remains
mysterious. Gauge theories, which split the electron into a Fermionic ?spinon?
and a Bosonic "chargon"?, offer one of the few available techniques to access
such non-Fermi liquid phases. But describing a non-Fermi liquid requires placing
the Bosons into a non-superfluid 2D phase. Recent progress on "Bose-metal"
phases should allow access to entirely new classes of electronic non-Fermi
liquids. The PI will study candidate electron Hamiltonians which are likely to
manifest non-Fermi liquid phases using both numerical and analytic techniques.
Employing quasi-1D ladder models should be very helpful in systematically
approaching the 2D limit.

This award supports advanced graduate student and postdoc level training in
condensed matter theory.

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY

This award supports theoretical research and education focused on electronic
states of matter in materials where strong interactions between electrons lead
to correlations in their motions, rather like an intricate dance.

Within each of nature's crystals is an exotic quantum world of dancing
electrons. Each crystal has its own unique choreography. In some crystals the
electron dancing patterns are structured and orderly. Within others the
electrons are entangled in a web of quantum motion. One goal of this project is
to use advanced concepts, and theoretical and computational methods to discern
the "quantum choreography" that underlies such electron dances. Lessons learned
may enable the design of a futuristic topological quantum computer based on the
manipulation of quantum mechanical states of matter to achieve unprecedented
performance for some tasks.

The quantum theory of solids, born in 1930, has been extremely successful in
describing the properties of many materials. A basic premise is that it is
legitimate to ignore the interactions between the electrons, treating each one
independently. This theory accounts well for many properties of conventional
insulators, semiconductors and metals. But in classes of materials approach
fails, sometimes in a dramatic way. Developing a new theoretical framework for
such strongly interacting electron systems is one of the central goals of the
field.

In one novel class of materials called Mott insulators, the electrons are
entirely immobilized by the electron repulsion. But electrons have the property
of spin making them in a crude sense like tiny tops. The spins in Mott
insulators are free to fluctuate. If the spins remain in a disorderly
arrangement down to low temperatures, a novel spin-liquid state results, a state
of electronic matter believed to manifest an exotic new quantum choreography.

By combining an arsenal of modern theoretical and numerical techniques, some
only possible in the past few years due to the rapid increase in computer speed
and new algorithms that have been developed, the PI aims to gain understanding
of spin-liquids - the intricacies of the entangled state of the electron's
spins, and an ability to guide the search for interesting new materials. This
project provides valuable training and research experience for advanced students
and postdocs. It also contributes to the intellectual foundations of future
electronic device and information technologies.