* 1101282
* Hyperbolic Kac-Moody Group Symmetry and Applications
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/2011,07/31/2014
* Lisa Carbone, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Tie Luo
* 07/31/2014
* USD 138,041.00

This project concerns hyperbolic Kac-Moody groups, which are infinite
dimensional Lie groups that have yet been extensively studied. We are interested
in the Lie groups of infinite dimensional hyperbolic Kac-Moody algebras which
contain affine Kac-Moody subalgebras. Some of the proposed problems are
physically motivated. Our study of physical theories such as supergravity,a
theory that incorporates both supersymmetry and general relativity, has revealed
a number of compelling and intriguing mathematical problems, consistent with
open problems in Kac-Moody group theory. The proposed work is the first
mathematical initiative that aims to apply the symmetry properties of hyperbolic
Kac-Moody groups to the study of supergravity models in theoretical physics.
While some of these correspondences of hyperbolic Kac-Moody symmetry with
supergravity theories are conjectural, developing a full mathematical theory of
hyperbolic Kac-Moody groups and their symmetric spaces amenable to computation
will have a significant impact on the understanding of open problems concerning
the symmetry groups of supergravity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this
project is to advance understanding in the study of algebraic symmetries
underlying high energy theoretic physics. Almost all finite dimensional
semisimple Lie groups and Lie algebras occur in space-time symmetries and the
development of the Standard Model of particle physics, which could not have
progressed without an understanding of symmetries and group transformations.
Infinite dimensional generalizations, known as Kac-Moody algebras and their
associated groups, naturally form two distinct classes, namely affine and
hyperbolic. By the 1980's the class of affine Kac-Moody algebras was shown to
have wide applications in physical theories such as elementary particle theory,
quantum field theory, gauge theory, conformal field theory, gravity and string
theory. This project concerns Lie groups of infinite dimensional hyperbolic Kac-
Moody algebras which contain affine Kac-Moody subalgebras.