* 1101900
* Biomolecular Materials: Structure, Phase Behavior, &amp; Interactions
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2015
* Philip Pincus, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Aleksandr Simonian
* 08/31/2015
* USD 450,000.00

ID: MPS/DMR/BMAT(7623) 1101900 PI: Safinya, Cyrus ORG: UC Santa
Barbara&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Title: Biomolecular Materials: Structure, Phase
Behavior, and Interactions&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;INTELLECTUAL MERIT: The aim of
this proposal is to develop a fundamental understanding of the intermolecular
forces and resulting structures in assemblies of filamentous proteins (in
particular, neurofilaments and microtubules) derived from the cytoskeleton of
neuronal dendrites and axons (the extensions used by neurons to receive and send
signals to neighboring neurons). The proposal combines state-of-the-art
synchrotron x-ray-scattering, x-ray-osmotic pressure, and optical and electron
microscopy techniques used by the PI, and in parallel, closely related modern
modeling by the co-PI. Experiments are proposed to study forces between
microtubules mediated by microtubule-associated-protein (MAP) tau, an abundant
unstructured biological polymer containing anionic and cationic amino acid
residues, which binds to (via electrostatic interactions) and stabilizes
microtubules in axons. While the precise role of MAP-tau in modulating
interactions between microtubules is unclear, it is well established that
aberrant interactions between tau and microtubules (e.g., due to tau mutations
or over-phosphorylation) invariably lead to collapse of the cytoskeleton and
neurodegeneration. Experiments are proposed to understand the structures and
inter-filamentous interactions, mediated by charged neurofilament-sidearms and
MAP-tau, in systems which closely mimic the distinct local environments of axons
and dendrites (i.e., with different composition of the three neurofilament-
sidearms and the presence or absence of MAP-tau). The specific aims of this
proposal are (1) to elucidate the role of biological and synthetic multivalent
counter-ions in suppressing the repulsive barrier, which prevents MAP-tau-
mediated short-range attractions between microtubules, (2) to unravel the
structure-function properties of MAP-tau by discovering how domain deletions
(via truncated tau constructs) alter tau-mediated microtubule assembly, (3) to
study the intermolecular interactions and resulting structures between neuronal
cytoskeletal filaments in co-assembling mixtures of microtubules and
neurofilaments, and (4) to develop quantitative models of forces between two
opposing polyampholyte brushes (mimicking the structures of neurofilaments and
microtubules) to closely capture the biophysics of interactions between
microtubules mediated by MAP-tau, between different neurofilament-sidearms, and
between neurofilament-sidearms and MAP-tau. Aside from enhancing our knowledge
of the nerve cell cytoskeleton, the proposed research will further our
understanding of charged-polymeric systems, a very important field of soft and
biological matter, where much remains to be
understood.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;BROADER IMPACTS: The proposed studies will lead
to a comprehensive understanding of how nature makes use of competing
intermolecular forces (e.g., attractions at short distances and repulsions at
longer distances) to assemble distinct filamentous structures within the long
extensions of nerve cells to impart critical functionalities such as mechanical
stability and facilitated transport of materials. The understanding gleaned from
the studies (e.g., about the specific chemical moieties responsible for inter-
filament interactions) will enable the broader scientific community to employ a
rational approach in the design of synthetic building-block mimics for
constructing hierarchical structures arising from the built-in functionality at
the molecular level that control intermolecular interactions. The biomimetic
structures, in turn, are expected to have important technological applications,
for example, as templates for miniaturized materials with applications in nano-
biotechnology. The biomaterials research effort of the PIs is multidisciplinary
and educates and trains undergraduate and graduate students and postdoctoral
researchers in modern methodologies required to address important problems at
the interface between physics, chemistry, engineering, and biology. The acquired
interdisciplinary skills prepare the trainees for careers in academe, national
laboratories, and industry. The principal investigators actively participate in
UCSB Outreach Programs with the community colleges and with colleges and
universities outside of Santa Barbara. The programs include the Internships in
Nanosystems Science and Engineering Technology, California Alliance for Minority
Participation, Research Internship in Science and Engineering, Cooperative
International Science and Engineering Internships, and the Research Experience
for Teachers. This activity allows the PIs to train a broad spectrum of students
and teachers in multidisciplinary methods of science and engineering.