* 1101547
* CCSS-CPS: Collaborative: If Bridges can talk: Towards Autonomous Structure Health Monitoring for Civil Structure
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2015
* Zhi Ding, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* chengshan xiao
* 08/31/2015
* USD 126,000.00

The objective of the research is to develop fully autonomous Structural Health
Monitoring (SHM) system consisting of sensors organically integrated within the
structure, free of wire leads and external power sources. Central to the
proposed approach are the multi-functional piezoelectric transducer-based smart
aggregates, which can transform ambient energy to electricity power, modulate
useful information on stress waves for communication, and generate and receive
stress waves for detection of structural
defects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectually, the project will advance the
knowledge regarding communication over concrete conduits through: i)
Measurement-driven characterization of "smart aggregates" transceivers and
concrete channels under different loading conditions, and ii) Design of
modulation schemes for acoustic communications in concrete channels. The project
aims to develop a holistic system solution through: i) the development of energy
harvesting and storage modules, in conjunction with low-power circuits, and ii)
Design and evaluation of energy-aware task scheduling.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
proposed research is expected to generate far-reaching broader impacts in
science, education, and society. Our systems-based research integrates
innovative research on hardware, algorithms, and architectures to enable the
next generation of cyber systems. It also integrates educational activities in
real-life infrastructure building, communications systems, and networking. In
the near term, the basic building blocks developed for communication and energy
harvesting can help extend existing wireless-based, battery powered systems,
making these systems more fault tolerant and energy efficient. In the long term,
the project outcomes can provide impetus for wide-spread integration of fully
autonomous SHM systems as the technology matures, leading to improved public
safety and reduced maintenance costs.