* 1101215
* ICES: Small: Collaborative Research:  Algorithms and Mechanisms for Pricing, Influencing Dynamics, and Economic Optimization
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2014
* Avrim Blum, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Balasubramanian Kalyanasundaram
* 08/31/2014
* USD 199,594.00

The intersection of Computer Science and Economics has become increasingly
important to the development of both fields. Today's software often must handle
multiple individuals with their own interests in mind, bringing incentive issues
to the forefront in algorithm design. Economic problems, especially in
electronic commerce, increasingly involve large numbers of goods and buyers as
well as unknown and complex market conditions, making algorithms and machine
learning of key importance. This project aims to address fundamental questions
at the heart of the intersection of these two fields. These include problems of
modeling and influencing behavior in systems with large numbers of agents and
components, problems of optimization under complex and changing preferences and
constraints in electronic commerce, and problems of efficiently computing and
estimating basic economic quantities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
specifically has three main thrusts. The first is development of algorithms and
analysis techniques for positively influencing dynamics in systems with large
numbers of interacting agents. For example, if behavior is currently at a poor-
quality equilibrium, when can additional information or few targeted incentives
be used "nudge" behavior towards a good equilibrium? This applies not only to
self-interested agents but also to components in a distributed system acting on
local information (such as sensors in a sensor network). The second thrust is
development of algorithms for efficiently computing or estimating important
economic quantities. This includes approximately computing Nash equilibria in
large interactions, and learning submodular functions and other common valuation
classes from observations of behavior or experimentation. The third thrust is
developing mathematical frameworks for understanding and solving problems of
pricing and resource allocation in settings with unknown and changing market
conditions. These frameworks are crucial for next-generation markets of
resources such as computing power and network bandwidth.