* 1101901
* Liquid phase organic transistor sensor platform based on surface sorted semiconducting carbon nanotubes for small molecules and biological targets
* ENG,ECCS
* 04/15/2012,03/31/2015
* Zhenan Bao, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* Nadia El-Masry
* 03/31/2015
* USD 360,000.00

The objective of this program is to create a stable and robust electronic sensor
platform capable of sensitive and selective detection of analytes in complex
liquid media. This project will investigate the fabrication and
functionalization strategies for sensors. This project will utilize numerous
pathways of attaching receptors for small molecule and biological analytes on
and around the nanotube surfaces. The approaches and methods proposed here are
expected to lay the groundwork for future highly sensitive sensor technologies.
&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit is to develop a technology that utilizes
electrical engineering and materials science in the development of device
architectures capable of functioning in complex media. The sensor platform is
based on our unique solution-based method of "surface sorting" to create
primarily semiconducting carbon nanotubes (scSWNTs) and our specially
synthesized organic semiconductors. The project will enable a new approach to
detection technology using organic electronics. The proposed studies will allow
probing of biological processes as well as monitoring analyte concentrations in
real time and within the required complex media. The proposed work is expected
to provide a major step towards the incorporation of organic electronics within
practical sensors. &lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts are the participation of
community college students, graduate students and undergraduates, and the
development of interdisciplinary research in the United States and to promote
public understanding of the impact of organic electronics on industrial and
economic development. The development of a highly sensitive, selective and
robust sensing platform will have applications ranging from biomedical,
environmental, defense to food security.