* 1101369
* Collaborative Research:  Cluster Algebras Approach to Poisson-Lie Groups and Higher Genus Directed Networks
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2011,05/31/2015
* Michael Shapiro, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Tie Luo
* 05/31/2015
* USD 140,000.00

The proposed research builds upon PIs' previous collaboration on applications of
Poisson geometry to cluster algebras. In the current project we will undertake a
systematic study of multiple cluster structures in coordinate rings of a number
of varieties of importance in algebraic geometry, representation theory and
mathematical physics and study an interaction between corresponding cluster
algebras. Important examples include simple Lie groups, homogeneous spaces,
configuration spaces of points, and are related to discrete and continuous
integrable systems. The problems to be considered include cluster structures on
simple Lie groups compatible with Poisson-Lie structures associated with the
Belavin-Drinfeld classification, inverse problems for directed nets on surfaces
of higher genus, continuous limits for directed networks with applications to
moduli spaces of flat connections and growth rate classification of cluster
algebras.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The rapid development of the cluster algebra
theory in recent years revealed relations between cluster algebras and a variety
of areas including, among others, commutative and non-commutative algebraic
geometry, quiver representations and Teichmuller theory. The proposed research
is linked to the development of undergraduate and graduate courses and research
projects. Synergistic activities are planned with the goal to promote inter-
institutional and inter-departmental cooperation, to attract graduate students
from underrepresented groups and with diverse educational backgrounds, and,
through a community outreach, at the early exposure of high school students to
mathematical research.