* 1101209
* ICES: Small: Information Elicitation and Aggregation in Market Mechanisms
* CSE,CCF
* 05/01/2011,04/30/2016
* Michael Ostrovsky, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Tracy Kimbrel
* 04/30/2016
* USD 396,543.00

Situations in which a decision maker has less information relevant for her
decision than does some other agent occur in most areas of economic activity. In
such situations, the less informed decision maker would like to obtain
information from the more informed agent, or a group of agents. This award funds
research on the properties of various mechanisms that can be used to elicit such
information, both in the case of a single informed agent and in the case of
multiple partially informed agents.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The first part of the
project studies the single-agent case, the origins of which go back to the
literature on scoring rules. While most of the past work has focused on
eliciting either the full information about the distribution of the random
variable or only the information about its mean, the project's goal is to
generalize this theory to the elicitation of any set of characteristics of the
distribution, such as, e.g., the mean and the variance, the quantiles,
confidence intervals, etc., and to provide a full characterization of sets that
can be elicited on their own using a limited number of questions and those that
cannot.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The second part of the project studies multi-agent
mechanisms in a one-period setting. Each informed agent makes a prediction only
once, though unlike the single-agent case, the payment that the agent receives
now depends not only on his prediction and the outcome, but also on the
predictions of other agents. The goal is to provide a full axiomatic
characterization of static mechanisms that satisfy several desirable properties,
and analyze the performance of such mechanisms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The third
part of the project considers dynamic, multi-period market mechanisms, in which
strategic agents observe each other's actions, learn from them, and adjust their
forecasts accordingly. The research into the properties of such mechanisms is
important both for the design of new market-based information elicitation
mechanisms (such as, e.g., prediction markets operated by companies like
Hewlett-Packard, Electronic Arts, and Google to forecast demand and other
variables) and for understanding the informational properties of financial
markets that already exist. In particular, this subproject bridges a gap between
the non-strategic literature on the informativeness of prices in rational
expectations equilibria and the fully strategic literature on the behavior of
traders in dynamic market models.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact of
this award has several components. The results of this research will be included
in the courses taught to graduate students in economics, finance, computer
science, and operations research. The research itself will involve students from
these disciplines exploring the role of information in markets and single-agent
settings, its aggregation and elicitation, and other related issues. Finally,
this research has potential for a direct impact on the practical design of
information elicitation mechanisms, such as, e.g., corporate prediction markets
or information exchanges that allow traders to buy and sell information.