* 1101226
* ICES: Small: Manipulation of Learning Heuristics in Strategic Interaction
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2011,06/30/2016
* Burkhard Schipper, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Tracy Kimbrel
* 06/30/2016
* USD 188,532.00

This project analyzes strategic manipulation of learning players in repeated
games. People are not born with optimal strategies, but instead learn to
interact in markets and other social situations. Increasingly, humans interact
with computerized agents who may be programmed to use some adaptive learning
heuristic. Especially when economic success is at stake, resources may be
invested to manipulate learning players. First, the Principle Investigator (PI)
seeks to find simple adaptive heuristics that are essentially unbeatable by any
opponent in generic and economically relevant classes of games. Second, the PI
seeks to discover simple adaptive heuristics whose long run outcome can not be
manipulated by sophisticated opponents. Such heuristics are of interest to
robustly implement outcomes in mechanisms with learning players. Third, the PI
will investigate the existence of simple adaptive heuristics whose long run
outcome is not only close to Nash equilibrium but which can also not be
manipulated by sophisticated opponents in generic and economically relevant
classes of games. Prior work on learning in games focuses on simple heuristics
that lead in all games to Nash equilibrium. The objective is to settle the
important open question whether such learning heuristics themselves can be
robust to strategic manipulation. Finally, the PI aims to find dynamically
optimal strategies against well-known adaptive heuristics such as myopic best
reply, fictitious play, reinforcement learning, imitation, trail &amp; error
learning, and regret matching in generic and economically relevant classes of
games.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The findings developed in this project are not only
relevant for the theory of learning in games in economics but they are foremost
relevant for the understanding of real-life strategic interaction and the design
of interacting learning machines. In reality, players almost always have to
learn how to interact and are almost always heterogeneous with respect to
knowledge, strategic sophistication and learning abilities. This becomes obvious
for instance in the increasing interaction of humans with machines such as
calling robots and automated trading. Especially for automated trading in
financial markets, one expects simple learning players to be manipulated by
other more sophisticated players if the latter can achieve a strategic
advantage. The results of this project are expected to influence the design of
interacting learning machines robust to manipulation in many environments.