* 1101393
* Radon transforms: geometric combinatorics, regularity, and extensions
* MPS,DMS
* 07/15/2011,06/30/2014
* Philip Gressman, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Bruce P. Palka
* 06/30/2014
* USD 132,125.00

The goal of this project is to address a series of interesting open problems in
mathematical analysis relating to geometric integral transforms (like the Radon
and X-ray transforms) and oscillatory integrals. Some of the goals include
determining the boundedness of certain multilinear functionals (nonlinear
analogues of the Holder-Brascamp-Lieb inequalities) on products of Lebesgue
spaces and understanding of the regularity of averaging operators (in both the
standard and overdetermined cases) on Lebesgue and Lebesgue square integrable
Sobolev spaces. These problems and related generalizations are deeply connected
to some of the most important conjectures in modern mathematics, including the
Kakeya conjecture, the Bochner-Riesz conjecture, the Restriction conjecture, and
Sogge's local smoothing conjecture. The intellectual merit of these problems to
be studied here is that their solutions require fundamental new insights and
hold the promise of being potentially significant steps on the road to the
resolution of some of these deep conjectures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader
impacts of the work in this project may be felt throughout medical imaging: CT
and SPECT scans, NMR imaging, RADAR, and SONAR applications all depend on a deep
theoretical and practical understanding of the Radon transform. Optical-acoustic
tomography, scattering theory, and even motion-detection algorithms also depend
on the Radon transform. More exciting and unexpected impacts are also
anticipated in connection with the Boltzmann equation - a 140-year-old equation
describing the dynamics of a dilute gas. Recent joint work with R. M. Strain has
uncovered deep connections between this fundamental equation of statistical
mechanics and the geometry and analysis connected to this project. These
connections and the ideas and constructions arising from this new insight
promise to have a deep and lasting impact on the way that this equation is
understood by mathematicians.