* 1101323
* Derived Equivalences, Generic Vanishing, and the Structure of Cohomology
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2011,05/31/2014
* Mihnea Popa, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Tie Luo
* 05/31/2014
* USD 223,834.00

A central problem originating on the homological side of mirror symmetry and
birational geometry is to compare the numerical invariants, cohomology, and
geometry of varieties with equivalent bounded derived categories. Continuing
work with Schnell on the behavior of the Picard variety under derived
equivalence and the invariance of certain Hodge numbers, the PI plans to address
problems like the invariance of the canonical cohomology, the invariance of
cohomological support loci, and the invariance of all Hodge numbers for Fourier-
Mukai partners, or the study of the dimension of derived categories of coherent
sheaves. In a different direction, many results on the cohomology of compact
Kahler manifolds lie at the intersection of the areas of Generic Vanishing
theory, Fourier-Mukai theory, and homological and commutative algebra. The PI
will continue work in this area, initiated with Lazarsfeld, on the structure of
the canonical cohomology as a module over the exterior algebra. He would like to
derive consequences on either the existence of indecomposable bundles of low
rank on projective space, or on improved lower bounds on the holomorphic Euler
characteristic of compact Kahler manifolds without irregular fibrations, after
applying the BGG correspondence to such modules. He will attempt to apply
methods of this type to approach a conjecture of Carrell and Hacon-Kovacs on
holomorphic one-forms on varieties of general type. He will also continue work
towards the Beauville-Debarre-Ran Schottky-type conjecture predicting which
principally polarized abelian varieties contain subvarieties representing
minimal cohomology classes, and towards the Beauville conjecture on filtrations
on the rational Chow groups of abelian varieties induced by the Fourier-Mukai
transform.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Some of the problems the PI proposes
to attack, like the invariance of cohomology groups or Hodge numbers under
derived equivalences, restrictions on the total cohomology of a variety, or the
study of minimal classes on abelian varieties, are among the most prominent and
established problems in their respective areas and will have a high impact as
proved statements. Others, like for instance the dimension of derived categories
or the exterior structure on cohomology modules, are part of newly emerging
theories where a better understanding will surely lead to more applications. All
parts of the project will have a broad range of applications, further our
knowledge in the fi eld, create interaction with people of diff^erent
mathematical backgrounds, and produce problems suitable for Ph.D. students.
Outside of Mathematics, the PI will continue to be involved in non-departmental
activities, like his membership on the WISEST Committee devoted to creating a
better environment for women in science and engineering, and on the UIC Senate.
In the international mathematical community, he will be involved in organizing
conferences and workshops, and editing volumes with the goal of disseminating
knowledge. Funds will help the PI continue to deliver lectures at summer schools
and conferences in the US and abroad; in the recent past this has led to working
with students outside of the PI's base institution and getting part of their
research started. In the UIC department they will be used for assisting the
research and travel of graduate students, supporting seminars, and developing
and improving the graduate curriculum.