* 1101194
* EAGER:  Advancing the Analysis of Secondary Organic Aerosols Through Innovations in Soft Ionization Aerosol Mass Spectrometry
* GEO,AGS
* 01/01/2011,06/30/2012
* Giuseppe Petrucci, University of Vermont & State Agricultural College
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Edgerton
* 06/30/2012
* USD 100,000.00

This project involves developing a more comprehensive understanding of the
formation, growth, and aging of biogenic and anthropogenic secondary organic
aerosols (BSOA and ASOA, respectively). Atmospheric aerosols play a central role
in the atmosphere by influencing global and regional radiative energy balance,
visibility, the hydrological cycle, regulation of greenhouse and reactive gases,
and human health. SOA is the predominant contributor to submicron atmospheric
aerosols, therefore developing an improved understanding of its life cycle in
the atmosphere is of great importance. Most chamber-based SOA studies to date
have placed emphasis largely on understanding the impact of monoterpenes on the
formation and growth of BSOA whilst studies that focus on ASOA typically only
employ benzene derivatives with emphasis on toluene, trimethylbenzene, and
xylene. There is a need to understand the role of less commonly studied volatile
and semivolatile organic compounds (VOC and SVOC, respectively) in SOA formation
and atmospheric processing. The goal of this exploratory project is to expand
these boundaries to include compounds of basic character (such as amines) which,
although potentially important in SOA formation and transformation, have
received little attention to date, in large part due to the paucity of suitable
analytical methods. The approach will be to develop and utilize an enhanced
aerosol mass spectrometry system (i.e., near-infrared laser
desorption/ionization AMS, NIR-LDI-AMS) capable of simultaneous measurement of
the acidic and basic organic components of SOA, while abnegating extensive
fragmentation and rearrangement of ions associated with more vigorous ionization
AMS methods. The new, dual-mode instrument will use symmetric reflectron time-
of-flight mass spectrometers to measure positive and negative ions from the same
aerosol sample. Focus will be placed on the influence of organic nitrogen
compounds (ON, such as amines and urea) on the formation, growth and aging of
SOA. The studies will include addressing the formation and growth of SOA
directly from ON VOCs; and the effects of reactive uptake of ON on SOA, as well
as primary organic aerosols (POA). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Undergraduate and
graduate students will play key roles in implementing and executing experiments
in the laboratory as well as disseminating results through presentations and
preparation of manuscripts. Students will be trained in several areas, including
mass spectrometry, gas/aerosol generation and control, and atmospheric
chemistry. The project will also enhance collaborations that have been initiated
between the Principal Investigator's group and groups at Harvard University and
Amherst College. Results garnered from the studies will be disseminated at
national and international conferences, as well as at less formal meetings such
as the New England Summer Conference Day on aerosols and atmospheric chemistry,
where students and post-doctoral scholars from institutions in the Northeast
present results and exchange ideas.