* 1101357
* BioFEL Workshop at Lawrence Berekeley Laboratory on January 18-21, 2011.
* MPS,PHY
* 03/01/2011,02/29/2012
* John Spence, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Krastan Blagoev
* 02/29/2012
* USD 5,000.00

This award partially supports a workshop at Lawrence Berkeley Laboratory on the
use of the Free Electron Laser in the biological sciences. The workshop will
have approximately 120 attendees, and it will be held in January 2011. The
workshop will explore the exciting possibilities which the recent invention of
the hard Xray laser offers for biology. The PIs will bring together leaders in
the fields of biophysics, structural biology, biochemistry, accelerator physics,
and diffraction physics to review the research opportunities which the unique
capabilities of the many Free Electron Lasers (FELs) which are being constructed
provide. Topics covered will include pump-probe protein dynamics, in-situ
chemical snapshot diffraction at room temperature, protein nanocrystal growth
and synthesis, single-shot imaging of cells and viruses, fast ab-initio
fluctuation SAXS, reconstruction and phasing algorithms, detectors, sources and
protein-beam injectors. A panel of senior biologists will outline the needs of
structural biology, and suggest lines of development for this field. The
workshop is co-funded by Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory, Lawrence
Berkeley National Laboratory, SLAC National Accelerator Laboratory, Arizona
State University, and the Center for Biophotonics Science and Technology at
University of California at Davis.