* 1101189
* Weak Coupling Effects in helium-4
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2011,07/31/2015
* Francis Gasparini, SUNY at Buffalo
* Continuing Grant
* Paul Sokol
* 07/31/2015
* USD 375,000.00

TECHNICAL For a system near a continuous phase transition, the behavior of many
thermodynamic properties arises from the growth of the correlation length. This
length diverges in the thermodynamic limit and is responsible for singularities,
for instance, in the heat capacity and susceptibility. This behavior stems from
the ability of fluctuations in the average thermodynamic properties to propagate
and be felt over progressively larger distances. The research to be pursued as a
result of this award will address a particular aspect of this behavior: How do
two adjoining, but weakly coupled helium samples behave near the transition from
the normal state to the superfluid state? This will be studied in arrays of
helium confined in boxes or channels and connected through a very thin film.
This geometry is achieved on silicon wafers through lithography and the use of
direct wafer bonding. Preliminary results for this work have been very
surprising, indicating that the coupling extends over much larger distances than
expected. In some ways this indicates a similarity between superfluid helium and
observations with high temperature superconductors. This project will support
two graduate students working towards their doctorate. The students will develop
expertise in silicon processing, vacuum techniques, thin film deposition and an
array of cryogenic techniques and data analysis.

NON-TECHNICAL ABSTRACT

At a phase transition a system will change its characteristics in such a way
that new properties become manifest. The melting of ice is an example of this
whereby ice transforms into a liquid and the latter has the new ability to
easily "flow". At some types of transitions the changes are more dramatic, and
they are often accompanied with very unusual behavior. Liquid helium has a
transition at low temperatures whereby it transforms from a normal liquid into a
superfluid. The latter is able to flow without friction in an analogous way that
a superconductor can carry an electrical current without resistance. The
proposed research will focus on one aspect of this behavior: How do two regions
of liquid helium which are "weakly" connected influence each other as they
undergo this transition? One calls this a proximity effect. This is also
manifest in superconductors and in magnetic systems, and can be quite general.
The proposed work will provide some unique answers to this question in the sense
that both the properties of the helium will be studied and those of the weak
link. This project will support two graduate students working towards their
doctorate. The students will develop expertise in silicon processing, vacuum
techniques, thin film deposition and an array of cryogenic techniques and data
analysis. It is expected that these results will be presented at conferences and
published in archival journals as part of the students' doctoral training.