* 1101673
* ICES: Small: Networks, Public Goods, and Social Interactions: At the Edge of Analytics and Complexity
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2015
* Rachel Kranton, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Tracy Kimbrel
* 08/31/2015
* USD 349,821.00

This project brings social networks and geography into the economic theory of
public goods. Public goods are goods that benefit many people all at once. For
example, innovation, education, and social services are all critical to modern
economies and economic growth. The project studies the long-standing problem in
public good provision: individual contributions benefit many people, but
contributors do not receive payment or recompense for the total impact of their
work. This project considers social interactions and social incentives in public
good provision. Communities, neighborhoods, ethnicity, and kin have all been
argued to be central to the provision of public goods. The project draws heavily
on these empirical findings. It formalizes social networks and social identity,
and integrates them into mathematical models of decision-making. By developing a
network theory of public goods and social interactions, the project both
advances basic science and provides a guide to new directions for empirical
research and policy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Public goods are vital to a productive
workforce and sustainable economic growth. Industrial research and development,
health, security, and environmental preservation are just some examples of
public goods. In its scientific mission, this project will advance understanding
of how actual and virtual communities and governmental agencies help or hinder
the provision of public goods. The project combines new economic techniques and
computer science techniques to understand how networks of people can contribute
to economic growth. In its education mission, the project will promote and
advance the participation and education of women in two scientific fields -
computer science and economic science - where women are significantly
underrepresented. The project will develop courses and run workshops to train
students in a set of tools for studying networks and strategic games. In its
personnel and subject matter, the project follows national panel recommendations
to increase the participation of women in science by providing role models and
fostering research with social objectives.