* 1101690
* ICES: Small: Distributed Computing with Adaptive Heuristics
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2015
* Rebecca Wright, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Tracy Kimbrel
* 08/31/2015
* USD 398,267.00

Dynamic environments where computational nodes or decision makers interact
repeatedly over time arise in a variety of settings, such as Internet protocols,
large-scale markets, social networks, and multi-processor computer
architectures. In many such settings, the prescribed behavior of the nodes is
simple, natural, and myopic, reflecting either the desire or necessity for
computational nodes (whether humans or computers) to provide quick responses and
have a limited computational burden. These "adaptive heuristics" can often, in
the long run, move the global system in good directions and yield highly
rational and sophisticated behavior, such as in game-theoretic results
demonstrating the convergence of best-response or no-regret dynamics to
equilibrium points. However, these positive results for adaptive heuristics in
game theory are primarily based on the often unrealistic premise that nodes'
actions are somehow synchronously coordinated. In many settings, where nodes can
act at any time, this kind of synchrony is not available; it has long been known
that asynchrony introduces substantial difficulties in distributed systems. The
project draws ideas from distributed-computing theory and from game theory to
investigate provable properties and possible worst-case system behavior of
adaptive heuristics in asynchronous computational environments. A central thrust
of project research is understanding the convergence behavior of distributed
computing with adaptive heuristics. Identifying dynamics that provably converge
to equilibria even in the presence of asynchrony both strengthens classic
results regarding game dynamics and has implications across a wide domain of
applications, including: convergence of game dynamics to pure Nash equilibria;
stabilization of asynchronous circuits; and convergence to a stable routing tree
of the Border Gateway Protocol, which handles Internet
routing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Project results strengthen classic results
regarding game dynamics and guide the design of new protocols for routing,
congestion control, and other Internet environments. The outcomes of this
project include new applications of existing techniques from game theory and
distributed computing and the development of new techniques that are of use to
both communities. A thorough understanding of convergence behaviors of systems
is both of scientific interest and has significant potential to affect real-
world systems and policy decisions. With an improved understanding of the impact
that assumptions about the environment and participants of a complex system have
on possible global and local outcomes, policy makers, system designers, and
system participants can engage in more informed discussion and make better
decisions.