* 1101342
* Infrastructure via Science and Technology Enhanced Partnerships III
* O/D,EPS
* 09/01/2011,06/30/2014
* Mark Young, Montana University System Office
* Cooperative Agreement
* Timothy VanReken
* 06/30/2014
* USD 8,000,000.00

This RII award to Montana EPSCoR will build a coordinated research program
linking microbiology, ecology, and climatology to understand the dynamics of the
processes that govern how an ecosystem responds to climate change. Through this
interdisciplinary and ecosystem-centric approach, the program will provide an
innovative model that is both regionally relevant and nationally significant,
while capitalizing on the unique resources and scientific strengths in Montana.
The funded participants include Montana University System (MUS), University of
Montana (UM), and seven tribal colleges: Blackfeet Community College, Fort Peck
Community College, Little Big Horn College, Stone Child College, Fort Belknap
College, Fort Peck Community College, and Salish Koontenai
College.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will form a single statewide umbrella
institute, the Montana University System Consortium for Ecosystem Research and
Education (MtCERE), which will build on past EPSCoR investments to acquire new
talent in targeted scientific areas, establish shared research facilities, and
develop an integrated education, diversity, and outreach program.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit&lt;br/&gt;The proposed MT EPSCoR
research program aims to link microbial ecology, systems ecology, and
climatology to investigate the multi-scale processes that govern ecosystem
responses to climate change. In particular, researchers will examine how
physical and biotic processes, operating at multiple scales, interact to govern
ecosystem structure and function and the influence of climate change on these
systems. The project has identified three focal areas to study: 1) feedback
between microbial dynamics and ecosystem processes; 2) linkages among landscape
patterns and ecosystem processes; and 3) impacts of multi-scale interactions and
specific vulnerabilities of species and ecosystems to climate change. The
project will involve interdisciplinary experimentation, observation, modeling,
and iterative data-model comparisons in four benchmark Montana ecosystems,
including the Crown of the Continent, High Plains, Upper Missouri, and Greater
Yellowstone. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts&lt;br/&gt;The research
outcomes will have strong relevance to a broad set of research fields, both
within Montana and nationally. The project has an extensive diversity plan to
enhance math and science success for Native American undergraduate students and
other underrepresented groups, improve core environmental sciences education at
Tribal Colleges, support accelerated math preparation for Tribal College
students, and increase the number of Native American Ph.D. students in
environmental sciences. Workforce development efforts include research
partnerships, teaching-the-teacher programs, pre-college student opportunities,
team-centered research internships and mentoring, and new approaches for science
communication to promote Montana?s connection to science and provide the state?s
rural and underrepresented populations. In addition, the project plans to take
advantage of Montana?s unique natural areas, including Yellowstone and Glacier
National Parks, to have extensive external engagement with the general public.