* 1101507
* Representation Theory,  Cluster Algebras, and Canonical Bases
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2014
* Arkady Berenstein, University of Oregon Eugene
* Standard Grant
* Tie Luo
* 08/31/2014
* USD 163,831.00

The main theme of this proposal is to investigate the area lying at the
crossroads of the representation theory of Lie groups, quantum groups,
commutative and non-commutative cluster algebras, and non-commutative algebraic
geometry. A new approach to the study of canonical bases in various quantum
algebras is proposed along with the study of the related cluster structures. The
class of quantum algebras in which the canonical bases arise include coordinate
rings of reductive algebraic groups and double Bruhat cell as well as new
objects such as interval and Hankel algebras. It has been recently discovered by
the proposer that most of the above mentioned cluster and quantum cluster
structures admit totally non-commutative analogues, which discovery, on the one
hand, resulted in the proof of Kontsevich Cluster Conjecture and, on the other
hand, provides a new transition from the rational Algebraic Geometry to its
purely non-commutative counterpart. Another avenue of the research, quantum
folding is a new approach to looking at the Dynkin symmetries of quantum groups
that, quite surprisingly, produces the Langlands duals of the classical fixed
points groups Even the simplest cases of quantum folding bring about new
nilpotent Lie algebras and quantum uberalgebras that are flat deformations of
both enveloping and symmetric algebras of those Lie algebras. The results of
this study will be applied for solving problems such as computing the
multiplicities for the symmetric powers of representations of reductive groups,
computing products of Schubert classes in cohomology of the corresponding flag
varieties and Grassmannians, constructing new totally positive varieties,
integrable systems, and Hecke type algebras as well as for explication and
elaboration of related combinatorial and geometric structures including the
``geometric lifting'' of crystal bases as a new tool in understanding the local
Langlands correspondence.

Representation theory is one of the most dynamically developing fields of modern
Mathematics. It has a large impact in other fields of Mathematics and numerous
applications in other Natural Sciences. The concepts of anonical and crystal
bases are of great importance for the representation theory: a mere establishing
of existence of such bases has helped in solving classical enumeration problems
like computing multiplicities of irreducible representations or decomposing
tensor products of irreducible representations. A new class of canonical bases
discovered by the proposer is expected to settle an old problem of decomposing
symmetric powers of representations. Therefore, any information on canonical or
crystal bases would be very beneficial for the representation theory. The
results of the proposer and other researchers suggest natural algebro-geometric
counterparts for the purely discrete canonical and crystal bases: totally
positive varieties, geometric crystals, commutative, quantum, and totally
noncommutative cluster varieties. Understanding the relationship between these
structures underlying the canonical bases is one of main priorities of this
proposal. This relationship has proved to be a useful tool in the study of
Langlands correspondence -- the most mysterious and inspiring correspondence
between Algebra and Geometry of the 20th and 21st century Mathematics.