* 1101105
* Collaborative Research: An Innovative Gap Damper to Control Seismic Isolator Displacements in Extreme Earthquakes
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2011,06/30/2015
* Keri Ryan, Board of Regents, NSHE, obo University of Nevada, Reno
* Standard Grant
* Yick Hsuan
* 06/30/2015
* USD 194,994.00

This research project will study the use of a special gap damper that is
designed to limit the excessive deformation without causing impact and the
associated high frequency motions and accelerations. In the design of a seismic
base isolation system for a building, an isolator must be allowed to deform a
significant amount. At the same time, this deformation must be controlled to
avoid structural damage due to its reaching the displacement limit in a rare but
possible strong ground motion. The project involves advanced analytical and
numerical simulation studies to determine the optimal gap damper characteristics
for desired performance such as the size of gap element, the ratio of pre- and
post-gap isolation system stiffness, and the energy dissipation demand to reduce
displacements without inducing large accelerations in the building. Experimental
studies on a standalone damper will be conducted in the Structural Research
Laboratory at Auburn University to characterize the energy dissipation
properties of the damper. Shaking table studies at the Large Scale Structures
Laboratory at the University of Nevada, Reno will validate the effectiveness of
the proposed gap damper scheme. This study will provide an experimentally and
analytically validated framework leading to reliable performance-based isolator
design of buildings under different seismic scenarios.

This research project is expected to lead to better designs of base isolation
systems that are often used in critical or essential facilities such as
hospitals, emergency operation centers, fire stations, and other important
buildings. The research results will be broadly disseminated for practical
implementation to practitioners through publication in technical journals,
presentations in professional conferences and the website created for the
project. The experimental data will be archived on the George E. Brown Network
for Earthquake Engineering Simulation data repository for easy accessibility by
other researchers in the earthquake engineering community. The project will
provide advanced training to graduate and undergraduate students through their
involvement in project research activities. To enhance the awareness and
importance of earthquake engineering, a ?Reconnaissance Education Program" will
be established with participation of several upper level undergraduate students
with representation from underrepresented groups in an earthquake reconnaissance
mission after the next major earthquake. This participation is expected to
provide a life-changing experience for the students and to motivate them for
long-term commitment to earthquake engineering.