* 1101934
* Amphidynamic Crystalline Materials Based on  Inertial Rotors and Dipolar Arrays
* MPS,DMR
* 09/15/2011,08/31/2014
* Miguel Garcia-Garibay, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing Grant
* Michael J. Scott
* 08/31/2014
* USD 465,000.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;This proposal describes a research plan centered on
the design of a novel class of functional materials based on the motion of their
molecular units. These materials are said to be amphidynamic in reference to the
fact that they have architectural elements that exist at the two extremes of the
molecular dynamics spectrum. The long-term vision of this project is to create
dense multi-component assemblies with the complexity and addressability that is
expected of smart materials and artificial molecular machines. By form and
function, the building units selected for this study resemble macroscopic
compasses or gyroscopes, with the designation of choice depending on their state
of motion and the presence of dipoles that respond to external fields. Their
structures consist of a rotary mass, or rotator, that is connected by an axle to
a rigid frame that holds the assembly together and plays the role of a stator.
&lt;br/&gt;Amphidynamic materials based on inertial rotors and dipolar arrays
are expected to have addressable mechanic, dipolar, and optical properties for
electro-optic and dielectric applications. In analogy to liquid crystals, the
new materials will possess birefringence, dichroism, and second-order non-linear
optical responses that can be switched on and off with external fields. However,
molecular compasses will not require the entire molecule and the bulk domain to
reorient so that dipolar lattices with suitable symmetries will have a
ferroelectric ground state and response times approaching those given by the
moment of inertia of the reorienting units, on the order of 1012 s-1 (THz). With
the support of the Solid-State and Materials Chemistry program in the Division
of Materials Chemistry and the Macromolecular, Supramolecular, and Nanochemistry
program in the Division of Chemistry , the UCLA team will test structures design
to display inertial rotation in the solid state, a new family of molecular
compasses and gyroscopes with rotary motion that responds to thermal and
photochemical stimuli, and will investigate a new class of electrochromic
materials based on changes in orientation between linearly conjugated
chromophores. Hoping to make an impact on the number of underrepresented
minority students who pursue materials research careers, the PI has established
a collaboration with Faculty at Trade Technical College, which is located in
downtown Los Angeles and has a very large Hispanic and African American
population. The PI and his students have outlined plans to disseminate their
research to the general public. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NON-TECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;The primary objective of this project, supported by the Solid-
State and Materials Chemistry program in the Division of Materials Chemistry and
the Macromolecular, Supramolecular, and Nanochemistry program in the Division of
Chemistry, is to develop a new class of responsive materials that can be
switched on-and-off to manipulate light and electrical signals. This will be
accomplished by altering the orientation and motion of the molecules that
constitute the material. Notably, molecular motion is not the first thing that
comes to mind when thinking about solids. However, recent advances in the PI
laboratory have shown that such materials can be built with molecular rotors
linked to rigid frameworks by molecular axles and bearings akin to those found
in macroscopic machines. The specific structures studied in this project are
evocative of a macroscopic compass. They have a bar needle, or "dipole", that
rotates about an axle in order to point towards the strongest magnetic or
electric field. By collectively changing their orientation in the presence of
strong external fields many such molecular compasses within the material can
change the intensity, color, and polarization of transmitted light. Using
elements designed to change the speed of rotation, the UCLA group aims at
changing the speed of signal transmission in order to improve technologies
currently used in cell phones and other devices. Research on these so-called
"amphidynamic" materials will provide the PI with opportunities to educate and
train talented materials chemists and to carry out research activities aimed at
increasing the number of students from underprivileged backgrounds that enter
the field of materials chemistry. The PI has been very successful attracting
women and minority students to his research group by maintaining a highly
supportive and creative environment that fosters careers in materials science
and in science education. As part of this project, the PI has established
several outreach activities in collaboration with Faculty at Trade Technical
College, which is located in downtown Los Angeles and has a very large Hispanic
and African American population. It is hoped that the most talented students
will transfer to UCLA and other research universities to pursue careers in
chemistry and materials sciences.