* 1101245
* Interactions Among Climate, Land Use, Ecosystem Services and Society
* O/D,OIA
* 09/01/2011,12/31/2018
* Kevin Gardner, University of New Hampshire
* Cooperative Agreement
* Timothy VanReken
* 12/31/2018
* USD 21,916,262.00

This Research Infrastructure Improvement (RII) Award focuses on the terrestrial
and&lt;br/&gt;aquatic ecosystem services in New Hampshire and their interactions
with short and long&lt;br/&gt;term changes in climate and land use. The project
will investigate the&lt;br/&gt;interdependence of ecosystems, climate change,
and impacts on society. The work is&lt;br/&gt;scientifically significant and
regionally relevant as ecosystem services are central to the&lt;br/&gt;well-
being of New Hampshire residents and to the region's economy. The
project&lt;br/&gt;brings together research universities, 2- and 4-year colleges,
small businesses, local&lt;br/&gt;government, and non-profit organizations to
address key issues related to ecosystems&lt;br/&gt;research, education, and
workforce development in the state.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
Merit&lt;br/&gt;This RII project will examine how climate variability and
climate change affect and are&lt;br/&gt;affected by changes in land use, supply
and demand balances of water resources, and&lt;br/&gt;dynamics of nutrients in
New Hampshire's streams and rivers. The research program&lt;br/&gt;will build a
statewide system of terrestrial and aquatic sensors as well as use
aircraft&lt;br/&gt;remote sensing and satellite imagery. This infrastructure
will provide information on&lt;br/&gt;forest structure, soil emission, water
temperature, and nutrient levels with high spatial&lt;br/&gt;and temporal
resolution than is currently possible. The new data will be used
in&lt;br/&gt;climate, hydrological, and ecosystem models. The integration of
observational and&lt;br/&gt;modeling work on forest and water ecosystems will
lead the way to examine future&lt;br/&gt;scenarios of climate change and the
potential impacts on ecosystem function. The&lt;br/&gt;project will survey
public perceptions of climate change and land use and
broadly&lt;br/&gt;disseminate the analyzed results to improve communication
among the public, policy&lt;br/&gt;makers, and an interdisciplinary team of
scientists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts&lt;br/&gt;The project has a
suite of activities that are well-integrated with research to
promote&lt;br/&gt;education at all levels. The implementation of the research
project will contribute to an&lt;br/&gt;improved understanding of the historical
effects of climate, land use, and demographic&lt;br/&gt;changes. In addition,
improved communication among researchers, policy makers, and&lt;br/&gt;the
public is expected to enable informed decision-making by all
stakeholders.&lt;br/&gt;Workforce development initiatives under this project
include incentives to transfer from&lt;br/&gt;2-year to 4-year schools, and
summer institutes for K-12 teachers, 2-year college&lt;br/&gt;faculty, and 4-H
volunteers to be trained in the use of terrestrial and aquatic
sensors,&lt;br/&gt;data collection methods and participation in research. The
project includes distance&lt;br/&gt;learning programs and plans for web-based
dissemination of research results.