* 1101600
* China/U.S. Symposium for the Advancement of Earthquake Sciences and Hazard Mitigation Practices; held October 19-21, 2010 in Beijing, China.
* ENG,CMMI
* 11/15/2010,10/31/2011
* Jay Berger, Earthquake Engineering Research Institute
* Standard Grant
* Joy Pauschke
* 10/31/2011
* USD 29,998.00

This award provides travel support to China for five U.S. academic researchers
and two Earthquake Engineering Research Institute (EERI) representatives on the
twenty-one member U.S. team to participate in the first China/USA Symposium for
the Advancement of Earthquake Sciences and Hazard Mitigation Practices. This
symposium is in response to a request from the President of the Chinese Academy
of Sciences to conduct a joint scientific exchange on earthquake hazard
mitigation with invited U.S. expertise. The one-day symposium in Beijing, China
and two-day field trip to the epicentral area of the 2008 M7.9 Wenchuan, China
earthquake will be held from 19 to 21 October 2010. Two days of informal
meetings with key Chinese government agencies and researchers working in
earthquake-related fields will be held during the week of the symposium/field
trip. The symposium/field trip is co-sponsored by EERI and the Chinese Chamber
of Commerce of Hawaii. EERI will administer the travel grant, coordinate travel
arrangements, and handle all administrative procedures involved.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The symposium will advance earthquake
sciences and hazard mitigation practices in both China and the U.S., establish a
baseline of state of the art earthquake engineering practices, and identify
areas for future research of common interest, while enhancing cooperation and
mutual understanding between the two
countries.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: In this symposium, expert
earthquake scientists, engineers, and hazard mitigation practitioners from China
and the U.S. will meet and collaborate to identify and discuss the approaches
and research taken by both countries to address common issues in earthquake
hazard mitigation. This first meeting will help identify areas of future
research and facilitate a continuing exchange of useful scientific, engineering,
and planning knowledge and experience that could lead to safer buildings and
reduced casualties in future earthquakes. The symposium and related meeting
functions enable a multi-disciplinary team from the U.S. to interact with a very
broad range of Chinese officials and researchers in the key ministries,
universities, and institutes dealing with earthquake research, development of
codes and standards, planning, hazard mitigation, and disaster response and
recovery policies.