* 1101423
* The Isentropic Euler Equations and Optimal Transport
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/2011,07/31/2015
* Chongchun Zeng, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Bruce P. Palka
* 07/31/2015
* USD 136,000.00

The project will explore the deep connections between compressible fluid
dynamics and the theory of optimal transport. It will establish that the
isentropic Euler equations can be understood as a steepest descent on a suitable
space of probability measures, by proving that a sequence of approximate
solutions generated by a certain variational time discretization converges to a
measure-valued solution of the conservation law. For the particular cases of one
space dimension and of self-similar solutions, it will be shown that these
measure-valued solutions are weak entropy solutions in the classical sense. A
novel solution concept for the isentropic Euler equations will be explored in
the framework of second-order differential inclusions. The interpretation as a
differential inclusion will also be applied to one-dimensional models of
compressible fluid flows with interactions, in the context of sticky particle
dynamics. Stability of sticky particle solutions will be shown and global
existence will be established. The variational time discretization will be used
to derive new numerical methods for the two-dimensional isentropic Euler
equations. Finally, the project will investigate the fine structure of solutions
through gamma-convergence of the energy dissipation functional.

The compressible Euler equations model the dynamics of compressible fluids, in
particular, of gases. They express in mathematical terms a simple but
fundamental principle of physics: that mass and energy must be preserved. They
form the basic building block for mathematical models in various disciplines of
science and engineering. One example is aerodynamics: an understanding of the
properties of solutions to the compressible Euler equations are necessary to
design more efficient airplane wings or cars with smaller aerodynamical
resistance. Other examples include the theory of combustion processes, weather
and climate modeling, models of blood flows, and more. This project will advance
the mathematical understanding of the compressible Euler equations by harnessing
tools from another field in mathematics that has attracted a lot of interest
recently and is developing rapidly: optimal transport. This theory grew out of a
very simple engineering problem: How does one move an amount of sand or debris
from one place to another, with minimal effort? When applied to the compressible
Euler equations, this theory expresses the idea that typically nature tries to
do things in the most economical way. This point of view allows us to gain new
insights into the nature of the compressible Euler equations and the properties
of their solutions.