* 1101743
* ICES: Large: Meme Diffusion Through Mass Social Media
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2011,06/30/2016
* Filippo Menczer, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Tracy Kimbrel
* 06/30/2016
* USD 919,917.00

The project is aimed at modeling the diffusion of information online and
empirically discriminating among models of mechanisms driving the spread of
memes. We explore why some ideas cause viral explosions while others are quickly
forgotten. Our analysis goes beyond the traditional approach of applied epidemic
diffusion processes and focuses on cascade size distributions and popularity
time series in order to model the agents and processes driving the online
diffusion of information, including: users and their topical interests,
competition for user attention, and the chronological age of information.
Completion of our project will result in a better understanding of information
flow and could assist in elucidating the complex mechanisms that underlie a
variety of human dynamics and organizations. The analysis will involve studying
meme diffusion in large-scale social media by collecting and analyzing massive
streams of public micro-blogging data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project stands
to benefit both the research community and the public significantly. Our data
will be made available via APIs and include information on meme propagation
networks, statistical data, and relevant user and content features. The open-
source platform we develop will be made publicly available and will be
extensible to ever more research areas as a greater preponderance of human
activities are replicated online. Additionally, we will create a web service
open to the public for monitoring trends, bursts, and suspicious memes. This
service could mitigate the diffusion of false and misleading ideas, detect hate
speech and subversive propaganda, and assist in the preservation of open debate.