* 1101903
* Development of Large-Scale Electric Fields in the Inner Magnetosphere during Substorms
* GEO,AGS
* 12/01/2011,11/30/2015
* Lawrence Lyons, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing Grant
* Janet U. Kozyra
* 11/30/2015
* USD 300,000.00

This project will focus on temporal variations of electric fields in Earth's
magnetosphere that are associated with the onset of a magnetic substorm. It will
use data from the THEMIS and Cluster spacecraft as well as the THEMIS ground-
based imaging array to precisely determine the time of substorm onset. Data from
the THEMIS spacecraft will be used to determine the time difference between
substorm auroral onset and the electromagnetic field and Poynting flux
responses. These results can then be used to determine the propagation path of
energy that lead to the formation of subauroral polarization streams (SAPS).
SAPS are a major magnetosphere-ionosphere coupling phenomenon associated with
region 2 FACs flowing into the subauroral ionosphere in the premidnight sector.
For quantitative understanding of disturbances in the inner magnetosphere during
substorms, it is essential to determine the transmission path of electromagnetic
energy released in the magnetotail at substorm onset towards the inner
magnetosphere, as well as the promptness and spatial distribution of this
response. While a number of studies have been conducted for quasi-steady
distributions of SAPS electric fields, this project will focus on temporal
variations of electric fields associated with substorm onset.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The coupling of electromagnetic energy from the
magnetosphere to the ionosphere is one of the most important processes that
affect space weather. This project will investigate an important component of
magnetosphere-ionosphere coupling that is associated with electric fields
generated at the onset of a magnetic substorm.