* 1101192
* From many body quantum dynamics to nonlinear dispersive PDEs, and back
* MPS,DMS
* 09/15/2011,08/31/2015
* Natasa Pavlovic, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* Edward Taylor
* 08/31/2015
* USD 198,485.00

The investigator plans to study existence and regularity of nonlinear dispersive
PDEs as well as derivation of these equations. More precisely, the investigator
proposes to study two groups of problems. The first group focuses on analyzing
regularity of solutions to the super-critical nonlinear wave (NLW) and
Schrodinger (NLS) equations. The last two decades brought numerous advances in
understanding global existence of solutions to the so called "critical"
nonlinear PDEs, where criticality is understood in the sense that a PDE
possesses a quantity globally controlled in time which has the same regularity
as a certain scaling invariant norm. However obtaining global in time solutions
to super-critical equations remains a challenging problem. Here by a super-
critical equation we mean that the conserved quantities are at lower
regularities than the scaling invariant norm. A famous example is the 3D Navier-
Stokes equations that describe the most fundamental properties of viscous
incompressible fluids. Other examples involve various nonlinear wave equations
that appear in the context of general relativity as well as Schrodinger
equations. With her collaborators, the investigator proposes to work on three
projects towards obtaining partial regularity results for super-critical NLW and
NLS inspired by similar results available in the context of the 3D Navier-
Stokes. The second group of problems focuses on projects related to derivation
of the NLS from many body quantum dynamics. The investigator, together with
Chen, proposes to develop further the work that they recently started on the
Cauchy problem for the Gross-Pitaevskii (GP) hierarchy, which is an infinite
system of coupled linear non-homogeneous PDEs, that appear in the derivation of
the NLS. The GP hierarchy describes the dynamics of a gas of infinitely many
interacting bosons, while at the same time retains some of the features of a
dispersive PDE. Based on these dispersive features, the investigator proposes to
investigate solutions to the GP hierarchy and illustrate that, in some
instances, the GP can be studied using generalizations of methods of dispersive
PDEs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Suggested problems involve important mathematical
questions such as existence and regularity of solutions to PDEs that describe
various wave phenomena. For instance, the NLS and their combinations with the
Korteweg-de-Vries and wave equations have been proposed as models for many basic
wave phenomena. Due to their physical significance, it is essential to develop
tools to understand behavior of solutions to these nonlinear equations and the
investigator plans to work in that direction via adapting some tools from her
earlier work on equations of fluid motion (such as Navier-Stokes equations that
describe fundamental properties of viscous fluids) to the context of dispersive
equations. On the other hand, the investigator plans to continue her recent work
on physically inspired questions related to derivation of dispersive PDEs from
many body Boson systems. The proposed activity contains an interdisciplinary
approach in the sense that it has potential to bring dispersive PDE methods to
the level of many body quantum dynamics and vise versa. In particular, the long
term goal is to try to adapt some of the recent advances from dispersive PDEs to
the many body systems, where one has physically relevant questions that are
beyond the reach of known mathematical methods.