* 1101377
* Wall-crossing, stability conditions and mirror symmetry
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2015
* Ralf Schiffler, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Pollington
* 08/31/2015
* USD 126,000.00

Stability of vector bundles has been a central concept in algebraic geometry
since Atiyah initiated their study over 50 years ago. The concept was later
extended to coherent sheaves, which are a natural generalization of vector
bundles, and can be thought of as a way to allow for vector bundles with
singularities. While the notion of stability for coherent sheaves depends on
choices, only recently has the space of possible such choices been studied. In
particular, due to the seminal work by Bridgeland, we know that there is a
manifold of stability conditions, if we are willing to extend our notion of
stability from coherent sheaves to complexes of coherent sheaves, i.e., to the
derived category. This new concept of stability is motivated by string theory,
and mirror symmetry relates it closely to symplectic geometry and properties of
the Fukaya category. One focus of this proposal is to work on questions for
Bridgeland stability conditions that are suggested by string theory, but don't
have a satisfactory mathematical answer yet. For example, the PI will work on
constructing a missing class of examples of stability conditions, whose
existence is closely related to a notion of stability for D-branes in string
theory. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Algebraic Geometry is the study of shapes arising
as solution sets of systems of polynomial equations. While these are ubiquitous
in mathematics, they have also become important in mathematical physics and,
more specifically, in string theory. Conversely, insights by string theorists,
who approach similar question with different background and intuition, have had
an enormous influence on algebraic geometry over the last 20 years. The projects
of this proposals will contribute further to this interaction between algebraic
geometry and string theory.