* 1101415
* Partial Differential Equations and Several Complex Variables
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2011,05/31/2015
* Mei-Chi Shaw, University of Notre Dame
* Continuing Grant
* Bruce P. Palka
* 05/31/2015
* USD 220,000.00

Two of the most important equations in several complex variables are the Cauchy-
Riemann equations and the induced tangential Cauchy-Riemann equations. The
understanding of these equations have been the focal point of research in
complex analysis in the past few decades. The problems addressed in this project
include &lt;br/&gt;the Cauchy-Riemann equations and the tangential Cauchy-
Riemann complex on complex manifolds, especially on complex projective spaces
(which is compact and with positive curvature) and negatively curved manifolds.
Understanding the geometric aspects of these equations under the curvature
conditions and their relations with function theory in complex manifolds are
some of the most challenging and important problems in complex analysis and
geometry. The study of several complex variables in a geometric or non-smooth
setting has provided interesting new questions with fresh insight to problems in
topology, foliation theory, complex dynamics, algebraic and complex geometry.
Complex geometric theory has only just begun to develop and Shaw will continue
her efforts in this direction. She will also continue her research on applying
the geometric measure theory and harmonic analysis to several complex variables
for non-smooth domains. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Since the pioneering
work of Poincare and Hartogs more than a century ago, the field of several
complex variables has played a major role in modern mathematics. The use of
partial differential equations has been the main tool for studying several
complex variables, as well as complex geometry in the past few decades. The
broader impacts from the proposed activity are that these problems are at the
intersection of analysis, geometry and topology with applications in applied
mathematics and physics. Other than the mathematical areas described in the
proposal, recent progress in the Dirichlet and Neumann problem on nonsmooth
domains has found applications in other disciplines like physics and
engineering. The Hodge theorem is an extension of the classical Dirichlet
Principle, the canonical solution to the energy minimizing problem arising from
the heat transfer problem. Recent applications of the theorem on domains with
corners and wedges have been used in electrokinetics and other fields in
engineering and physics. The PI will use all of these ideas in her work
mentoring students and the writing of a text that makes some of these partial
differential equations topics more accessible to a wider range of
mathematicians, especially those working in geometry and complex analysis.