* 1101401
* AIS: Entanglement of Approximate Dynamic Programming and Modern Nonlinear Control for Complex Systems
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/2011,07/31/2015
* Zhong-Ping Jiang, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 07/31/2015
* USD 281,847.00

The objective of this research is to develop a new framework for robust
adaptive/approximate dynamic programming to address grand challenges arising
from engineering and biology, such as smart grid, brain research, robotics, and
flight control. The approach is to take explicit advantages of versatile
techniques from two active areas of research in reinforcement learning systems
and neural networks and in modern nonlinear
control.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit&lt;br/&gt;This
interdisciplinary research initiative, driven by the need in building brain-like
reinforcement learning systems and in understanding ultimately the brain
function, is significant in different aspects. It will significantly advance the
state of the art on approximate dynamic programming and address the truly model-
free situation. In addition, instead of building exact mathematical models,
which often is very hard, if not impossible, for contemporary complex problems
arising from engineering and biology, this proposal adopts a novel
interconnected system viewpoint on the basis of the PI?s work on nonlinear
small-gain theory. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts&lt;br/&gt;The proposed
work will lead to the development of new tools for robust adaptive critic
designs in interconnected complex systems. Not only these tools are expected to
find applications in emerging engineering applications such as smart grid,
robotics and flight control, but also they will help gain a deeper insight
toward the long-term goal in understanding brain functions and building brain-
like reinforcement learning engineering systems. The proposed research will have
a substantial direct impact upon education at the PI's institution by engaging
students from several areas and departments.