* 1101233
* Ergodic theory of infinite interval exchange transformations
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2011,05/31/2015
* William Hooper, CUNY City College
* Standard Grant
* Bruce P. Palka
* 05/31/2015
* USD 142,962.00

This project involves the extension of ergodic theoretic results about interval
exchange transformations (IETs) to cases of interval exchanges involving
infinitely many intervals. The primary question of interest is to classify the
locally finite ergodic invariant measures of an infinite IET. Interest in the
infinite case is motivated by connections between infinite IETs and more
classical topics. Progress on these classes of examples will make significant
contributions to the field of infinite ergodic theory, and to the subject of
dynamical systems. Recently, the work of the principal investigator and others
in the field have shown the existence of parallels between the theory of
infinite IETs, and the much more well developed theory of horocyclic flows on
non-compact hyperbolic surfaces. Motivated and directed by these connections,
known results about infinite IETs will be extended and new results will be
produced.

Dynamical systems is the study of any system which updates according to a fixed
rule. For example, a finite number of particles behaving according to the rules
of Newtonian mechanics is a dynamical system. This project concerns systems
which are said to have low complexity, meaning that similar states for the
system take a very long time to become dissimilar. These systems are of interest
because they arise naturally from geometric, algebraic and physical questions.
Despite the relevance of these systems, questions involving low complexity
systems often can not be directly addressed by approaches prevalent in the
theory of dynamical systems, because, for instance, these systems are not
hyperbolic. This is particularly true for questions about the long term
statistical behavior of low complexity systems. This project will extend the
collection of tools which do apply to low complexity systems, and further extend
the classes of systems to which these tools apply. Progress on these questions
is of importance to the development and applicability of the theory of dynamical
systems, which is one of the primary mathematical approaches available to
understand the physical world. The PI will be working with undergraduates on
related research during the summer.