* 1101905
* Spatial Multiplexing in Multimode Fiber using Adaptive Optical or Digital Signal Processing
* ENG,ECCS
* 05/01/2011,12/31/2014
* Joseph M. Kahn, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* GEORGE HADDAD
* 12/31/2014
* USD 359,961.00

The objective of this research is to develop techniques for increasing
transmission capacity in both short-reach and long-reach fiber networks. The
approach is to use spatial multiplexing in multimode fiber, which is a form of
multi-input, multi-output transmission.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit:
&lt;br/&gt;Short-reach fiber systems, such as data-center and local-area
networks, already use multimode fiber with direct detection, but are limited by
modal dispersion to only 10 Gbit/s per fiber. Adaptive optical signal processing
will be used to prevent modal dispersion and enable spatial multiplexing in
these systems. The approach developed in this project will simultaneously
overcome modal dispersion and achieve multiplicative capacity gains in direct-
detection systems. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Longer-reach systems currently use
single-mode fiber, and are now using coherent detection, which preserves
information on phase and polarization of optical signals. Adaptive digital
signal processing techniques will be developed to compensate modal dispersion
and enable spatial multiplexing. Mode-dependent fiber losses and amplifier gains
can cause signal fading, as in wireless systems. System-level approaches, such
as modal-frequency diversity and space-time coding, will ensure reliability
without significantly sacrificing multiplexing gain. Fundamental diversity-
multiplexing tradeoffs will be studied.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts:
&lt;br/&gt;This project will enable dramatic increases in optical transmission
capacity, and will help lower the cost per bit, benefiting research, education,
healthcare, commerce, and security. New applications of multimode media will be
enabled, complementing single-mode media. New connections between optical and
wireless communications will be made, inspiring engineers in both fields. High-
school students will be exposed to current research. Undergraduate and graduate
students from diverse backgrounds will receive research training. Results of
research will be integrated into undergraduate and graduate curricula.