* 1101333
* Geometry of Moduli Spaces, Arithmetic Quotients and Theta Divisors
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/2011,07/31/2014
* Sebastian Casalaina-Martin, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Tie Luo
* 07/31/2014
* USD 130,000.00

This project addresses the geometry of moduli spaces that parameterize algebraic
and geometric objects. The focus will be on spaces where there are several
natural approaches to the moduli problem, particularly via geometric invariant
theory, moduli of pairs, and Hodge theory. The former two approaches provide a
method where the geometry of the objects parameterized plays a central role. The
latter approach can allow for the use of arithmetic methods, including modular
forms. Specific problems to be considered include giving modular interpretations
to boundary loci of arithmetic quotients, describing log-canonical models of the
moduli space of curves, and investigating the local structure of compactified
Jacobians. Abelian varieties and theta divisors will also be of special
interest.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Algebraic geometry is the field of mathematics
that focuses on the solution sets of polynomial equations. Inasmuch as
polynomial equations are ubiquitous, the subject sits at the crossroads of many
different fields including complex geometry, number theory and theoretical
physics. A motivating question for algebraic geometers has been to classify
solution sets by their invariants. For instance, one could try to classify those
complex valued solution sets that can be identified with a torus (the surface of
a donut); this would correspond to fixing the invariants known as the (complex)
dimension and genus equal to the number one. Often the collection of solution
sets with fixed invariants can itself be viewed naturally as a solution set of
polynomial equations. These are known as moduli spaces, and their algebraic and
geometric properties yield a tremendous amount of information about the original
solution sets of interest. The PI intends to study a number of such spaces. The
proposed research will have a significant impact on a field that plays a central
role in mathematics and interacts with numerous other fields.