* 1101655
* Support for Workshop Concerned with Current Trends in Foods and Food Movements in Postsocialist Settings
* SBE,BCS
* 02/15/2011,01/31/2013
* Melissa Caldwell, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 01/31/2013
* USD 19,620.00

This award to Dr. Melissa L. Caldwell (University of California, Santa Cruz)
provides support for the international workshop to be held in collaboration with
the Food Studies Centre of the School of Oriental and African Studies
(University of London). Issues of ethical food consumption, including food
safety, consumer health, and the dynamics of macroeconomic policy effects on
global food systems, are critically important for scholars, policy makers,
farmers, producers, and consumers. By focusing on these topics in late socialist
and formerly socialist societies, this workshop will provide new contexts for
examining the interplay among market values, moral values, and other factors
influencing food movements in emerging capitalist systems. The workshop also
will consider the connections among political regimes, producers, and
international trade regimes, and it will examine the effects of global
regulatory regimes as well as more locally oriented food movements on local
consumers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This workshop brings together, for the first
time, leading international researchers in anthropology, sociology, geography,
and environmental studies to share research on ethical food movements and
consumption across a diverse cross-section of previously communist countries in
Eastern Europe, the former Soviet Union, and Africa, and market-oriented
communist states such as China, Vietnam, and Cuba. Topics to be examined
include: production of economic moralities through different economic global
processes; food and farming as forms of resistance and critiques; models of
health and civil society; supply and demand relationships outside formal market
economy systems; national and international food safety policies; consequences
of global governance systems; and models of sustainable development and
environmentalism. A variety of ethnographically based qualitative and
quantitative field data will be discussed at the
workshop.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This workshop is important because it will
present research findings on the complexities of the contemporary global food
system, with special attention to relationships between state, industry, and
international trade within specific forms of governance, and their impact on
citizen-consumers throughout the world. The workshop also supports international
research collaboration and the mentoring of junior researchers and graduate
students.