* 1101149
* Special Complex Surfaces, Moduli Spaces, and Some Analytic Approach
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2011,07/31/2015
* Sai Kee Yeung, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Pollington
* 07/31/2015
* USD 167,270.00

The Principle Investigator proposes to work on three directions in algebraic and
complex geometry. The first is on investigation of properties related to
hyperbolicity of moduli spaces of canonically polarized manifolds, such as a
conjecture of Viehweg that the spaces are of log-general type. The idea is to
study moduli of higher dimensional varieties guided by principles known for the
moduli spaces of curves, though completely new approaches have to be taken. The
main tools to be used are algebraic geometric and differential geometric in
nature. The second is on the classification and understanding of special
surfaces, such as fake projective planes, exotic quadrics, and complex ball
quotients in general. Fake projective planes have been classified algebraically
by Gopal Prasad and the PI in a project partially supported by a prior NSF
grant. The goal here is to understand them geometrically. The project involves
techniques from algebraic geometry, number theory, Bruhat-Tits theory and
computer aided computations. The third is on development and application of
analytic tools to problems which are algebraic or topological in nature. This
includes a quest for classification of exotic quadrics and development of
analytic tools for existence of rational curves on some varieties. The main
techniques to be used are analytic in nature, such as estimates in partial
differential equations and geometric analysis.

An interesting aspect of mathematics is its intrinsic coherence and beauty. Time
and again, ideas and tools from different areas of mathematics are brought
together to solve seemingly unrelated problems spectacularly. A goal of the
proposal is to study more in this direction by developing and applying
techniques from various mathematical disciplines to understand various algebraic
and complex geometric problems, some of which are long standing. It varies from
investigation of general properties of moduli spaces which are collections of
varieties of the same topological type, to detailed study and classification of
special varieties such as fake projective planes and exotic quadrics which are
algebraic surfaces with small topological invariants. The PI expects his
graduate students to be actively involved in the mathematical projects proposed
and to learn to appreciate the process of research. He also hopes that the
interests in mathematics may be passed to other students through seminar talks
and summer school presentations, both in US and in foreign countries.