* 1101535
* DOUBLE AFFINE HECKE ALGEBRAS
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2011,05/31/2015
* Ivan Cherednik, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Continuing Grant
* James Matthew Douglass
* 05/31/2015
* USD 170,000.00

The aim of the project is to study double affine Hecke algebras introduced by
PI. They proved to be very useful in the representation theory and found many
applications in mathematics and physics. The area of the algebraic analysis and
its applications is the major theme of the project, including the harmonic
analysis on symmetric spaces, the theory of hypergeometric, spherical and
Whittaker functions. The theory of the difference counterparts of these
functions, called ``global functions" due to their universality and excellent
analytic properties, is one of the greatest applications of double affine Hecke
algebras obtained by PI, Stokman and other researches. The global q-Whittaker
functions have and expected to have multiple applications, including the
Givental-Lee theory and the quantum Langlands program; the corresponding theory
of nil-DAHA is very fruitful.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The theory of DAHA is a
breakthrough development in the geometric, analytic and physically-inspired
representation theory, which demonstrates the power of p-adic methods and
tremendous potential of the q-functions. The directions of the project are
mainly grouped around PI's theory of global difference spherical and Whittaker
functions. There are important relations (known and expected) of these functions
to the theory of homogeneous spaces of loop groups and (hopefully) to the
geometric quantum Langlands program. The first results concerning the behavior
of these functions at some special cases are an indication of their significance
for the Number Theory. Also, these functions are expected to serve recent
physics theories employing the integrability of the various quantum many-body
problems.