* 1101284
* Iowa EPSCoR: Harnessing Energy Flows in the Biosphere to Build Sustainable Energy Systems
* O/D,EPS
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2017
* Robert Brown, Iowa State University
* Cooperative Agreement
* Uma Venkateswaran
* 08/31/2017
* USD 20,000,000.00

Proposal Number: EPS-1101284&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Title: Iowa EPSCoR:
Harnessing Energy Flows in the Biosphere to Build Sustainable Energy
Systems&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Institution: Iowa State
University&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Research Infrastructure Improvement project
seeks to expand the research capacity within the state to support a transition
in energy supply from subsurface fossil energy stores to renewable energy flows
at or near the earth?s surface. The research program is organized into four
platforms in renewable energy, each of which consists of several research foci
(or planks) which are detailed below. The project seeks to examine energy flows
and processes from a holistic systems perspective that considers technical,
economic, social, and environmental constraints and impacts. This comprehensive
program will enable innovative research, strengthen energy-related education,
train a ?clean-tech? workforce, and engage diverse communities in implementing
environmentally and economically sustainable solutions to the growing energy
challenges facing Iowa and the U.S. The project brings together research
universities, 2- and 4-year colleges, the private sector, and local government
agencies (Iowa Power Fund, Iowa Office of Energy Independence), to address key
issues related to renewable energy research, education, and workforce
development in the state. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit
&lt;br/&gt;This proposal seeks to significantly enhance the research
competitiveness of Iowa through a comprehensive, multi-faceted research program
in renewable energy and energy efficiency. The program builds upon existing
strengths of Iowa in the areas of bioenergy and wind energy while including
highly complementary components in the areas of energy efficiency and energy
policy. The program seeks to change the energy landscape across Iowa by
improving the energy balance while mitigating environmental concerns and
positioning citizens to compete more effectively in a global
economy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts&lt;br/&gt;An overarching goal of
this project is to translate the knowledge gained in the research platforms into
specific actions that can increase the participation of under-represented
minorities in STEM fields. IA EPSCoR proposes the creation of the Future Leaders
in Advancing Renewable Energy (FLARE) Institute to lead the implementation of
strategic broader impacts activities. Modeled after the Iowa?s NSF I3 program,
Strengthening the Professoriate at ISU, the FLARE Institute will be a state-wide
organization supporting the human infrastructure development needed to
accelerate Iowa?s transition to a green economy. Critical to this goal are
strategies to broaden the participation of women, underrepresented minorities,
and first-generation college students in the STEM fields, prepare a workforce
that can meet the demands of Iowa?s emerging green economy, and create a
community of scholars who integrate broader impacts into their research efforts
in all fields. Accordingly, the FLARE Institute will address key deficiencies in
state-wide infrastructure by integrating broader impacts through all elements of
activities leveraged by IA EPSCoR, thereby having a far greater state-wide
impact than any individual program could achieve on its own.