* 1101572
* RUI: Open, coupled and extended dynamical systems with nonuniform hyperbolicity
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2011,05/31/2015
* Mark Demers, Fairfield University
* Standard Grant
* Bruce P. Palka
* 05/31/2015
* USD 130,000.00

The author will undertake several projects in the area of dynamical systems and
ergodic theory. The first project concerns open systems, which are inspired by
physical models in which mass or energy is allowed to escape. The project will
study various mechanisms that facilitate or hinder escape in nonuniformly
hyperbolic systems and use the relation between entropy and positive Lyapunov
exponents to quantify the escape rate. The second project develops a powerful
approach, the spectral decomposition of the transfer operator, to study the
statistical properties of particle systems, which are an important class of
models from mathematical physics. The third project investigates the behavior of
dynamical systems which are comprised of (possibly infinitely many) smaller
components linked together, with orbits or energy allowed to pass between
components. When focused on one component at a time, such systems generalize the
discussion of open systems in a natural way by allowing both entry and escape.
All three projects involve a detailed analysis of the spectral properties of the
transfer operator associated with the corresponding closed system without
relying on restrictive Markovian assumptions on the dynamics.

Much research in dynamical systems has focused on closed systems in which the
dynamics are self-contained. In many modeling situations, however, it is not
possible to obtain such a global view so that it becomes necessary to study
local systems that are influenced by other unknown systems, possibly on
different scales. Such considerations motivate the study of the types of systems
considered in this project: systems in which mass or energy may enter or exit
through deterministic or random mechanisms. Many of these problems are motivated
by models from mathematical physics. For example, open particle systems are used
to model atom traps; extended and linked particle systems are used to create
mechanical models of heat conduction in solids and to investigate metastability
in molecular processes. The research will provide analytical tools to solve
problems posed and approached formally in the physics literature. The project
will both promote and be informed by this interdisciplinary dialogue. In
addition, the project will support undergraduate research in mathematics. Using
the highly visual nature and physical motivation of the problems described, the
PI will recruit undergraduate students to work on projects related to these
topics during the summers. Students will disseminate the results of their
research at poster sessions and through publication in undergraduate or research
journals, as appropriate. By stimulating interest in research careers in
mathematics and creating a peer community supportive of that interest, the
project will contribute to the important goal of integrating research and
education.