* 1101269
* Space-Time Resonances and Asymptotics; Stability of Self-Similar Solutions
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2015
* Pierre Germain, New York University
* Continuing Grant
* Bruce P. Palka
* 08/31/2015
* USD 167,854.00

Nonlinear dispersive partial differential equations equations are a very wide
class of equations that are used to describe varied phenomena, ranging from
waves at the surface of water to plasma physics and quantum mechanics. The first
aim of this project is to extend our understanding of nonlinear dispersive
equations by using the method of space-time resonances, which was introduced
recently by the principal investigator and his collaborators, Nader Masmoudi and
Jalal Shatah. The method of space-time resonances combines the standard notion
of resonances, well known since at least Poincare's time, with a study of the
spatial localization of solutions. Its aim is to understand the stability of
equilibria. It involves delicate multilinear harmonic analysis questions, which
the principal investigator plans to study systematically. The second aim of this
project is to deepen our understanding of self-similar blow-up. This is a
mechanism for the formation of singularities in the solutions of nonlinear
dispersive equations, a topic of fundamental importance in the study of such
equations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;So-called nonlinear dispersive partial
differential equations are a class of equations describing extremely varied
physical phenomena: surface water waves, the physics of charged fluids
(plasmas), or quantum mechanical effects, to name but three. The range of
applications is very broad: the physics of water waves includes the study of
tsunamis; as for plasma physics, it is not only very important for our
understanding of the universe but is also crucial for many industrial
applications. The aim of the principal investigator is to deepen our
understanding of this very general class of equations at a fundamental level. He
intends to study two questions in particular. First, when are the equilibria of
these equations stable? Second, how do these equations develop singularities or,
stated differently, how can "smooth" solutions of these equations become
increasingly "jagged"? Answers to these questions would, for instance, help
understand how tsunami waves propagate or how laser beams focus.