* 1101326
* Topology of Tiling Dynamical Systems
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/2011,07/31/2015
* Lorenzo Sadun, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* Edward Taylor
* 07/31/2015
* USD 187,000.00

This grant supports the research of Dr. Lorenzo Sadun on the dynamics, topology
and ergodic theory of aperiodic tilings. The focus is on several classes of
tilings that are more complicated than previously studied. This includes
hierarchical "fusion" tilings, akin to self-similar "substitution" tilings, only
where the structure can be qualitatively different at each length scale. It also
includes tilings with infinite local complexity (where tiles fit together in
infinitely many local patterns) and tilings of non-Euclidean spaces where the
relevant group action is not amenable. In each setting, the goal is to
understand which combinatorial, topological and ergodic properties of simpler
tilings carry over, and to create examples where other properties do not. A
further goal is to address the broad conceptual question: how do ergodic and
topological properties of a tiling space relate to geometric properties of the
underlying tilings?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Tiling theory has many applications
within science and engineering and has been used to model materials such as
quasicrystals, to code information on computers, and to solve abstract problems
in logic. However, much of the theory is built around a small set of classic
examples, mere islands in the sea of possible tilings. This project aims to
bridge these islands, developing both a more general theory and qualitatively
new examples, examples that will allow for a still broader range of
applications. For example, tilings of curves spaces may aid in the design of
efficient computer networks. In addition to supporting basic research, the grant
supports the training of a PhD student in the mathematical sciences, thereby
addressing a severe shortage of young American scientists. It also supports
visits by researchers who will give lectures to graduate and undergraduate
students.