* 1101981
* Collaborative Research: Multiband, Ultrasensitive Terahertz Imaging Receivers Based on Quasi-Optical Balanced Hot-Electron Mixers
* ENG,ECCS
* 06/01/2011,05/31/2015
* Robert Weikle, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Continuing Grant
* GEORGE HADDAD
* 05/31/2015
* USD 195,000.00

The objective of this research is to explore the realization and study the
performance of a multiband imaging receiver system that potentially provides the
highest available heterodyne detection sensitivity in the frequency range of 1-3
THz. The approach is to integrate a pair of identical superconducting hot-
electron bolometers (HEBs) into a dual-polarization sinuous antenna to form a
quasi-optical balanced mixer configuration. To further reduce the system noise,
a superconducting microwave hybrid will be integrated for IF output. THz multi-
band/reconfigurable frequency selective surfaces (FSSs) will also be explored to
be employed in the receiver system. The research program consists of detailed
design, simulation, development, and experimental demonstration of prototype
receivers operating in the sub-millimeterwave through THz regimes. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;The program's intellectual merit centers on the challenges and
opportunities offered by integrating two HEBs into a sinuous antenna to realize
a high performance receiver system suitable for multiband THz detection and
imaging applications. The ultra-low system noise and multi-frequency operation
are achieved by novel approaches of quasi-optical balanced mixer configuration,
the integration of superconducting IF hybrids and the utilization of
multiband/tunable THz FSSs. Advances in THz devices, circuits design and
integration technology are expected. Insights gained may be transferrable to
other THz detection and imaging technologies.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The broader
impacts include both the creation of new scientific/engineering knowledge, as
well as contributions to university education. In addition to the THz community,
this work will benefit a wide range of science disciplines such as astronomy,
atmospheric physics, chemical/biological sensing, and medical diagnostics. The
graduate students in this program will be exposed to the full scope of the
system design process, from devices to the system level. Undergraduates will be
involved through summer and honors thesis research.