* 1101876
* Diffusively Coupled Networks:  Synchronization, De-Synchronization, and Structure
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/2011,07/31/2015
* Murat Arcak, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 07/31/2015
* USD 398,086.00

Objective&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will develop novel design and
analysis techniques for spatially distributed networks that exhibit a diffusive
coupling structure, common in biomolecular networks and multi-agent systems. The
first step in this development will be to unravel structural properties of agent
dynamics and their interconnection that yield prescribed spatial behaviors, such
as synchronization or pattern formation. The second step will be to enhance the
desirable properties via architectural decisions. The techniques to be developed
will serve biomolecular networks and multi-agent systems, as well as other
applications that possess similar structures&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
Merit&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Part One of the proposal sets forth a new technique
to determine which conditions guarantee synchronous behavior in diffusively
coupled networks. In addition to networks of discrete agents, this technique is
applicable to continuous reaction-diffusion models where synchrony means spatial
homogeneity. A key research task will be to develop new system gain concepts
that quantify the amount of inhomogeneity caused by the amount of spatial model
variation, and to apply the results to oscillator networks and biomolecular
signaling cascades. Part Two aims to induce desirable forms of de-
synchronization to generate spatial patterns, which is one of the outstanding
problems in synthetic biology. It proposes to employ systemtheoretic concepts to
design new gene networks that are amenable to synthetic implementation and that
exhibit diffusion-driven instability in prescribed spatial modes, thus leading
to gene expression patterns dominated by these modes. One such topology is
identified and detailed in the proposal. Part Three posits a connection between
diffusion-driven instability and nonminimum-phase agent dynamics, and
demonstrates that a form of this instability can occur in multi-agent systems.
It then proposes to investigate the limits of achievable synchronization
performance imposed by nonminimum-phase agents, and to mitigate the resulting
design tradeoffs with a re-allocation of node and link weights to be performed
via convex optimization.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impact&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; The PI will continue incorporating research
material into graduate courses. In addition, he will introduce selected topics
from this project into two undergraduate courses. The PI leads recruitment and
mentoring of underrepresented graduate students in his department, and will make
every effort to recruit a female or minority graduate student researcher for the
proposed project.