* 1101801
* Collaborative Research: Slow and Stopped Light Photonics with Atomic Spectroscopy Chips
* ENG,ECCS
* 05/15/2011,04/30/2016
* Holger Schmidt, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Standard Grant
* Mahmoud Fallahi
* 04/30/2016
* USD 232,225.00

The objective of this program is to create the first set of quantum interference
based slow and stopped light photonic devices. Quantum interference creates some
of the strongest light-matter interactions ever observed, including
electromagnetically induced transparency (EIT), slow light, and stopped light. A
large number of possible applications exist, including optical data processing,
enhanced sensing, (quantum) optical memories, and quantum information
processing. However, to date there is no viable platform that combines large
quantum interference effects with photonic device integration. The intellectual
merit of this project is to explore the use of a recently developed self-
contained atomic spectroscopy platform for creating a new class of photonic
devices based on quantum interference. To this end, a second generation hollow-
core waveguide spectroscopy chip for high temperature and high optical density
operation will be developed and used to demonstrate stopped light on a chip. A
set of novel, canonical photonic devices for chip-scale sensing and optical
signal processing based on quantum interference, slow and stopped light will be
demonstrated. This new class of devices will have transformative impact on the
use of non-solid (atomic) media for photonics. The broader impacts of this work
are to unite several fields, including microfabrication, integrated optics,
atomic spectroscopy, and device physics. This collaborative project will provide
opportunities for graduate and undergraduate students to acquire a unique,
multidisciplinary skill set. The program is complemented by a number of outreach
efforts to recruit undergraduate students from underrepresented groups through
established and successful programs at UCSC and BYU, respectively.