* 1101489
* Extremal combinatorial structures and algorithms
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2011,06/30/2015
* Jacques Verstraete, University of California-San Diego
* Continuing Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 06/30/2015
* USD 315,000.00

This proposal concerns research in combinatorics, focussing on extremal
structures and related algorithms. This area is currently very active, and the
methods are central to many applications in other mathematical disciplines as
well as other fields of science, such as statistical mechanics, theoretical
computer science and information and coding theory. The proposer aims to study
specific central problems in extremal combinatorics including the Turan problem,
cycles in graphs, graph and hypergraph coloring problems, and thresholds in
random graphs. Central to these problems are well-established mathematical
techniques from various areas of mathematics as well as newly developed notions
of pseudorandomness in graphs and hypergraphs, inequalities of concentration of
measure, and martingales. For many of these topics, the proofs of the main
theorems are also connected to algorithmic complexity questions, and questions
about randomized algorithms and derandomization. Many of the problems proposed,
such as the extremal problem for even cycles, have long been open; any new
advance is likely to have a substantial theoretical impact and at least some
practical consequences. While these open problems are important and clearly
difficult, new methods and standard combinatorial techniques combined with some
new ideas offer new hope for solving them. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Extremal
combinatorics is the study of mathematical structures which have constraints
placed on the substructures they may contain. An extremal structure is one which
satisfies those constraints, and is optimal with respect to some measure of
density. For instance, one may ask for the smallest size of a code that can
securely transmit a message while correcting a given number of bit errors. These
extremal structures arise naturally in many areas of science. As another
example, given a network one may ask for the minimum number of nodes whose
failure would cause the network to disconnect. These questions often lie at the
heart of digital and communication security, web searching, reliable data
transmission, network dynamics, and the spread of infectious disease or
information; as such, they have applications to theoretical computer science,
information theory and statistical mechanics, to mention three areas. Further
concrete examples include multiplication of large arrays of numbers for
qualitative web searches -- these matrices tend to have billions of rows and
columns; the RSA cryptosystem, which underpins much of modern digital security
and is based strongly on the belief that factoring integers is difficult. This
leads to the question of algorithmic complexity, which is related to the
extremal structures: given a network, efficiently find the smallest set of nodes
which disconnect the network; or given a code, efficiently decode a received
message. The researcher plans to use modern combinatorial and probabilistic
techniques to approach some central problems in the area and to study the
practical algorithms which these methods generate. He will collaborate with PhD
students and teach advanced courses on these topics.