* 1101146
* Microfluidically-Tunable Metamaterial Lenses for Wideband, High-Power, Phased-Array Applications
* ENG,ECCS
* 05/01/2011,04/30/2016
* Hongrui Jiang, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Hao Ling
* 04/30/2016
* USD 374,000.00

The objective of this research is to fundamentally advance the development of
affordable, high-power phased-array antenna technology. The approach is to use
the recent advances in the areas of microwave metamaterials and microfluidics to
develop a new class of high-power-capable, tunable, true-time-delay microwave
lenses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: The fundamental tradeoffs that
exist between cost, power handling capability, thermal management, and
efficiency have hindered the development of high-power, affordable phased-array
antenna technology. This project seeks to address these fundamental shortcomings
using a previously unexplored interdisciplinary approach. A new class of
metamaterials will be used to develop true-time-delay microwave lenses capable
of handling very high power levels. A microfluidic mechanism will be used to
rapidly reconfigure the lens response and achieve dynamic beam steering in lens-
based phased arrays.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: This project is
expected to positively impact the society and the economy by proliferating the
use of phased-array technology in future wireless systems that aim at addressing
grand societal and economic challenges, including efficient access to the radio
spectrum and economically viable solar power transmission. Educational goals of
this work are intimately linked to the research objectives and include
involvement of underrepresented undergraduate and graduate students in research
activities, integration of research into the teaching of engineering at the
undergraduate and graduate levels, and development and broad dissemination of
research-based educational materials. The research findings of this work will be
integrated with existing University of Wisconsin-Madison courses to enhance the
undergraduate and graduate engineering curricula.