* 1101168
* Two Symposia for US/ European Collaborative Initiatives in Freshwater Ostracode Research
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2011,05/31/2013
* Alison Smith, Kent State University
* Continuing Grant
* Maija Kukla
* 05/31/2013
* USD 59,631.00

This award supports two one-day workshops for US and European non-marine
ostracode specialists, with a focus on northern hemisphere Quaternary and modern
taxa, to develop collaborative research initiatives relevant to urgent societal
questions concerning climate change impacts, changes in biodiversity, changes in
water quality and supply in aquifers and surface waters. The first workshop,
organized by Dr. Alison Smith (Kent State University), Dr. David Horne
(University of London) and Dr. Martin Gross (Universal Museum Joanneum in
Austria), will be held immediately following the European Ostracodologists
Meeting (EOM) in Graz, Austria in July 2011. The second workshop will take place
immediately following the Geological Society of America meeting in Charlotte,
North Carolina in November 2012. Approximately 45 scientists and students are
expected to attend each of these workshops, with approximately 15 U.S.
scientists and students funded by this grant.

Non-marine ostracodes are microscopic crustaceans commonly found in almost all
non-marine aquatic habitats and are important proxies of climatic and
environmental change. These organisms produce easily fossilized calcite shells,
and are an abundant record used for ecological, geochemical, and molecular
phylogenetic research. Previous results suggest that analyses at larger spatial
scales should enable researchers to ask fundamental questions, test hypotheses,
and gain new insights in the fields of ecology, molecular genetics,
paleoclimatology, and hydrology. These workshops will 1) establish an
international dialogue for collaborative research; 2) explore the development of
linked datasets, cross-training of graduate students, and establishment of
taxonomic harmonization procedures; and 3) produce a research agenda and results
dissemination plan.

This award is jointly supported by NSF's Office of International Science and
Engineering and Division of Earth Sciences.