* 1101234
* Investigations in Intermediate Energy Physics
* MPS,PHY
* 09/15/2011,08/31/2015
* Samuel Danagoulian, North Carolina Agricultural & Technical State University
* Continuing Grant
* Kenneth Hicks
* 08/31/2015
* USD 234,001.00

This award supports research activities by the nuclear physics group at North
Carolina A&amp;T State University (NCA&amp;T) on two experimental programs to be
carried out at Jefferson Lab, the Moller experiment and the Nucleon form factor
program. The Moller experiment measures the parity-violating asymmetry (Apv) in
the scattering of longitudinally polarized 11-GeV electrons off the atomic
electrons in a liquid hydrogen target (Moller scattering). The expected
precision on the measured parity-violating asymmetry (Apv) is 0.73 part per
billion. This very high accuracy measurement will help precisely determine the
fundamental quantity for the standard model, the weak mixing angle. This
measurement can complement potential discoveries at the Large Hadron Collider
(CERN), which explore new physics beyond the Standard Model. The nucleon Form
Factor (FF) program is dedicated to the measurement of the neutron
electromagnetic form factor ratio GEn/GMn in double polarized, quasi-elastic
3He(e,e'n)pp scattering at momentum transfers Q2 of 5-10.2 (GeV/c)2, and the
neutron to the proton magnetic form factor ratio GMn/GMp in quasi-elastic
scattering off the deuteron at Q2 up to 18 (GeV/c)2. Elastic electromagnetic
Form factors of the nucleon (proton or neutron) provide key information on the
structure and composition nature of the nucleon, as well as on the dynamics of
its basic constituents, i.e. quarks and gluons. A detailed and systematic study
of the structure of the nucleon is of paramount importance for the understanding
of nuclear matter. The NCA&amp;T group will take a leading role in designing and
building a pion detector for the Moller experiment. The detector will determine
the asymmetry of the pion background, which is essential to controlling the
systematical error on the measured asymmetry Apv. For the FF program, the group
will build a timing scintillator hodoscope needed for the reconstruction of the
time-of-flight of the nucleon. The group will participate in the detector and
software development effort, simulation, data taking and data analysis for the
two programs. Undergraduate and graduate students will play a major role in all
these activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;North Carolina A&amp;T State University
is a historically black university (HBCU). Ninety percent of the student
population is African American. These students have been traditionally
underrepresented in physics. This research program will provide them with unique
research opportunities in experimental nuclear physics, and therefore will have
a strong impact on their training and education. The program is highly
interdisciplinary. It includes work with both hardware and software i.e.,
electronics, nuclear detector systems, optics, computer simulation, data
acquisition, and data analysis. This award will help train and support two
undergraduate and one graduate students each year. Students will be exposed to
state-of-the-art facilities, will use cutting-edge equipment, and will interact
with scientists from other national and international universities. In this
respect, this research program will be very effective in attracting African
Americans and other under-represented groups to advanced degrees in physics and
engineering, and will, therefore, contribute to greater diversity in the field
of nuclear physics.