* 1101003
* GOALI: Performance of Deeep and Wide Excavations in Congested Urban Areas
* ENG,CMMI
* 04/15/2011,03/31/2016
* Nick O'Riordan, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Richard Fragaszy
* 03/31/2016
* USD 848,264.00

The increase in urban population density in the US and many parts of the world
requires major advances in our ability to extend civil infrastructure into the
subsurface environment. Development of underground space is key to continued and
sustainable urban living. A continuous challenge to underground space
utilization in many urban areas is in constructing/developing that space in a
heavily built environment in often challenging soil conditions. The Transbay
Transit Center (TTC, http://transbaycenter.org/) under construction in downtown
San Francisco is a $2 billion public works project designed to replace the
existing Transbay terminal with a modern regional transit hub that will connect
11 transit systems and will be the terminus point for the planned California
High Speed Rail from Los Angeles. The construction of the TTC includes an open
cut excavation that is about 200 ft wide, 60 ft deep and over 1500 ft long in
relatively soft soils. The excavation is adjacent to several high-rise and low-
rise buildings including one of the tallest buildings in San Francisco. The TTC
will have to be constructed with minimal disruption to infrastructure and
economic activity in the area. The excavation is unprecedented in scale on the
US West Coast, and will include an extensive monitoring program. A suitable
analogy for this project is the equivalent of conducting open heart surgery on a
patient running a marathon.

This research project is an industry-university partnership between the
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, the University of California,
Berkeley, and Arup to leverage this unique excavation project to enhance our
understanding of the response of very wide and long excavations and to develop
suitable computational models. The TTC excavations extend beyond our available
empirical databases and validated models. The research project includes
development of numerical models, performance of a supplementary laboratory
testing program and installation of supplementary field instrumentation designed
to answer specific research questions, leveraging current investments in the
geotechnical aspects of the project. Field instrumentation will include strain
gages on cross-lot bracing, extensometers and first development and use of
flushable piezometers in the US to measure potential negative pore pressures in
the unloaded clays. Data from the laboratory testing and field monitoring
programs will be used in inverse analyses to generate new soil constitutive
models and to update predictions of excavation performance. Analyses will also
be conducted to better understand the impact of long term unloading on the
seismic response of the underground structures. This research project will
significantly advance state-of-the-art in excavation modeling techniques. The
successful completion of this excavation and the acquired knowledge provides
valuable knowledge that can be applied to large upcoming underground
infrastructure investments in the US including San Francisco, Los Angeles,
Seattle, New York and Miami.

Our ability to achieve urban sustainable living is critically dependent on
development of underground space in ever challenging environments at an
unprecedented scale. Through knowledge gained on this project, we will develop
the expertise and technical tools to confidently construct these types of
structures with minimal disruption to the urban environment. We will be able to
provide decision makers with the sound technical data that will alleviate
societal apprehension and potential resistance that has traditionally impeded
such projects. Among a number of educational activities, we have partnered with
the Alliance for Minority Participation at UC Berkeley to engage
underrepresented undergraduate students to assist with this research project.
Students working on this project will gain invaluable real-world experience on a
major construction project, and will interact with both researchers and
consultants.