* 1101713
* Fundamental Studies of Disturbed Tropical Cyclones: A Deeper Look into the Causes and Consequences of Asymmetric Structure Under Various Environmental Conditions
* GEO,AGS
* 07/15/2011,06/30/2015
* David Schecter, NorthWest Research Associates, Incorporated
* Continuing Grant
* Anjuli Bamzai
* 06/30/2015
* USD 486,740.00

Tropical cyclones are responsible for extensive damage and loss of life in
coastal and island communities around the globe. They have been studied for
decades, but are not fully understood. Greater physical understanding of
tropical cyclones will improve our ability to predict the behavior of individual
storms and the effects of climate change on storm statistics. This project seeks
further insight into the causes and consequences of tropical cyclone
asymmetries, which are commonly associated with spiral rainbands, tilts and
eyewall mesovortices. The following issues will be addressed: the extent to
which environmental conditions control the dominant asymmetries, the mechanisms
that create or suppress asymmetries, and the impact of asymmetries on vortex
intensity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will involve complimentary studies
with reduced (3-layer) and cloud-system resolving (CSR) tropical cyclone models.
The reduced model will facilitate an efficient computational survey of
prevailing asymmetries under different environmental conditions. Moreover, it
will be used to advance underdeveloped theories of core instabilities (which
create asymmetries) and vortex resilience (resistance to tilt). The theoretical
studies will focus on the roles of overturning circulation, boundary layer
coupling, and diabatic forcing associated with moist convection. The effects of
varying the surface-exchange coefficients, sea-surface temperature, mid-level
relative humidity and cumulus parameterization scheme will be examined.
Conclusions derived from the reduced model will be tested against CSR
simulations, and any differences will be explained. The impact of transient and
persistent asymmetries on vortex intensity will be assessed, partly by
comparison of axisymmetric and 3D versions of the tropical cyclone
models.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Funds for this project will be used in part for the
advanced training and mentorship of a postdoctoral researcher. Project findings
will be disseminated through university seminars, journal publications,
conference presentations, and a research web page.