* 1101765
* Very High Energy Particle Astrophysics with VERITAS
* MPS,PHY
* 09/15/2011,08/31/2014
* Lucy Fortson, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Jonathan Whitmore
* 08/31/2014
* USD 439,500.00

The Very Energetic Radiation Imaging Telescope Array System (VERITAS), located
at the F. L. Whipple Observatory basecamp of Mt. Hopkins, AZ, is in a full
science-driven mode. The array consists of four Imaging Atmospheric Cherenkov
Telescopes (IACTs), allowing observations of very-high-energy (VHE) gamma rays
above an energy threshold of 50 GeV to detect exotic sources of VHE gamma rays
throughout the galaxy and extra-galactic space, probing the extreme physics of
sources such as the jets of Active Galactic Nuclei (AGN), supernova remnants and
microquasars. VERITAS is well-positioned to complement the Fermi Gamma-ray Space
Telescope launched by NASA in June 2008 where the two observatories together
provide overlapping spectral coverage from the tens of MeV to tens of TeV
range.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award will provide this University of Minnesota
(UMN) group with base support of their VERITAS science and collaboration service
efforts over the next three years. The group will continue development of
improved analysis techniques using advanced multivariate algorithms developed by
the High Energy Physics community. Their scientific analysis efforts will be in
studies of extragalactic sources including AGN, starburst galaxies, and galaxy
clusters with a focus on locating the source of gamma-ray emission in blazars
and understanding the origin of cosmic rays. The group will continue to lead the
VERITAS multi-wavelength coordination efforts and, in particular, will bring the
new important resource of optical polarimetry to the multi-wavelength study of
blazar emission zones. The team will also contribute multiwavelength correlation
studies complementing the TeV data obtained with VERITAS.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: The outreach effort has two components.
The first is to work with the established Research Experiences for
Undergraduates program at UMN to actively mentor undergraduates on a VERITAS-
related project each summer. The second component is to select at least one
undergraduate to participate in the Adler Planetarium's VERITAS EPO program
which recruits students from VERITAS collaborating institutions to work with
scientists in the Adler's Space Visualization Laboratory to develop gamma-ray
computer interactives.