* 1101568
* Coxeter combinatorics and cluster algebras
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2011,07/31/2015
* Nathan Reading, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 07/31/2015
* USD 135,000.00

Cluster algebras were introduced by S. Fomin and A. Zelevinsky as a framework
for studying total positivity and canonical bases in semisimple groups. They
have since appeared in a wide range of mathematical areas, including Teichmüller
theory, Poisson geometry, quiver representations, Lie theory, algebraic
geometry, algebraic combinatorics, and even in partial differential equations
(in the equations describing shallow water waves). This project will bring new
Coxeter-theoretic tools to bear on the study of cluster algebras, in order to
greatly expand the class of well-understood cluster algebras, and to prove new
results even in finite type. Much of the research will use the combinatorics and
geometry of sortable elements and Cambrian fans, developed by the investigator
in collaboration with D. Speyer.

This project brings together two streams of mathematical research that both have
deep connections to a broad array of mathematical fields. Coxeter groups are an
algebraic abstraction based on reflective symmetry, and they have played a role
in some of the important mathematical developments of the past century. Cluster
algebras are a more recent discovery, but have already shown surprising
applications in unexpected areas. The application of Coxeter-theoretic tools is
one of several promising approaches to the structural study of cluster algebras.
The interaction also goes in the other direction, as cluster algebras bring to
light new ways of understanding Coxeter groups.