* 1101373
* Topics in Number Theory and Geometry:  Zeta Functions and Circle Packings
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2011,06/30/2015
* Jeffrey Lagarias, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Andrew Pollington
* 06/30/2015
* USD 300,000.00

Dr. Lagarias will investigate three problem areas in number theory and geometry.
The first topic concerns study of generalizations of the Lerch zeta function and
their interpretation in representation theory terms. The second topic concerns
the study of Hilbert spaces of entire functions and associated operators related
to automorphic L-functions. The third topic concerns exploration of analogies
between circle packings, conformal geometry and Diophantine
approximation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The subjects of number theory and geometry
interact in several areas, including packing problems and the geometry of
numbers. In recent years these connections have led to interactions across
mathematics, physics and materials sciences. Number theory has also provided
many useful applications in communications, coding theory and cryptography. Zeta
functions encode both number theoretic and geometric invariants. The proposal
will study one class of such functions to explore connections of this kind.
There have also been connections noted between zeta functions and operators in
mathematical physics, and Dr.Lagarias will investigate connections of this kind
from the operator side. Thirdly, circle packings have recently been intensively
studied, as they seem to provide a discrete bridge between conformal geometry
and number theory. The problems considered may stimulate interactions between
researchers in the fields: conformal geometry,mathematical physics and number
theory. Dr. Lagarias is training graduate students in both number theoretic and
geometric topics.