* 1101375
* Representation theory and geometry of varieties associated to quivers
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2011,10/31/2011
* Yiqiang Li, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Tie Luo
* 10/31/2011
* USD 99,333.00

This proposal is concerned with the interactions between representation theory
and quiver varieties. It is mainly dedicated to the establishment of geometric
Langlands reciprocity in quantum groups (or quantized enveloping algebras) in
analogy with similar reciprocity in affine Hecke algebras. To accomplish this
goal, the principal investigator proposes to study several, closely related,
fundamental problems in the representation theory of quantized enveloping
algebras via the geometry of certain quiver varieties, including geometric
realizations of quantum modified algebras and their canonical bases, the
comparisons of various geometric realizations of quantum modified algebras of
type D and of affine type A, and the development of new classes of quiver
varieties. He will also investigate the relationship between algebraic and
geometric categorifications of quantum modified algebras, the relationship
between canonical bases and semicanonical bases of Schur algebras and the
geometric construction of two-parameter quantum groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
proposed activities will strengthen the deep connections between Lie theory,
algebraic geometry and the theory of finite dimensional algebras. The solutions
to the proposed problems will eventually lead to the settlement of geometric
Langlands reciprocity in quantum groups and, along the way, the proof of the
positivity conjecture on canonical bases of quantum modified algebras. This
conjecture has been remained open for over twenty years. The proposed activities
are likely to make progress in geometric representation theory and algebraic
geometry and will help further knowledge in combinatorial, graphical and
categorical representation theories and other fields of mathematics. During the
time of the proposal, the PI intends to mentor undergraduate and graduate
students of various levels at his host institute. He plans to organize seminars
and conferences in his host institute. The research results in this proposal
will be presented in various universities the PI plans to visit and conferences
the PI will attend. Collaborations, published papers, and sometimes inspirations
of new ideas will be accomplished during the time of the proposal.