* 1101570
* ICES: Small: Heuristic Mechanism Design
* CSE,CCF
* 05/01/2011,10/31/2015
* David Parkes, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Tracy Kimbrel
* 10/31/2015
* USD 359,920.00

Computational mechanism design (CMD) seeks to understand how to promote
desirable outcomes in multi-agent systems, despite private information, self-
interest and limited computational resources. CMD finds application in many
settings; e.g., in the public sector for wireless spectrum and airport landing
rights, in Internet advertising, in expressive sourcing in the supply chain, in
allocating resources in computational systems. A key concept is
strategyproofness: the mechanism's outcome should be robust against
manipulations through misreports of private information held by
participants.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In meeting the demands for CMD in these rich
domains, we often need to bridge from the theory of economic mechanism design to
the practice of deployable, computational mechanisms. The broad goal of this
project is to leverage scalable, heuristic optimization algorithms, making them
applicable in settings with self-interest. Rather than seeking provably optimal
but possibly inapplicable mechanisms (either without complexity considerations,
as in economic theory, or with worst-case complexity considerations, as is
commonplace in theoretical computer science), we propose a new computational
agenda.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Provable guarantees are often unavailable when
search algorithms are applied to real-world optimization problems. Still,
heuristic search algorithms are widely employed, and find good empirical
success. We seek something analogous to this for settings in which inputs are
distributed to participants, each self-interested and willing to misreport
inputs in order to improve the outcome in their favor. Rather than looking for
optimal mechanisms amongst the class of polynomial-time algorithms, we seek to
employ search algorithms with excellent empirical performance despite worst-case
exponential run-time (if run-to-completion.)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specific
topics of interest include: (a) automatic self-correction, to apply online
sensitivity analysis to automatically correct the outcome of an algorithm,
allowing the algorithm to be coupled with payments and made strategyproof; (b)
metrics for approximate strategyproofness, to enable design without solving for
equilibrium; and (c) automatic generation of payment rules through the use of
machine learning, by imposing appropriate structure on the hypothesis
space.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Successful progress will provide new and fundamental
methodologies with which to develop incentive-aligned mechanisms (e.g., for
resource and task allocation) that enjoy excellent empirical properties and are
able to scale to real-world domains. The theory of mechanism design has already
provided broad societal impact, in enabling the auctioning of public resources
such as wireless spectrum and power generation capacity, and in driving revenue
to internet businesses by enabling efficient advertising. A new framework for
heuristic mechanism design will enable a new generation of mechanisms for large-
scale coordination and resource allocation amongst people, firms and
organizations, with the promise of broad applications to electronic commerce
(including mobile commerce), cloud computing, and across the supply chain.