* 1101171
* High field terahertz plasmonics
* ENG,ECCS
* 04/15/2011,03/31/2014
* Daniel Mittleman, William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* Dimitris Pavlidis
* 03/31/2014
* USD 312,819.00

Objective The aim of this research program is to demonstrate new techniques for
sensing and nonlinear spectroscopy using terahertz pulses with very high peak
electric fields. Our approach is to combine our recent work on plasmon-induced
field enhancements with newly developed techniques for high-energy terahertz
pulse generation. Plasmonic interactions near subwavelength metal structures
give rise to tiny regions of enhanced electromagnetic energy density. When these
structures are excited by high-energy ultrashort pulses, the resulting field
strengths will be huge, well into the regime of nonlinear optics. The
combination of these two ideas, optimized for terahertz radiation, will open up
a new realm of terahertz nonlinear optics. Intellectual Merit The intellectual
merit of this research program lies in the development of sensitive new
techniques for time-resolved spectroscopic studies based on nonlinear
interactions induced by strong terahertz fields. In addition, the ability to
detect very small quantities of an analyte using terahertz nonlinear optical
effects, with high temporal and spatial resolution, will reveal new dynamical
processes previously obscured by limitations of sample size and inhomogeneity.
Finally, this work will enable the study of nonlinear surface plasmon
propagation, and will contribute to our understanding of high-field plasmon
dynamics from terahertz to optical frequencies. Broader Impacts By generating
the highest terahertz fields yet reported and studying their interaction with
materials, this work will establish the possibility of exploiting higher-order
nonlinear interactions. It will also demonstrate new techniques for terahertz-
based sensing, which are of great technological importance. More broadly, this
research will change our view of the limits of science in the THz regime by
establishing a new discipline of high-field terahertz light-matter interactions.