* 1101587
* Development of High Power Continuous Wave Lasers, Components, and Optical Contamination Diagnostics for Future Ground-based Gravitational Wave Detectors
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2011,07/31/2012
* David Reitze, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Pedro Marronetti
* 07/31/2012
* USD 85,000.00

This research award will enable the continuation of investigations important to
the Advanced Laser Interferometer Gravitational-wave Observatory (Advanced
LIGO). First, the quality of the mirror surfaces is crucial to the performance
of Advanced LIGO. A method is under development to monitor mirror surface
contaminants during the operation of Advanced LIGO using a nonlinear optical
technique known as surface second harmonic generation (SSHG). Theoretical
investigation of SSHG generation from multi-layer dielectric coatings and
experimental investigation of SSHG, specifically investigations of controlled
contamination on superpolished mirrors used in Advanced LIGO, will be conducted.
Second, optical isolation of high power laser beams is important for Advanced
LIGO, and this research addresses issues with the development of optical
(Faraday) isolators capable of handling higher laser powers. Activities to be
undertaken are characterization of thermal depolarization, isolation ratio, and
thermal lensing for a large aperture Faraday isolator design and testing of
Advanced LIGO Faraday isolators in vacuum.

&#8232;&#8232;Advanced LIGO will open a new astronomical window --- the ability
to probe some of the most cataclysmic events in universe through the emission of
gravitational waves, a mechanism proposed by Albert Einstein almost 100 years
ago, but yet to be directly observed. These investigations will both aid in the
operation of Advanced LIGO over long time scales and potentially improve its
performance once it is in operation. They will also impact many applications
which use high power lasers. Finally, this research will also foster
international collaborations.