* 1101258
* High-Resolution Radiosonde Data, Gravity Waves, Turbulence, and the Extratropical Tropopause
* GEO,AGS
* 08/01/2011,01/31/2016
* Marvin Geller, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Continuing Grant
* Eric DeWeaver
* 01/31/2016
* USD 702,745.00

This award provides continued funding for the researcher's effort to acquire
high-resolution radiosonde data for the United States for use in research on
atmospheric turbulence, gravity waves, and the tropopause. While most publicly
available US radiosonde data is provided at widely spaced standard pressure
levels and a few "significant levels", the raw data has traditionally been
archived every 6 seconds, implying a vertical resolution of about 30m. The US
National Weather Service is now archiving raw data at one second intervals, so
recent data is archived at roughly 5m vertical resolution. This project will use
the high-resolution data to conduct research in two areas: studies of turbulent
layering in the troposphere above the boundary layer and in the lower
stratosphere, and the role of gravity wave breaking in establishing the
turbulent layers; and studies of the physical processes that form and maintain
the extratropical tropopause.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research has broader
impacts for the scientific community by providing estimates for the parameters
commonly used in parameterization schemes for gravity waves and turbulence in
weather and climate models. In addition, the high-resolution data is made
available to the scientifc community through the researcher's website, and the
researcher will organize a workshop to help other researchers understand and use
the data. The project also supports a graduate student and a postdoc, thereby
providing for the next generation of scientists in the field.