* 1101471
* Spherical varieties in the Langlands program
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/2011,07/31/2015
* Ioannis Sakellaridis, Rutgers University Newark
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Pollington
* 07/31/2015
* USD 116,376.00

The objective of this project is to investigate various aspects of the
relationship between spherical varieties and the Langlands program. It is
motivated by recent conjectures relating periods of automorphic forms over
spherical subgroups to Euler products of functionals arising from the Plancherel
formula of a spherical variety, and expressing the support of Plancherel measure
in terms of Arthur parameters. A major part of the project is devoted to
creating trace formula-theoretic tools, both locally and globally, necessary to
put the conjectures in the correct setting, to clarify some aspects and to prove
particular instances of them. Other parts include extending previous harmonic-
analytic results and developing a relative trace formula in specific cases in
order to analyze the pertinent periods of automorphic forms.

L-functions are very central objects in various branches of number theory, and
there are strong conjectures and results (in and around the Langlands program)
relating most of the interesting types of L-functions to those L-functions which
are called automorphic. Automorphic L-functions are studied by constructions of
global harmonic analysis, that is explicit integrals of functions on the
quotient of a Lie group by a discrete, arithmetic subgroup, but these
constructions remain mysterious after many decades of use. A lot of them involve
spherical ("large") subgroups, and a general theory has started to emerge which
connects global harmonic analysis to Euler products (and hence L-functions) via
local harmonic analysis on spherical varieties. According to this theory, which
for now is mostly conjectural, the local Langlands conjecture admits a
generalization to the harmonic analysis of a spherical variety over a local
field, where a "dual group" is attached to the spherical variety and describes
the representations distinguished by it; and spherical periods of automorphic
forms, satisfying certain assumptions, are eulerian in a very explicit way and,
hence, related to L-functions or special values of those. This project aims at
improving these conjectures and investigating ways for their proof, mainly by
trace formula-theoretic techniques.