* 1101266
* ICES: Small: Socio-Technical Design of Crowdfunding  Websites
* CSE,CCF
* 05/15/2011,06/30/2017
* Richard Wash, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Tracy Kimbrel
* 06/30/2017
* USD 431,511.00

This project will explore some technical problems in the area of "crowdfunding:"
inducing members of the public to contribute small amounts of money at a time to
fund projects. Crowdfunding web sites are an instance of a commonly studied
problem called a "matching marketplace:" a central place where two types of
people come to be matched according to some criteria. Other examples of this are
job websites, where employers and employees come to be matched (find jobs), and
online dating sites. Crowdfunding exhibits a "complementarity:" a project cannot
start until enough people donate money. One person's donation is not enough to
support a project, but if a person waits for others to donate first, valuable
projects may be left unfunded. Many real-world matching marketplaces involve
complementarities, including couples finding jobs together and a project manager
trying to put together a team that works well
together.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project brings together ideas from both
computer science and economics. Both disciplines study matching problems, but
neither has found a completely satisfactory solution in the presence of
complementarities. In economics, the most common solution is a "deferred
acceptance" mechanism, which breaks down when dealing with complementarities.
Computer scientists frequently use "recommender systems" that make
recommendations to people to help improve matches. But it isn't even clear what
should be recommended when there are complementarities. This research will
develop an understanding of the role of complementarities in both of these types
of solutions, and apply insights across fields to design better methods of
matching.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will test these ideas in the real
world by developing a crowdfunding system. This system will provide a test bed
for new algorithms and mechanisms. It will also support a vibrant community of
students by helping them to fund small creative projects that develop important
skills. Crowdfunding is increasingly being applied to fund high-quality
professional journalism (on sites such as Spot.Us), and improved crowdfunding
systems have the potential to be a new funding source for this struggling
industry. This research project will also train both undergraduate and graduate
students in the conduct of interdisciplinary research.