* 1101452
* ICES: Small: Collaborative Research: New Approaches to Computationally Protecting Elections from Manipulation
* CSE,CCF
* 08/01/2011,07/31/2015
* Edith Hemaspaandra, Rochester Institute of Tech
* Standard Grant
* Tracy Kimbrel
* 07/31/2015
* USD 249,264.00

Election mechanisms are broadly used in computational settings, including a
rapidly expanding range of applications in multiagent systems. Twenty years ago,
responding to results showing that all reasonable elections systems can be
manipulated, Bartholdi, Orlin, Tovey, and Trick proposed protecting election
systems from manipulation by making the attacker's task computationally
prohibitive, e.g., NP-hard. Their work started a rich line of research, yielding
many such computational protection results.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;However, a
number of weaknesses in this approach have emerged: (1) Much of the work assumes
that voters have complete, transitive preferences and that the manipulator has
perfect knowledge of the preferences of each voter. (2) Many election systems
have polynomial-time algorithms for perfect manipulation and so cannot be
computationally protected. (3) Even when there are NP-hardness results, these
assume all ensembles of voters are possible, and it has recently been shown that
when one looks at, for example, voters obeying the common behavior model known
as single-peakedness, these NP-hardness results often evaporate. (4) Even when
there are NP-hardness results, they are worst-case results, and so it is
possible that often-correct heuristic attacks exist.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project will respond to these weaknesses, rebuilding the computational approach
to protecting elections and more rigorously delineating its limitations. More
natural and realistic models will have strong consequences in terms of the
weaknesses discussed above. Complexity theory and algorithmics will both be
developed in a broad investigation of the above weaknesses and techniques to go
beyond them to retain the value of using complexity theory to protect election
systems against manipulation.