* 1101936
* Microfluidic Devices for Tunable RF Communication Systems
* ENG,ECCS
* 07/01/2011,06/30/2015
* Aaron Ohta, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* Usha Varshney
* 06/30/2015
* USD 364,424.00

Reconfigurable RF antennas and circuits have been implemented in several ways
including the use of MEMS switches, variable impedance elements, or manipulation
of the ground plane. No single solution achieves all the desired qualities of
low loss, agility, low cost, and reliability. A new approach is proposed that
involves liquid-metal microfluidic technology for geometrically reconfiguring
antennas and circuits by literally moving metal across a planar surface. The aim
is to use microfluidic actuation of liquid metals to make the tuning of RF
devices as straightforward as drawing patterns using an Etch-A-Sketch toy. The
proposed approach will replace typical copper microstrip components with a metal
that is liquid at room temperature, such as mercury or gallium alloys. These
liquid metals can reflow to form conductive elements of varying shapes and
sizes, resulting in a tuning of the RF circuit. Microfluidic technology provides
precise control of small liquid volumes, and has been widely developed for
applications such as biomedical devices. The functionality of microfluidics will
be extended to include tunable RF devices. To maximize flexibility and speed of
fluidic actuation while minimizing interference with RF components, fluid
actuation using electrowetting and pressure-driven flow will be used to create
tunable RF devices using liquid metals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
Merit&lt;br/&gt;The research objective of this proposal is to use microfluidic
actuation to enable the tuning of RF devices using dynamic, flexible patterning
of liquid metal RF elements. Using a 2D embedded electrode array or specially
designed microchannels, it will be possible to dynamically pattern liquid metals
in all types of shapes and sizes. The proposed approach can be used for
geometrically reconfiguring planar transmission line elements that form the
basis of antennas, filters, matching networks, and coupling structures. In this
proposal, the capabilities of liquid-metal patterning will be demonstrated by
creating tunable reflectarrays for autonomous, high-directivity beamsteering and
tunable frequency-selective surfaces for RF filters. Results of the proposed
research will be valuable to RF system designers and the RF
community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of
realizing such agile, reconfigurable components are huge, impacting commercial,
scientific, government, and military applications. The proposed research will
enable systems that are more versatile, multifunctional, robust, and economical.
Recently a need has been identified for a widespread, affordable, and accessible
broadband wireless networks as one of the key economic drivers for this nation,
and the proposed research is a step towards realizing this goal. In addition,
this proposal will strongly focus on the participation of underrepresented
minorities in graduate- and undergraduate-level research projects. Native
Hawaiian engineering students will be encouraged to participate as student
researchers for the proposed research. Concepts related to the proposed research
will be introduced in an engaging manner to pique interest in science and
engineering among K-12 students via open houses and lectures at local schools.