* 1101152
* Algebraic Combinatorics
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2011,06/30/2015
* Sergey Fomin, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 06/30/2015
* USD 300,000.00

The project focuses on the study of combinatorial structures arising in algebra
and geometry, with an emphasis on the theory and applications of cluster
algebras. Cluster algebras, discovered by the investigator in collaboration with
A.Zelevinsky, have found applications in several mathematical disciplines,
including representation theory, Teichmueller theory, discrete dynamical
systems, discrete potential theory, Lie theory, tropical geometry, and
enumerative and geometric combinatorics. The investigator develops general
structural theory of cluster algebras and related combinatorial constructions,
and applies it to the study of concrete classes of cluster algebras arising in
various applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is motivated by several
classical areas of mathematics listed above. The main tools come from
combinatorics, including combinatorial topology, algebraic and geometric
combinatorics, and the machinery of quiver mutations. Combinatorics deals with
discrete objects such as finite sets, graphs, permutations, partial orders, etc.
Many continuous phenomena allow for a discrete representation, lending
themselves amenable to combinatorial methods of study. It is often the case that
identical or similar combinatorial structures underlie seamingly unrelated
mathematical entities, revealing hidden connections between them and allowing to
transfer insights and techniques from one discipline to another. A case in point
is the theory of cluster algebras, which are the main focus of this project.