* 1101947
* Photonic devices based on fluorescent proteins
* ENG,ECCS
* 07/01/2011,06/30/2014
* Seok (Andy) Yun, Massachusetts General Hospital
* Standard Grant
* Usha Varshney
* 06/30/2014
* USD 360,000.00

Since Theodore Maiman demonstrated the first laser a half century ago,
stimulated emission and lasing have made a tremendous impact on modern science
and technology. Although lasers and the coherent light they emit are omnipresent
today, lasing has remained a man-made phenomenon. Generation of laser light has
so far relied on artificial or engineered optical gain materials, such as doped
crystals, semiconductors, synthetic dyes, and purified gases; biological
materials and living organisms have not been explored as gain materials for
lasers. This project introduces fluorescent proteins as a new optical gain
material. The proposed research will investigate the optical amplification
characteristics of biologically produced, biocompatible and biodegradable
fluorescent proteins that have high quantum yield at various wavelengths across
the entire visible spectrum. The fluorescent proteins offer unique properties
not shared by any existing gain materials. For example, they can be expressed as
functional transgene in a wide variety of organism.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual merit of this project is harnessing these
properties of fluorescent proteins to demonstrate novel photonic device
concepts, including protein lasers in solutions and in condensed-state forms, as
well as biological lasers based on single cells expressing fluorescent proteins
will be explored. Successful completion of the proposed research will improve
our ability to control and optimize the stimulated emission properties of
fluorescent proteins and demonstrate miniature lasers and amplifiers built on
the biological platform. Furthermore, it is expected to provide insights into a
range of novel protein-based devices and technologies for practical
applications. For example, lasing within the tissues and inside the cells may
offer new possibilities of nonlinear deep imaging and intracellular sensing for
bioengineering and medical diagnosis. The ability to generate laser light in
vivo may enable new approaches in light-controlled therapy and drug activation.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts of this project include the opportunity to
educate and train graduate students and postdoctoral fellows in the highly
vibrant and multidisciplinary environment at the Wellman Center for
Photomedicine. Undergraduate students enrolled in the Wellman-HST Summer
Institute for Biomedical Optics and other summer internship programs will be
invited to participate in this project. The researchers and students will learn
how to work across boundaries between disciplines through creativity and
inspiration. In the long run, stimulated emission from fluorescent proteins has
the potential to improve human health by enabling innovative approaches to
disease diagnosis and light-based treatments.