* 1101779
* Transducing Thermal and Optical Energies to Motion and Electricity with Coherent-Domain Ferroelastic Materials
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/2011,07/31/2014
* Junqiao Wu, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 07/31/2014
* USD 335,438.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;"Transducing Thermal and Optical Energies to
Motion and Electricity with Coherent-Domain Ferroelastic Materials" by Junqiao
Wu, University of California-Berkeley&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Research Objectives
and Approaches&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this program is to
demonstrate a transformative technology with superior performance to transduce
thermal and optical energies to mechanical motion and electricity. A training
program will also be built for undergraduate and community college students
through curriculum and research developments.&lt;br/&gt;The approach is to
exploit the large spontaneous strain arising from the ferroelastic phase
transition of VO2-based single-crystal microbeams. This beam is mechanically
coupled with a passive clamping beam or a piezoelectric layer, forming a
composite beam that bends in a tunable temperature range over which the active
material undergoes the phase transition. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
Merit&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research seeks to transform conventional
thermal-optical-mechanical-electrical energy transducing technologies using
innovative material systems coupling multiple functionalities with coherent
domain structures. Low-grade waste heat from sources slightly above room
temperature is extremely abundant. In this temperature regime (&lt;100 Celsius),
conventional technologies such as thermoelectrics become too inefficient to be
practical. The proposed innovative approach is able to convert low-grade waste
heat into mechanical motion and electricity at efficiencies potentially much
higher than conventional technologies. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;On the global energy diagram, more than 80% of the
power is generated through thermal processes, and more than 50% of the total
energy produced is lost as heat. The proposed research benefits society by
enabling novel, microscale thermal actuation and waste heat recovery
technologies at unprecedentedly high performance and low cost. The proposed
project will broaden its impact by developing a "Materials for Energy" training
program at Berkeley.