* 1101939
* Advanced Wideband Microwave Metamaterials
* ENG,ECCS
* 07/01/2011,06/30/2015
* Kasra Daneshvar, University of North Carolina at Charlotte
* Standard Grant
* Dimitris Pavlidis
* 06/30/2015
* USD 329,517.00

Proposal # 1101939 Advanced Wideband Microwave Metamaterials Thomas Weldon, Ryan
Adams, Kasra Daneshvar

Abstract Objective: The main objectives of the proposed research are to develop,
demonstrate, and disseminate theory, design methods, and experimental results
for advanced microwave metamaterial devices that demonstrate wideband negative
permittivity, negative permeability, and negative refractive index. In
particular, the theory and design for these new metamaterials will be developed,
simulations will be performed, and prototype microwave metamaterial devices will
be fabricated and tested.

Intellectual merit: The proposed research aims to develop and experimentally
confirm the theory and design methods for novel microwave metamaterials that
offer significantly wider bandwidth by using active devices. The proposed effort
offers the promise of broad, fundamental, and transformational impact in
metamaterial technology in microwaves, terahertz, electromagnetics, and optics
that lays the foundation for novel wideband devices having negative
permeability, negative permittivity, and negative refractive index.

Broader impacts: The proposed activity advances discovery in the areas of
metamaterial phenomena and integrates these discoveries with significant
teaching, training and learning activities. In particular, we plan to work with
K-12 students in presentations, workshops, and laboratory tours.
Underrepresented K-12 students will be particularly targeted for inclusion in
the educational efforts. Also, underrepresented undergraduate and graduate
students will be asked to participate in the proposed research wherever possible
as research assistants as well as through course topic modification, course
additions, senior design projects, class projects, and summer REU opportunities.
The results of the proposed research are planned for dissemination in top?tier
peer?reviewed journals; intermediate results will be presented to the
international community through professional conferences.