* 1101827
* Groupoids, Deformations and Noncommutative Geometry
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2011,05/31/2016
* Ping Xu, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Pollington
* 05/31/2016
* USD 180,000.00

The PI proposes to continue the study of problems in noncommutative geometry
using tools from deformation theory, Lie groupoids, and operator algebras. They
include the study of deformation quantizations,&lt;br/&gt;quantum groupoids and
twisted cohomology over differentiable stacks. The project also involves
studying the Chern-Connes character map for twisted K-theory, delocalized
twisted equivariant cohomology, and its ring structure. It also aims to study
C*-algebras associated to non-abelian gerbes and
2-groupoids.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The idea of noncommutative geometry is to
study geometry via algebras of functions on ``noncommutative manifolds''. On
such a ``noncommutative manifold'', the relevant objects are no longer points in
a space, but rather an associative algebra, which may not be commutative. Many
``noncommutative spaces'' are obtained either as deformations of commutative
algebras or as convolution algebras of groupoids. The theory of deformation
quantization lies on the boundary between classical and quantum mechanics. The
mathematical structures of the two theories are very different, so it is
challenging to understand how the transition from classical to quantum takes
place. Quantization, roughly speaking, is the study and prediction of quantum
phenomena, which is normally described by noncommutative associative algebras,
from the geometry of their underlying classical counterparts. The Kontsevich
formality theorem in a certain sense confirms that such a prediction is indeed
possible, which implies that there is a deep interplay between noncommutative
algebras and geometry. Groupoid convolution algebras, substituting for algebras
of functions (on badly behaved quotient spaces), play a central role in Connes'
noncommutative geometry program. They also play an important role in the study
of the stringy space-time, or gerbes. The purpose of the project, which is
centered around the application of noncommutative geometry, is to investigate
questions in these fields motivated by mathematical physics. More specifically,
it is motivated by a combination of ideas from quantum
groups,&lt;br/&gt;representation theory, differential geometry, noncommutative
geometry, and operator algebras. Thus the interdisciplinary nature of the
proposed project promotes further interaction between these fields.