* 1101491
* ICES: Small: A Probabilistic Look at Algorithmic Game Theory
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2015
* Constantinos Daskalakis, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Tracy Kimbrel
* 08/31/2015
* USD 400,000.00

Recent years have seen a remarkable growth of communication networks and
computational platforms overlaid on these networks; primary examples are the
Internet and the systems created and enabled by it. At the same time, it has
been recognized that to properly understand and engineer such systems one needs
to incorporate insights and methods from both Computer Science and Economics
into their study, as these systems tend to be large, highly distributed, and
owned, operated and used by thousands, or even millions, of self-interested
parties. The proposed research will contribute to the growing interactions
between Computer Science and Economics a new research direction motivated by a
systematic study of the role of uncertainty in the structure and tractability of
economic systems. Crucial in this study will be the use of concepts and tools
from Statistical Physics and Probability Theory, ultimately strengthening the
interaction of these fields with Algorithmic Game
Theory.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Uncertainty is most certainly both present and
taken into account in the study of systems of interacting individuals. A player
of a game may be uncertain about her opponents'payoffs or even her own payoff,
may be unable to fully observe the strategies used by the other players and the
potential opportunities created by these strategies, or may even be uncertain
about the exact number of opponents, the structure of the game, the order of
players' moves, etc. Likewise a social planner, or mechanism designer, may have
uncertainty about the values or budgets of the agents in the mechanism, the
number of participants, the information that the participants have about the
other participants, etc. This uncertainty is sometimes modeled by assigning
probabilistic beliefs to the parameters of the system that are not fixed, and
other times eliminated by obtaining worst-case
guarantees.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Both harnessing uncertainty in the Bayesian way
and tackling it via worst-case/prior-free results have been central in the
development of Game Theory. Nevertheless, we believe that there still remain
large benefits to be obtained by a systematic treatment of uncertainty, through
the import of tools from Probability Theory, Statistical Physics and Algorithms
into Game Theory. We will employ these tools (1) to understand the equilibrium
structure and complexity of large games of aggregative form (games with a lot of
symmetries or anonymity), (2) to make progress in optimal multi-dimensional
mechanism design, (3) to study dynamics in network games, (4) to understand the
correlation of behaviors across large networks of interacting individuals, (5)
to characterize the complexity and structural properties of equilibria in random
ensembles of games, and (6) to study the Price of Anarchy in selfish routing
games where the players' utilities are non-linear probabilistic functions of the
delay.