* 1101074
* Self-Organized Metal Nanoarchitectures for Planar Plasmonics
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2011,06/30/2015
* Regina Ragan, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Khershed Cooper
* 06/30/2015
* USD 380,490.00

The objective of this research project is to develop versatile methods for self-
organization of metal nano-architectures where colloidal solutions of metal
nanoparticles are assembled on self-organized chemical domains using covalent
nanoparticle-substrate interactions. The assembly process to be developed allows
for control of nanoparticle size, composition and shape, number of nanoparticles
assembled in a cluster as well as array architecture. The chemical domain
diameter to nanoparticle diameter ratio will be investigated as a means to
control the cluster size. A balance between capillary and double layer forces
yields molecular scale separations between nanoparticles in clusters that is
important to yield enhanced optical fields. The inter-particle spacing and
cluster size will be varied to tune resonances and local enhancement of optical
fields. Models for investigating local and collective resonances in clustered or
arrayed nanoparticles will be developed, including the local density of states,
and extinction and absorption coefficients. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;None of the
standard nanoscale lithographic techniques such as focused ion-beam, electron
beam and nano-imprint lithography, are easily translated into large-area
production that is needed to transform proof of concepts into commercial
products. In contrast, guided self-organization is designed here to be
inexpensive and scalable to large-area production. Facile, large-area synthesis
of ordered arrays of metal nanostructures will enable or enhance performance in
several critical technologies. Partnerships with industrial and government
laboratories are included to test metal nanosystems in sensor, laser and
detector applications. For example, plasmonic nanoparticle clusters will be used
to lower detection limits in optical based sensors that is needed in both
biomedical applications and in explosive agent detection. The research program
will also directly contribute to the education of graduate and undergraduate
students through hands-on laboratory experience in a field that is at the
forefront of modern research. Outreach activities will include integrating local
high school students in research activities to increase science, technology,
engineering, and math enrollment of underrepresented groups.