* 1101154
* Workshop: Theoretical and Methodological Innovations in Science and Technology Studies
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/2011,06/30/2013
* Stefan Timmermans, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Linda Layne
* 06/30/2013
* USD 49,000.00

The proposed workshop brings together graduate students, junior faculty, and
senior faculty to explore and transform theoretical concepts and research
methodologies central to the field of Science and Technology Studies. The late
Dr. Leigh Star's theoretical and empirical work will provide the workshop's
central focus. Drawing from pragmatism and the Chicago school's sociology of
work, Star's scholarship highlighted the social dimensions of scientific
practice and innovation. Where others conducted ethnographies of the work of
laboratory scientists' manipulating tools and data to construct epistemic
insights, Star focused upon the countless, taken-for-granted and often dismissed
practices of assistants, technicians, and students that make scientific
breakthroughs possible. Digging even deeper into the conditions that make
science possible, Star foregrounded the infrastructure of classifications,
computer technologies, paperwork, and regulations that constrained and
constituted scientific work. Her work has impacted numerous fields including but
not limited to Science and Technology Studies, Sociology, Anthropology, and
Computer Science.

The workshop, co-funded by the Science and Technology Studies program and the
Information and Intelligent Systems Division, provides an in-depth examination
and transformation of Star's conceptual, empirical, and methodological
contributions. Drawing from a broad set of theoretical concepts, Star examined
themes of ecology, infrastructures, invisible work, articulation work, boundary
objects, and classifications. Star's intellectual innovations opened up new
areas of inquiry, brought social and behavioral scientists to Science and
Technology Studies [STS], strengthened methodology in STS, and emphasized an
unwavering focus on scientific work often rendered invisible in publication,
award, and promotion practices. Scholars in North America, Europe, and Japan
have further expanded upon and transformed Dr. Star's approaches and
methodologies. The workshop aims to situate Star's ideas in the formation of
Science and Technology Studies as well as move these theoretical frameworks into
new scientific terrain.