* 1101317
* Adaptation to Climate Change in the Lake Champlain Basin: New Understanding through Complex Systems Modeling
* O/D,OIA
* 09/01/2011,11/30/2016
* Judith Van Houten, University of Vermont & State Agricultural College
* Cooperative Agreement
* Sean Kennan
* 11/30/2016
* USD 20,000,000.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number:
EPS-1101317&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Title: Adaptation to Climate Change in
the Lake Champlain Basin:&lt;br/&gt;New Understanding through Complex Systems
Modeling&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Institution: University of Vermont &amp; State
Agricultural College&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Project Director: Judith Van
Houten&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Research Infrastructure Improvement (RII)
proposal from Vermont EPSCoR (VT EPSCoR) is focused on understanding the effects
of changing climate and land use on the Lake Champlain Basin through the
creation of two centers, the Center for Research on Adaptation to Climate Change
(RACC) and the Center for Workforce Development and Diversity (CWDD). Funded
participants include Johnson State College (JSC), Middlebury College (MC), St.
Michael?s College (SMC), and University of Vermont (UVM). The Community College
of Vermont (CCV) is an unfunded partner.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will
build transdisciplinary teams of social and natural scientists to study the Lake
Champlain Basin as a coupled human and natural system affected by climate
change, with an emphasis on complex systems modeling. Scientists will
investigate the relative importance of endogenous in-lake processes (e.g.
internal loading, ice cover, and hydrodynamics) versus exogenous to-lake
processes (e.g. land use change, snow/rain timing, storm intensity, land
management) to algal blooms. Scientists will use extensive scenario testing to
investigate how adaptive management can be designed and implemented to respond
to climate change and land use. The central theme of ecosystem and water
research aligns well with Vermont State Science and technology (S&amp;T plan),
as well as national and international
interest.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit&lt;br/&gt;This project will
address how the interaction of climate change and land use alter hydrological
processes and nutrient transport within the Lake Champlain Basin, and
investigate the resulting implications for adaptive management strategies. The
RACC will leverage existing watershed studies and biophysical and add
significant value through its integration of those studies with socio-economic
and governance studies. The project will combine extensive observations and
monitoring with modeling of two of the contributing watersheds and 10 smaller
catchments. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts&lt;br/&gt;Management of water
resources in response to climate and land use changes is a scientific issue that
has broad applicability across the US and internationally. The project?s multi-
scale approach has the potential to be broadly applicable, in that it includes
the investigation of broader global environmental issues of climate change,
urban/agricultural change, and the socio-ecological interfaces. The project will
be continuing VT?s very successful Streams project for outreach to high school
students and teachers and undergraduates, which has shown a significant impact
in workforce development and in encouraging underrepresented minorities in STEM
to pursue science careers. The CWDD will integrate workforce and diversity
efforts, and will offer an extensive suite of approaches to outreach to the
general public and work with small businesses to encourage economic development
across the state.