* 1101100
* Bridging Data, New Technologies, and Communities to Enable and Communicate EarthScope Exploration and  Discovery
* GEO,EAR
* 05/01/2011,04/30/2016
* Matthew Fouch, Arizona State University
* Cooperative Agreement
* Gregory Anderson
* 04/30/2016
* USD 2,615,614.00

EarthScope enables the exploration of the structure and evolution of the North
American continent by scientists accessing a range of seismological, geodetic,
in situ fault zone sampling, and geochronology and high resolution topography
resources. EarthScope science is notable for its interdisciplinarity. Science
results from EarthScope go beyond narrow analyses of individual datasets, and
combine diverse observational datasets with innovative experimental and
theoretical exploration. These results produce transformative knowledge for
studying earth's structures and processes and in understanding hazards and
guiding exploration of resources. In addition, these data and technologies offer
superb opportunities to enhance formal and informal science education in the
solid Earth sciences. The EarthScope National Office (ESNO) at Arizona State
University serves the broad and diverse community of EarthScope stakeholders,
including EarthScope researchers, formal and informal educators in Earth
science, and the general public. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The ESNO will serve the
scientific community through leadership and support of the EarthScope Steering
committee, via close communication with the EarthScope program at NSF and the
EarthScope Facilities (USArray, PBO, SAFOD), and by frequent solicitation of
feedback and new ideas. The ESNO will maintain these activities as well as
further promote EarthScope by assuming a meta-leadership role in coordinating
current and new earth science initiatives (such as a major focus on Cascadia,
the eastward movement of the Transportable Array, developing a plan for Alaskan
EarthScope investigation, impending Frontiers in Earth System Dynamics projects,
and earthquakes directly affecting the US). The need to integrate EarthScope and
related data and other geoscience tools remains a critical need which can be
addressed using the tools of cyberinfrastructure. Interesting new and unexpected
applications of the EarthScope observational systems will be encouraged (e.g.,
atmosphere, hydrosphere, and cryosphere).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The ESNO
foregrounds education and outreach (E&amp;O): giving it attention, expertise,
and resources at the same level as EarthScope science. This is accomplished by
maintaining and expanding on effective services such as the EarthScope E&amp;O
website, Newsletters, Speaker Series, Interpretive Workshops for informal
educators, and the biannual EarthScope National Meeting. Further, ESNO adds
value to the programmatic E&amp;O portfolio through new initiatives
to:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;- Rapidly channel EarthScope science through new social
media such as Facebook, Twitter, and the 'Geoblogosphere'; &lt;br/&gt;- Pilot
and disseminate exemplary new solid-Earth science content and inquiry-driven
pedagogy for K-12 STEM teacher development (in partnership with organizations
such as AGI and PRI);&lt;br/&gt;- Catalyze the use of regional and local results
from EarthScope research in promoting place-based Earth science teaching at all
levels to better engage and retain diverse students; and&lt;br/&gt;- Deliver a
new continuing professional education service for EarthScope researchers and
educators at the university and graduate levels: the University of
EarthScope.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;E&amp;O at ESNO, infused with a place-based and
educator-centered ethos, coordinates the compilation and presentation of the
spectacular findings and scientific legacy of the EarthScope program, and is a
reliable and effective partner to
stakeholders.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual merit: Exploration of the 4-D
structure of the North American continent is spectacularly underway with
EarthScope by a vigorous community of scientists. The results are fundamental to
increasing our understanding of the Earth, for characterizing how we live with
potentially hazardous Earth processes, and for guiding exploration of resources.
They are transformative in Earth science and technology education. The ESNO at
ASU will be well-situated, planned, and configured to foster continued Earth
exploration and discovery. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts: The ESNO at
ASU will enhance and continue to expand a high-profile public identity for
EarthScope, establish a sense of ownership among scientific, professional, and
educational communities, promote science literacy and understanding of
EarthScope and Earth science in general, advance formal Earth science education,
and foster use of EarthScope data, discoveries, and new technology in resolving
challenging problems and improving our quality of life. Scientists, educators,
students, decision makers, and our fellow citizens, in the Southwest as well as
across the US and abroad, will all benefit from these
activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Non-technical explanation of broader
significance and importance: Exploration of the four dimensional structure of
the North American continent and Earth processes operating on and within it is
spectacularly underway with EarthScope by a vigorous community of scientists.
The results are fundamental to increasing our understanding of Earth, for
characterizing how we live with potentially hazardous Earth processes, and for
guiding exploration of natural resources. They are transformative in Earth
science and technology education. The EarthScope National Office at Arizona
State University will be well-situated, planned, and configured to foster
continued Earth exploration and discovery. It will enhance and continue to
expand a high-profile public identity for EarthScope, establish a sense of
ownership among scientific, professional, and educational communities, promote
science literacy and understanding of EarthScope and Earth science in general,
advance formal Earth science education, and foster use of EarthScope data,
discoveries, and new technology in resolving challenging problems and improving
our quality of life. Scientists, educators, students, decision makers, and our
fellow citizens, in the Southwest as well as across the U.S. and abroad, will
all benefit from these activities.