* 1101162
* Eigenvalue Inequalities, Intersection of Schubert Varieties, and Related Problems
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/2011,07/31/2016
* Wing Suet Li, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Bruce P. Palka
* 07/31/2016
* USD 160,351.00

This project will continue the study on various problems naturally arise in
operator theory and operator algebra related to the Horn's Conjecture, and their
relationships to representation theory, combinatorics, and algebraic geometry.
The Horn's Conjecture was originally formulated for the eigenvalues of sums of
self-adjoint matrices and had shown many important connections with algebraic
geometry and representation theory. So far, there were successful
generalizations to the infinite dimensional settings, including compact
operators on infinite dimensional Hilbert spaces and elements in finite von
Neumann algebras. This work also revealed some intricate structure properties on
the lattices of invariant subspaces of certain operators and properties on the
algebra. This project will help to gain insights in the structure of finite von
Neumann algebras and may bring new directions to representation theory and
algebraic geometry.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Horn's Conjecture was formulated as a
problem in linear algebra and it has natural analogues in the infinite
dimensional setting and in the von Neumann algebra setting. The tools involved
in solving the original Horn's Conjecture were coming from algebraic geometry,
representation theory, and combinatorics. The recent advances make a compelling
case to continue the investigator's collaborative effort. It is also hopeful
that the insights developed here may result in new discoveries, directions and
problems for algebraic geometry and representation theory. The investigator is
also the ADVANCE Professor of College of Sciences at Georgia Tech, working
towards a more family friendly working environment for all faculty, in
particular for women and as a role model and advocate for junior women faculty
in the college. She plans to continue her work providing networking
opportunities and encouraging discussions among women mathematicians, especially
junior women mathematicians.