* 1101256
* MAGNETOELECTRIC COUPLING IN FERROELECTRIC/FERROMAGNETIC HETEROSTRUCTURES: BEYOND VOLUME EFFECTS
* ENG,ECCS
* 07/01/2011,06/30/2015
* Stephen Ducharme, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Continuing Grant
* Usha Varshney
* 06/30/2015
* USD 395,020.00

This proposal focuses on the direct (changes in ferroelectric polarization with
applied magnetic field) and converse (changes in magnetic properties with
electric field) magnetoelectric coupling in thin film heterostructures of
organic ferroelectrics with transition metal and half-metal ferromagnets and the
fabrication, characterization and testing of two prototype devices that exploit
these effects. A sensitive low-magnetic-field sensor based on the direct
magnetoelectric effect will provide an electrical output proportional to the
magnetic field strength, and a non-volatile magnetic memory cell based on the
converse magnetoelectric effect, with electric-field-assisted writing and an
optical readout of the magnetic state will allow for the well-know advantages of
electric rather than magnetic field writing. The large mismatch in stiffness
coefficients between the soft polymer ferroelectric and the much stiffer
ferromagnets enables the exploration of coupling effects that go beyond the
strain driven coupling between magnetostriction and piezoelectricity. The two
prototype devices will provide a proof-of-concept that will enable the
development of devices that are not dependent on strain, resulting in lower
material fatigue, and therefore increasing device longevity. Preliminary results
on the direct effect in heterostructures of organic ferroelectrics with
ferromagnetic top electrodes show ferroelectric polarization changes that are
orders of magnitude too large to ascribe to strain effects alone, but are
dependent on the strain gradients at magnetic domain walls changing the
polarization via the flexoelectric effect. Studies of the converse effect will
focus on the electric field induced effect driven by the spin dependent electric
field screening at the surface of a ferromagnet. The ability to apply large
electric field is greatly enhanced by the large displacement charge density D at
the surface of the polymer ferroelectric. Preliminary results indicate that the
high ferroelectric surface charge drives large changes in the magnetic
anisotropy in thin Co films. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit lies
in the elucidation of novel interface coupling effects that, with careful
design, have the potential to produce macroscopic changes in ferromagnetic or
ferroelectric ordered materials. The ability to accurately attribute and
quantify the coupling in these particular heterostructures will lead to a
significantly improved ability to design heterostructures with large interfacial
coupling effects, as well as the ability to understand how the coupling is
driven, an understanding that is applicable to a wide range of interfaces
between differently ordered materials. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact
lies in the potential for technological benefits from applications in data
storage and sensors, as exemplified by the prototype devices mentioned above
that will lead to novel methods for magnetic field sensing and for non-volatile
magnetic data storage. All three PIs are committed to a wide variety of
activities that promote teaching and learning beyond the UNL physics department.
These include direct interactions with K-12, such as regular visits to
elementary school classrooms, the mentoring of numerous undergraduate students,
the development of effective teaching materials for teachers in K-12, the
mentoring of student teacher pairs from underrepresented institutions through
the MRSEC summer teacher fellowships and public outreach to museums and civic
organizations.