* 1101389
* ICES: Large: Economic Foundations of Digital Privacy
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2016
* Michael Kearns, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Tracy Kimbrel
* 08/31/2016
* USD 997,993.00

In the last decade private data has become a commodity - it is gathered, bought
and sold, and contributes to the primary business of many Internet and
information technology companies. At the same time, various formalizations of
the notion of "privacy" have been developed and studied by computer scientists.
Nevertheless, to date we lack a theory for the economics of digital privacy, and
this project aims to close this important gap.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Concretely,
the project will develop a theory to address the following
questions:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;- How should a market for private data be
structured? How can one design an auction that accommodates issues specific to
private data analysis: that the buyer of private data often wishes to buy from a
representative sample from the population; and that individuals' value for their
privacy can itself be a very sensitive piece of
information?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;- How should other markets be structured to
properly account for participants' concerns about privacy? How should privacy be
modeled in auction settings, and how should markets be designed to address
issues relating to utility for privacy?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;- Studying economic
interactions necessitates studying learning - but what is the cost of privacy on
agent learning? How does the incomplete information that is the necessary result
of privacy-preserving mechanisms affect how individuals engaged in a dynamic
interaction can learn and coordinate, and how do perturbed measurements affect
learning dynamics in games? How can market research be conducted both usefully
and privately?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Our investigation of these questions will
blend models and methods from several relevant fields, including computer
science, economics, algorithmic game theory and machine
learning.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project directly addresses one of the most
important tensions that the Internet era has thrust upon society: the tension
between the tremendous societal and commercial value of private and potentially
sensitive data about individual citizens, and the interests and rights of those
individuals to control their data. Despite the attention and controversy this
tension has evoked, there is no comprehensive and coherent science for
understanding it. Furthermore, science (rather than technology alone) is
required, since the technological and social factors underlying data privacy are
undergoing perpetual change. Within the field of computer science, the recently
introduced subfield of privacy preserving computation has pointed the way to
potential advances. This project aims to both broaden and deepen these
directions.