* 1101060
* Making the Complex Comprehensible: Approximate Bayesian Computation and Behavioural Dynamics
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2011,07/31/2015
* Simon Tavare, University of Southern California
* Continuing Grant
* Mary Ann Horn
* 07/31/2015
* USD 994,373.00

In this project the investigator and his colleagues focus on the need to develop
mathematical approaches that can successfully analyze data of very high
dimension, and make intelligible large numbers of higher-order interactions,
focusing on an application involving a study of the genetic and environmental
determinants of behavior in the model organism Drosophila melanogaster. The
dearth of tractable methods of analysis for such datasets is a major bottleneck
in the collection and analysis of molecular variation data. The focus is on a
method that has arisen in response to the size of modern genetic variation
datasets: approximate Bayesian computation [ABC]. The use of ABC has grown
rapidly over the last decade, but is generally conducted in a relatively ad-hoc
manner in that key choices are made in a subjective way. Aiming to put the
method onto firmer foundations, they develop approaches that systematize some of
the key choices of an ABC analysis. For example, they suggest that improvements
are achieved by introducing a weighting scheme for summary statistics, and by
systematically choosing those weights, along with other features of the
analysis, as well as automatically constructing efficient low-dimensional
summaries of the data. Such approaches are much needed in the ABC world. They
then apply these methods to a system that represents a perfect test-bed: the
parameterization of agent-based models of fly group behavior. This application
is to an experimental framework considerably more complex than most current
behavioral studies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;We are in the midst of the Information
Age, arguably the third great revolution experienced by humankind. In the
agricultural revolution, a radical change in the way in which food was obtained
led to great increases in its production rate and consequent great increases in
population levels. In the industrial revolution, the wide-scale introduction of
industrial machinery led to vastly increased industrial output and efficiency.
Both of these prior revolutions have led to exponential increase in the rate at
which their products (food and goods, respectively) were produced, and this
eventually led to significant improvements in quality of life for the human
species. The Information Age is also resulting in an exponential increase in the
rate at which its product, information, is gathered, and holds forth the same
hope of great improvements in our quality of life. However, the vast amounts of
information now being generated can only be fully utilized once the ability to
successfully deliver those data in understandable forms - i.e., analysis
machinery - is developed. For this reason the investigators here develop
systematic mathematical approaches that can successfully analyze datasets of
extremely high dimension and thereby make intelligible the large numbers of
higher order interactions that are likely to exist within such data. The
approach the investigators develop here helps transform many aspects of analyses
of behavior and well-being.