* 1101341
* Nonlinear Photonic Crystal Nanocavities and Waveguides
* ENG,ECCS
* 06/01/2011,05/31/2014
* Hyatt Gibbs, University of Arizona
* Continuing Grant
* Mahmoud Fallahi
* 05/31/2014
* USD 325,802.00

Objective. Evaluate the efficacy of phosphorous-based MBE-grown layers and
quantum dots for quantum-limit strong coupling between a single quantum dot and
a photonic crystal slab nanocavity (solid-state entanglement on a
chip).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit. Following demonstration of
strong coupling in 2004 in Tucson, worldwide progress toward improving the ratio
of vacuum Rabi splitting to linewidth, as needed for practical applications in
switching and quantum information, has been disappointingly slow. Since the
limitation on linewidth is cavity Q, reported values as high as 700,000 for
GaAs-slab/GaInP-sacrificial-layer empty cavities compared with typically 30,000
in GaAs/AlGaAs motivate this project to optimize the growth of P-based layers
and dots for strong coupling. Success could transform the whole field of
semiconductor cavity QED. Much of the P-based growth has been by MOCVD
(apparently adequate for electronics and lasers), but the surfaces are too rough
for fabrication of high-Q cavities. This project would first grow flat layers
for empty high-Q cavities and then grow dots within the center of the
slab.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts. The principal impact of success
would be much more robust semiconductor quantum devices, much less susceptible
to dephasing caused by photon escape from low-Q cavities. This would make the
devices much more useful for single photon switches and for quantum state
transfer between internal states of separated cavities. Training of graduate
students in quantum optics and the required experimental skills of cryogenics
and spectroscopy is another important impact. Mentoring RET teachers and REU
students helps attract bright students into scientific and engineering careers.