* 1101741
* ICES: Small: Economic Analysis of Recommender Systems
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2015
* Daniel Friedman, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Standard Grant
* Tracy Kimbrel
* 08/31/2015
* USD 412,175.00

A recommender system takes on-line user histories and demographic information,
and automatically creates personalized recommendations for goods and services.
Already common for small items such as books and movies, such systems are
destined to play an increasing role in the economy as new applications emerge
for them, such as firms searching for suppliers and workers searching for jobs.
Previous research, however, has shed little light on the economic benefits and
costs that recommender systems bring, nor on which of the many sorts of systems
work best in each current or prospective niche.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project will improve metrics for measuring performance of recommender systems,
use these metrics to evaluate existing recommender algorithms in major niches,
and develop and test new algorithms and systems adapted to under-served niches.
The research builds on previous research by computer scientists, and connects it
to established economic theory as well as to controlled experiments with human
subjects. The improved metrics explicitly incorporate the economic goals of
users, suppliers, and platform providers. The algorithms include collaborative
filtering, content based filtering, and hybrids as well as more advanced
algorithms that use heterogeneous information and actively trade off exploration
and exploitation while interacting with the users. The data will include
proprietary industry data already compiled for this project, together with new
data obtained in controlled laboratory experiments conducted at UCSC and in on-
line field experiments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The direct impact will be to
increase understanding of the strengths and weaknesses of various sorts of
recommender systems. More broadly, the research will shed light on how humans
process freely available information, an important question in many social
science disciplines, and practical benefits may ultimately accrue to millions of
users of recommender systems. Additionally, conducting this research will
promote on-campus teaching, training and learning for graduate students who
serve as research assistants and programmers; for undergraduates (mostly game
design engineering majors) who contribute to the programming; and for hundreds
of undergraduates who will serve as laboratory subjects.