* 1101549
* Tautological Intersection Theory on Moduli Spaces
* MPS,DMS
* 10/01/2011,09/30/2015
* Renzo Cavalieri, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Pollington
* 09/30/2015
* USD 113,389.00

The PI's field of research is algebraic geometry. More specifically he
investigates the intersection theory of geometrically defined classes on various
moduli spaces related to curves. For this proposal there are roughly two major
areas of research. A cluster of questions in open orbifold Gromov-Witten theory
spring from the PI's previous work with Andrea Brini (University of Geneva) and
his own graduate student Dusty Ross (Colorado State University). A second group
of problems in Hurwitz theory continue along the line of the PI's previous work
with Hannah Markwig (Saarbrucken), Paul Johnson (Imperial College) and Steffen
Marcus (Brown University) and Johnatan Wise (Stanford University). Open orbifold
GW theory for toric orbifolds was defined by Brini and the PI, with the scope of
giving a mathematical definition to invariants predicted by mirror symmetry and
to obtain combinatorial techniques to study (ordinary) GW invariants of
orbifolds. The work with Ross gave some positive evidence that open invariants
could be useful tool for questions such as the Crepant Resolution Conjectures of
Ruan and others. We mention some direction for future investigation in the area:
- setting up a convenient formalism for open GW invariants, that may help extend
the applicability of these tools to the Crepant Resolution Conjecture question
beyond the Hard Lefschetz cases. - studying the algebraic structure of the
orbifold topological vertex, its relation with the analogous object in Donaldson
Thomas theory, and its connection with representation theory of wreath products
of groups. - applying techniques of OGW to a conjecture of Bouchard-Klemm-
Marino-Pasquetti relating such invariants to quantities arising in mirror
symmetry via topological recursions developed by Eynard-Orantin. In Hurwitz
theory the PI has investigated with Johnson and Markwig the piecewise
polynomiality of double Hurwitz numbers. The three authors gave a convincing and
fairly exhaustive description of the combinatorial phenomenon, including some
interesting wall crossing formulas. This opens up the quest of finding a
geometric interpretation for such wall crossings. The author is seeking to
develop a cohomological intersection formula (along the lines of the ELSV
formula for simple Hurwitz numbers) on some appropriate moduli spaces that
describes the double Hurwitz numbers and explains the piecewise polynomiality
either in terms of birational modification of the moduli spaces involved, or of
boundary corrections to the cohomology classes involved. An ingredient that
should prove extremely helpful to this scope is the description of the
pushforward to M_g-bar of the virtual fundamental class of moduli spaces of
relative stable maps to the projective line in terms of standard generators of
the tautological ring. This question has been investigated by the PI together
with Marcus and Wise in genus 1. Richard Hain recently provides an answer for
all genera but restricting to curves of compact type. The PI proposes to
investigate this class on the full moduli space of curves, and exploit its
polynomiality (or piecewise polynomiality) properties to prove an ELSV-type
formula for double Hurwitz numbers. The PI also intends to work with Hannah
Markwig to reinterpret this question tropically, with the twofold goal of
obtaining better combinatorial tools to answer the question and to help the
developments of the foundations of tropical moduli spaces of curves in arbitrary
genus. The PI's research explores interconnections among several areas of
mathematics and mathematical physics. Creating "bridges" and "dictionaries"
among several scientific disciplines is often a useful way to make science
progress. The proposed research is inserted in a fertile and modern area of
mathematics. The PI has been participating to several workshops and conferences.
Throughout the period of the proposed project, the PI intends to support
graduate students and help their mathematical development. He has taken some
preliminary contacts about co-organizing research schools both in Colorado and
internationally. He intends to give an opportunity to his own graduate students
to travel to conferences and to interact with the broader mathematical
community. Finally he is interested in developing partnership programs between
Colorado State University and several international institutions, including
University of Costa Rica, and University of Michoacan.