* 1101022
* Electrochemical Nano-manufacturing of Multi-segment Magnetic Structures to Introduce "Color Contrast" to Magnetic Resonance Imaging
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/2011,05/31/2015
* Li Sun, University of Houston
* Standard Grant
* Khershed Cooper
* 05/31/2015
* USD 341,000.00

This award will provide funding to develop magnetic nanostructures as contrast
agents (CAs) with controllable shape, size, chemistry and more importantly local
magnetic field to introduce frequency dependent nuclear magnetic resonance(NMR)
signals. These signals will be reconstructed to form "color" magnetic resonance
images (MRIs). Compared to the current MRI which can only provide grey scale
images, the new technology can have significantly improved resolution,
sensitivity and capability of indentify different types of CAs. Proposed
research focuses on developing non-traditional nanomanufacturing approaches to
fabricate multicomponent nanostructures with desirable properties for bio-
medical applications. Compared to traditional lithographic and physical
synthesis methods, the new approach will effectively lower cost, increase yield
and improve quality control through the combination of a unique nanoporous
template synthesis method and controlled electrochemical deposition technique
for nano-manufacturing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If successful, this research will
develop nano-manufacturing techniques capable of producing non-spherical, muti-
component and biocompatible nanomaterials with precise size, shape and
composition control at levels that are difficult to achieve by other synthesis
methods. Through careful design, multi-component nanomaterials can deliver a
wide range of functionalities that are difficult to realize in conventional
spherical particles. This ability to create diverse shapes and functionalites
will then be used to create next generation MRI with three-segment CAs with
discreet localized magnetic fields. The net effect is that these contrast agents
will offer differing response with changing frequency. Similar to the impacts of
introduction of color decoration in optical imaging using dyes and fluorophores,
the introduction of "color" contrasts in MRI will significantly improve disease
diagnosis efficiency, accuracy and sensitivity. In addition, these anisotropic
nanostructures will have other multi-functionalities that can be utilized in
targeted delivery, tissue engineering and localized treatment. In addition, the
boarder impact of the project on society will also be reflected through the
integrated research and educational program development.