* 1101597
* Descriptive Set Theory, Geometric Group Theory, and Combinatorial Model Theory
* MPS,DMS
* 07/15/2011,06/30/2015
* Gregory Cherlin, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Continuing Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 06/30/2015
* USD 450,655.00

The research proposed involves the development and application of techniques of
mathematical logic to a broad range of mathematical problems. First, the
classical subject of descriptive set theory has been found, in combination with
techniques of ergodic theory and superrigidity theory, to have extensive
applications to the analysis of problems of classification in algebra and
elsewhere. In particular the subject of Borel equivalence relations will be
applied to problems in geometric group theory, revolving around the central
notion of quasi-isometry. The now classical theory of Borel reductions will be
sharpened by considering continuous reductions, which correspond in a number of
cases to "natural" or "invariant" constructions. Second, the techniques of model
theory will be applied to settle certain problems in combinatorics, notably the
problem of the existence of universal graphs subject to one forbidden subgraph,
and the classification of the metrically homogeneous graphs, first proposed in
1998 by Cameron and subsequently seen to have connections with topological
dyamics in work of Kechris, Pestov, and Todorcevic. In both cases, new examples
of homogeneous structures will be identified (in an appropriate refinement of
the category of graphs), and then the relation to topological dynamics will
involve the further study of structural Ramsey theory in the associated classes
of finite structures. The proposal includes a visitors' program based on
extended visits by Saharon Shelah, one of the world's preeminent mathematical
logicians, and a variety of his collaborators, who will collaborate on aspects
of the proposed research, both on the side of descriptive set theory and in the
applications to combinatorics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The thrust of the research
is interdisciplinary. The notion of classification is fundamental to many
branches of mathematical research, and techniques of mathematical logic, in
combination with more specialized tools from other branches of mathematics, some
the result of very recent breakthroughs, make it possible to analyze the scope
and limitations of this method, revealing a wealth of structure. The techniques
of mathematical logic also provide a very broad perspective on problems of
combinatorics, raising issues of computability and providing new and systematic
techniques for the resolution of concrete problems regarding the complexity of
classes of finite structures, and the problem of the existence of a single
infinite limit of such a class with a tractable structure, which provides a way
for distinguishing "chaotic" from "highly structured" classes, and the
identification of new cases which can be analyzed structurally.