* 1101814
* CAREER:  A Novel Approach to Catalysis for Next Generation Direct-Hydrocarbon Solid Oxide Fuel Cells
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2010,06/30/2013
* Steven McIntosh, Lehigh University
* Standard Grant
* George J. Antos
* 06/30/2013
* USD 74,000.00

PROPOSAL NUMBER.: CBET-0643931 PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR: McIntosh, Steven
INSTITUTION: University of Virginia CAREER: A Novel Approach to Catalysis for
Next Generation Direct-Hydrocarbon Solid Oxide Fuel Cells

Intellectual Merit A number of technologies are under development to increase
the efficiency of power generation systems. One of the most promising for large
scale and distributed systems is the Solid Oxide Fuel Cell (SOFC). SOFCs utilize
an oxygen anion conducting electrolyte and may theoretically operate on any
combustible fuel supplied to the fuel electrode, the anode. Current SOFC are
unnecessarily restricted to hydrogen fuel due to anode materials limitations.
The development of SOFC that efficiently convert both traditional and bio-
derived hydrocarbon fuels to electrical power would be of great benefit to
society. Progress has been made in developing new oxide-based anodes; however,
the catalytic properties of these novel materials are note well understood. A
high performance anode material must posses both high oxygen ion and electron
conductivity and catalytic activity towards fuel oxidation. The overall research
goal is to understand the coupled ion transport and catalytic processes
occurring in complex oxides and relate these to the material structure and
composition.

Three distinct approaches will be taken. First, a pulse reactor technique will
be utilized to investigate the nature of the active site and reaction mechanism
for hydrocarbon oxidation on novel SOFC anode materials. Second, thin film
electrodes with well defined structure, composition and geometry will be
fabricated and operated as model SOFCs. Combined electrochemical and catalytic
measurements on these model systems will investigate the influence of applied
potential, film microstructure and ionic flux on the surface reaction rate and
mechanism. Finally, lab-scale SOFCs will be fabricated to demonstrate the
application of this technology and relate fuel cell performance to the
fundamental anode material properties. The work will be supplemented by detailed
characterization of the microstructure and composition of the material surface
and bulk.

Broader Impact The proposed research is integrated with an educational component
that incorporates energy technology education into the University of Virginia
curriculum. A senior level undergraduate course will be developed that explores
both technological and societal issues surrounding energy use. This will be
supplemented by a new undergraduate laboratory fuel cell experiment. A freshman
engineering course will allow students to design and build novel energy-related
devices. The students will present their work at university open days to share
their ideas and designs with the public. In addition, the graduate chemical
reaction engineering class will be revised to include the fundamental concepts
behind emerging energy technologies.

The development of an efficient direct-hydrocarbon fuel cell will have a
significant impact upon energy production in the US. The final research goal of
producing a lab-scale fuel cell operating on readily available fuels will
provide immediate outreach to the public through a tangible scientific
discovery. Understanding coupled transport and catalysis in oxides has broader
application in the fields of chemical sensors, dense oxide membranes and the
emerging field of nano-ionics.

