* 1101945
* Multi-Satellite Investigation of Plasma Sheet Flux Rope Formation and Dynamics
* GEO,AGS
* 10/01/2011,09/30/2014
* Suzanne Imber, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Janet U. Kozyra
* 09/30/2014
* USD 291,641.00

This project will investigate the formation and evolution of magnetic flux ropes
in Earth's magnetotail. It will address four main questions: (1) Are flux ropes
formed by simultaneous magnetic reconnection at multiple x-lines and if so what
determines the number of reconnection sites? (2) How do flux ropes in the plasma
sheet evolve with time? Do smaller ropes coalesce to form larger ones? Or can
internal x-lines form inside a large flux rope to generate smaller, secondary
ropes? (3) Is there a connection between the onset of the formation of a flux
rope and the onset of a magnetic substorm? (4) Does the location of the near-
Earth neutral line vary and if so what controls it? A significant part of the
data analysis will be done using a new data mining tool. This part of the
project will be done as a subaward to the developer of the data mining tool. The
data mining tool will be used to automate the detection of flux ropes. The
detailed structure and evolution of selected events will be done using a Grad-
Shafranov reconstruction -- a 2-D analysis technique that assumes the axis of
the flux rope is an axis of symmetry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Most of the research
for this project will be carried out by an early-career woman scientist. She
will also be interacting with space scientists at the University of Michigan and
at the University of Leicester in the UK. An innovative data mining technique
will be used to construct a large database of flux rope events which will be
made available to the space science community.