* 1101165
* Topics in Dynamical Systems:  Attractors, Dimension, Lattice Models
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/2011,07/31/2014
* Yakov Pesin, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Bruce P. Palka
* 07/31/2014
* USD 207,000.00

There are several main topics in the proposal: 1) Thermodynamic formalism for
nonuniformly hyperbolic dynamical systems -- this is to build statistical
physics of phase transitions for systems with nonzero Lyapunov. 2) SRB measures
for nonuniformly hyperbolic systems - this is to to build "physically natural"
class of invariant measures for dissipative systems. 3) Coexistence of
hyperbolic and non-hyperbolic behavior -- this is to complement the famous
Kolmogorov-Arnold-Moser (KAM) theory by constructing particular examples of
systems with coexistence of nonzero Lyapunov exponents and areas with zero
entropy. 4) Anosov rigidity - this is to establish a subtle relation between
uniform and nonuniform types of hyperbolicity. 5) Dimension of non-conformal
repellers - this is to study Hausdorff dimension for generic non-conformal
repellers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research deals with problems in the
theory of smooth dynamical systems and their applications to mathematical and
statistical physics and geometry. The main subject of study is hyperbolic
dynamical systems that provide a mathematical foundation for the paradigm that
is widely known as ``deterministic chaos'' -- the appearance of irregular
chaotic motions in purely deterministic dynamical systems. This paradigm asserts
that conclusions about global properties of a nonlinear dynamical system with
sufficiently strong hyperbolic behavior can be deduced from studying the
linearized system along its trajectories. The study of hyperbolic phenomena
originated in seminal works of Artin, Morse, Hedlund, and Hopf on ergodic
properties of geodesic flows on compact surfaces. Later, hyperbolic behavior was
observed in other situations (e,g, Smale horseshoes and hyperbolic toral
automorphism). The systematic study of hyperbolicity was initiated by Smale,
Anosov and Sinai who studied systems with sufficiently strong hyperbolic
behavior. Such systems possess high level of unpredictability and exhibit strong
chaotic behavior. In the proposal the PI considers the weakest (hence, most
general) form of hyperbolicity known as nonuniform hyperbolicity. The theory of
nonuniformly hyperbolic dynamical systems originated in the work of the PI
(sometimes this theory is referred to as ``Pesin theory'') and the study of
these systems is based upon the theory of Lyapunov exponents. The PI's theory
has a wide impact on the entire field. The PI will work with graduate students
during the period of this award.