* 1101797
* Anti-Shock Scheme Based on Dual-Membrane Structure in Capacitive MEMS Sensors and Actuators
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2016
* Junseok Chae, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Mona Zaghloul
* 08/31/2016
* USD 368,000.00

The objective of this program is to develop a scheme based on&lt;br/&gt;a novel
dual-membrane-structure (DMS) configuration to &lt;br/&gt;mitigate mechanical
shocks for MEMS sensors and actuators,&lt;br/&gt;which constitutes an
outstanding problem in MEMS research. For &lt;br/&gt;example, in order to
maximize the sensitivity of an existing MEMS&lt;br/&gt;microphone, the distance
between the diaphragm and backplate needs&lt;br/&gt;to be small and the membrane
should be thin, rendering the device&lt;br/&gt;particularly vulnerable to
external shocks. The DMS configuration &lt;br/&gt;represents an intrinsic, self-
sustained, practically implementable &lt;br/&gt;control scheme to counter
mechanical shocks. A comprehensive
&lt;br/&gt;theoretical/computational/experimental paradigm based on
MEMS&lt;br/&gt;physics, nonlinear and synchronization analyses will be
established&lt;br/&gt;to validate the proposed
approach.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit is that the strongly
interdisciplinary &lt;br/&gt;research will result in novel impact-protected MEMS
devices with &lt;br/&gt;nonlinear control. The research will lead to a new class
of &lt;br/&gt;MEMS sensors and actuators with ultra-reliable
performances.&lt;br/&gt;The theoretical/computational/experimental paradigm
required to &lt;br/&gt;realize the proposed research is transformative to
developing&lt;br/&gt;MEMS devices in biomedical, industrial, defense and
homeland-security &lt;br/&gt;applications. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader
impacts are (1) to advance significantly understanding &lt;br/&gt;of the
fundamental dynamics of small-scale systems, (2) to enable &lt;br/&gt;high-
performance applications of robust MEMS devices in a broad &lt;br/&gt;range of
fields, and (3) to create an exciting environment for graduate &lt;br/&gt;and
undergraduate students in terms of interdisciplinary awareness and
&lt;br/&gt;skills.