* 1101552
* Research Problems in Harmonic Analysis and Partial Differential Equations
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2011,11/30/2011
* Shuanglin Shao, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Clancey
* 11/30/2011
* USD 99,791.00

The investigator plans to investigate the extremisers problem for the Tomas-
Stein inequality for the sphere, to establish a Strichartz estimate for an
oscillatory integral with a non-elliptic phase, and to investigate the Cauchy
problem for the two dimensional water wave equations with surface tension. The
first two projects aim to understand some aspects of oscillatory integrals,
which are important in the restriction/extension theory of Fourier transforms to
hyper-spaces with curvature in the Euclidean spaces. The extremisers problem for
the Tomas-Stein inequality asks whether there exists a function which optimizes
the inequality so that it becomes an equality. It also includes questions of
characterizing extremisers such as establishing the smoothness property. The
first project concerns the extremisers problem for the Tomas-Stein inequality
for the one and higher dimensional spheres. The second project focuses on
studying an oscillatory integral with a non-elliptic phase, which is in form of
Strichartz estimates. It is motivated by the applications of these estimates in
the Schrodinger equations. The third project is to investigate the Cauchy
problem for the two dimensional water wave equations with surface tension. It is
well known that an important step in approaching this problem in previous works
is a reduction of the original system of equations to a suitable and equivalent
quasilinear system. So it remains an interesting question how such a reduction
will play a role in developing its wellposedness
theory.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research will result in broader impact
from several points of view. First, these problems under investigation lie at
the interface of several branches of mathematics, e.g. analysis and partial
differential equations. Thus their solutions will facilitate interactions among
these fields. Moreover, these problems concern both the development of
mathematical techniques and the human understanding of the fundamental concepts
in mathematics. For instance, the Tomas-Stein inequality is an important measure
of properties of a basic operation in mathematics, the Fourier transform, and
goes back to a fundamental question: when is an infinite series (in this case
the Fourier series of a given function) summable? Examples of ways in which
these problems impact applied science and engineering are many and varied. For
instance, the water wave equation is used as a model to describe the propagation
of surface waves on a river or the ocean. A rigorous study of this model will
provide the theoretical ground for modeling and computational simulations, which
in turn allow researchers to gain some insight into some destructive physical
phenomena such as the rogue waves and tsunamis. Finally, sharing the research
experience through the investigator's teaching activities will increase the
awareness and appreciation of mathematics research, and improve diversity of the
scientific community and the society.