* 1101843
* Collaborative Research: Very-Near-Ground Wireless Channel Modeling: Theory and Practice
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2016
* Seyed Zekavat, Michigan Technological University
* Continuing Grant
* Lawrence Goldberg
* 08/31/2016
* USD 376,000.00

The objective of this research is to develop channel models for radio wave
propagation with antennas installed very near ground (H+), at ground level (H0),
and/or covered by ice, water, snow, or other materials (H-). The approach is to
evaluate the temporal, spatial and spectral statistical characteristics of very
near ground antenna channels through simulations, analysis, and measurements
conducted in an anechoic chamber and in real environments.

Intellectual Merit: The conducted research includes: 1) development of physics-
based propagation models for H+/H0/H- radio channels over a wide range of
frequencies to address a variety of applications; 2) exploration of the effect
of transmitter and receiver antenna heights, frequency, bandwidth, rough surface
materials, and the degree of roughness on the channel model; 3) investigation of
near-ground channel dispersion and its impact on direction-of-arrival and time-
of-arrival estimation; 4) study of the effect of ground roughness and bandwidth
on amplitude, phase, and time-of-arrival statistics in both line-of-sight and
non-line-of-sight scenarios as well as spatial correlation and its effect on
multi-input-multi-output systems; and 5) design of proper antenna elements and
antenna arrays for H+/H0/H- situations.

Broader Impacts: This research should enable optimal design of wireless sensor
networks and localization systems for applications such as autonomous collision
avoidance, multi-robot collaboration, safety services (firefighting), and under-
ground exploration, which would benefit the national economy and security. This
project integrates research with education and outreach activities. The
theoretical work is demonstrated by practical applications through laboratory
activities and measurement processes. Hands-on experiences will be provided for
undergraduate students and school teachers. Underrepresented minority students
will be recruited into engineering education.