* 1101754
* Developing a tunable single-spin bit for scalable spin-based optoelectronics
* ENG,ECCS
* 04/01/2011,03/31/2014
* Matthew Doty, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* Usha Varshney
* 03/31/2014
* USD 359,996.00

Electronic and photonic devices that operate at the quantum limit will enable
many new technologies, including ultrafast photonic switches, fundamentally
secure communication, and quantum information processing. Efforts to engineer
single-spin optoelectronic devices based on single quantum dots have faced
significant challenges because ensembles of quantum dots always have a large
inhomogeneous distribution in energy levels. The distribution in energy levels
prevents spin bits based on single quantum dots from being integrated into
multi-bit devices where each bit must be tuned into resonance with a discrete
number of fixed laser or optical cavity wavelengths. Recent discoveries have
demonstrated that quantum dot molecules have optical transitions whose
wavelength can be tuned in situ over a range ten times larger than available in
present single-spin bit designs. Moreover, these quantum dot molecules have
other tunable optoelectronic and spin properties that can be engineered at the
single-spin quantum level. This program supports development of a prototype bit,
based on quantum dot molecules, that can isolate and control a single spin.
Coherent and time-resolved magneto-optical techniques will be used to develop
and demonstrate operation of this prototype bit and quantify the wavelength
tunability that can be achieved. The results will provide a direct path to the
production of scalable spin-based optoelectronic devices.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit&lt;br/&gt;Single quantum dots are being actively
pursued for integration into photonic and spin-based optoelectronic devices, but
the inhomogeneous distribution of energy levels in ensembles of single quantum
dots provides a fundamental barrier to scalability. This limitation can be
overcome with the proposed new single-spin bit design based on quantum dot
molecules. The key element of the proposed bit architecture is the use of
indirect optical transitions whose wavelength is an order of magnitude more
sensitive to applied electric field than the transitions of single quantum dots.
Experiments have shown that these indirect transitions can have dipole matrix
elements only a few times weaker than direct transitions. Spin initialization,
manipulation and readout methods that utilize the indirect transitions will be
developed. The range of wavelength tunability that can be achieved while
maintaining spin initialization and readout will be measured. The bit design and
spin-control protocols take advantage of recently discovered tunable spin
interactions in quantum dot molecules to eliminate the need for transverse
magnetic fields and incorporate nondestructive readout. The proposed work will
develop and demonstrate a spin-bit design with at least an order of magnitude
more wavelength tunability than existing spin-bit designs and consequently
eliminate one of the largest obstacles to the scalable production of single-
spin-based optoelectronic devices.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts&lt;br/&gt;The proposed work will enrich new courses already under
development and provide crucial training for graduate students who will lead the
next generation of electronic and photonic device research. The work will
further broaden the exposure and opportunities for undergraduates and teacher-
scholars participating in summer research programs. Funds from this program will
provide local K-12 teachers with equipment to bring cutting-edge scientific
concepts into their classrooms and inspire the next generation of students to
pursue careers in STEM fields.