* 1101246
* Analytic and geometric properties of variational inequalities and PDE
* MPS,DMS
* 09/15/2011,08/31/2016
* Donatella Danielli, Purdue University
* Continuing Grant
* Marian Bocea
* 08/31/2016
* USD 224,782.00

In recent years, the analysis and geometry of sub-Riemannian spaces has received
increased attention. The quintessential examples of sub-Riemannian settings are
the so-called Carnot groups, whose fundamental role in analysis was first
highlighted by E. M. Stein. They now occupy a central position not only in the
study of hypoelliptic partial differential equations, harmonic analysis, and
geometric function theory, but also in the applied sciences such as mathematical
finance, mechanical engineering, and the neurophysiology of the brain. The most
distinctive feature of sub-Riemannian spaces is that the metric structure can be
viewed as a constrained geometry, where motion is possible only along a
prescribed set of directions, changing from point to point. The principal
investigator has a long-term project aimed at investigating geometric and
analytic properties of these structures. More specifically, she proposes to
continue her study of the Bernstein problem and of the regularity of minimal
surfaces in Carnot groups, to investigate subelliptic boundary value problems,
and to develop a regularity theory for fully nonlinear equations of Monge-Ampere
type. Another area of interest in this project is the investigation of elliptic
and parabolic free boundary problems that arise naturally in the theory of flame
propagation. The principal investigator also intends to study a class of
minimization problems in which the relevant functional is modeled after the one
introduced by Alt and Caffarelli. In addition, she is interested in exploring
variational inequalities of elliptic and parabolic type with obstacles confined
to lie in lower dimensional manifolds. One of the main objectives of the
proposed research is to prove regularity properties of the free boundary. The
necessary tools from harmonic analysis and the theory of partial differential
equations for the study of such problems will be developed concurrently.
Finally, motivated by the striking analogy between the theories of minimal
surfaces and of free boundaries in the Euclidean setting, the principal
investigator plans to merge her different lines of research into a yet quite
unexplored area, namely, the study of free boundary problems (both of obstacle
and Alt-Caffarelli type) in Carnot groups.

The principal investigator has a research program that lies at the interface of
the areas of mathematics known as the calculus of variations, partial
differential equations, and geometric measure theory. The focus is on the study
of analytic and geometric properties of solutions to so-called variational
inequalities and partial differential equations involving a system of
"noncommuting" vector fields. The proposed problems not only turn up in a
variety of mathematical contexts (e.g., optimal control theory, mathematical
finance, and geometry) but are also of interest in other fields such as
mechanical engineering, robotics, and neurophysiology. A second focus of the
project concerns free boundary problems, which surface in physics and
engineering in situations where a conserved quantity or relation changes
discontinuously across some value of the variables under consideration. The free
boundary appears, for instance, as the interface between a fluid and the air, or
between water and ice. One of the proposed projects aims at studying regularity
properties of the free boundary in burnt-unburnt mixtures. The results of this
investigation will lead to a better understanding of the models, to the
improvement of simulation methods, and ultimately to a precise description of
how flames propagate in nonhomogeneous media. As mentioned earlier, several
parts of this project find their motivation in the applied sciences. On the
other hand, their solutions involve an interplay of ideas from different areas
of analysis and geometry. It is conceivable that all these different fields will
benefit from this synergy. The principal investigator is committed to the
training of future generations of mathematicians and to increasing the
representation of women in the scientific community via the organization of a
variety of educational and mentoring activities for untenured faculty and
graduate, undergraduate, and K-12 students.