* 1101742
* Classification of group actions and structure of transformation group C*-algebras
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2011,09/30/2015
* N Phillips, University of Oregon Eugene
* Standard Grant
* Bruce P. Palka
* 09/30/2015
* USD 174,812.00

This project has two main lines of investigation. The first is the
classification of actions of finite groups on Kirchberg algebras (purely
infinite, simple, separable, nuclear C*-algebras). A theorem very similar to the
classification of Kirchberg algebras satisfying the universal coefficient
theorem should be possible at the very least when the group is cyclic of prime
order, the action is in a suitable bootstrap class (as is required for the
classification of algebras), and the action is pointwise outer. One expects
classification up to conjugacy, not just cocycle conjugacy. Various extensions
of this expected result are also under investigation. The second avenue of
research is the study of the transformation group C*-algebras of free minimal
actions of the group of integers, and the product of several copies of the group
of integers, on compact metric spaces. In all cases, the objective is to
describe the structure of these algebras. For the integers acting on an infinite
dimensional space, the principal investigator seeks to relate the mean dimension
of the action to the radius of comparison of the crossed product. For the
product of copies of the integers acting smoothly on a compact manifold (and in
some other cases), the principal investigator hopes to prove that the
transformation group C*-algebra is stable under tensoring with the Jiang-Su
algebra and that it has related good behavior. For the same group, but now
acting on the Cantor set, the principal investigator would like to prove that
the transformation group C*-algebra has tracial rank
zero.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project would have a number of broader impacts.
First, one of the proposed results would provide a new and striking link with
another part of mathematics. Second, previous work of the principal investigator
has connections with the study of the quantum mechanical behavior of an electron
in a quasicrystal, and some of the work in this project has the potential to
shed further light on this problem. Third, the principal investigator is active
in supervising graduate students at one of the few institutions in the Pacific
Northwest with a substantial Ph.D. program. Moreover, he is serving as an
informal coadvisor to students at two other universities. Fourth, through
continued research interaction with former graduate students, the principal
investigator expects to help support mathematical research at primarily
undergraduate institutions and to foster international cooperation with Mexico.
Fifth, some elementary questions and numerical experiments related to the
project can become undergraduate senior theses at the principal investigator's
university. Such projects expose undergraduates to mathematical research, and
thus advance the overall technological preparedness of the U.S.