* 1101688
* Collaborative Research: Positive definite functions in distance geometry and combinatorics
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2014
* Oleg Musin, The University of Texas at Brownsville
* Standard Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 08/31/2014
* USD 119,836.00

The project is devoted to the study of finite point configurations in metric
spaces. Classical results in harmonic analysis and group representations imply
the existence of functions that satisfy certain positivity constraints when
evaluated on such configurations. These constraints give a set of necessary
conditions for the existence of the configuration. The project studies the
extent to which the positivity constraints are also sufficient in that they
imply that a configuration with desired properties exists. A related topic
studied in the project is the maximum size of point sets with few distances in
metric spaces. The context for the development of the project is related to the
recently established semidefinite programming bounds on codes in homogeneous
spaces. The project also pursues a link between uniformly distributed sets of
points known as spherical and Euclidean designs and a more general concept of
cubature formulas with the aim to use methods of algebraic combinatorics to
study cubature formulas in metric and functional spaces. One of the goals is to
establish new universal bounds on cubature formulas in homogeneous spaces.

Finite collections of points in space find applications in reliable and
numerical analysis. Studying the structure of point configurations creates
insights into construction of optimal signal transmission schemes and of optimal
nets for Monte-Carlo integration.