* 1101007
* Collaborative Research:  Isogeometric Boundary Element Analysis
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/2011,09/30/2014
* Thomas J Hughes, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Christiaan Paredis
* 09/30/2014
* USD 362,929.00

The research objective of this collaborative research award is to develop
methods that allow engineers to perform stress analysis using their computer
aided design (CAD) models without the time consuming mesh generation required by
traditional finite element analysis. The research approach combines isogeometric
analysis with boundary element technology. Isogeometric analysis uses the same
basis functions that are used in the CAD models for engineering analysis.
Examples of these basis functions include non-uniform rational B-splines (NURBS)
and T-Splines. Traditional numerical methods, such as finite element analysis,
use piecewise continuous polynomials of low degree. A mesh generation step is
therefore required to convert the CAD representation of the geometry to one that
the numerical analysis can use. Using CAD basis functions directly allows us to
eliminate this step. The current limitation with CAD basis functions is they
only represent surfaces. To sidestep this limitation, we will use boundary
element technology, which works directly with surface representations.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If successful, the results of this research will allow
engineers to rapidly perform structural analyses with their CAD models during
the preliminary design process. The high cost of doing detailed analysis during
the design phase limits the scope of the design space that engineers are able to
explore, and makes truly innovative design expensive. By reducing the time and
cost of analysis, design engineers will be able to produce designs that are more
optimal in terms of weight, performance, and cost. Automatic design optimization
will also be facilitated since the numerical analysis will work directly with
the design space parameterized by the CAD models, allowing optimization programs
to work with less human intervention and correction.