* 1102757
* P2C2: Synoptic Dendroclimatology--Using Tree Rings to Reconstruct the Driving Forces of Hydroclimatic Variability in the Western United States
* GEO,AGS
* 07/01/2011,06/30/2015
* Erika Wise, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* David Verardo
* 06/30/2015
* USD 251,290.00

The researcher will examine western U.S. hydroclimatic variability and its
relationship to El Nino/Southern Oscillation (ENSO) using synoptic
dendroclimatology. Synoptic dendroclimatology integrates synoptic climatology
and dendrochronology in a process-based approach linking large-scale circulation
patterns to local tree-growth anomalies. The researcher contends that it has
been difficult to apply existing ENSO reconstructions to assess ENSO impacts in
extratropical regions due to the instability of the impact pattern and the
influence of other atmospheric controls on climate patterns in the U.S.
west.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There are three main objectives of the research: 1)
develop a long-term record of atmospheric pressure patterns using existing tree-
ring chronologies and gridded reanalysis data; 2) determine controls on
persistent meridional and zonal atmospheric flow regimes using targeted field
sampling and synoptic analysis; and 3) delineate the spatial footprint of past
ENSO events by tying together data from the first two objectives with existing
reconstructions of drought and ENSO.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts
include supporting a new female investigator early in her career, the education
and training of a graduate student, and the inclusion of a number of
undergraduates in field and lab research. The work would be relevant for water
managers and others interested in the hydroclimate of the Western U.S. while the
gridded pressure reconstruction would be of value to other climate researchers.