* 1102349
* Emerging Research - Empirical Research -  Representation Translation with Concrete and Virtual Models in Chemistry
* EDU,DRL
* 10/01/2010,07/31/2013
* Mike Stieff, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Finbarr Sloane
* 07/31/2013
* USD 446,583.00

Organic chemists rely heavily on physical models of molecules, so it not
surprising that models are also commonly employed to help teach organic
chemistry. It has been assumed that when undergraduate students work with these
models, ability to construct an internal representation of the molecular
structures is enhanced. But few studies have examined this directly and
empirically. In addition, virtual models (3-D computer visualizations) have
replaced concrete models as powerful computers become available, inviting
comparison between learning with real and virtual
models.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Researchers at the University of California Santa
Barbara and the University of Maryland will conduct a series studies to examine
how undergraduate organic chemistry students use models to advance their
understanding of molecular structures that require visualizations in three
dimensions. This study investigates the benefits of students' use of concrete or
virtual models, asking:&lt;br/&gt;- Does model use improve students? ability to
translate between different&lt;br/&gt; representations of molecular
representations?&lt;br/&gt;- What aspects of models are most effective for
representation translation?&lt;br/&gt;- Does instruction in model use alter the
frequency and quality of model use?&lt;br/&gt;- Do models support students of
low spatial ability more or less effectively than students of high spatial
ability?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study uses experimental methods to
systematically explore the uses of both concrete and virtual models in promoting
meaningful learning in organic chemistry in a series of studies set in the
controlled environment of the psychology lab. An important dependent variable
for this study measures students' ability to translate between alternative
diagrammatic representations of molecules. This is an essential skill that all
students of organic chemistry must master. Measures include accuracy of the
representations that students produce in representational translation and
students' interactions (including gestures) with the concrete and virtual models
during task performance. The study also tests its emergent theory of model use
in university classroom settings by comparing the performance of undergraduates
who are trained to use models with those who have had no such
training.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study is important because it systematically
studies model use in organic chemistry. If students learn to use models more
effectively, then they may find more success in undergraduate organic chemistry,
a gatekeeper course for advanced STEM professions. The ability to visualize
molecules may be especially challenging for students with low spatial abilities,
and the deliberate training in model use may allow more students to not only
pass organic chemistry, but stimulate their ability to use models in eventual
STEM professions. This study should result in a better understanding of the
effectiveness and appropriateness of concrete and virtual models for enhancing
student learning in chemistry and new instructional activities for use in
chemistry classrooms.