* 1102506
* Strengthening the STEM Pipeline in the Peach State: Recruitment, Retention and Research (New Alliance)
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/2011,09/30/2017
* Michelle Cook, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Cooperative Agreement
* Martha James
* 09/30/2017
* USD 5,018,115.00

The University of Georgia, lead institution for the Peach State Louis Stokes
Alliance for Minority Participation (Peach State LSAMP) will continue successful
practices in recruitment and retention to increase the representation of
historically underrepresented minorities in science, technology, engineering and
technology (STEM) fields. The 2011-2016 program will consist of a partnership
with the following institutions: Fort Valley State University, Savannah State
University, Southern&lt;br/&gt;Polytechnic State University, Georgia Institute
of Technology, Georgia Perimeter College and Kennesaw State University.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Through close coordination with state-funded and other
externally funded programs, such as the University System of Georgia STEM
Initiative and NSF's Historically Black Colleges and Universities-Undergradute
Program, the alliance contributed to significant achievements in broadening
underrepresented minority STEM participation, providing targeted support to
1,135 PSLSAMP students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This program provides a stronger
focus on key recruitment and retention strategies and a strengthened evaluation
process, as well as a broadened research collaboration network. The
substantially broadened state-wide presence along with stronger and more
rigorous focus constitutes a program that will provide committed institutional
support; strong administrative and faculty support; and targeted academic
enrichment, proactive mentoring, and meaningful research opportunities for
students. Building on the foundation developed in the last five years, the
intended goals for the project are as follows: &lt;br/&gt;1. Significantly
increase minority STEM enrollment and baccalaureate degree completion;
&lt;br/&gt;2. Increase the percentage of LSAMP students who participate in STEM
research or an external&lt;br/&gt;internship as an undergraduate
student;&lt;br/&gt;3. Increase the percentage of LSAMP scholars who transfer to
a 4-year institution after completing&lt;br/&gt;partner two-year
program;&lt;br/&gt;4. Increase the number of students who pursue STEM graduate
programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The best practices implemented in this project
will have transferable values for STEM&lt;br/&gt;activities in other
institutions in the nation. It will also create an environment in which the
outcomes&lt;br/&gt;achieved will be sustainable after the project comes to an
end. This project will not only contribute to&lt;br/&gt;increasing the number of
URM students in STEM disciplines but also to increase the awareness for and
to&lt;br/&gt;foster the development of state-wide measures for accelerating
diversity in STEM disciplines.