* 1102860
* IRFP:  Characterizing species boundaries with an integrated genetic, ecological and behavioral approach; Implications for mountain zebra conservation in Namibia
* O/D,OISE
* 12/01/2012,06/30/2014
* Pauline Kamath, Kamath                  Pauline        L
* Fellowship Award
* John Tsapogas
* 06/30/2014
* USD 0.00

The International Research Fellowship Program enables U.S. scientists and
engineers to conduct nine to twenty-four months of research abroad. The
program's awards provide opportunities for joint research, and the use of unique
or complementary facilities, expertise and experimental conditions abroad.

This award will support an eighteen-month research fellowship by Dr. Pauline L.
Kamath to work with Dr. Michael Bruford at the University of Cardiff, Cardiff,
United Kingdom.

The breakdown of reproductive barriers between closely related species has been
frequently observed in nature, and its implications debated, particularly when
involving threatened and endangered species. Although introgressive
hybridization is a natural phenomenon playing a significant role in species?
adaptations and the evolutionary process, rapid human-mediated ecological
alterations can create situations that unnaturally promote its occurrence, such
as through changes in species? behavior and distribution. Hybridization has been
shown to have devastating consequences for vulnerable species, leading to the
loss of locally adaptive traits or complete ?genetic extinction? of the species.
To date, there is a surprising paucity of data on the processes operating within
hybrid zones, thereby making predictions of evolutionary outcomes difficult to
ascertain. This study employs an integrative approach, combining genetic,
spatial, demographic and behavioral data, to evaluate the degree of
introgressive hybridization and the underlying ecological and behavioral
processes driving its occurrence in a wildlife system: between the common plains
zebra (Equus quagga) and vulnerable mountain zebra (E. zebra) in Namibia. It
specifically aims to (1) genetically characterize the direction, frequency, and
spatial extent of gene flow between zebra species and (2) elucidate behavioral
and ecological factors influencing mate choice and hybrid fitness. Furthermore,
coalescent-based Bayesian models will be developed to address complex hypotheses
concerning the time of admixture, parental contribution and possibility of
multiple admixture events.

This research will identify the demographic and behavioral factors that both
prevent and promote the breakdown of species boundaries in nature. Ultimately,
the characterization of the genetic and spatial extent of hybridization between
zebra species across their sympatric zone in Namibia will elucidate the severity
of the risk for mountain zebra and aid in making informed conservation
management decisions. In addition, uncovering the direction, degree and timing
of admixture will be imperative for distinguishing between natural and human-
mediated hybridization. Beyond both scientific and management contributions,
this research will help build local capacity for wildlife conservation research
in Namibia. Furthermore, it will establish a valuable international
collaboration between research groups at the University of Cardiff, in Cardiff,
UK, (Dr. M. Bruford), the University of Newcastle, in Newcastle UK (Dr. M.
Gosling), the Namibia Nature Foundation (Dr. M. Gosling) and the Etosha
Ecological Institute, Ministry of Environment and Tourism, Namibia (J. Werner
Kilian).