* 1102485
* LSAMP Educational Research Project: Retention of URM Engineering Students through Practice-Oriented Experiential Education
* EHR,HRD
* 07/01/2011,06/30/2015
* Mohamad Metghalchi, Northeastern University
* Continuing Grant
* tasha inniss
* 06/30/2015
* USD 199,999.00

Northeastern University, partner institution in the Northeast Louis Stokes
Alliance for Minority Participation (NE-LSAMP) will conduct an engineering
educational research study that investigates the hypothesis that participation
in experiential education programs, such as formal cooperative education (co-
op), internships and research experiences for undergraduates (REUs),
supplemented by mentorships, leads to enhanced self-efficacy, augmented
learning, and an increased likelihood of retention, particularly among minority
students who are historically under-represented in engineering. Each of the five
universities in the alliance will participate in the study. The institutions
are: Northeastern University, University of Massachusetts-Amherst, University of
Connecticut, University of Rhode Island and Worcester Polytechnic Institute.
These alliance institutions have formally established research experiences for
undergraduates, with only one of the universities having a formal cooperative
education program.

One of the reasons for the persisting low percentage of engineering
professionals among minorities is their attrition in undergraduate engineering
majors. A promising approach to retaining undergraduate minority students is the
provision of programs that allow students to gain work experience (referred to
as Practice-Oriented Experiential Education or POEE). Such approaches are
becoming increasingly relevant in a work culture characterized by the need to
continuously reflect and learn from on-going experience. This study will
investigate whether POEE is a critical predictor of historically
underrepresented students' STEM learning and retention through its impact on
self-efficacy. It will also examine whether an enriched form of POEE (peer
mentoring) significantly increases the effect of experiential education on self-
efficacy, learning, and retention.

The proposed study will have broader implications for undergraduate engineering
programs to have formal support systems in place, as in the case of the NSF
LSAMPs. In addition to the contributions to research in the fields of
psychology, social cognitive career theory, and experiential education, this
project has a number of broader impacts that have national implications. These
national implications are as follows: (1) The research results will provide
engineering colleges with data-supported measures of the effectiveness of POEE
programs on historically underrepresented minority students. By empirically
tracking the effectiveness of these contextual supports, the study will make it
possible for engineering colleges to emphasize programs that work. (2) The study
will assess the value of formal POEE programs and identify features which can be
replicated at other universities, using the methods created through this study.
(3) The use of cleaned retention data will create a means for comparison across
the five partnering schools, and since one of them represents a significant
percentage of engineering cooperative education, the new retention data has the
potential to contribute to defining a new parameter. (4) The prominence of the
role of self-efficacy in this study will help to determine if it merits
inclusion as one of the most critical explanations of academic outcomes, in this
case, the outcomes of learning and retention among underrepresented minority
engineering undergraduates. (6) This project will seek to build on the newly
validated measure of work self-efficacy introduced by Joe Raelin, the Asa
Knowles Chair of Practice-Oriented Education in the "Pathways to Self Efficacy
and Retention of Women In Undergraduate Engineering" research study currently
underway, which could impact future national studies involving learning outcomes
from work experience. (7) The model has the potential to become a standard that
can be replicated with other populations (such as students with disabilities),
with other educational levels (such as graduate studies), or among multiple
areas of education beyond engineering (such as the physical sciences).