* 1102136
* Collaborative Research: Stochastic Optimization and Coordination Control of Demand Response for Enhancing the Secure and Economic Operation of Power Systems
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2015
* Mohammad Shahidehpour, Illinois Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 08/31/2015
* USD 73,636.00

The objective of this research is to explore novel demand response management
models and robust solutions for both Aggregators of Retail Consumers and
Independent System Operators, which enable demand response to become a resource
for providing ancillary services and maintaining system security. The approach
is to (1) establish an adaptive price-sensitive load forecasting model; (2)
propose a risk-constrained stochastic demand response scheduling model for
Aggregators of Retail Consumers; (3) construct a two-stage security-constrained
stochastic scheduling model for Independent System
Operators.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: The demand
response integration will be analyzed and quantified for minimizing daily
operating costs, satisfying hourly security constraints, and accommodating
uncertainties. This project is of practical importance since demand response is
being implemented worldwide, and consumers will have opportunities to make
distinctive contributions to energy security and environmental improvements in
power system operation. The project team is qualified to perform the study and
the research and educational facilities at Clarkson and Illinois Institute of
Technology are adequate.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: This
project has profound impacts with the increasing deployment of distributed
generations and plug-in hybrid vehicles. The proposed integrated research and
educational activities and the new course development on modern power system
operation and control in smart grid will attract more students to seek careers
in power engineering. Underrepresented students will be recruited to participate
in various tasks of this research. This project will increase public awareness
and understanding of the complexity of power system operation among ratepayers,
regulators, politicians, utility executives, market participants, and
electricity consumers.