* 1102067
* GOALI: Heterogeneous 3D Integration of Electronic, Optical, and Structural Platform for Neural Microsystems
* ENG,ECCS
* 06/15/2011,05/31/2016
* Euisik Yoon, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Mona Zaghloul
* 05/31/2016
* USD 360,000.00

The objective of this program is to define a hierarchical integration
architecture that allows all&lt;br/&gt;the heterogeneous components required for
electrical and optical interface with neurons can be&lt;br/&gt;directly
integrated on a micromachined probe substrate with a low-rise profile for high-
density&lt;br/&gt;studies of neural networks in behaving animals. The
implemented microsystem aims to be a&lt;br/&gt;generic platform technology for
scalable, adaptable and reconfigurable hybrid integration.&lt;br/&gt;The
intellectual merit is in a number of important areas, including the formation of
highdensity&lt;br/&gt;interconnects to hybrid electronic chips, hermetic
encapsulation of these chips on&lt;br/&gt;micromachined platforms, the use of
magnetically-aligned anisotropic conductive adhesives for&lt;br/&gt;high-density
lead transfers, the monolithic integration of highly-flexible parylene cables
into&lt;br/&gt;probes formed using completely dry-etched process flows, and the
development of hermetic,&lt;br/&gt;low-profile packages that are compatible with
both the cables and the hybrid circuitry.&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts are in
realizing tools to permit revolutionary progress in our&lt;br/&gt;understanding
of neural circuits and systems. The work will also provide a platform for
realizing&lt;br/&gt;improved prostheses designed to overcome disorders such as
severe epilepsy, Parkinson?s&lt;br/&gt;disease, and, perhaps, paralysis. Though
important these breakthroughs in health care will be, the&lt;br/&gt;impact of
the work should be much broader, especially in combining MEMS-based sensors
with&lt;br/&gt;embedded computing and wireless connectivity, as the next major
frontier in microelectronics,&lt;br/&gt;coupling it to the non-electronic world.