* 1102201
* Exploring Size Dependent Brittle-to-Ductile Transition in Single Crystal Silicon Using High Temperature MEMS
* ENG,ECCS
* 07/01/2011,06/30/2016
* Jagannathan Rajagopalan, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Mona Zaghloul
* 06/30/2016
* USD 360,000.00

The objectives of this program are to (a) measure brittle-to-ductile (BDT)
temperature in Single Crystal Silicon (SCS), widely used in micro/nano scale
devices, as a function of size, and (b) unravel the mechanisms of size
dependence of BDT. The temperature at which materials become ductile from
brittle is known as BDT temperature. At macro scale, BDT is independent of size.
There is emerging evidence suggesting that at nano scale, BDT temperature
becomes size dependent, although the underlying mechanism is unclear, which this
program seeks to explore. The research will be conducted by developing a novel
SiC micro mechanical stage that allows testing micro/nanometer scale specimens
at room to 1000C while visualizing their microstructure in scanning or
transmission electron microscopes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit
is that the project explores a fundamental question: how BDT temperature becomes
size dependent. Its working hypothesis is, BDT is caused by a sudden increase in
density and mobility of crystalline defects such as dislocations. The energy
required to activate dislocations from the surface is substantially smaller than
that from the bulk. Hence BDT temperature decreases with size.
&lt;br/&gt;Broader impact: Research will be integrated with education and
outreach by developing a hands-on instructional module, and recruiting REU
students from diverse backgrounds. Due to collaborations with the Universities
of Vienna and of Leoben, Austria, the participants will gain international
experience.&lt;br/&gt;The study could be transformative if it shows that BDT is
size dependent in pure SCS, and its underlying mechanism. The study may offer a
new paradigm in the understanding of SCS.