* 1102159
* Collaborative Research: Wind Power - Neural Network Control, Multidisciplinary Integration, and Advanced Simulation
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/2011,07/31/2014
* Donald Wunsch, Missouri University of Science and Technology
* Standard Grant
* Paul Werbos
* 07/31/2014
* USD 179,999.00

The objective of this research is to develop intelligent vector control
technology, intelligent wind power extraction and management strategy, and
advanced simulation and testing mechanisms by using Adaptive Dynamic Programming
neural control mechanisms. This will improve the efficiency and reliability of
wind energy conversion systems and enhance wind power integration into the
electric utility system for the 20% wind penetration vision of the United States
in 2030. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;INTELLECTUAL MERITS &lt;br/&gt;The intellectual
merits of this research include development of: 1) Adaptive Dynamic Programming
vector control technology to overcome the deficiency of conventional vector
control technology, 2) intelligent wind power extraction and management
techniques to improve wind power production efficiency and reliability, 3)
intelligent control integration strategy under practical system constraints, 4)
advanced simulation and testing mechanisms, and 5) a curriculum in Intelligent
Sustainable Energy Systems to enhance student capability in multidisciplinary
fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;BROADER IMPACTS&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of
this research are significant. The rapid development and increased complexities
of sustainable energy systems make it increasingly urgent to develop intelligent
and cyber-enabled technologies for research and education of sustainable energy
system field. This research will enhance optimal and intelligent technology for
future smart and sustainable energy systems and increase the participation of an
EPSCOR state in advanced scientific research. The research should have direct or
indirect impacts to the following mission areas of the United States: reduction
in imported energy, reduction of energy-related emissions, improvements in
energy efficiency, and a technological lead for the United States in advanced
energy techniques.