* 1102382
* Robust Nonlinear Adaptive Control of Unmanned Aerial Vehicles Using Neural Networks
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/15/2011,07/31/2016
* Amar Raheja, Cal Poly Pomona Foundation, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 07/31/2016
* USD 360,000.00

The objective of this research is to develop and experimentally validate robust
nonlinear adaptive controllers for unmanned aerial vehicles (UAVs) using neural
networks. The approach is to use both pre-trained and on-line neural networks
based on multilayer perceptrons. The concept of dynamic nonlinear damping will
be applied to modify the adaptation law to increase the robustness in the
presence of unmodeled dynamics. A stable weight adjustment rule for the on-line
neural network will be derived using a Lyapunov stability theorem.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit&lt;br/&gt;This research, through the
use of adaptive controllers, will increase the robustness of UAV operations. The
lack of robustness has limited the use of UAVs, despite their potential to
replace manned vehicles for many types of missions. Also, as the level of UAV
autonomy increases, it is important to design controllers that can work in the
entire flight envelope. This research will involve an interdisciplinary team of
faculty members from the Engineering and Computer Science Departments at Cal
Poly Pomona. An existing fleet of UAVs and complimentary resources will be
used.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact&lt;br/&gt;Increased UAV robustness
will have potential to extend and increase the use of UAVs for rescue missions,
border patrol, scientific research, etc., which will have a significant positive
impact on society. This research will involve a number of undergraduate and
underrepresented students. This research will also be helpful in curriculum
improvement. Moreover, this project will help enhance the research capability of
the University, a Hispanic Serving and Designated Undergraduate Institution.
Research results will be disseminated to the Intelligent Systems community via
conference presentations and publication in journals.