* 1102524
* Islands of Opportunity Alliance: Louis Stokes Alliance for Minority Participation
* EDU,EES
* 08/15/2011,07/31/2018
* Donald Straney, University of Hawaii at Hilo
* Cooperative Agreement
* Leroy Jones II
* 07/31/2018
* USD 3,493,957.00

The Pacific region has a deep cultural history of scientific endeavors, as
witnessed by the astounding navigation feats that permitted colonization of the
Pacific and the subsequent development of technologies for resource extraction
that include intensification of agriculture and aquaculture. The diverse Pacific
peoples have potential to be scientific leaders for the nation, but are
currently underrepresented in the STEM fields. Barriers to STEM careers include
isolation, inadequate resources for secondary science education and for
mathematics and science skills remediation in colleges, and a resulting "leaky
pipeline" of students that would lead to baccalaureate degrees in STEM fields.
The Islands of Opportunity Alliance (IOA) was established in November, 2006 to
enlarge the pipeline and plug its leaks. There is evidence the Alliance has had
marked initial success in increasing numbers of students declaring STEM majors,
and initial data reveal that considerable progress has been made in increasing
matriculation to four-year institutions and attainment of baccalaureate
degrees.&lt;br/&gt;The IOA has increased the number of STEM graduates from
underrepresented groups by 81% in the first three years of the project, and
therefore is on target for meeting our goal of a 100% increase in these
graduates at the end of the five years. The primary goal for the proposed
project is to increase the number of STEM graduates from underrepresented groups
by an additional 75%. This goal will be met through four objectives: improving
instruction in STEM courses, particularly gateway courses; expanding research
and internship opportunities for STEM students by 50%; expanding IOA partnership
activities designed to recruit community college students into baccalaureate
STEM degree programs, increasing the transfer rate by 50%; and improving
retention and graduation rates to meet the program goal through enhancement of
student support services and the creation of learning communities that foster
academic excellence.&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit&lt;br/&gt;The IOA builds upon
its successes and on the experience of past and current LS-AMP Programs
throughout the country, utilizing approaches identified as best practices to
accomplish the overarching goal of increasing the number of students from
underrepresented minority groups graduating with baccalaureate degrees in STEM
fields. The Alliance has adapted these best practices to the unique cultural and
geographic setting of the Pacific region, utilizing the extensive scholarship on
cross-cultural communication and learning styles of islander peoples, and
proposes enhanced communication structures to allow the proposers to span the
vast distances between islands.&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact&lt;br/&gt;The Pacific
region, including Hawaii, spans a vast geographic area that is of strategic,
cultural, and economic importance to the United States. Pacific peoples are an
important resource with potential for greater contributions in scientific and
economic growth of the region and nation. The proposed Alliance will build on
the past technological accomplishments of Pacific peoples to develop the
region's workforce in STEM fields. The IOA will utilize multiple strategies for
disseminating the results of the project, including use of e-newsletters, the
IOA website, the LSAMP magazines, conference presentations, webcasts, and annual
meetings of IOA personnel to communicate best practices and lessons learned. The
increased numbers of Pacific Islander citizens with STEM degrees will serve as a
model for other indigenous groups to likewise increase recruitment and retention
in the STEM disciplines.