* 1102218
* Geometric and Topolocical Structures Related TO M-branes
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2014
* Hisham Sati, University of Pittsburgh
* Continuing Grant
* Bogdan Mihaila
* 08/31/2014
* USD 125,997.00

The goal of this project is to investigate new geometric and topological
structures arising from M-branes in M-theory. The PI also plans to study the
group of charges of the M-branes. This will involve higher notions of bundles,
generalized cohomology, and modular forms. The subject matter proposed here
suggests a rich interaction between theoretical and mathematical physics on one
hand and geometry and topology on the other, and will provide new constructions
in physics, differential geometry, and algebraic topology. Mathematics plays a
very important role in deciding on the consistency of a physical theory by
characterizing and canceling anomalies. Anomaly cancellations amount to
refinements of the fields and provide a natural arena for imposing orientations
on the underlying spaces with respect to (generalized) cohomology theories.
These theories provide a fundamental mathematical machinery to describe
invariants. On the other hand, M-theory, while not yet constructed, is already a
very rich theory, both in terms of physical ideas as well as mathematical
structures. Thus, the connection between the two is expected to yield a wealth
of new mathematical structures. In fact, there has already been indication of
this from the work of many researchers, including that of the PI. Previous work
of the PI highlights the power of this method and demonstrates the strength of
this approach to obtain new results and uncover new mathematical structures
arising from physics. In addition, the work of the PI and others in this area
has shown that application of ideas and techniques from geometry and topology
unexpectedly yields nontrivial insights into physical theories as well. The
project involves subtle constructions that are general enough to be of real
interest to geometers, topologists, and physicists. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
interaction between geometry/topology and field theory has recently been
extended to string theory and M-theory. This is expected to be fruitful since
string theory and M-theory subsume, and thus are structurally richer than,
quantum field theory. Not only does powerful mathematics solve deep physical
problems but many times we see that the physics inspires new directions in
mathematics and sheds light on interesting constructions. The intended research
will not only use techniques and have applications of constructions from
geometry and topology, but will also provide new geometric and topological
constructions motivated and guided by physics which will be of interest to both
mathematicians and physicists. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research will also
expand collaboration and bridge the cultural gap between differential
geometry/algebraic topology and theoretical/mathematical physics. The PI has
been organizing annual research meetings at the American Institute of
Mathematics on Algebraic Topology and Physics in the last three years for that
purpose and is co-organizing two other meetings 2011 and 2012 on such
interdisciplinary topics. In addition, the PI would like to engage graduate
students at Maryland in his research since the questions raised involve a wealth
of ideas and techniques. He is currently co-organizing a Research Interactions
in Teams (RIT) on Geometry and Physics, in which most of the lectures are
presented by graduate and even undergraduate students. He has also organized an
REU on Hyperdeterminants and Nonlinear Algebra, which has resulted in a
publication with three undergraduates, two freshman and a sophomore.