* 1102292
* Enriched 76Ge detectors for the MAJORANA DEMONSTRATOR
* MPS,PHY
* 07/01/2012,10/31/2016
* John Wilkerson, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Allena K. Opper
* 10/31/2016
* USD 1,820,663.00

This is an exciting time in our quest to understand neutrinos -- fundamental
particles that play key roles in the early universe, in cosmology and
astrophysics, and in nuclear and particle physics. Results from neutrino
oscillation experiments have provided compelling evidence that neutrinos have
mass and give the first indication that the Standard Model of nuclear and
particle physics is incomplete. With the realization that neutrinos are massive,
there is an increased interest in investigating their intrinsic properties.
Understanding the neutrino mass generation mechanism, the neutrino character
(Majorana or Dirac), the absolute neutrino mass scale, and the neutrino mass
spectrum are some of the main focuses of the immediate future's neutrino
experiments. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of this award is based
on the fact that a sensitive search for the neutrino-less nuclear double-beta
decay is the only practical way to determine if neutrinos are Majorana particles
(their own antiparticles). This exotic decay is the most sensitive test of
lepton-number conservation, which is an important symmetry in elementary
particle physics. With the goal of ultimately realizing a 1-tonne scale
neutrino-less nuclear double-beta decay experiment using Germanium (Ge)
detectors, the Majorana collaboration is assembling a prototype referred to as
the Demonstrator that is intended to confirm that background levels low enough
to justify such a large experiment can be reached. The baseline plan for the
Demonstrator is for 15 kg of Ge detectors fabricated from Ge enriched in the
double-beta isotope 76-Ge. Because most of the cost of such an experiment is the
apparatus associated with it and not enriched Ge, and because one can increase
the mass of instrumented 76-Ge significantly without increasing that base cost,
there is the opportunity to "increase" the physics reach of the project for a
reasonable, incremental additional cost. This award provides support for extra
Ge detectors fabricated from enriched material to improve the physics
reach.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The technology of larger, lower-
background HPGe arrays developed from a tonne-scale experiment can be expected
to enable a new generation of highly efficient, ultra-low-background gamma
spectroscopy measurements. Among the fields that stand to benefit from this new
generation of technology are: direct dark matter searches; measurements for
environmental monitoring; atmospheric, ocean, and groundwater environmental
transport; methods of radioactive dating; reactor monitoring; bioassay for
determining very low occupational exposures to radiation; and biological studies
involving radiotracers at very low activities. An E&amp;O program with the
Morehead Planetarium on the campus of U. of North Carolina will bring
underground science to the public.