* 1102263
* Novel Oxide-Based Magneto-Electric Tunnel Junctions
* ENG,ECCS
* 06/01/2011,05/31/2016
* Arunava Gupta, University of Alabama Tuscaloosa
* Standard Grant
* Usha Varshney
* 05/31/2016
* USD 345,800.00

The objective of this research is to fabricate and study magnetic tunnel
junctions with an active multiferroic or ferroelectric barrier - termed magneto-
electric tunnel junctions. Traditional magnetic tunnel junctions represent a
class of device that utilizes the electronic spin for its performance. The
proposed magneto-electric tunnel junctions are based on theoretical predictions
that have identified asymmetry as a fundamental criterion for obtaining multi-
functional devices. These devices are expected to exhibit simultaneous magneto-
resistance and electro-resistance effects, coupled with subtle electronic
transport effects. A comprehensive research program is planned which addresses
issues related to the following components: sample fabrication, structural
characterization, nanoscale magneto-electric properties, and device
characterization. The basic focus of the proposed program will be on the
investigation of magneto-electric transport properties of magneto-electric
tunnel junctions with ultra-thin ferroelectric and multiferroic barriers and
their composites. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of the research
lies in the investigation of novel heterostructures utilizing fundamental
insight into electronic properties coupled with innovative fabrication and
characterization methods that have the potential for realizing a new class of
multiple-state resistance devices. State-of-the-art pulsed laser deposition
techniques shall be used with unit-cell control to fabricate prototype devices.
Device characteristics shall be investigated both at the nanoscale and global
level. Nanoscale characterization would involve current-voltage characteristics
of bilayer structures using conducting atomic force microscopy. Local
ferroelectric switching properties of ultra-thin films shall be studied using
piezoresponse force microscopy. Advanced scanning probe characterization
investigating nanoscale ferroelectricity and tunneling properties shall be
performed at the Center for Nanoscale Material Sciences at the Oak Ridge
National Laboratory. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Broader Impacts includes a
multidisciplinary effort that will make significant contributions to scientific
knowledge, education outreach and infrastructure. The scientific outcomes of the
project are expected to include both advances in the fabrication of a new class
of tunnel junction structures and fundamental understanding of their materials
and physical characteristics. Device studies will provide a firm foundation for
realizing multifunctional devices and, if successful, would have an
extraordinary impact and open the door for a plethora of applications. The
program will provide support for graduate and undergraduate students, including
underrepresented minorities, and contribute to their broad interdisciplinary
training. Project personnel will collaborate with local schools to facilitate
participation by high school students in research.