* 1102738
* The Extraordinary Deaths of Ordinary Stars: 3D Simulations of Common Envelope Phases
* MPS,AST
* 08/15/2011,07/31/2014
* Jason Nordhaus, Nordhaus                Jason
* Fellowship Award
* Harshal Gupta
* 07/31/2014
* USD 226,509.00

Dr. Jason Nordhaus is awarded an NSF Astronomy and Astrophysics Postdoctoral
Fellowship to carry out a program of research and education at the Center for
Computational Relativity and Gravitation at the Rochester Institute of
Technology (RIT). Nordhaus will conduct three-dimensional numerical simulations
of common envelope (CE) phases with a new, state-of-the-art adaptive mesh
refinement, radiation-hydrodynamic code CASTRO (Compressible Astrophysics). For
the past two years, Dr. Nordhaus has been active in the development of, and
initial science applications of CASTRO to core-collapse supernovae. Despite the
importance of CE phases for cataclysmic variables, merging compact objects, the
progenitors of Type Ia supernovae, and low-mass evolved stars, common envelope
phases have never been properly simulated. With the advent of peta-scale, high-
performance computing facilities such as the NSF-funded Blue Waters system,
simulating CE phases with advanced multi-grid, multi-core techniques is now
possible. CASTRO has demonstrated excellent scaling at the peta-scale level,
thus making it one of only a few astrophysics codes able to efficiently employ
peta-scale resources. By employing CASTRO to simulate common envelope phases for
various binary types and mass-ratios, significant and long-lasting progress can
be made for a range of astrophysical systems.

Dr. Nordhaus will also develop a new, astronomy and scientific reasoning class
to be taught to students at RIT's National Technical Institute for the Deaf
(NTID). Dr. Nordhaus is fluent in American Sign Language, and NTID currently
does not offer any deaf astronomy classes. The course will be entitled "The
Universe Through Our Eyes and Hands: An Introduction to Scientific Reasoning and
Astronomy." The course will deviate from a traditional lecture to teach
scientific reasoning through astronomy in an active, but non-verbal,
environment. An end-of-semester project will have students break into groups of
3-4 with each group designing a one-hour lecture for deaf high school students
which highlights a particular topic from "The Universe" course. Based on these
end-of-course projects, Dr. Nordhaus will produce a one-week, multi-media
teaching guide that high-school teachers of deaf students can use in their
classrooms. Dr. Nordhaus will make the material freely available to teachers
throughout the country via NTID's extensive free online course materials.