* 1102505
* Simulation of Microphysical Properties, Mesoscale Organization and Variability of Stratocumulus Clouds During the VOCALS Regional Experiment (REx)
* GEO,AGS
* 08/01/2011,07/31/2015
* Robert Wood, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Chungu Lu
* 07/31/2015
* USD 399,907.00

Stratocumulus (Sc) clouds in the marine boundary layer (MBL) are a cornerstone
of the&lt;br/&gt;Southeast Pacific (SEP) climate system and important modulators
of the Earth's radiation budget. Sc clouds exhibit a wide range of properties
and morphologies and contribute considerably to the overall mesoscale
variability of the region. However, the mechanisms that control the mesoscale
variability of MBL clouds, influence their microphysical and macrophysical
properties as well as the interactions between aerosols and clouds are poorly
understood, not very well quantified and may even be misrepresented in current
large-scale and mesoscale models.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will focus
upon the numerical simulation of marine boundary layer clouds in the SEP region.
The major goals are (a) to better understand the microphysical and dynamical
mechanisms that lead to the observed mesoscale variability of microphysical and
macrophysical Sc cloud properties; (b) to investigate the role of aerosols and
aerosol-cloud interactions for the formation, mesoscale organization and
maintenance of pockets of open cells (POCs); and (c) to improve the
representation of microphysical and macrophysical properties of MBL clouds as
well as aerosols in a regional model. For the evaluation of the model
simulations and the comparison with observations we will use a combination of
extensive multi-platform measurements from the VAMOS Ocean-Cloud-Atmosphere-Land
Study (VOCALS) Regional Experiment (REx) and satellite
observations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The simulations with the regional model will
permit mesoscale variability that typically is crucial for organized mesoscale
convection, but also allow the context of a real world scenario. Thus, the
regional model simulations will bridge the gap induced by the scale disparity
between large eddy simulations and simulations with global circulation
models.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual merit:&lt;br/&gt;The expected
improvement in understanding of the microphysical and dynamical processes
leading to the observed mesoscale variability of marine boundary layer clouds in
the Southeast Pacific region. This knowledge will be of great value for
improving microphysical parameterizations of aerosol-cloud interactions with the
vision to better represent mesoscale cloud variability of marine Sc clouds in
regional and global models, which will then help to narrow down uncertainties of
aerosol indirect effects and cloud feedbacks in the global climate
system.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts:&lt;br/&gt;Newly acquired data sets
will be made available at the NCAR EOL database and shared with the broader
VOCALS community. Research results will be disseminated through presentations at
national and international workshops and conferences. The project will also
promote graduate education and training. Collaborating with other scientists,
the research activity will help to improve regional models and participation via
model intercomparison.