* 1102228
* Organic electronic devices using epitaxially grown conjugated polymer crystalline nanowires on carbon nanotube and graphene electrodes
* ENG,ECCS
* 06/01/2011,05/31/2015
* Lei Zhai, The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Standard Grant
* Dimitris Pavlidis
* 05/31/2015
* USD 379,999.00

The objective of this research is to develop a novel approach for the
fabrication of high performance organic field effect transistors by exploiting
strong pi-pi interaction between the polymer chains and the polymer-electrodes
for both efficient charge injection and transport. The approach is via epitaxial
growth of conjugated crystalline polymer nanowires on the single walled carbon
nanotubes and graphene electrodes. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Organic transistors
will be fabricated via direct growth of crystalline poly (3-hexylthiophene) and
poly(3,3-didodecylquaterthiophene) nanowires on the carbon nanotubes and
graphene electrodes and their charge transport properties will be studied. The
proposed transistors will have the following specific advantages: (i)
crystalline polymer nanowires will have improved nanomorphology, (ii) strong pi-
pi interaction between electrodes and semiconducting materials will provide
improved charge injection, (iii) higher on-current and operational frequency
will make them suitable for high frequency operation, and (iv) owing to reduced
contact resistance and better channel morphology, nanoscale transistors will be
demonstrated without any short channel effect.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
successful demonstration of high performance polymer nanowires based organic
transistors will have significant impact in low cost plastic electronics
including flexible displays, sensor sheets, radiofrequency identification tags,
and photovoltaics. Education and outreach activities includes, (i)
interdisciplinary training of graduate, undergraduate and high school students,
(ii) integration of research results in a new graduate level course through
lecture and lab demonstration, (iii) minority students recruitment through UCF
Office of Diversity Initiative and Women?s Research Center and (iv) outreach to
local high schools through visits and to the community through website and news
letters.