* 1102764
* CAREER: Integrated Research and Education on the Size Dependent Deformation in Polymers -- Indentation Tests, Material Modeling, and Numerical Simulations
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/15/2010,09/30/2015
* Chung-Souk Han, University of Wyoming
* Standard Grant
* kara peters
* 09/30/2015
* USD 318,010.00

The research objective of this Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) project
is the understanding and simulation of the deformation behavior of polymers at
small dimensions. The research includes experimental and theoretical
investigations as well as numerical simulation analyses. At small dimensions the
deformation of polymers can be dependent on the length scale. Such size
dependent deformation has been observed in indentation experiments of polymers
where significant increases in the hardness at small indentation depths have
been observed. The size dependent deformation of polymers at the micrometer to
sub-micrometer length scale is not well known and a sound theory and rationale
is not available. The purpose of this project is the development and
verification of a theory for such size dependent deformation.

The understanding of the deformation behavior of polymers at small dimensions is
of great importance not only for technological advancement but also for the
fundamental advancement of polymer physics and chemistry. Technological
applications include micro-/nano-electromechanical systems, sensors, composites.
Alongside the technological importance, the size dependent deformation is also
of importance for the fundamental issues in polymer physics and materials
science like contact and friction, fracture and delamination, and deformation
mechanisms at material interfaces. As polymers - in a broader sense - are also
found in biological materials, the findings of this project may also aid in the
understanding of the deformation mechanisms in human bones and tissue, wood, and
exoskeletons. The scientific research of this project is integrated into the
educational activities. Students of underrepresented groups including
individuals with disabilities and Native American Indians will actively
participate in the research activities and educational program of this project
via summer camps and undergraduate research.