* 1102481
* Collaborative Research: Ultra-high Performance Carbon Nanotube "Parallel Nanotube Architectures" (PNAs) for On-chip Gigascale Local and Global Interconnects
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/10/2010,08/31/2013
* Swastik Kar, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* GEORGE HADDAD
* 08/31/2013
* USD 163,386.00

The objective of this research is to address and resolve certain critical
problems of on-chip interconnects in future microprocessors that threaten to
impede the progress of the microelectronics industry in less than a decade.
Feasible revolutionary alternatives to overcome some of those impediments using
carbon nanotube architectures are proposed. The approach is to develop highly
organized ultra-high performance carbon nanotube architectures that can
potentially replace and outperform existing technologies for extremely narrow
(below 22 nanometers) future interconnects.

Although industrial technology roadmaps have envisaged that carbon nanotube
architectures will comprehensively outperform present interconnect technologies
in several ways, there has been little progress in their development and
integration. A synergy of multidisciplinary intellectually stimulating concepts
and their resulting inventions by the investigators, this program will bridge a
crucial technological gap in the microprocessor industry. The anticipated
revolutionary interconnect structures developed in this research program are
expected to meet or exceed technology roadmap projections and could facilitate
the continuing progress of microprocessor industries. The most fruitful impact
of this program will be in educating and training a young pool of researchers
(from high-school to graduate students) with appropriate skill sets needed for
tackling cutting-edge technological issues in nano/microelectronics industries.
The development of advanced course materials, short-term research modules and
signature educational programs such as Application of Nanoscale Industrial
Materials for Advanced Technology and Education (ANIMATE) will stimulate
students towards advanced research and education at an early stage, which will
play a key role in reversing the lack of adequate representation from diverse
backgrounds.