* 1102156
* Collaborative Research: Modulation and Statistical Detection Methods for Underwater Acoustic Communications
* ENG,ECCS
* 10/01/2011,09/30/2014
* James Preisig, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* Zhi Tian
* 09/30/2014
* USD 103,164.00

The objective of this research is to develop and explore a new generation of
modulation and statistical detection methods for Underwater Acoustic
Communications (UWA) communications. The proposed approach is based on a class
of filter bank multicarrier (FBMC) techniques, a statistical detection method,
and novel channel estimation algorithm that will enable substantially more
robust means of modulation and detection in the presence of the doubly spread
ocean acoustic environment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The following 4 elements
summarize the intellectual of the proposal: (i) Development of channel models
that will facilitate an in-depth study of the proposed methods during the course
of this project and also in future studies; (ii) Development and study of signal
processing techniques, including novel channel estimation algorithms, Doppler
compensation methods, and high performance detection algorithms; (iii) Design of
channel codes that are tuned to the characteristics of UWA channels and the FBMC
modulation techniques; (iv) Extension of the designs to multiple-input multiple-
output channels. The proposed algorithms will be tested with data collected
during underwater acoustic field experiments of
opportunity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research will contribute to
significant advancement in Underwater Acoustic Communications. The results of
the proposed research will be directly integrated into coursework at both the
involved Universities. Results from this effort will be broadly disseminated
through publication and presentations. Online resources that will make the
contributions accessible to a broad audience will be developed. Research results
will also be shared with high-school students who attend the annual Engineering
Open Houses on both campuses. Advanced undergraduate students involved in the
project will attend the Summer Student Fellow program at WHOI where they gain
practical experience.