* 1102471
* Magnetic Field Advection in High Energy Density Plasmas Produced by Radial Foil Configurations
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2015
* Bruce Kusse, Cornell University
* Continuing Grant
* Vyacheslav (Slava) Lukin
* 08/31/2015
* USD 420,000.00

Developing sustainable clean energy sources, studying the degenerate states of
matter or understanding the dynamics of the Universe require a detailed
knowledge of the basic mechanisms ruling extremely high pressure ionized gases,
also called high energy density (HED) plasmas. In particular, the advection of
the magnetic field by HED plasmas remains an open question to the international
scientific community. This research program investigates this topic using radial
foil configurations. In this experimental arrangement, a thin metallic foil is
driven by a large pulsed power generator. A pin cathode contacts the foil at its
geometrical center while the foil periphery is connected to a circular anode.
The converging electrical currents produce a plasma pressure close to a mega-
bar, a million times the earth atmospheric pressure. The experimental setup
benefits from quasi symmetric plasma dynamics and excellent diagnostic access.
This configuration permits a three dimensional reconstruction of plasma
properties such as magnetic field, mass density, velocity and temperature. By
combining multiple measurements spaced in time, this research analyzes the time
evolution of the plasma parameters and highlights the mechanisms ruling magnetic
field advection in HED plasmas.

This research program also impacts other area of plasma physics. We plan to
compare experimental results to numerical computations to validate advanced
plasma models. As plasma theory and numerical modeling can be used by the larger
plasma physics community, this research will benefit other areas of plasma
research, such as magnetic confinement fusion. Furthermore, the research
investigates the interaction of the magnetic field with supersonic plasma flows,
which are ubiquitous astrophysical occurrences encountered in supernovae and
accretion disks surrounding black holes. Due to favorable scaling laws, plasmas
generated by radial foils can help to unlock astrophysical mechanisms by
providing detailed plasma measurements in supersonic regimes. In turn, this data
can be used to validate astrophysical theory and numerical codes, fostering
cross-pollination between the HED physics and astrophysics communities.