* 1102440
* RUI: Complex Structures, Hyperbolic Invariants, Infinitesimal Currents and Intersection Numbers for Deformation Spaces
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/2011,07/31/2014
* Dragomir Saric, CUNY Queens College
* Continuing Grant
* Bruce P. Palka
* 07/31/2014
* USD 153,999.00

The Principal Investigator studies Teichmuller spaces of surfaces, both closed
and open. The Teichmuller space of a surface is the space of all possible shapes
of the surface, where a shape of the surface is the hyperbolic metric on a
surface up to isometries homotopic to the identity. Therefore the invariants of
hyperbolic metrics on a surface are used in the study of Teichmuller spaces. The
PI?s approach is to first consider the Teichmuller space of the hyperbolic plane
called the universal Teichmuller space as this space contains all other
Teichmuller spaces. An invariant called a shear associated to an ideal
triangulation of the hyperbolic plane is used to parameterize the universal
Teichmuller space. The PI intends to continue his study of the universal
Teichmuller space and related Teichmuller spaces in terms of these invariants
called shears. In particular, the PI intends to describe the Weil-Petersson
metric on the Teichmuller space of a finitely punctured closed surface in terms
of shears on ideal triangulations of the surface, where triangulations can be
both locally finite and locally infinite. He also intends to implement these
formulas on the computer with the help of some undergraduate and masters
students from Queens College. Another direction in applying shear invariants to
the Teichmuller spaces is to find a parameterization of Takhtajan-Teo
Teichmuller space in terms of shears and to find a formula for the Weil-
Petersson metric in this space. This direction has possible applications to
Sharon-Mumford?s approach to two-dimensional shape analysis in Computer Vision.
The Quasifuchsian space of a closed surface supports a Weil-Petersson metric as
well which is defined by taking the second partial derivative of the product of
the Hausdorff dimension of the limit quasicircle and the Sullivan-Paterson
measure. The PI intends to investigate the infinitesimal Sullivan-Paterson
measures and their intersection numbers to obtain another expression for the
Weil-Petersson metric on the Quasifuchsian space similar to the situation of the
Fuchsian (Teichmuller) space.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Riemann surfaces are two-
dimensional objects which locally look like open subsets of a plane and that
have transition maps which preserve angles. Each Riemann surface supports a
unique hyperbolic metric in its class of conformal metrics. The PI studies the
variations of hyperbolic metrics on a surface thought of as a single space of
metrics called the Teichmuller space. The Teichmuller space is of interest in
complex analysis, low-dimensional topology, dynamics, differential geometry and
physics. One aspect of the project is related to the Computer Vision given by
the approach of Sharon-Mumford as well as to the mathematical physics in the
approach of Nag-Sullivan and Takhtajan-Teo. The project is building tools for
study of the universal Teichmuller space and it has a potential for applications
to the above mentioned fields. Another part of the project involves
undergraduate and masters students from Queens College. The students
participating in the project will be exposed to an active research agenda thus
contributing to the human resource development in the sciences and engineering.