* 1102257
* Ultrafast nonlinearities in chip-scale photonic crystals
* ENG,ECCS
* 05/01/2011,04/30/2014
* Chee Wei Wong, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Dominique Dagenais
* 04/30/2014
* USD 354,657.00

The objective of this program is to examine the ultrafast nonlinear interactions
in slow-light photonic crystals, based on recent advancements and towards chip-
scale optical signal processing. Experimental observation, along with device
nanofabrication, theory and numerical modeling, will be examined in this
program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit is composed of three
interrelated Research Thrusts. In Thrust I temporal solitons and ultrafast
pulses will be examined in slow-light photonic crystals, in addition to the
characterization of the ultrafast pulses. In Thrust II, the program will extend
the single electromagnetic wave nonlinear - dispersive interactions to the
nonlinear coupling between two electromagnetic waves. In Thrust III, the program
will examine four-wave mixing, including optical signal
processing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts are the enhanced ultrafast
nonlinearities in slow-light photonic crystals for ultrashort pulse generation
and frequency conversion, in next-generation chip-scale optical signal
processing and communication modules. The Educational outreach and programs will
benefit minority and underrepresented groups, K-12 students, high-school
teachers, graduate and undergraduate students. The educational tasks involve the
outreach to under-served education programs in Harlem and Lower Bronx by working
with the GK12 programs and the Double Discovery Center summer program, to
develop optical nanoscience and technology teaching modules. The program will
also work with the high-school science and physics teachers in Harlem to develop
an elective teaching module, involving both theoretical and experimental
components, and a ?hands-on? module, to reinforce the advances at intersection
of optical physics with nanoscience and technology.