* 1102531
* 2011-2016 California Louis Stokes Alliance for Minority Participation (CAMP) Senior Level Alliance
* EDU,EES
* 07/01/2011,12/31/2018
* Timothy Lewis, University of California-Irvine
* Continuing Grant
* Leroy Jones II
* 12/31/2018
* USD 4,450,000.00

The University of California-Irvine, lead instituion for the University of
California System Louis Stokes Alliance for Minority Participation (CAMP), a
senior alliance, will continue to conduct recruitment and retention activities
over the next five years to produce highly competitive students from
historically underrepresented minority populations, mostly Hispanic-Americans,
in science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM) for the 21st Century
workforce. The University of California-Merced joins eight other UC campuses
(Berkeley, Davis, Santa Cruz, Santa Barbara, Los Angeles, Irvine, Riverside and
San Diego)in implementing successful practices such as peer-mentoring, faculty
mentored research, collaborative learning, undergraduate national and
international research to increase STEM degree production. This alliance of
institutions will continue linkages with California community colleges to
increase student transfer rates to 4-year baccalaureate-producing institutions.
Planned activities to stimulate community college transfer include annual "STEM
Transfer Days", partnerships with the Alliance for Regional Collaboration to
Heighten Educational Success (ARCHES), MESA, and other federal, state and local
educational organizations devoted to supporting pre-college and undergraduate
education. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;CAMP provides the tools and support for
minority students to overcome traditional barriers. With a common vision and
collective effort, CAMP has become the University's premier systemwide program
to raise academic performance and full participation in university life.
Academic socialization together with professionalization is embedded in all
student development activities from entering freshmen to enrollment in graduate
education. Faculty mentored laboratory research is a key component, resulting in
increased student connectivity to the discipline, subject mastery, and a strong
propensity to prepare for graduate school, particularly the
Ph.D.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Institutional commitment to increase the quality and
quantity of underrepresented minorities completing programs in STEM will
continue. The University of California LSAMP has sustained a 2:1 ratio of
support to NSF funding, representing an unparalleled effort for
institutionalization.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;CAMP's effectiveness stems from
connectivity among partners and significant, sustained commitment of STEM deans,
faculty, and program staff, supported by the University's top-level leadership.
From baseline year the minority STEM baccalaureate degree completion rate has
increased 168% and minority STEM enrollment increased 182%. CAMP has played a
strong role in these outcomes. The Alliance has fostered local, regional, and
national synergistic relationships that enable an effective infrastructure
within California higher education and among LSAMP-funded institutions
nationwide.