* 1102925
* GSE/DIF: Empowering Teachers to Enhance Adolescents' Motivation for Science (E-TEAMS): Leveraging SciMo Findings for Lasting Classroom Change
* EDU,EES
* 05/01/2011,04/30/2016
* Jennifer Schmidt, Northern Illinois University
* Standard Grant
* Dana Britton
* 04/30/2016
* USD 375,000.00

Intellectual Merit: Northern Illinois University proposes a diffusion-
dissemination project to share findings and implications regarding boys' and
girls' motivational processes with high school science teachers, pre-service
science teachers, and science teacher educators across the United States. The
primary research findings to be diffused come from the Science-in-the-Moment
Project (SciMo, HRD-0827526). The SciMo project documented the daily experience
and activities of male and female students in high school science courses by
gathering data through classroom observation, video, surveys, interviews, and
Experience Sampling--a data collection method in which students provided
multiple reports of their subjective experience in science in response to
vibrating pagers which signaled them during class. Data illuminated systematic
gender differences in the lived experience of students in science class, both in
terms of students' internal reactions to specific learning situations and in the
quality of their daily interactions with their science teachers. Several
cognitive and affective factors presumed to be critical motivational processes
(e.g., challenge, relevance, goal orientation, ability beliefs) operated
differently for male compared to female students, and suggest a motivational
disadvantage for girls. Analysis of classroom video data reveals continued bias
against girls. The proposed project will disseminate critical information
learned from SciMo and related projects about students' motivational processes
in science in a way that is accessible, practical, usable by a variety of
stakeholders, and empowering to educators at multiple levels in the education
system.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Products to be created include: 1) a book
(containing foundational knowledge, practical applications, and self study
materials) on how to enhance motivation for science among boys and girls in high
school; 2) ancillary presentation materials (power point slides and handouts) to
be used in professional development workshops and to share with parents; and 3)
video demonstrations of the teaching practices and activities discussed in the
book. Materials will be distributed at no cost to broad audiences using multiple
dissemination strategies targeting professional science teacher organizations.
Materials will be distributed in hard copy, electronic format on CD and through
an interactive, multimedia web portal.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The
project will provide large numbers of science teachers and teacher-educators
with the resources they need to understand and influence motivation for science
among their students. The materials to be disseminated could have substantial
effects on instructional practice, course design and curriculum in high school
science education. The benefit to society of equipping a broad range of science
teachers with research-based knowledge and practices about motivation is that
each teacher that applies this knowledge could have a positive impact on the
science motivation of hundreds of students over the course of her/his career.
Because proposed materials will focus on issues related to gender and
motivational processes in science, the project could result in broader interest
and participation of women in STEM education and careers.