* 1102114
* NOYCE Principal Investigators Garnering Useful Information on Developing [Project] Effectiveness (NOYCE PI GUIDE)
* EDU,DUE
* 02/01/2011,01/31/2013
* Proctor Reid, National Academy of Sciences
* Standard Grant
* Joan T Prival
* 01/31/2013
* USD 250,347.00

This project is identifying and developing the skill sets of Principal
Investigators in the Robert Noyce Teacher Scholarship program to enhance their
acquisition of core knowledge in areas relevant to their project's goals, key
skills in the nuts and bolts of project management (e.g., managing people,
managing funds, and managing operations) and change leadership (e.g., building
and sustaining support among key constituencies, anticipating and adjusting to
changing operational conditions, and institutionalizing the project's activities
within the core operations of host units). These skill sets are especially
critical for more complex projects. Mentorship is a well established academic
strategy for building such sets within faculty. This project seeks to explore
whether a many-to-many mentorship system can be effectively implemented using
electronic means. The system to be implemented is called the NOYCE Principal
Investigators Garnering Useful Instruction in Developing [Project] Effectiveness
(NOYCE PI GUIDE). The fundamental assumption is that there are answers to key
questions as well as guiding strategies that experienced PIs can share with
novice PIs (and potential PIs) to significantly aid their ability to
successfully achieve the goals of their projects. The project is establishing a
web site that features: (a) very short filmed segments and accompanying
transcripts introducing fictionalized scenarios derived from interviews
conducted with experienced NOYCE PIs, (b) at least 10 short video segments of
the experienced NOYCE PIs discussing these two topics, and (c) a moderated
electronic community of practice to build peer mentoring networks among would-
be, novice and experienced NOYCE PIs.