* 1102050
* EPAS: Hierarchical Characterization of Optoelectronic Hyperdoped Silicon Devices for Terawatt-Scale Photovoltaics
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2015
* Tonio Buonassisi, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 08/31/2015
* USD 370,000.00

EPAS: Hierarchical Characterization of Optoelectronic Hyperdoped Silicon Devices
for Terawatt-Scale Photovoltaics&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Research Objectives and
Approaches: The objective of this research is to demonstrate a viable route to
production of high-performance hyperdoped silicon photovoltaics (PV). The
approach is to determine the fundamental properties of performance-limiting
defects in PV devices containing hyperdoped silicon, thus leading to fabrication
of next-generation devices. Specifically, we will diagnose the current state-of-
the-art devices (demonstrate efficiencies of ~1%) using a hierarchical
characterization approach, while creating cost-effective devices with
drastically improved performance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit:
Hyperdoped materials were discovered 10 years ago and have since drawn interest
for their potential photovoltaic applications; yet no significant photovoltaic
technology has yet emerged due to a lack of understanding of limiting defects.
First, we will carefully characterize and model solar cells fabricated using
current hyperdoping methods. Second, we will analyze the fundamental properties
of performance-limiting defects, while developing a strategy for how to reduce
or eliminate their impact. Lastly, we will fabricate new prototype cells that
avoid these pitfalls.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: Because it is
abundant enough to contribute at the terawatt scale, silicon-based PV is
excellently positioned to contribute to the dual goals of decreasing our
economy's carbon-intensity while improving energy security. The proposed work
will also address the NSF?s mission of advancing discovery while promoting
teaching, training, learning, and diversity. Using new media including YouTube
and Wikipedia, the group will successfully disseminate the impact of the work to
the general public.