* 1102013
* Exploring Performance Limits of Multi-hop MIMO Networks via Tractable Models and Optimization
* ENG,ECCS
* 07/01/2011,12/31/2016
* Scott Midkiff, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* chengshan xiao
* 12/31/2016
* USD 400,000.00

The objective of this research is to close the gap between rapid advances at the
multiple-input-multiple-output (MIMO) physical layer by the wireless
communications research community and current limited progress on MIMO by the
networking research community. The proposed approach is to develop simple and
accurate models for multi-hop MIMO networks and, based on such new models, to
advance fundamental understanding of such networks. The research tasks include:
(1) the development of new simple and accurate models beneath the network layer;
(2) the exploration of performance optimization for multi-hop MIMO networks; and
(3) the design of distributed cross-layer algorithms that can approach optimal
solutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project serves a critical need in the
research community by producing new models beneath the network layer that are
both tractable and accurate. The findings of this project will remove the
current barrier facing multi-hop MIMO network research and allow the research
community to fully understand the potential of such networks. Based on these
findings, new knowledge frontiers for multi-hop MIMO networks can be explored
that were once considered difficult; and new insights and discoveries (possibly
unexpected) are now possible.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The education plan of this
project is to develop new cross-disciplinary teaching materials for wireless
networking, with the goal of closing the knowledge gap between networking and
wireless communications. This project will involve undergraduates and under-
represented students in wireless networking research, with the goal of building
their future careers in networking related fields.