* 1102587
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Public Opinions and National Identification Shifts
* SBE,SES
* 03/15/2011,09/30/2012
* Andreas Wimmer, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Saylor Breckenridge
* 09/30/2012
* USD 9,000.00

Doctoral Dissertation Research: Public Opinions and National Identification
Shifts SES - 1102587 Dr. Andreas Wimmer (PI) Yuval Feinstein (co-PI) University
of California, Los Angeles

Abstract Public opinion about the U.S. president and presidential policies
usually reflects basic social and ideological divisions related to e.g.,
partisanship, religion, education, income, age, sex, and race. Occasionally,
however, wars and security crises can boost a president's job approval rating.
This shift in political attitudes happens when an international conflict
situation causes people to experience higher levels of identification with the
nation. As a result, support for the commander-in-chief tends to cut across
fault lines that normally shape public attitudes. This study seeks an answer to
the following questions: How do international crisis that cause people to
identify more strongly with their nation affect people's emotional responses?
How do these emotions, in turn, affect people's attitudes toward the president
and foreign policy? To answer these questions, the project uses the
international turmoil around Iran's nuclear program as a case study. The
methodology relies on a survey-based experiment involving a representative
sample of adult American citizens. Participants are presented with different
vignettes in the survey that allow us to test whether nationalist priming
affects individuals' reactions to news about an international crisis situation,
and whether the way the conflict is framed affects people's responses.

Broader Impacts This study will contribute to the literature on nationalism, as
well as social movements and emotions. In addition, findings from this study may
help us understand the mechanisms through which national identification affects
political attitudes at individual and collective levels. This could shape
strategies used by various political interest groups.