* 1102650
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Investigation of Factors Controlling the Dynamics of Beach-Surface Moisture Content
* SBE,BCS
* 05/01/2011,04/30/2013
* Steven Namikas, Louisiana State University
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 04/30/2013
* USD 11,940.00

The spatial and temporal variability of beach surface moisture content is widely
recognized as a critical parameter affecting the operation of aeolian sediment
transport systems, and therefore represents a critical control on coastal dune
development over time. A number of recent studies have investigated the
variability of beach surface moisture content; however, a practical method to
model or simulate the considerable spatial and temporal variability in surface
moisture revealed by these studies remains elusive. This variability is
controlled by complex interactions between a suite of hydrological,
meteorological and sedimentary parameters that include precipitation,
groundwater flow, capillary transport, evaporation, condensation, soil texture,
and tidal oscillations. Accurate modeling of surface moisture content requires
more precise relationships describing the interactions between these controlling
parameters and their influence on beach surface moisture dynamics than are
currently available. The fundamental goal of this doctoral dissertation project
is to develop these relationships. In order to accomplish this objective, a
series of field and laboratory experiments will be conducted to monitor the
dynamics of surface moisture content in conjunction with fluctuations in these
controlling parameters. Field investigations for this study will be conducted at
Padre Island National Seashore, Texas to monitor the influence of the
controlling hydrological and meteorological parameters on the dynamics of
surface moisture content. Sediment texture has a profound influence on beach
hydrology and it is to be expected that the relative magnitudes and influences
of the key processes under investigation will vary at beaches with differing
sediment characteristics. Therefore, in order to enhance the applicability of
this study, a series of laboratory experiments will be conducted to document the
influence of sediment texture on surface moisture dynamics.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Results of this project will both broaden and deepen our
understanding of beach hydrology, specifically in relation to the spatial and
temporal dynamics of beach surface moisture content. This knowledge is vital to
improving our ability to forecast both short and long term dune recovery from
storm erosion. In addition, the basic understanding of surface moisture dynamics
resulting from this study will contribute to an extensive range of important
issues where surface moisture content has a significant impact, such as
ecosystem structure and development, environmental management applications,
global climate modeling and earth-atmosphere energy fluxes, and the terrestrial
hydrologic cycle. For example, this research has the potential to contribute to
enhancement of precipitation prediction associated with global climate change
models, as surface moisture dynamics has a profound effect on the development
local climatic circulation patterns. It may also contribute to the literature on
coastal water resource management issues. With increasing anthropogenic pressure
on coastal hydrological systems, proper knowledge and understanding of beach
hydrology is paramount to consideration of the dispersal of contaminants through
the soil matrix which is highly sensitive to the spatial and temporal dynamics
of moisture content.