* 1102088
* EAGER: Understanding the Role of Turbulent Eddy Composition in Stream Ecosystem Services: Application of in-situ PIV to Habitat Selection Studies
* ENG,CBET
* 05/01/2011,04/30/2012
* Hans Tritico, Youngstown State University
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 04/30/2012
* USD 30,080.00

Proposal Title: Understanding the Role of Turbulent Eddy Composition in Stream
Ecosystem Services: Application of in-situ PIV to Habitat Selection
Studies&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Principal Investigator: Hans
Tritico&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Institution: Youngstown state
University&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Proposal No:
1102088&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this EAGER proposal is
to demonstrate the applicability of in-situ particle image velocimetry (PIV)
technology to addressing fluid mechanics questions that are difficult to answer
in the laboratory. This applicability will be demonstrated by linking eddy
composition to fish habitat selection. Despite the ubiquity and importance of
turbulence in the fluvial environment, accurate measures of turbulent eddy
composition (eddy diameter, vorticity, and orientation) in rivers are lacking.
In-situ PIV extends laboratory particle image velocimetry to the field by using
synchronized portable laser and imaging systems. The result is a temporal series
of two-dimensional vector fields that can then be used to describe the size,
orientation, distribution, and rotational strength of eddies in a river. These
turbulent eddy metrics will be collected at locations where brown trout are
observed station holding in a river. The results will, for the first time,
describe the eddy characteristics of habitat selected by brown trout. The eddy
characteristics of trout habitat will be compared to regions not occupied by the
fish in order to also describe the habitat the fish are actively choosing
against. The benefits of this project will be: (1) demonstration of the
applicability of a new technology to fluvial research, (2) increased
understanding of the interaction between turbulence and fish habitat selection,
and (3) improved stream restoration designs that increase biodiversity. The
proposed work will provide researchers with a novel method for understanding
fluvial processes. While the specific process to be investigated is fish habitat
selection, the demonstrated method will be applicable to researchers interested
in fields as diverse as nutrient mixing, sediment transport, and turbulence
closure algorithms. This research will be conducted by researchers from
Youngstown State University, a primarily undergraduate institution (PUI), who
include the P.I., one undergraduate engineering student, one undergraduate
ecology student, and one Youngstown City high school student. In addition to the
objectives outlined above, this research will expose two undergraduate and one
high school student to interdisciplinary research opportunities in STEM
fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Bruce Hamilton&lt;br/&gt;Program
Director&lt;br/&gt;Environmental Sustainability&lt;br/&gt;10/16/10