* 1102316
* GOALI: Reliability Enhancement of Electric Drive Systems through Failure Prognosis and Fault Mitigation
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/15/2011,07/31/2016
* Elias Strangas, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 07/31/2016
* USD 478,164.00

Research Objectives and Approaches:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this
research is to develop a systematic approach to fault mitigation for improving
the reliability of electrical drives. The approach is to use data-driven and
model-based fault diagnosis and prognosis algorithms to determine the remaining
useful life of components and subsystems and to&lt;br/&gt;use this information
for accurate and timely failure mitigation for increased
system&lt;br/&gt;reliability.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
Merit:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of this research is the
development of signal processing and pattern recognition algorithms for compact
and discriminative fault signature extraction from sensor measurements, the
training and development of a stochastic prognosis model using these signatures
and the development of accurate&lt;br/&gt;reliability models for electric drives
incorporating this model.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The methodologies developed in this research will
have a broader impact on the design of electrical machines, power electronics
and controllers that employ redundancies. This research will have a great effect
on the US automotive industry as it migrates to hybrid and electric vehicles
where reliability is an overriding concern. The results of the proposed project
will be integrated into the curriculum in the form of design problems for the
senior capstone class and teaching modules on built-in redundancies of drives
and reliability to train the next generation of engineers who can work on hybrid
and electric vehicles. The collaboration between industry and Michigan State
University will offer summer internship opportunities for graduate students as
well as providing a forum for the PIs to share their findings with the
automotive engineering community.