* 1102143
* Diatom nanopore membrane devices for molecular transport and biomembrane studies
* ENG,ECCS
* 07/01/2011,06/30/2017
* Michael Goryll, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Usha Varshney
* 06/30/2017
* USD 388,000.00

Intellectual Merit: &lt;br/&gt;Nanopore membranes have become indispensible
tools for filtration. However, these membranes have several drawbacks. To
accomplish molecular separation, the nanopores have to be of the same size as
the molecules. If mechanical stability is to be maintained, such small nanopores
will be very long, significantly slowing down molecular transport. Nanopores
patterned using electron or ion beam lithography in silicon dioxide or silicon
nitride membranes have the benefit of having a well-controlled size and can be
controlled in thickness, however they are costly to manufacture. Biomineralized
structures, such as silica diatom shells, offer an alternative approach towards
nanopore membranes. Some species exhibit a narrow size distribution of nanopores
on the order of 40 nm while they can grow up to 200 µm in diameter. Diatom
shells have a hierarchical pore structure, stabilizing the nanopore membrane
with two sets of larger pores. Since they consist of silica, they are optically
transparent and can be functionalized using silane chemistry. In the proposed
project the possibility of using the silica diatom shells as nanomembranes in
microdevices will be explored. Using chemical pre-patterning of silicon dioxide
surfaces the diatom shells will be aligned to pre-defined structures on a wafer
scale, allowing to combine bottom-up and top-down device architectures. By
chemically functionalizing the silica nanopore surface, for example using Atomic
Layer Deposition, the molecular transport properties through the nanopores can
be tailored, allowing molecular separation studies. Furthermore, the pores
themselves can act as support structures for so-called nano-Bilayer Lipid
Membranes, which show an increase in lifetime by a factor of 30 on top-down
silicon nitride nanopores.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact:&lt;br/&gt;The
research will have a tremendous impact in the field of nanofluidic devices,
eventually replacing the track-etched nanopore membranes that are currently used
for filtration. Since the pore sizes are small and the pore length is short
without compromising the mechanical stability, faster diffusion of molecules is
expected. The expected lifetime improvement of nano-Bilayer Lipid Membranes will
have a transformational impact on the field ion channel reconstitution. The
interdisciplinary program targets to recruit and retain highly talented students
as well as underrepresented and minority students. Graduate students will be
educated to become future engineers by preparing them for the challenges that
lie ahead by involving them in the proposed research activities. Undergraduate
students will be engaged via the Undergraduate Research Initiative scholarship
program that has been established at ASU. In collaboration with the Down-to-
Earth Science (DES), an NSF-funded GK-12 track II project at Arizona State
University, the proposed project will offer a novel educational opportunity for
faculty and graduate students to share their research results with the K-12
community, providing a new thrust through the integration of cutting edge
research in nanotechnology into the secondary school curriculum. The research
component will be linked with an assessment plan, enabling feedback on the
effectiveness of the educational impact, enabling an improvement of the initial
teaching concepts.