* 1102841
* Experimental Particle Cosmology
* MPS,PHY
* 07/15/2011,06/30/2015
* Bernard Sadoulet, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* Jonathan Whitmore
* 06/30/2015
* USD 1,320,000.00

A broad range of cosmological observations tells us that about 85% of the matter
in the universe is not made of ordinary particles, but exists in some dark form.
Deciphering the nature of this dark matter is of fundamental importance to
cosmology, astrophysics, and particle physics. A leading hypothesis is that it
is comprised of Weakly Interacting Massive Particles, or WIMPs, that were
produced moments after the Big Bang. Such particles would represent an extension
of the Standard Model of particle physics, such as supersymmetry or additional
dimensions. If WIMPs exist and are the dark matter, then their presence in our
Milky Way may be detectable via scattering from atomic nuclei in a terrestrial
detector.

The Cryogenic Dark Matter Search (CDMS) Collaboration has pioneered the use of
low-temperature phonon-mediated devices to detect the rare scattering of WIMPs
on nuclei and to distinguish them from backgrounds. This award will provide
funds for the base program of UCB to support the scientific aspects of this
program in the following ways, fully coordinated with the CDMS collaboration:
(a) scientific support of the SuperCDMS Soudan experiment (monitoring of Soudan
operation, characterization of detector performance, reconstruction, and
analysis); (b) contribution to the design of SuperCDMS SNOLAB (proof of concept
of various detector configurations, detector testing, optimization of cold
hardware and electronics); and (c) scientific support to SuperCDMS SNOLAB
construction (SNOLAB production detector testing and characterization, cold
hardware design validation, optimization of analysis methods to maximize
efficiency).

Broader Impacts: This program's technological development will push the envelope
of phonon-mediated detectors, whose applications are increasingly widespread.
The project will contribute to the training of undergraduates, graduates, and
research scientists. A formal mentoring structure of the research scientists is
in place to help develop their scientific leadership and their career.
Furthermore, within the SuperCDMS collaboration, the PI will continue to support
the public outreach program at Soudan. At Berkeley, he will continue his support
of Bay Area high school students from underserved communities through his
successful contribution to the SMASH academy.