* 1102585
* RUI: Beyond the Standard Model: Model Building and Phenomenology
* MPS,PHY
* 10/01/2011,09/30/2015
* Tonnis Ter Veldhuis, Macalester College
* Continuing Grant
* Keith Dienes
* 09/30/2015
* USD 90,000.00

This RUI award funds the research activities of Professor Tonnis ter Veldhuis at
Macalester College. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The start of Large Hadron Collider
(LHC) operations promises a wealth of new experimental data in the near future.
This data is expected to contain important clues that will guide physicists in
their quest to solve the puzzle of how Nature functions at ever-smaller scales.
The objective of this research program is to design ways in which this new data
can be used in order to test and further develop physical theories that have
been constructed to explain how elementary particles obtain their mass. The
class of theories to be considered includes those that employ supersymmetry, a
new symmetry hypothesized to exist in order to explain how large differences in
physical scales can be stable in the presence of quantum
corrections.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Parts of this RUI research program will be
carried out in collaboration with students at Macalester College. The project
will therefore create significant research training in the field of particle
physics for undergraduate students. Through their research experience,
participating students will develop a toolbox of valuable research skills that
are widely applicable, and in particular form an excellent foundation to further
pursue a career in theoretical or experimental particle physics in graduate
school. The project thus serves as a model for the integration of teaching and
research in the environment of a physics and astronomy department at a liberal
arts college.