* 1102357
* A Novel Underwater Acoustic Communications Paradigm Exploiting Biological Sounds
* ENG,ECCS
* 06/15/2011,05/31/2015
* Tolga Duman, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* chengshan xiao
* 05/31/2015
* USD 380,000.00

The objective of this research is to develop a novel integrative framework for
advancing state-of-the-art in biomimetic signal design, underwater acoustic
communications, and underwater channel modeling and processing. The challenges
brought upon by the highly-distortive nature of underwater sound propagation,
such as extended multipath spread, frequency-dependent path loss, and Doppler
scale and nonlinear phase changes, are addressed non-invasively by utilizing
marine mammal sounds that match the propagation environment. The proposed
approach is to develop signal models with time-varying signatures to represent
characteristic mammal sounds, design a digital communications system with
channel-matched biomimetic transmission signals, characterize the underwater
channel and estimate nonlinearly-changing dynamic parameters, and perform
information theoretic analysis and optimal channel code
design.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Transformative research emerging from integrating
the use of biomimetic signals with underwater environment matched processing
techniques is expected to set up set the groundwork for revolutionary advances
in underwater acoustic communications. These advances will directly impact
development of new communications products with applications in scientific
research, ocean geology, ecology, diving safety, and maritime archeology. The
technology will also impact covert underwater acoustic communications for
defense, environmental monitoring or oil exploration applications.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will have broader impacts on scientific
underwater research as it can affect future scientific discoveries and their
consequential benefits to society. Furthermore, through the integration of
research and education, curriculum innovations will be advanced, including an
educational toolbox with web-based exercises and demonstrations offering
research opportunities for undergraduate students through senior design and
honors projects and providing an avenue for minority and outreach activities.