* 1102634
* Convergence Questions in Ergodic Theory
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2015
* Mate Wierdl, University of Memphis
* Continuing Grant
* Bruce P. Palka
* 08/31/2015
* USD 121,579.00

This research project consists of two parts: almost everywhere convergence along
subsequences and multiple averages. In the first part, the theory of Hardy
fields is used to describe good sequences of measurements. Based on two decades
of previous work, it has become clear that a complete characterization of good
sequences in terms of Hardy fields will be possible - quite a surprising
development in almost everywhere questions. The second part deals with multiple
ergodic averages. It is suggested that complete characterizations of good
sequences for mean convergence and recurrence are possible in terms of Hardy
fields. Random modeling of sequences is also
investigated.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The mathematical impact of the
work on almost everywhere convergence is on Fourier analysis and number theory.
The Fourier analysis connection is related to the work of Magyar, Stein, Wainger
and others. The number theory connection is with bases of the integers. The
mathematical impact of the work on multiple averages is in additive
combinatorics: problems related to Szemerédi's theorem. Each of these
mathematical connections have been established previously by the PI. As with
most theoretical mathematical work, it is difficult to predict the impact on
other sciences and other activities of humanity. But quite pleasingly, the
proposer has already found some connections in physics and computer (hardware)
security. His collaborations in the foundation of thermodynamics and in hardware
security have come about because of work on subsequence ergodic questions. It is
also important to note that the connection between the project's activitiy and
other parts mathematics has led to some important educational insights into how
to teach and view some basic mathematical theories.