* 1102192
* Fundamental Studies of Efficiency Droop in III-Nitride Solid-State Lighting Devices
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/2011,07/31/2016
* Shaikh Ahmed, Southern Illinois University at Carbondale
* Standard Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 07/31/2016
* USD 252,329.00

The objective of this research is to computationally investigate i) how
efficiency droop and color degradation in III-nitride solid-state lighting (SSL)
devices are governed by an intricate interplay of crystal atomicity, built-in
structural fields, and charge and phonon transport processes, and ii) how tuning
the basic physical properties at nanoscale can create transformative solution
paths. The multiscale numerical approach is built primarily upon i) a massively
parallel molecular dynamics code for obtaining structural relaxation and phonon
modes, ii) atomistic tight-binding models to calculate exciton and optical
spectra, and iii) a quantum-corrected 3-D Monte Carlo transport solver. ab
initio methods and available experimental data will be used for parameterization
and model bandstructure calculations.&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: The research
bridges the gap between continuum system and ab initio material modeling
paradigms and will suggest design optimization routes by simulating
realistically-sized devices containing &gt;100 million atoms, which can
subsequently be used by experimentalists to manufacture the device. The
simulator will exploit computing capability and assess reliability of petascale
clusters, use novel, memory-miserly, and fast algorithms, and incorporate state-
of-the-art software design approaches.&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: SSL has the
potential, by 2025, to decrease electricity consumed by lighting by &gt;50%, cut
~28 million metric tons of carbon emission annually, and benefit general
illumination, transportation, communication, automobiles, imaging, agriculture,
and medicine. SSL will revolutionize semiconductor market and can reestablish
U.S. manufacturing leadership. A free version of the simulator and tutorials
will be deployed on nanoHUB.org. Findings of the research will be integrated
into both undergraduate and graduate courses.