* 1102711
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant: Subsistence and Specialization in the Inland Niger Delta, Mali
* SBE,BCS
* 02/01/2011,01/31/2013
* Abigail Smith, Washington University
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 01/31/2013
* USD 15,600.00

Under the direction of Dr. Fiona Marshall, Ms Abigail Smith will collect data
for her doctoral dissertation. She will investigate the interrelationship
between mobile pastoral groups and urban populations in the past, focusing on
the site of Jenné-jeno and its surrounding landscape. Jenné-jeno, occupied ca.
250 BCE to CE 1400, is one of Africa's earliest known urban centers. Its
location in the extremely fertile floodplains of the Inland Niger Delta, Mali,
allowed the site to grow rapidly and enabled occupants to forge trade links with
regional populations, eventually becoming a vital cog in the emerging trans-
Saharan trade.

Pastoral populations have a long history in Africa and continue to be an
important part of modern African society. Very little, however, is known about
the relationships between pastoral peoples and their sedentary neighbors in the
past. In West Africa, pastoral trajectories are particularly unclear. With this
dearth of information in mind, this project uses excavation, faunal,
archaeobotanical, geoarchaeological, and isotopic analysis to identify the
presence of mobile pastoral herds in the area around Jenné-jeno. The study
places these herds in broader context by investigating the nature of subsistence
at the sites throughout the long period of occupation. A major question is
whether domestic herds were moved seasonally out of the delta by mobile
pastoralists, as they are today, or kept year-round by a sedentary urban
population.

This project is the first large-scale excavation of smaller sites in the Jenné-
jeno area and will provide important information about local variability and the
scale of occupation through time. As the first excavation in the area focusing
on subsistence and specialization, this project will provide empirical data
about the trajectories of West African pastoralism and agriculture. The
information will enable discussion of the role of pastoral populations in the
Jenné-jeno urban system, which will increase understanding of Jenné-jeno's
intergroup interactions and political organization. Given the unique
trajectories of African food production when compared to other world areas, this
project could also be an important contribution to our understanding of
variability in global pastoral strategies and mobile-sedentary interactions.
Along with studies in other world areas this information will help to move
theoretical models of mobile-sedentary interactions beyond Near Eastern
configurations that too often are misapplied to other world areas.

By working with several local students and Malian archaeologists, this project
will forge connections between US and Malian scholars and enable the
dissemination of specialized archaeological skills and methods. Furthermore,
archaeological investigations that engage the local populace are a critical
means of preserving Mali's archaeological heritage. Looting of archaeological
sites for glass beads, terra cotta figurines, and ceramics is a major obstacle
to Mali's efforts to understand and preserve its cultural patrimony. Combined
efforts by local and international archaeologists, Mali's Ministry of Culture,
and the Malian people are making great strides, but continued support by
international scholars is vital in this endeavor. Even small projects like this
one that hire local workers, engage local students, and endeavor to make
information from the research available to and interesting for a nonacademic
public can have a significant impact. Finally, by focusing on subsistence and
interactions, this project will be of potential use to development projects
working with Mali's vast agricultural population. People have thrived in the
semi-arid environment of the Sahel for millennia, and the archaeological record
has the potential to show how strategies and interactions shifted in the face of
various climatic, epidemiological, cultural, and political changes, providing
instructive information for the modern era.