* 1102178
* Adaptive Control Based on the Use of Collective Information from Multiple Models
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2014
* Kumpati Narendra, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 08/31/2014
* USD 348,201.00

Intellectual Merit:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of the proposal is to
develop mathematical theory of decision making under uncertainty based on
multiple models. How the different views should be combined to arrive at
decisions rapidly and accurately at any instant is addressed. Past efforts were
based on having a sufficiently large number of experts and basing the current
decision on the one proven most successful in the short term. In contrast to
such approaches, the proposal deals with novel procedures, in which the
decisions of all the experts are weighted to choose the action at any instant.
The weights, in turn, depend upon the recent short term performance of all the
participants. Simulation studies have indicated that the new approach results in
significantly faster and more accurate decisions, and that the latter are more
robust even under rapidly changing environments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The methodology investigated in the proposal will
be applicable to a very large class of problems. In particular, the new
technique will find application in Cyber-Physical systems in which vast amounts
of data are collected by numerous sensors, and networking problems in which
distributed decision makers have to make critical choices in real time. The
results obtained from the investigations will be widely disseminated by the PI
and his co-workers in national and international conference, and in specialized
workshops held at Yale. More importantly, undergraduates will be trained by the
PI, both during the academic year and during the summers, in the mathematical
foundations of the approach as well as in their application to practical
problems.