* 1102525
* A Systematic Survey of Dual Supermassive Black Holes as a Signpost for Galaxy Evolution
* MPS,AST
* 06/01/2011,05/31/2014
* Julia Comerford, Comerford               Julia
* Fellowship Award
* Harshal Gupta
* 05/31/2014
* USD 191,632.00

Dr. Julia Comerford is awarded an NSF Astronomy and Astrophysics Postdoctoral
Fellowship to carry out a program of research and education at the University of
Texas at Austin. A wealth of observations have shown that galaxy mergers are
common and that nearly all galaxies host a central supermassive black hole
(SMBH); consequently, some galaxies must host two SMBHs as the result of recent
mergers. The two SMBHs are known as "dual SMBHs" for the first ~100 Myr after
the merger when they are at separations >1 kpc. These dual SMBHs have
significant potential as probes of galaxy evolution, as they are observational
tracers of galaxy mergers, the role of active galactic nuclei (AGN) in galaxy
mergers, and SMBH mergers. However, the full potential of dual SMBHs for studies
of these topics has not yet been realized, due to the small number of known
dual-SMBH systems. Dr. Comerford proposes to use optical spectroscopy to
increase the number of known dual SMBHs several folds and build a statistical
catalog of 0 < z < 2 dual SMBHs. She will use her dual-SMBH catalog to constrain
the galaxy merger rate, mechanisms for AGN fueling and feedback in galaxy
mergers, and the number of SMBH mergers that should be detected by future
gravitational-wave experiments such as the Laser Interferometer Space Antenna
(LISA).

Dr. Comerford will also teach science communication workshops for astronomy
undergraduates to increase the students' effectiveness in communicating to the
general public and to the astronomical community. Undergraduate workshop
participants will share their research experiences with minority high school
students at Eastside Memorial High School in Austin. In addition, to extend the
development of scientific communication skills beyond Austin, Dr. Comerford will
initiate an annual one-day Undergraduate Research Symposium for astronomy majors
from the University of Texas at Austin, Texas A&M University and Rice
University.