* 1102123
* Dynamic Power Amplifier Architectures for High Average Efficiencies
* ENG,ECCS
* 05/01/2011,04/30/2014
* Sudhakar Pamarti, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* GEORGE HADDAD
* 04/30/2014
* USD 359,714.00

The objective of the research is to reduce the power consumption of wireless
transmitters by improving power amplifier (PA) efficiency. The approach is to
use dynamic reconfiguration of power amplifier circuit components in conjunction
with sophisticated digital signal processing algorithms to ensure that power
efficiency does not degrade significantly while generating modulated radio
frequency signals.

The intellectual merit of the research is that it presents a promising,
radically different approach that recognizes the need to employ digital signal
processing techniques to solve longstanding problems in power amplifier design.
Realization of digital signal processing techniques in power amplifier design
allows the creation of architectures that operate the power amplifier always in
near optimum efficiency mode. The attendant dynamic range limitations are
overcome by using signal processing algorithms. The approach is very suitable
for monolithic integration in very fine fabrication processes.

The broader impacts of the project are at least three fold. First, the research
activity addresses the problem of building power efficient wireless transmitters
that is crucial to the growth of communication systems in particular and the
electronics industry in general. Second, reducing wireless radio power
consumption contributes to the growing efforts to lowering our energy footprint.
Third, the research activity will be useful in training future circuit designers
in the fundamental interplay between circuit design, signal processing, and
electromagnetics, thereby preparing them to better face the immediate challenges
of circuit design, and to adapt to the impending evolution of integrated
circuits from microelectronics into newer technologies.