* 1102978
* Framing Policy Debates in the European Union
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/2011,07/31/2014
* Frank Baumgartner, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Brian Humes
* 07/31/2014
* USD 300,000.00

This project is a large-scale study of the framing of political argumentation by
interest groups involved in policymaking in the European Union. It makes use of
new automated techniques to identify frames in policy debates surrounding 120
issues. The investigators coordinate with a large team of scholars
simultaneously conducting interviews and fieldwork associated with these same
issues, thus contributing to a large and growing infrastructure for the study of
policy processes and the roles of civil society organization in the European
Union. The larger project addresses issues of the democratic nature of debate
and the relative impacts of nation-states, civil society organizations, and
business in shaping policy decisions in the world's largest new political
system. The focus of this proposal is on the application of tools and the
development of an infrastructure that will allow the analysis of the choice and
effectiveness of arguments by interest groups seeking to affect policy outcomes.
This focus on framing contributes to the larger collaboration but constitutes a
coherent stand-alone project. All of the documents collected will be made
available on-line as a resource for other scholars of public policy to download
and analyze in order to answer a broad range of theoretical
questions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project makes the literature on framing more
systematic, quantitative, and rigorous. More importantly, it uses a framing
approach to understand a number of substantively and conceptually important
questions: What are the roots of policy stability? Are those roots based in
shared policy perspectives that become predominant within professional
communities, or are they due to institutional structures? How do models of
policy negotiation and compromise work within uni- and multi-dimensional policy
spaces? Are most issues debated in the policy process unidimensional or do they
have multiple dimensions of active engagement by the stakeholders involved? Can
one understand policy change with greater focus on argumentation and framing?
Can one predict and understand movement in offical positions on a policy debate
with reference to the arguments put forward by advocates during the policy
process? Do material resources, network structures, group type, or alliance with
national governments affect the success of interest groups in promoting their
preferred arguments with official policy statements?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project seeks to enhance the study of framing and policy processes by initiating
a large and rigorous automated content analysis study of political argumentation
focused on the European Union in collaboration with a network of European
scholars conducting parallel research on the same issues. This project enhances
the study of policymaking through the development of new tools of automated text
analysis to generate important empirical findings about the dimensionality of
debate across a sample of policy issues and the abilities of interest groups and
government advocates to affect policy debates through framing. These techniques
and insights will provide a basis for further research on framing in the United
States and other political systems. This project will train a number of
undergraduate and graduate students and create a public web-based resource for
the continued study of democratic decision-making in the European Union and
systematic research on political argumentation more generally.