* 1102475
* Conference: International Conference on Biochemical and Molecular Engineering, Seattle, WA, June 26-29, 2011
* ENG,CBET
* 05/01/2011,04/30/2012
* Costas Maranas, Engineering Conferences International, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Friedrich Srienc
* 04/30/2012
* USD 25,000.00

This NSF award by the Biotechnology, Biochemical and Biomass Engineering program
supports the participation of US investigators and graduate students in the 17th
International Conference on Biochemical and Molecular Engineering (BME XVII) to
be held in Seattle, WA from June 26-29, 2011. The conference is organized under
the aegis of Engineering Conferences International (the successor program to
United Engineering Foundation Conferences program). The chairpersons are Costas
Maranas (Penn State), Francois Baneyx (University of Washington), and and Beth
Junker (Merck).&lt;br/&gt; Intellectual Merit &lt;br/&gt;The Biochemical
Engineering Conference is one of first among several conference series related
to biotechnology sponsored by the Engineering Foundation (now ECI). Biochemical
Engineering, which started in 1978, continues to be the preeminent venue for
discussing research at the cutting edge of this diverse and rapidly expanding
field. The 2011 meeting adopts the new title of ?Biochemical and Molecular
Engineering? to emphasize the increasingly important role that molecular-level
thinking and techniques play in the research of the biochemical engineering
community. The conference will bring together established researchers, young
investigators, private sector scientists and engineers as well as graduate
students to assess the present and chart the future of the ever-changing field
of biochemical and molecular engineering. In a series of plenary presentations,
oral sessions, and poster sessions, BME XVII will explore a number of emerging
and established subjects with a small conference atmosphere that enables high-
level discussion and participation. The focus of the conference will be on
research at the cutting-edge of biotechnology including biomolecular design, the
nano-bio interface, biofuels, and bioremediation, vaccine engineering,
nanotechnology, metabolic engineering, biomolecular networks, and stem cell
differentiation in combination with core areas of biochemical engineering
(protein engineering, process development, and scale up).
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact &lt;br/&gt;Biochemical and Molecular
Engineering XVII will provide comprehensive coverage of present challenges and
future directions in biochemical and molecular engineering. Sessions span a
broad range of topics across the biotechnology field including molecular design
and display, the cell-materials interface, biofuels and bioenergy, vaccines,
nanotechnology, metabolic engineering, biochemical networks, and stem cell
bioengineering in combination with core areas of biochemical engineering
(protein stability and engineering, vaccine design, process development, and
scale up). Organizers anticipate that the conference will have a profound impact
on the future direction of biotechnology. The resulting cross-fertilization of
ideas facilitated by the close proximity of participants from many countries
will enrich and strengthen the discipline as a whole. &lt;br/&gt;NSF support
will help ensure the success of the meeting by partially defraying conference
costs for select US academic scientists and engineers with an emphasis on
underrepresented groups and graduate students. In the absence of NSF support,
many US academic scientists and graduate students would not be able to attend
and benefit from interactions with the international community of biotechnology
researchers. Many of these researchers and graduate students are currently
funded by the National Science Foundation. Participation in the meeting will
enhance and help advertise their NSF supported work.