* 1102213
* Towards Integrated Noise Thermometry and Its Applications to Embedded Temperature measurements
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2011,01/31/2017
* Degang Chen, Iowa State University
* Continuing Grant
* Jenshan Lin
* 01/31/2017
* USD 359,998.00

The objective of this research is to develop an integrated solution to low-cost
Johnson noise thermometers (JNT) with significantly faster speed than currently
available, and to demonstrate its practical application to on-chip temperature
measurement. The approach is to follow the same Nyquist noise principle that
enabled other primary JNTs, but to focus on the most widely used industrial
temperature range over which sensitivity and bandwidth requirements are
drastically relaxed, and to reduce measurement time from hours to milliseconds
for practical use by integrating several innovative circuit design and digital
signal processing techniques.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary intellectual
merit of the research is in developing the first practical integrated solution
to JNTs. A further intellectual merit is in providing an accurate and inherently
linear temperature sensor and/or sensor reference for embedded applications.
Other intellectual merits include novel circuit design techniques for
eliminating speed bottlenecks in primary JNTs, and sampling and post-processing
techniques for significantly reducing measurement errors. Finally, this research
introduces a new on-chip multi-temperature self-calibration scheme for other
embedded temperature sensors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;An immediate broader impact
of the research is the wide applicability of the integrated thermometer in
science, industry and everyday uses. The new technology also has a high
probability of being adopted by industry and creating a direct economic impact.
Targeted approaches are planned to facilitate recruiting and training of female
and minority students. Several noise and temperature measurement techniques and
laboratory experiments will be incorporated into undergraduate courses. Finally,
nontraditional dissemination activities will further broaden the project's
impact.