* 1102540
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: The Social Organization of Suburban Poverty
* SBE,SES
* 05/15/2011,04/30/2013
* Alexandra Murphy, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Patricia White
* 04/30/2013
* USD 9,840.00

SES-1103116&lt;br/&gt;Mitchell Duneier&lt;br/&gt;Alexandra
Murphy&lt;br/&gt;Princeton University&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This ethnographic
community study seeks to move beyond existing economic and demographic
descriptive snapshots of the new suburban poverty phenomenon. Using Penn Hills,
PA, a Pittsburgh suburb, as a case-study, three primary questions guide this
research: (1) How is poverty socially organized and what is everyday life like
for the suburban poor?; (2) How is the social and economic life of the wider
community organized around poverty in the suburbs?; and (3) To what extent are
these suburban neighborhoods economically, politically, and socially isolated
from broader metropolitan networks? The focus is on African American poverty.
Suburbs do not feature many of the neighborhood characteristics observed to be
important in shaping the lives of the urban poor (e.g. public space and the
presence of antipoverty organizations). Given these significant differences, one
cannot assume that what is known about urban poverty will translate to the
suburbs. This research builds upon existing theories of urban sociology by
taking questions asked of urban poverty to the suburbs. In doing so, the
researchers are interested in three different suburban actors: (1) poor
residents, (2) institutions, and (3) local government. With respect to poor
residents what do differences in the suburban built environment mean for three
features of daily life important to the poor: (1) the creation of networks and
subsistence strategies, (2) access to antipoverty organizations, and (3)
neighborhood social control. To better measure the political and economic
location of the suburb in the broader metropolitan ecology the study will also
research a wide range of suburban institutions (churches, business, schools, and
community organizations) and the municipal government. The study?s focus is on
the challenges that poverty places on these institutions and the resources and
networks they use to meet these challenges. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impact: By being one of the first ethnographic studies of the new suburban
poverty, this research will be a critical component of what will surely be a
rising field of social science scholarship across disciplines: suburban poverty.
The research will also shed significant light on existing urban poverty research
and debates by refining the particular built environment and institutional
factors that uniquely shape urban versus suburban poverty. Further, by
publishing and presenting findings in academic and public forums, this research
will make important public policy contributions. It has been argued that
suburban poverty exists in a ?policy blind spot.? We may only begin to address
the problems of suburban poverty adequately if we understand what life is like
for the suburban poor. By working to understand these dimensions of suburban
poverty this research will help us to understand the ways in which current
policies are not useful for the suburban poor, identify gaps in local, state,
and federal policies, illuminate various stakeholders and suburban
particularities around which policies should be shaped, and help us to craft
tools appropriate to the contours of the lived realities of the poor in these
places.