* 1102845
* Measurements of High-Mass Black Holes Through Stellar and Gas Dynamical Modeling
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2014
* Jonelle Walsh, Walsh                   Jonelle        L
* Fellowship Award
* Harshal Gupta
* 08/31/2014
* USD 251,000.00

Dr. Jonelle Walsh is awarded an NSF Astronomy and Astrophysics Postdoctoral
Fellowship to carry out a program of research and education at the University of
Texas (UT)-Austin. A major achievement for the field of extragalactic astronomy
over the past decade has been the detection of supermassive black holes in the
centers of nearby galaxies, and the discovery of correlations between the black
hole mass and properties of the host galaxy bulge. About 50 black hole mass
measurements have been made to date, most often through the dynamical modeling
of stars or nuclear gas disks. While the black hole mass - host galaxy bulge
correlations have been clearly established, the determination of the true shape
and scatter of the relationships is an evolving process that will continue to
change with advances in both observational and modeling techniques.

Dr. Walsh proposes to investigate and quantify the biases in both stellar and
gas dynamical methods through the re-evaluation of existing measurements, and to
make new mass measurements with the aim of addressing uncertainties associated
with certain supermassive black hole demographics. She will focus on three
projects: (1) determining the biases in previous stellar dynamical black hole
mass measurements that neglected to model the dark matter halo's contribution to
the gravitational potential, (2) revising gas dynamical black hole mass
measurements previously made using the Hubble Space Telescope (HST) Faint Object
Spectrograph by acquiring much higher quality data and applying a more
comprehensive analysis, and (3) increasing the number of black hole mass
measurements at the high-end of the black hole mass - host galaxy bulge
relationships. In order to carry out her research, Dr. Walsh will obtain high-
resolution observations with integral field spectrographs assisted by adaptive
optics and with the HST Space Telescope Imaging Spectrograph. She will also
acquire large-scale observations using the unique instrument VIRUS-P on the 2.7m
telescope at the McDonald Observatory.

Dr. Walsh will also develop an interactive video conference program on black
holes specifically aimed at high-school students. The new educational content
will be integrated into the existing "Live from McDonald Observatory!" program
run by the McDonald Observatory. These live video conferences allow students to
take a virtual field trip to the observatory, and include tours of the
observatory, hands-on activities that encourage the exploration of a science
topic, and science demonstrations. Dr. Walsh will develop pre- and post-
conference activities that will focus on the fundamental properties of black
holes and the nature of active galactic nuclei. She will participate in the
production of the video conference either remotely from UT Austin or through a
pre-recorded portion. The materials and activities that she develops for the
program will also be available for other UT Austin scientists to bring to high-
school classrooms. Last year, the observatory connected with over 150 schools
and reached thousands of students. Hispanics and African Americans account for a
majority of the enrollment in Texas public schools, and over half of the
students in the public school system are classified as economically
disadvantaged. Therefore, the video conferences will reach a large number of
students from underrepresented groups.