* 1102527
* Kinetic Structure, Stability, and Dynamics of Current Sheets in Magnetospheric Plasmas
* GEO,AGS
* 07/15/2011,06/30/2014
* Martin Goldman, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* Rachel Walker-Kulzick
* 06/30/2014
* USD 420,000.00

This project will develop and employ a new class of current sheet equilibria in
Earth's magnetosphere. These equilibria will be analytic solutions and can be
used initiate dynamical studies of their time evolution using particle-in-cell
(PIC) kinetic simulations of the plasma. Among the issues that will be addressed
are the following: Can the many observed current sheet configurations in Earth's
magnetosphere be modeled by the stable members of this new class of equilibria?
How sensitive is undriven (spontaneous) reconnection to initial conditions? What
are the underlying instabilities which destabilize current sheets? How is
magnetic reconnection triggered in Earth's magnetotail? How well can the
initiation of asymmetric reconnection at Earth's magnetopause be modeled by the
new equilibria? How well can the new equilibria model transient reconnection
onset in the magnetotail? The PIC simulations in two and three dimensions will
determine the stability of these diverse kinetic equilibria against a variety of
plasma processes including tearing, lower hybrid drift and other instabilities.
In addition, preliminary results have demonstrated that non-equilibrium initial
conditions can lead to self-generated current sheets. The investigation of how
non-equilibrium conditions can evolve toward an equilibrium condition will
improve our understanding of the dynamics of the
magnetosphere.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research has relevance to many different
fields of plasma physics. Even within the main focus of magnetospheric physics
the research will have diverse impacts. It will provide novel asymmetric kinetic
current sheet equilibria for simulations of reconnection at the magnetopause as
well as symmetric equilibria for a wider class of simulations of reconnection in
the magnetotail and magnetosheath. Furthermore, it can contribute to our
understanding of the many broad stable current sheets which have been observed
in the magnetosphere and which cannot be modeled as Harris current sheet
equilibria. Its potential impact extends to all plasma domains where
collisionless magnetic reconnection occurs: to the magnetosphere, to the solar
wind, to the solar corona, to laboratory reconnection experiments and to
toroidal magnetic fusion devices in which "sawtooth" instabilities which inhibit
confinement and heating are believed to involve reconnection. The project will
also have an educational impact through the training of a graduate student in
plasma theory, simulations, and data visualization.