* 1102791
* Star Formation in the Extreme Environments of Milky Way Massive Star Clusters
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2014
* Jessica Lu, Lu                      Jessica        R
* Fellowship Award
* Joan Schmelz
* 08/31/2014
* USD 170,000.00

Dr. Jessica Lu is awarded an NSF Astronomy and Astrophysics Postdoctoral
Fellowship to carry out a program of research and education at the University of
Hawaii Institute for Astronomy (IfA). Dr. Lu will study young Milky Way star
clusters that are more massive than most well-studied nearby star forming
regions, like Orion and Taurus, in an effort to understand whether star
formation differs in these more extreme environments. Study of such regions will
advance our understanding of star formation not only in our own Galaxy, but in
other galaxies and to higher redshift where such extreme environments are much
more common. High spatial resolution near-infrared observations will be used to
penetrate the dust and gas that obscures these distant and embedded clusters and
resolve individual stars in the dense cluster cores. Precision astrometric
measurements of the stars over a 1-2 year time baseline will enable individual
cluster members to be distinguished from the sea of contaminating field stars.
Furthermore, extending the time-baseline for existing astrometric observations
of one cluster in the W51 molecular cloud will allow me to measure the internal
kinematics of the cluster. This will provide an estimate of the total cluster
mass, constrain the dissipation timescale of the cluster, enable a search for
kinematic sub-structure as evidence for dissolving sub-clusters, and reveal the
importance of competitive accretion between stars as they move through their
parent molecular cloud.

Dr. Lu will also address education, outreach, and diversity on two fronts.
First, the PI will broaden current and future astronomy teachers' exposure to
inquiry-based teaching methods at IfA by developing and offering teacher
training for several inquiry-based introductory astronomy labs. The PI plans to
work with willing faculty to review their curriculum in order to find suitable
points at which an inquiry-based activity could be incorporated. Second, the PI
will advise individual students from minority or under-represented sectors in
scientific research projects during the IfA's Research Experience for
Undergraduates summer program. With these projects, the PI aims to bridge the
gap between the smaller community focused on astronomy education research and
diversity issues and the larger community of astronomers who teach, but do not
follow education research in depth.