* 1102301
* Plasmonic devices for controlling light at the nanoscale
* ENG,ECCS
* 06/01/2011,05/31/2016
* Georgios Veronis, Louisiana State University
* Standard Grant
* Mahmoud Fallahi
* 05/31/2016
* USD 240,000.00

The objective of this program is to develop new plasmonic structures and devices
for manipulating light and enhancing light-matter interactions at the nanoscale
through the excitation of subwavelength plasmonic modes for device applications
in sensing, switching, and photovoltaics. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual
merit is to greatly advance the state of the art of nanoplasmonics by exploring
nanoscale plasmonic structures and devices for enhancement of nonlinear optical
effects, all-optical absorption switches, ultra-compact sensors, and plasmon-
enhanced thin-film photovoltaic solar cells. The proposed research is
potentially transformative, since the results of the program may lead to new
opportunities for device applications, which will represent important
breakthroughs in integrated optics, optical information processing, and
renewable energy sources. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts are
fundamental breakthroughs in photonics science and engineering, a field which
profoundly influences the quality of human life. This program will also provide
excellent training opportunities for two graduate students. In addition, as part
of the efforts on outreach and education, a new course on nanophotonics will be
introduced in which numerical codes will be used to deepen the students?
understanding of the basic physics of nanophotonic devices. Special focus will
also be placed on incorporating undergraduate students into the research
program, as well as on outreach to the local communities, and on recruiting
minority graduate students to work on this program.