* 1102179
* Electrical Control of Droplet Direction for Coalescence of Multiple Nano-liter Droplets
* ENG,ECCS
* 05/01/2011,04/30/2014
* Eun Kim, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Mona Zaghloul
* 04/30/2014
* USD 350,000.00

The objective of this research is to establish the technology for electrical
control of droplet-ejection direction for coalescence of multiple directionally-
ejected droplets (up to 21) in air. Coalescence of such a large number of
nanoliter droplets midair is unprecedented, and is transformative as it enables
midair micromixing, synthesis, analysis, etc. Fundamental studies will be
performed to elucidate the underlying physics of directional droplet ejections
by a focused acoustic beam, to eject nanoliter droplets with electrically
controllable directions, and to merge a large number of ejected droplets in air.
&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit is in the electrical controllability of the
direction in which the droplets are ejected, its usage in merging
simultaneously-ejected droplets in air, and the novel applications of the midair
coalescence. The electrical controllability of the droplet direction will allow
fine control of the direction, droplet-coalescence, and ensuing event after the
coalescence. Array of multi-directional droplet ejectors capable of varying
their ejection direction over a wide angle will be developed and used for
automated screening of protein crystallization.&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts
are on cell separation and/or lysis, protein synthesis and/or crystallization,
complex combinatory analyses at high throughput and great precision, etc. The
results of the proposed fundamental studies will be incorporated into the
interdisciplinary curriculum at the investigators' institution. Also, several
undergraduate students, particularly from underrepresented groups, will be
included in the research. Moreover, local inner-city high schools in south Los
Angeles will be offered some droplet ejectors with which the high school
students can experiment in their science labs.