* 1102801
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Determining the Phasing of Southern Laurentide Ice-Sheet Retreat and Deglacial Climate Forcings using Cosmogenic Radionuclide Dating
* SBE,BCS
* 05/01/2011,04/30/2014
* Anders Carlson, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 04/30/2014
* USD 12,000.00

This study will improve the retreat chronology of the southern Laurentide Ice
Sheet (LIS) in Wisconsin by measuring in-situ cosmogenic nuclides on glacially
deposited boulders from terminal and recessional ice marginal deposits. Sample
locations will span a range of climate settings and glacial bed conditions. The
proposed research will address two hypotheses. (1) Initial ice margin retreat in
Wisconsin was synchronous with the rest of the southern LIS. (2) Increasing
boreal summer insolation forced LIS deglaciation. Determining the phasing of
ice-sheet retreat relative to changes in insolation, atmospheric greenhouse
gases, and global climate is important to understanding the mechanisms that give
rise to deglaciations. The leading hypothesis for the forcing of deglaciations
is that increasing Northern Hemisphere summer insolation initiates ice-sheet
retreat and deglaciation. Alternatively, tropical sea surface temperatures and
atmospheric carbon dioxide may lead portions of ice-sheet retreat, implicating
them as the driver of deglaciation. Key to discerning between these deglacial-
forcing hypotheses is a precise Northern Hemisphere ice-sheet margin chronology.
Of the Northern Hemisphere ice sheets, the southern LIS descended to the lowest
latitude and should have had the highest climate sensitivity. It is thus an
ideal location to study the mechanisms driving initial ice retreat. Despite over
40 years of chronologic research, however, the southern LIS chronology remains
incomplete. While the LIS retreat chronology is fairly well constrained in Iowa,
Illinois, Indiana, Ohio, and New England, a substantial gap in the chronology of
initial deglaciation exists in Wisconsin where permafrost conditions at the Last
Glacial Maximum preclude the use of traditional radiocarbon dating methods.

This new dataset will identify the timing of LIS retreat from terminal moraines
in Wisconsin and fill a gap in the southern LIS deglacial chronology. Dates will
be compared with other parts of the southern LIS margin chronology, deglacial
climate forcings and climate model simulations to determine the major triggers
of Northern Hemisphere deglaciation. Broader impacts include support of the
doctoral research and education of Ph.D. candidate David Ullman at the
University of Wisconsin-Madison along with the education of undergraduate
students in the field and the laboratory, introducing them to the fields of
glacial geomorphology, paleoclimatology, geochronology, paleogeography and
geochemistry. Results and overall concepts from this research will be presented
to the public via the Ice Age Trail Alliance (IATA) in Wisconsin to improve the
educational focus of the organization with updated signs, placards and posters
along the IATA trails and at various visitor centers. The University of
Wisconsin-Madison Geology Museum exhibit on the deglacial history of Wisconsin
will also be expanded.