* 1102397
* Microfluidic Finite State Machine Controller
* ENG,ECCS
* 05/01/2011,04/30/2015
* Elliot Hui, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Mona Zaghloul
* 04/30/2015
* USD 299,591.00

i. Objective:&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this program is to construct a system-
on-a-chip that integrates a digital microcontroller together with fluid handling
elements such as valves, pumps, and mixers on a single monolithic device. The
key advance will be the development of a digital logic microcontroller that is
built entirely out of microfluidic valves and channels rather than electronics.
Microfluidic computing obviates the need for transduction between the electrical
and fluidic domains, enabling all components to be fabricated in parallel in a
single process that is amenable to low-cost manufacturing techniques such as
injection molding. Specifically, a finite-state-machine controller will
autonomously drive fluid-handling operations such as metering, mixing, and timed
incubation, relying simply on a moderate pressure differential for
power.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;ii. Intellectual Merit&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual
merit is the pressing need to reduce the complexity, cost, size, and power
consumption of integrated microfluidic systems. This will enable the widespread
deployment of lab-on-a-chip systems, transforming the landscape of medical
diagnostics as well as laboratory research. While there have been previous
examples of microfluidic digital logic, an autonomous microcontroller has yet to
be reported, thus this project also represents an important advance in
unconventional computing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;iii. Broader
Impacts&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts are the potential for drastically improved
access to medical diagnostics and the consequent advances in public health in
both developed and developing countries. Furthermore, this program will train
scientists at the important interface between computer engineering and life
sciences.