* 1102795
* SQUID-based Readout Systems for Cryogenic Dark Matter Detectors
* MPS,PHY
* 07/01/2011,06/30/2015
* Martin Huber, University of Colorado at Denver-Downtown Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Jonathan Whitmore
* 06/30/2015
* USD 163,711.00

A broad range of observations tell us that about 85% of the matter in the
universe is not made of ordinary particles, but exists in some dark form.
Deciphering the nature of this dark matter is of fundamental importance to
cosmology, astrophysics, and particle physics. A leading hypothesis is that it
is comprised of Weakly Interacting Massive Particles (WIMPs) that were produced
moments after the Big Bang. Such particles would represent an extension of the
Standard Model of particle physics, such as supersymmetry or additional
dimensions. If WIMPs exist and are the dark matter, then their presence in our
Milky Way may be detectable via scattering from atomic nuclei in a terrestrial
detector. The Cryogenic Dark Matter Search (CDMS) Collaboration has pioneered
the use of low-temperature phonon-mediated devices to detect the rare scattering
of WIMPs on nuclei and to distinguish these events from other background
interactions. One of many key technological requirements for the scaling to
greater mass of the low-temperature germanium technology is improvement in the
cryogenic preamplifiers of both phonon and ionization signals. The
superconducting quantum interference device (SQUID) preamplifiers used in the
present Soudan facility were produced and evaluated through the efforts of this
group several years ago, and the group has been an integral member of the
collaboration in optimizing their performance throughout the operation of the
various CDMS experiments at Soudan. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award will
support the scientific aspects of the CDMS programs in four complementary
directions, fully coordinated within the collaboration: (a) support of the
SuperCDMS-Soudan experiment (participating in operation of the Soudan
experiment, particularly oversight and maintenance of the phonon readout
system), (b) contribution to the design of SuperCDMS-SNOLAB (design optimization
of cold hardware and electronics), (c) scientific support to SuperCDMS-SNOLAB
construction (production testing of SuperCDMS-SNOLAB SQUIDs and room-temperature
electronics), and (d) long-term R&amp;D towards GEODM (SQUID-based ionization
readout). Continued development of the cryogenic readout systems is a critical
component of the science goals of the SuperCDMS and GEODM
programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts&lt;br/&gt;This program's
technological development will also push the envelope of phonon-mediated
detectors, the applications of which are increasingly widespread. This program
will also support the education and training of physics and electrical
engineering students.