* 1102696
* CAREER:Structural and Functional Studies of Midline-1, a RF-B-box E3 Ligase Targeting PP2Ac
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/2010,04/30/2012
* Michael Massiah, George Washington University
* Continuing Grant
* Kamal Shukla
* 04/30/2012
* USD 175,185.00

Midline-1 (MID1) is a member of a large family of tripartite RBCC motif (TRIM)
proteins found in all vertebrates. It associates with microtubules and
facilitates the ubiquitination and subsequent degradation of the catalytic
subunit of the most abundant Ser/Thr protein phosphatase (PP2Ac). PP2Ac
regulates a vast array of intracellular processes that affect essentially every
aspect of the cell's life cycle. Consequently, MID1 appears to regulate
epithelial-mesenchyme cellular differentiation along the ventral midline in
vertebrates. This project aims to establish the structure and mechanism of
function of MID1's three N-terminal zinc-binding domains, Ring Finger (RF) and
two B-box domains, which are essential for MID1's functions. RF mediates PP2Ac
ubiquitination, while B-boxes 1 and 2 target alpha-4, a regulator of PP2Ac. The
structure of B-box 1, with a canonical RF-fold, suggests a novel mechanism for
ubiquitin E3 ligase activity and specificity. This project will employ NMR
spectroscopy and pull-down assays coupled with mutagenesis to demonstrate that
MID1 represents a new class of Ub E3 ligase in which both RF and B-box domains
are required to target PP2Ac for degradation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Knowledge of
the mechanism of MID1's role in the ubiquitination of PP2Ac is significant to
elucidate signal transduction pathways associated with cellular differentiation
during embryogenesis. Mechanistic studies of MID1 will yield an essential model
for understanding the structure-function relationship of similar proteins in the
TRIM family, for which no information is available. TRIM proteins are involved
in signal transduction pathways critical to vertebrate development. This project
will allow the PI to offer innovative and novel research opportunities for
students. Fifteen undergraduates that included eleven females, two African-
Americans, and one Native American have been involved in many aspects of
research in the PI's lab. As a minority and a protein NMR spectroscopist in
Oklahoma, the PI is in a unique position to attract and recruit students of
various ethnic and racial backgrounds. The PI has presented seminars and
participated in recruitment activities at annual symposia by the Oklahoma
Academy of Sciences that focused on undergraduate research from universities
across Oklahoma, and the Louis Stokes Alliances for Minority Participation
(LSAMP) Program. LSAMP includes students from Langston University, a
historically African-American undergraduate institution located ~20 miles away
from Oklahoma State University. The PI's extensive experience with mentoring
five Meyerhoff minority students at the University of Maryland Baltimore County
and two at Johns Hopkins School of Medicine are consistent with the PI's
commitment to not just increase the number of minorities in Biochemistry but
also to mentor them. The PI has made a commitment to continue making regular
recruiting trips to academic institutions throughout Oklahoma.&lt;br/&gt;