* 1102599
* A Panel Study of the Effects of Long-Term Unemployment upon Individualist Values
* SBE,SES
* 04/15/2011,03/31/2013
* Philip Paolino, University of North Texas
* Standard Grant
* Brian Humes
* 03/31/2013
* USD 109,554.00

This project investigates the effect of personal experience upon core American
values. Many scholars concur that core values provide a stable foundation for
people's attitudes on public policy. The argument is that such values as
individualism and equality are formed early in life and are relatively resistant
to change. The question remains whether people's values might change when their
personal experiences and knowledge of others' experiences challenge beliefs at
the heart of those values.

The intellectual merit of this project is rooted in its examination of the
effect of chronic unemployment upon people's attitudes toward the value of hard
work, which lies at the heart of economic individualism. The context for the
project is the fact that so many US citizens are affected by the current
economic conditions, especially that of long-term unemployment. This project,
informed by extant scholarly work, posits that the personal circumstance of
unemployment, combined with information about others' problems and the severity
of the economic downturn, should affect people's beliefs about the extent to
which they have control of their economic well-being and their own sense of
satisfaction, which in turn should reduce their support for one core value of
American politics, individualism--that is, the belief that people should get
ahead on their own hard work.

This study builds on the investigator's prior work in order to assess the effect
of unemployment, as well as the general economic downturn, on changes in
people's individualist attitudes. This project will re-interview, for two
additional waves, respondents from the investigator's September 2010 survey of
the general population, with an oversample of unemployed respondents. That first
study collected information about respondents' attitudes toward individualism
and equality, as well as measures of their employment status, length of
unemployment, their information about others' unemployment, and their attitudes
about their recent financial situation and future prospects. By re-interviewing
these respondents, this project will allow for an examination of any change in
respondents' values, the nature of those changes, and the extent to which
personal experiences are related to those changes as the nation's economy
improves and people return to work.

This study makes several broader contributions. It will create a publicly
available dataset of special interest to scholars studying the impact of
significant personal experiences such as unemployment upon political attitudes.
The study will also have policy implications for determining, for example,
whether extending unemployment benefits, which can ameliorate unemployment's
negative consequences, has an effect upon public support for social welfare
policies. Perhaps most broadly, the project enhances understanding of the
deepest recession since the Great Depression. The lessons it offers hold
interest for scholars, policymakers, and citizens alike.