* 1102074
* GOALI: Three-dimensional Magnetic Recording At Areal Densities Above 1 Terabit-per-square-inch
* ENG,ECCS
* 07/01/2011,06/30/2015
* Ilya Dumer, University of California-Riverside
* Continuing Grant
* Usha Varshney
* 06/30/2015
* USD 574,333.00

Intellectual Merit&lt;br/&gt;This collaborative GOALI proposal between
researchers of the University of California, Riverside (UCR), Florida
International University (FIU), MagOasis LLC, and Western Digital Corporation
(WDC) presents interdisciplinary research to study three-dimensional (3-D)
magnetic recording, a promising and challenging near- and long-term solution to
increasing the capacity of electronic and computer devices. Unlike 2-D
alternatives, 3-D recording exploits advantages of using a 3rd spatial dimension
to store information. The specific goals will include: (i) a study of different
modes of 3-D recording, (ii) understanding the physics underlying write
processes in 3-D systems, (iii) fabrication of 3-D media with three or more
magnetic layers accessible for write/read processes, (iv) a basic study of 3-D
media with a focus to understand thermal fluctuations in 3-D structures, (v) an
investigation of new data coding channels to gain from the multilevel signal
configuration in 3-D recording, and (vi) an industry-standard spinstand testing
to demonstrate areal densities above 1 terabit/in2. One of the important
research objectives will be to understand the physics of 3-D recording necessary
for achieving effective areal densities substantially above 1 terabit/in2. The
experimental study, involving (i) extensive fabrication via sputter deposition
and combinatorial chemistry synthesis, ultra-high-density patterning via
electron beam lithography (EBL), (ii) focused Kerr microscopy and ultra-high
resolution magnetic force microscopy, (iii) measurements of heat propagation in
3-D, and (iv) a spinstand study to simulate recording systems, will be supported
by numerical simulations to understand the micromagnetics in 3-D systems and a
basic theoretical study to devise adequate multilevel data coding methods.
Accordingly, the effort will follow a cross-disciplinary direction through
involving experts in magnetic recording, materials science, micromagnetic
modeling, and signal processing from both academia and industry. Particularly,
the project will employ the complementing strengths of five co-investigators
with a history of synergetic collaboration including (i) Sakhrat Khizroev at
Florida International University (FIU) for Magnetic Recording and
Nanofabrication, (ii) Alex Balandin at UCR for Heat Management at Nanoscale,
(iii) Ilya Dumer at UCR for Data Coding, (iv) John Oti at MagOasis LLC for
Micromagnetic Simulations, and (v) Rabee Ikkawi at Western Digital Corporation
(WDC) for Disk Drive Integration and Spinstand Testing, respectively.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts &lt;br/&gt;This project might have a significant
impact on the data storage industry especially today when the progress in the
multi-billion-dollar industry is facing a fundamental limit to scaling due to
thermal instabilities in the recording media. The main targeted deliverable of
the project is a cross-disciplinary basic study to demonstrate a record high
information density over 1 terabit/in2 using the disruptive technology of 3-D
magnetic recording. As one of the pioneering concepts in the broad area of 3-D
devices, 3-D recording may pave a way to the new era of 3-D magneto-electronics
and 3-D electronics applications in general3. The proposed educational component
includes a new university-wide initiative to establish a channel for industry
internships for both undergraduate and graduate level students. The connection
to the industry will be secured through involvement of John Oti, President of
MagOasis LLC, and Rabee Ikkawi, a Principal Engineer of Western Digital
Corporation, as the industry Co-PI and Senior Personnel, respectively. UCR is
one of America?s most ethnically diverse research institutions with a dominant
Asian American body and 35% Hispanic enrollment. FIU is the largest Hispanic
serving institution in the mainland U.S.A. The investigators commit to make
every effort to assure diversity among the students who work on this project. In
particular, they intend to do this in part by recruiting from the student
chapters of the Society of Women Engineers, the National Society of Black
Engineers, and the Society of Hispanic Professional Engineers, among others. In
addition, the PIs have established a tradition of hosting local high-school
students to give them tours of state-of-the-art research labs with the goal to
attract students to become future engineers. Finally, the PIs intend to organize
the next anticipated IEEE Nanoscale Device and System Integration (NDSI)-2012
conference to help broaden the research preparation of current students in the
minority serving institutions and further attract talent with an emphasis on
underrepresented students.