* 1102996
* The CalWomenTech Scale Up Project
* EDU,EES
* 06/01/2011,05/31/2016
* Donna Milgram, Institute for Women in Trades, Technology and Science
* Standard Grant
* Jolene Jesse
* 05/31/2016
* USD 999,982.00

Intellectual Merit: This CalWomenTech Scale Up Project (CWT Scale Up Project) is
based on the successful, five-year GSE Extension Services grant. The original
project worked with eight community college technology programs in California to
increase the number of women recruited and retained to STEM programs in which
they were underrepresented. The project also disseminated research-based proven
strategies and resources to California educators and a limited national
audience. The CalWomenTech Project has resulted in significant increases in the
enrollment of female students and in the retention of both female and male
students. The CWT Scale Up Project seeks to diffuse the core activities of the
intensive CalWomenTech Project to a much larger audience of educational
practitioners.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The CWT Scale Up Project is based on
research: both the CalWomenTech Project's own successful outcomes and on a
literature review of the proven practices of other STEM practitioners, much of
which can be found in IWITTS' online Proven Practices Collection (includes peer-
reviewed articles, case studies, and webinars) developed by the CalWomenTech
Project. Objectives include providing educational practitioners with workshops,
webinars, and group coaching on recruitment and retention plan implementation,
along with development of an online learning community. A professionally
designed outreach campaign by an experienced social media networking consultant
will feature CalWomenTech successful results, professional development
opportunities, and the online Proven Practices
Collection.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The end goal of the
CalWomenTech Scale Up Project is to increase the number of women in STEM. Our
nation is enriched when women fully contribute to the advancement of science and
technology. By giving practitioners nationwide the tools and knowledge they need
to close the gender gap for women and girls in STEM classrooms, the CalWomenTech
Scale Up Project has the power to change the lives and livelihoods of women for
the benefit of all.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is co-funded by the
Advanced Technology Education program.