* 1102767
* Coordinated Deployment of Seismic Instruments to Record Aftershocks of the September 2010 New Zealand Earthquake
* GEO,EAR
* 01/01/2011,12/31/2011
* Clifford Thurber, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Eva Zanzerkia
* 12/31/2011
* USD 30,953.00

The September 4, 2010, Darfield, New Zealand earthquake is the most damaging
earthquake to strike New Zealand since the 1931 Napier Earthquake. Although no
lives were lost, damage was extensive in the area, particularly in nearby
Christchurch, and economic losses are expected to total over NZ $2 billion. The
earthquake is also scientifically interesting and in many ways surprising. It
occurred on a previously unmapped fault in an area that was presumed to have
lower risks than other areas (e.g., the Alpine Fault). The complex source time
function indicates that two or more subevents were involved.One of the most
surprising aspects is the predominantly strike-slip character of the event along
a nearly east-west fault. South Island tectonics are dominated by the Alpine
Fault system and nearby, mostly northeast-southwest striking strike slip faults,
such as the Hope Fault. The data from this project will provide a unique
opportunity to study a fault that is very likely quite young and immature, and
thus fundamentally different in character from mature faults such as the San
Andreas Fault in California or the Anatolian Fault in Turkey.

New Zealand and UW-Madison scientists have deployed temporary seismic
instruments to monitor aftershocks. The New Zealand instruments were deployed by
GNS Science and Victoria University staff, led by Terry Webb and Martha Savage,
respectively. PI Thurber arranged for the shipment of 9 RAMP instruments from
the IRIS/PASSCAL facility to Christchurch and sent 2 UW-Madison staff to New
Zealand to deploy them. 18 short-period, 9 broadband, and 3 strong motion
instruments will be deployed through this joint endeavor. The RAMP deployment
will continue until mid January 2011. The data will be made available to the
scientific community within the time frame required for IRIS/PASSCAL "RAMP"
deployments.

The project will support a postdoctoral student to participate in the
deployment, and foster a collaboration with scientific teams in New Zealand.
This work is jointly supported by the Office of International Science and
Engineering and the Geophysics program.