* 1102280
* Droplet Thermotaxis: A New Platform Technology for Droplet-based Microfluidic Systems
* ENG,ECCS
* 05/01/2011,04/30/2016
* Ranganathan Kumar, The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Continuing Grant
* Mona Zaghloul
* 04/30/2016
* USD 359,999.00

Droplet Thermotaxis: A New Platform Technology for Droplet-based Microfluidic
Systems&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this
program is to develop a new platform technology for droplet-based microfluidic
systems and demonstrate chemical unit operations using the developed platform
for applications in chemistry and biology based on the study of the fundamental
science of thermotaxis actuation. &lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit is found at
the cross-section of electrical engineering, mechanical engineering and
chemistry, laying the solid foundation and design guidelines for various
microfluidic devices and systems that can take advantage of the newly discovered
droplet actuation mechanisms. The proposed work will provide fundamental
information for understanding the dual behavior of droplets, underlying science
of unique transport mechanisms at the interfacial boundaries (liquid-liquid,
liquid-air, liquid-solid), practical tool kits for droplet-based chemical
experiments, methodology for optical diagnostics of miniaturized devices and
systems, and novel experimental protocols for controlled chemical
reactions.&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts are summarized as (a) wide
applicability of our technology for handling liquid samples in a self-confined
configuration and for the effective thermal management of droplets relevant to
many disciplines (b) dissemination of cultivated knowledge to research
communities across electrical engineering, mechanical engineering, chemistry and
biology and (c) long-lasting educational outcomes from thoughtfully designed
multidisciplinary mentorship and outreach activities involving undergraduate,
graduate and K-12 students. &lt;br/&gt;This program is built upon a new and
transformative discovery ? bidirectional droplet actuation based on the surface
film deformation, unlike the traditional approach. This program will help
understand the defining science and working principles so the newly proposed
actuation mechanism may be favorably used for miniaturized devices and systems.