* 1102278
* GOALI: Nanowire Broken-Gap Tunneling Field-Effect Transistors for High-Performance, Ultra-Low-Power Logic Applications
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/15/2011,07/31/2015
* Steven Koester, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 07/31/2015
* USD 330,000.00

Intellectual Merit: The purpose of the proposed research is to design, fabricate
and characterize novel nanowire broken-gap tunneling field-effect transistors
(NW BG-TFETs), devices that have the potential to substantially reduce power in
computational systems by simultaneously achieving sub-60-mV/decade subthreshold
slope and drive currents comparable to MOSFETs. The proposed work has strong
intellectual merit as it addresses a critical problem for future CMOS scaling,
which is how to reduce logic power consumption. It does so by exploring a new
device concept, the NW BG-TFET that has not yet been experimentally explored. In
particular, project intends to provide a thorough understanding of all aspects
of the device design and operation, including the influence of interface states
and trap-assisted tunneling, mechanisms that must be fully understood if this
new device is to function as intended.&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: The proposed
project could have substantial benefits for understanding the role of surface-
mediated transport in TFETs and nanometer-scale devices in general. It also
provides an ideal training ground for graduate students, in that the industrial
collaboration allows students to obtain direct industry interactions that will
better allow them to understand the real world applications of their research
endeavors. The project also offers an opportunity for classroom education, as
the device provides an ideal example of the factors that affect and ultimately
limit CMOS scaling. Finally, K-12 educational outreach activities are tightly
integrated into this work, and this project provides numerous opportunities for
demonstrations of nanotechnology that can generate excitement about engineering
and scientific careers in general.