* 1102390
* Epileptogenic Focus Localization and Closed-loop Control of Brain Dynamics in Epilepsy
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2015
* David Treiman, Arizona State University
* Continuing Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 08/31/2015
* USD 360,000.00

This project deals with the development of multivariable feedback decoupling
controllers for the suppression of epileptic seizures by altering the brain
dynamics through the use of deep-brain electrical stimulation. The key enabling
concepts are a quantifiable relationship between the epileptic state and
measures of brain?s spatial synchronization, and the ability to disrupt this
synchronization by means of electrical stimulation.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Prior work with
electroencephalographic (EEG) data from epileptic patients and animals has
indicated that such measures can be consistent indicators of the epileptic state
of the brain and that electrical stimulation has generally beneficial, though
not quite consistent effects. The novel idea behind the proposed control
strategy is to combine our recent epileptogenic focus localization techniques
with real-time delivery of practical stimuli in the form of biphasic, pulse-
train-modulated, electrical signals to disentrain the brain. The controller
design will rely on control-oriented models, describing the relationships
between electrical stimuli and selected measures of spatial brain
synchronization. The success of these experiments in rodents with chronic
epilepsy, together with the physiological evaluation of the subjects, will
provide a quantitative assessment of the effectiveness and possible side effects
in the control of seizures, as well as important clues on the validity of the
underlying theory about the mechanisms of seizure generation
(ictogenesis).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Expected intellectual benefits range from the
solution of nonstandard problems in the regime of control of chaotic systems, to
yet untapped engineering applications to biological systems. This research, if
successful, will contribute to the new treatment modalities of neuromodulation
for epilepsy and form a basis for economic growth and reduction of associated
medical costs. It may also provide data for new applications in medicine and
neuroscience, such as the treatment of Parkinson?s tremors, migraines, sleep
disorders and other brain dynamical disorders.