* 1102998
* Targeted MSP: The University at Buffalo/Buffalo Public Schools (UB/BPS) Interdisciplinary Science and Engineering Partnership
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2011,02/28/2018
* Joseph Gardella, SUNY at Buffalo
* Continuing Grant
* David Haury
* 02/28/2018
* USD 9,831,207.00

The Interdisciplinary Science and Engineering Partnership (ISEP) is led by the
University at Buffalo, a member of the State University of New York system, and
includes as core partners the Buffalo Public Schools, Buffalo State College and
the Buffalo Museum of Science. Supporting partners include Praxair Technology,
Inc., Roswell Park Cancer Institute, Hauptman-Woodward Medical Research
Institute, the Western New York Service Learning Coalition, and the Buffalo
Public Schools District Parent Coordinating Committee. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
focus of ISEP is the critical middle school experiences of students in science
and engineering as they transition to high school. The project utilizes an
innovative approach to teacher professional development among 12 high-needs
urban schools (including "feeder" middle schools and their corresponding high
schools) via courses and interdisciplinary research experiences, development of
science and technology classroom materials that are aligned with state science
learning standards, and inquiry-based curricula. The ISEP also combines novel
mentoring approaches and expanded professional learning communities to build
leadership and resources for improving science education in high-needs/high-
potential urban schools. The learning communities cultivate mentoring
relationships involving middle and high school teachers and students, University
at Buffalo and Buffalo State College STEM faculty, education faculty,
undergraduate students and graduate students, volunteer STEM professionals,
and/or parents.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A key program component is the development
of a successful mechanism to integrate the latest scientific and engineering
research approaches into the experience base of middle and high school teachers.
"Research Experiences for Teachers" are widespread across the ISEP with teachers
involved in interdisciplinary team-based research programs that focus not only
on the research experience, but also on the development of classroom materials
that are aligned with learning standards and draw from multidisciplinary
approaches. Approximately 48 Buffalo Public Schools teachers each year have the
opportunity to access cutting edge research through multiple science and
engineering tracks. The ISEP team, which includes principals, links these
research experiences to intensive leadership development training, in which
teachers align challenging science courses and curricula with national and New
York State Learning Standards, focusing on increasing the number of inquiry
experiences for students. Ultimately, the teachers enhance their mentoring
skills, learn to form expanded learning communities of science educators within
their schools, and impact their entire school culture.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;ISEP
is conducting educational research on the processes and conditions in which
science teachers develop interdisciplinary science inquiry knowledge, and how
this knowledge may be translated into interdisciplinary pedagogical content
knowledge (PCK) that ultimately improves student science learning. Thus, the
research questions for the ISEP are: (1) What are science teachers' conceptions
of interdisciplinary science inquiry? How do their conceptions change through
intensive summer research and ongoing professional developments? (2) How do
science teachers translate interdisciplinary science inquiry experiences and
understanding gained in university research laboratories into their classroom
inquiry instructional practices, i.e., how do science teachers develop
interdisciplinary science inquiry PCK? and (3) How do professional learning
communities support teacher development of interdisciplinary science inquiry
PCK? Findings produced through ISEP are being disseminated throughout the
district via a well-organized science teachers network, regionally and statewide
using NYLearns.org, through a project website, and through presentations and
publications via regional and national venues.