* 1102354
* Drug Trips for Worms: Smart Droplet Microfluidics for Real-time, High-throughput Drug Screening of Single Organisms
* ENG,ECCS
* 07/01/2011,06/30/2015
* Alan Robertson, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Mona Zaghloul
* 06/30/2015
* USD 359,999.00

Objective: The objective of the program is to develop an integrated droplet-
based microfluidic system for parallel screening of phenotypic changes in
nematode worms within droplet microenvironments of varying chemical
compositions. This work aims to provide a radical translation from existing low-
throughput worm motility assays to a truly high-throughput, whole-organism assay
for testing multi-drug compounds against nematodes.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: The intellectual merit is to provide a
powerful lab-on-a-chip assay system for biological studies on whole-animal
models with unprecedented high throughput. The system will uniquely combine
automated generation and modulation of drug-coded pharmacological droplet
libraries, guided movement stimulation, locomotion assay, and
electrophysiological recording for single organisms inside droplets. This
research is transformative because the system can provide unique details of
neurophysiological changes in nematodes with drug exposures, facilitating
experiments that are impossible by current techniques. The proposed technology
is generic because the system can be adapted to test a wide range of important
nematodes and drug compounds. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The
proposed research will help answer fundamental questions in diagnosing,
controlling and predicting drug resistance in nematode parasites, thereby
unraveling complex mechanisms of host-parasite interactions. This research will
generate broad educational opportunities for both undergraduate and graduate
students, and benefit curriculum development for a new Undergraduate
Bioengineering Minor Program of the Iowa State. Women and minority students, and
middle school students will be attracted into science and engineering through
open-lab tours, and in-class presentations. High school science teachers will be
collaborated to develop K-12 instructional materials in the topics of
micro/nanotechnology and bioengineering.