* 1102572
* Key Parameter for the Mass and Energy Transfer at the Magnetopause Determined from Cusp Structures
* GEO,AGS
* 10/01/2012,09/30/2016
* Steven Petrinec, Lockheed-Martin Advanced Technology Center
* Continuing Grant
* Janet U. Kozyra
* 09/30/2016
* USD 306,432.00

This project will examine the processes that are involved with magnetic
reconnection at the dayside magnetopause of the Earth. It will determine the
relative occurrence of anti-parallel reconnection versus component reconnection
as a function of the parameters of the solar wind that control the interaction.
It will also examine the transition from one mode of reconnection to the other
and will determine under what conditions magnetic reconnection becomes quasi-
continuous and under what conditions it becomes intermittent. The project will
analyze the nature of structures in the magnetic cusp using the low-velocity
cutoff method to determine the location of the reconnection site. The data to be
used in this study come from a number of space missions, in particular the
European Space Agency's Cluster Mission and the NASA THEMIS mission.

Magnetic reconnection at the magnetopuse is the dominant mechanism by which
plasma mass and energy is transported from the solar wind into the magnetopause
and eventually to the upper atmosphere. In order to provide quantitative
predictions about the mass and energy transfer, several paramters need to be
known as a function of the solar wind conditions. Among these parameters is the
relative occurrence of anit-parallel reconnection versus component reconnection.
In addition to the senior personnel involved with this research, during the
summer months high school science teachers will participate in the project
through the Industry Initiatives for Science and Math Education (IISME) program.