* 1102284
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant: The Archaeology of the Middle Stone Age
* SBE,BCS
* 02/01/2011,01/31/2013
* Aaron Armstrong, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 01/31/2013
* USD 19,999.00

Under the guidance of Dr. Martha Tappen, Aaron Armstrong will study three South
African archeological sites, focusing on small mammal remains. The goal of this
investigation is to provide a more complete picture of the Middle Stone Age
(MSA, 280-35 thousand year ago) diet, a question central to understanding the
evolution of modern humans. The dataset will consist of MSA and Later Stone Age
(LSA, &lt;35 thousand years ago) faunas from Die Kelders Cave 1 (DK1) and MSA
faunas from Pinnacle Point sites 13B (PP13B) and site 5-6 (PP5-6).
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In recent years an abundance of paleoanthropological
research has emerged that suggests both the modern human lineage and behavioral
repertoire first appeared in Africa during the MSA. In particular, South Africa
has produced a range of MSA archaeological sites that exhibit evidence of the
modern human behavioral repertoire such as the production of elaborate tools and
material culture suggestive of symbolic expression. Though it is clear that MSA
humans preyed upon a variety of large mammals and exploited sessile or less-
mobile organisms such as shellfish and tortoises, the foraging strategies of
these humans are not well understood as subsistence research has tended to focus
on large mammals at the expense of small prey. The study proposed here is a
detailed taphonomic and zooarchaeological assessment of MSA small mammal
accumulations designed to address this disparity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
foraging capacities of MSA humans is of direct relevance to understanding how
and why modern humans dispersed from the African continent ~60 thousand years
ago and rapidly replaced populations of archaic humans throughout Eurasia. A
comprehensive analysis that includes the small mammals at South African MSA
sites will provide a more complete understanding of MSA diet and is vital to the
study of this critical time period in human evolution as subsistence strategies
and foraging adaptations have played a central role in debates concerning the
behavioral modernity of MSA humans. By determining the role humans played in the
accumulation of small mammals at DK1, PP13B, and PP5-6, Mr. Armstrong will be
able to address the following questions: Were humans responsible for the
accumulation of small mammals at MSA sites in South Africa? If so, why were
these resources targeted over others? Were small mammals an important component
of the diet? Did diet breadth increase during the MSA of South
Africa?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Mr. Armstrong will communicate the results of his
study to the scientific community and general public through publications in
refereed journals, conference presentations, and public lectures. This
dissertation project will further his training in taphonomy and zooarcheology
through the data collection, analysis, and curate of the materials in question.
Proper curation of the collections will facilitate access by future researchers.
The project also calls for the training of two South African undergraduate
students to assist in collection curation and faunal identification. Training of
this type promotes both international academic collaboration and aids in the
preservation of South African cultural heritage.