* 1102208
* Shimura varieties, Galois modules and Galois representations
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2011,05/31/2015
* Georgios Pappas, Michigan State University
* Continuing Grant
* Andrew Pollington
* 05/31/2015
* USD 179,997.00

The PI is attempting to describe integral models for Shimura varieties at primes
of non-smooth reduction and study related p-adic spaces. In particular, he
investigates the structure of the singularities of Shimura varieties at such
primes using methods from the theory of algebraic loop groups and p-adic Hodge
theory and he is developing a theory of ``local models" for these varieties. The
motivation is to obtain information that can be used in the calculation of their
Hasse-Weil zeta functions and in other number theoretic applications. He is also
studying closely connected p-adic spaces such as deformation spaces of local
Galois representations, Rapoport-Zink spaces and their p-adic cohomology. In
addition he is studying the representations that appear in the cohomology of
arithmetic varieties with a finite group action and is developing related
Riemann-Roch type theorems. In the past, the PI has obtained formulae useful for
calculating equivariant Euler characteristics of varieties over the integers
with an abelian group action. He is extending his work to the case of non-
abelian group actions and he will apply his techniques to deduce information
about Galois modules obtained from covers of modular curves. He is also
developing refined versions of Riemann-Roch type theorems that allow for
calculations of torsion classes, and, in some cases, he is providing local or
adelic descriptions of the isomorphisms underlying the Riemann-Roch identities.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This is research in the field of arithmetic algebraic
geometry,a subject that blends two of the oldest areas of mathematics: the
geometry of shapes that can be described by the simplest equations, namely
polynomials, and the study of numbers. This combination of disciplines has
proved extraordinarily fruitful - having solved problems that withstood
generations (such as ``Fermat's last theorem"). The proposal mainly concentrates
on the study of specific polynomial equations that have many symmetries. The
general field has connections with physics, the construction of error correcting
codes and cryptography.