* 1102827
* The Molecules of Life: Incorporation of Oxygen into Planetary Atmospheric Hazes
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2014
* Sarah Horst, Horst                   Sarah          M
* Fellowship Award
* Harshal Gupta
* 08/31/2014
* USD 257,000.00

Dr. Sarah Horst is awarded an NSF Astronomy and Astrophysics Postdoctoral
Fellowship to carry out a program of research and education at the University of
Colorado. Due to the limitations of in situ measurements of planetary aerosols,
and in particular the impossibility of in situ measurements in the cases of the
atmospheres of the early Earth and extrasolar planets, laboratory experiments
provide a necessary bridge between theoretical models of planetary atmospheres
and the reality of their observed properties. The observed compositions of
extrasolar planet atmospheres, and the poorly constrained composition of early
Earth's atmosphere, indicate that laboratory experiments need to investigate
organic molecule and aerosol production for a broader range of gaseous
compositions than previously considered. The research proposed here will take
advantage of the world-class aerosol simulation and analysis facilities at the
University of Colorado to investigate the effect that oxygen has on aerosol
formation and composition. This research will also investigate how choice of
laboratory energy source affects aerosol formation and composition, which will
further our understanding of the biases present in laboratory experiments and
allow for more accurate application of the results of laboratory experiments to
planetary atmospheres. Dr. Horst's research will improve our understanding of
the range of planetary atmospheres where aerosols may form and increase our
understanding of how oxygen is incorporated into organic molecules, which may
have implications for the origin of life.

Dr. Horst will also work with the Division of Planetary Sciences of the American
Astronomical Society and the NASA Science Mission Directorate to host a teacher
workshop each year in conjunction with the annual DPS meeting. The teachers that
attend the workshop will be paired with a planetary scientist or astronomer to
interact with them and their students throughout the following year.