* 1102946
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Status Characteristics and Differential Patterns of Trust
* SBE,SES
* 05/15/2011,04/30/2012
* Alison Bianchi, University of Iowa
* Standard Grant
* Patricia White
* 04/30/2012
* USD 5,115.00

SES-1102946&lt;br/&gt;Alison Bianchi&lt;br/&gt;Celeste Campos-
Castillo&lt;br/&gt;University of Iowa&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;How is trust and
influence organized in groups where the goal is to improve the situation of a
single member? Oftentimes an individual will seek the advice of others to
benefit his or her own situation: patients seek the health advice of physicians,
students attend tutoring sessions to improve their grades, and defendants
waiting to stand trial request assistance from a lawyer. In these situations,
trust in those providing advice and acceptance of their influence may become
critical for improving outcomes. These situations can become complex with both
status and role-identity distinctions jointly governing the interaction process.
Status is your standing in a group, based on your relative prestige. Role-
identities, in this context, are the meanings we attach to our positions in a
group. Status characteristics theory (SCT) will be used to inform our
understanding of this specific group setting. The goals of this doctoral
dissertation research project are to: 1) provide a test of SCT in this setting;
2) integrate the emergence of trust into SCT related research; and 3) integrate
role-identity theory into SCT. These will be achieved by making modifications to
a standard experimental setting used in this line of research.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The results of this
laboratory experiment will extend our understanding of SCT, role-identities, and
trust as these have not been examined concurrently. By understanding these
relationships, we gain insight into how trust is shaped in occupations primarily
engaged with providing expert advice to others ? professionals. Trust in
professionals has generally been on the decline, a trend with important
implications for not only sociology, but also the fields of these professionals
(e.g., medicine, law, psychology, education). Research illuminating these
processes might eventually point to ways that will restore trust in
professionals, a condition particularly important for patients since trust in
the medical care provider can have dramatic effects on health outcome.