* 1102523
* Louis Stokes Colorado Alliance for Minority Participation: A Senior Alliance for Broadening Participation in STEM
* EDU,EES
* 08/01/2011,09/30/2016
* Rick Miranda, Colorado State University
* Continuing Grant
* A.  Hicks
* 09/30/2016
* USD 2,499,543.00

Colorado State University (CSU), the lead institution, in collaboration with
fourteen institutional&lt;br/&gt;partners constitutes the CO-AMP consortium. The
Consortium is proposing a strategic and&lt;br/&gt;comprehensive effort to
address the following goals in connection with underrepresented
minorities,&lt;br/&gt;women of color, and persons with disabilities successfully
completing baccalaureate degrees in Science,&lt;br/&gt;Technology, Engineering,
and Mathematics (STEM):&lt;br/&gt;1) Continue to increase bachelor degree
completion in STEM disciplines;&lt;br/&gt;2) Improve retention and transfer
rates from 2-year to 4-year institutions;&lt;br/&gt;3) Enhance partnerships with
Hispanic Serving Institutions (HSI) in Colorado;&lt;br/&gt;4) Strengthen
graduate school preparation;&lt;br/&gt;5) Promote international research
experiences to enhance global diversity and understanding.&lt;br/&gt;Since its
inception, efforts of the CO-AMP Consortium have extended from the pre-
freshmen&lt;br/&gt;level to enrollment in graduate school programs. The
Consortium has been a major driving force at&lt;br/&gt;partner institutions to
encourage and motivate students to excel and graduate with a bachelor?s. degree
in&lt;br/&gt;STEM fields. The enrollment and visibility of diverse students has
also increased, demonstrated by the&lt;br/&gt;recent 84% increase in LS CO-AMP
enrollment. A significant level of support, in addition to that
from&lt;br/&gt;the NSF, has been provided by central administrations,
Departments and Colleges of the Consortium,&lt;br/&gt;and industry partners.
Most importantly, the Consortium faculty and staff have provided
individualized&lt;br/&gt;student support without which the activities would not
have been as successful.&lt;br/&gt;Most, if not all, of the proposed initiatives
in goals 1 through 5 have been and will continue to
be&lt;br/&gt;institutionalized at partner institutions. Early integration of
minority students into college life must start in&lt;br/&gt;the admissions
office with early faculty advising and mentoring linked to the process. Proposed
math skill&lt;br/&gt;building and science course assistance will be continued
and further expanded. Student academic&lt;br/&gt;advancement will also be
enhanced by participation in NAPIRE and other international
research&lt;br/&gt;experiences, contributing to global diversity and
understanding. In addition, further establishment of&lt;br/&gt;professional
societies at 2-year and 4-year colleges is critical to increasing science
identity and&lt;br/&gt;integration into the professional community. This
collaboration of national resources, resulting from these&lt;br/&gt;diverse
programs, is essential to assure benefits to underrepresented minorities, women
of color, and&lt;br/&gt;person with disabilities; and will be sustained as an
essential structure continuing after funding from the&lt;br/&gt;NSF is no longer
available.&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit&lt;br/&gt;Innovative programs based on
the Tinto Model and research results from the Higher
Education&lt;br/&gt;Research Institute (HERI) will target improved academic and
social integration of students into college life&lt;br/&gt;and promote students?
self-identity as scientists. CO-AMP will integrate math assistance and
curricula&lt;br/&gt;between 2-year and 4-year institutions. Pipelines between
high school, 2-year/4-year colleges, and&lt;br/&gt;graduate school will be
integrated by faculty mentoring into the admissions process,
establishing&lt;br/&gt;professional societies on campuses, and building bridges
through innovative summer workshops,&lt;br/&gt;research at 2-year and 4-year
campuses, and international research experiences. Evaluation efforts
will&lt;br/&gt;provide evidence-based methodologies for improving student
retention. CO-AMP has a history of qualified staff, as well as the facilities,
networks, and partnerships in place to focus on&lt;br/&gt;building a stronger
infrastructure that will continue to build capacity and compatibility in the
Consortium.&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts&lt;br/&gt;The programs and activities CO-
AMP will undertake cover the core areas of recruitment and&lt;br/&gt;retention,
including training of faculty, promotion of proven programs, support from
industry involvement,&lt;br/&gt;as well as conducting research to determine best
practice in preparing students for higher levels of math&lt;br/&gt;and science.
CO-AMP is partnered with all of the Hispanic Serving Institutions in Colorado
and Fort&lt;br/&gt;Lewis (one of only three Native American-Serving Non-Tribal
Colleges in the US) making it optimally&lt;br/&gt;positioned to serve the
greatest number of Hispanic and Native American students. Results of
research&lt;br/&gt;conducted will be presented at conferences and published to
further knowledge in this important area of&lt;br/&gt;diversity education. The
results will reduce educational disparities and improve scientific knowledge
in&lt;br/&gt;minority/tribal communities, as trained minority scientists act as
role models and educators.