* 1102920
* American Society for Cell Biology Meeting: Cell Biology Education: An Integrated Approach
* BIO,MCB
* 02/01/2011,01/31/2012
* Caroline Kane, American Society For Cell Biology
* Standard Grant
* Gregory W. Warr
* 01/31/2012
* USD 15,000.00

1102920&lt;br/&gt;Kane Caroline&lt;br/&gt;Cell Biology Education: Increasing
Participation &amp; Educating Students &amp;
Postdocs&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual merit. The ASCB Annual Meeting offers
undergraduate students, graduate students, and postdoctoral fellows a unique
opportunity to see the breadth and depth of modern cell biology. Through
presentation opportunities, onsite feedback from more senior scientists, oral
and poster scientific presentations by others, workshops and Working Groups
(tackling particularly difficult problems in biology), and multiple networking
and discussion opportunities (including the new Graduate School Fair and senior
scientist-facilitated, topic-based Science Discussion Tables), travel awardees
will improve their understanding of cell biology, its processes, and
potentials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts. Travel awardees who would
otherwise not have been able to attend the ASCB Annual Meeting will get both the
?big picture? in core cell biology topics at Symposia, and a more in depth
understanding of a variety of topics at Special Interest Subgroups,
Minisymposia, Working Groups, and Poster Sessions. In special poster sessions
(e.g., undergraduate, minority) and events, Travel awardees will advance their
knowledge and understanding of techniques, including approaches for education
and career development. These events include the Women in Cell Biology Network
Reception, Minority Affairs Committee Mentoring Symposium, Career Discussion
Roundtables, and Workshops. By increasing their scientific literacy and
expanding their networks, Travel Awardees are pointed to potential mentors,
instructed in public outreach, and provided tools to use as educators.