* 1102903
* GSE/EXT: Peer Alliance for Gender Equity (PAGE)
* EDU,EES
* 07/01/2011,06/30/2018
* E. Liesl Chatman, Science Museum of Minnesota
* Continuing Grant
* Jolene Jesse
* 06/30/2018
* USD 2,805,354.00

The Science Museum of Minnesota (SMM) proposes to develop an extension service
project, "Peer Alliance for Gender Equity (PAGE) Extension Service," that will
build the capacity of district education leaders in Science, Technology,
Engineering, and Mathematics (STEM) to provide professional development (PD) to
K-12 STEM teachers in research-based, gender-sensitive pedagogical classroom
practices. These K-12 district leaders will serve as Extension Service Agents
(ESAs) in the Upper Midwestern United States to implement a unified program of
change focused on gender equity in STEM education that integrates theory,
research findings, and practice. Each ESA will participate in 80 hours of PD
through a PAGE Institute, Colloquia, a Virtual Learning Network (VLN), and
Symposium over a 12-month period. The PAGE Portfolio of research, methods, and
strategies will be used throughout the program. The goals of the PAGE Extension
Service are to (1) prepare district-based, K-12 PD leaders to serve as ESAs for
gender equity in STEM education by engaging them in summer institutes that
provide a coherent foundation in related theory, pedagogical practices, and
belief systems (referred to as the PAGE Portfolio); (2) develop ESAs' ability to
adapt, incorporate, and refine PAGE Portfolio modules within their own PD
services for K-12 teachers through colloquia and on-going consultation; and (3)
promote educational researcher awareness of the challenges and successes that
teachers encounter as they ground their practice in theory by creating feedback
loops among researchers, the Expert Project Team, ESAs, and teacher
practitioners.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: PAGE will create a new
model of extension services incorporating best practices from the PD literature
that approaches gender equity in the context of complex equity issues of race,
culture, and class, and is highly sensitive to the needs and pragmatic concerns
of K-12 district leaderships who rarely are offered intensive professional
development specifically designed for their positions. The field-tested PAGE
Portfolio is organized around four major themes: (1) Equity and Access, focusing
on classroom interaction patterns and pipeline issues; (2) Curriculum and
Pedagogy, focusing on gender sensitive pedagogy and curriculum; (3)
Reconstructing the Nature and Culture of STEM, focusing on the epistemology of
these disciplines and the ways in which the values and beliefs behind scientific
knowledge production have been associated with the masculine; and (4) Identity,
focusing on the relationship between students' identity formation and learning
in STEM classrooms. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: Over five years, PAGE
will involve the efforts of 125 ESAs, each of whom provide professional
development to a minimum of 50 STEM educators per year. The Practitioner
Community upon whom PAGE will ultimately have an impact includes 18,750 K-12
STEM teachers in public schools in Iowa, Minnesota, North Dakota, South Dakota,
and Wisconsin. PAGE will bring together strategies that translate research into
action through the PAGE community of educators who have extensive aggregate
expertise in gender equity, STEM education, PD, research, and evaluation. The
capacity built in individuals and programs through PAGE will be sustained
through the combination of intensive PD, the virtual and face-to-face
consultation, and material support for implementation of modules. The creation
of a regional model that is responsive to local, state, and regional contexts
and to the complex issues of identity will be disseminated to the national STEM
education community and gender equity researchers.