* 1102762
* Measuring the Growth of Structure with Millimeter-Wavelength Surveys
* MPS,AST
* 10/01/2011,08/31/2012
* Neelima Sehgal, Sehgal                  Neelima
* Fellowship Award
* Harshal Gupta
* 08/31/2012
* USD 80,000.00

Dr. Neelima Sehgal is awarded an NSF Astronomy and Astrophysics Postdoctoral
Fellowship to carry out a program of research and education at Princeton
University. Ground-based millimeter-wavelength surveys are underway and are
detecting tens to hundreds of galaxy clusters by their Sunyaev-Zel'dovich (SZ)
signal, in which high-energy electrons distort the cosmic microwave background
radiation (CMB) through inverse Compton scattering, in which the low energy CMB
photons receive energy boost during collision with the high energy cluster
electrons. These surveys have presented their first measurements of the cluster
number density evolution over cosmic time and can potentially provide precision
measurements of structure growth. This, in turn, could discriminate between dark
energy as a component of the Universe or as a manifestation of General
Relativity's failure on the largest scales. Dr. Sehgal will build on her
previous work to lead an analysis of the first cosmological constraints from an
SZ-selected sample of galaxy clusters detected with the Atacama Cosmology
Telescope. She will play a leading role in the determination of cosmological
parameters from larger and more sensitive SZ cluster surveys and in upgrading
simulations of the millimeter-wavelength sky by calibrating to the latest multi-
wavelength observations. The latter will help reduce sources of systematic
uncertainty in the cosmological analysis. Dr. Sehgal will also explore the
feasibility of measuring cluster peculiar velocities using millimeter-wave
simulations and thereby assess their utility as an alternative probe of
structure growth.

Dr. Sehgal will also work with the New Jersey Astronomy Center for Education to
develop and support several series of class modules that teach high-school
students about key concepts in cosmology. She will also train high-school
teachers on the use of these modules and assess their effectiveness through
surveys. These modules will be distributed to high-schools nationwide.