* 1102553
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Residential Segregation Measures and Their Spatial Properties
* SBE,BCS
* 05/01/2011,04/30/2012
* David Folch, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 04/30/2012
* USD 11,073.00

Residential segregation is an inherently spatial phenomenon as it measures the
separation of different types of people within a region. The spatial nature of
segregation results in three distinct yet interrelated challenges that should be
accounted for by the empirical scientist. First, most researchers utilize data
provided by public sources, and with this comes the concern that administrative
boundaries are not necessarily optimized for segregation research. Second,
"neighborhoods" are generally not walled enclaves. This results in residential
interaction across neighborhood boundaries in shops, schools and other shared
locations. Third, residential segregation captures the socio-spatial interaction
of individuals meaning that some spatial interaction function must be defined to
allow for segregation to be measured. The classic segregation measures assumed
administrative areas to be equivalent to neighborhoods, ignored the potential
for interaction across neighborhoods and therefore implicitly defined a spatial
interaction function that ended at the administrative boundary. The evolution of
segregation measurement has seen a number of advances that directly address
these challenges. This research will further advance the methods of segregation
measurement in the face of these challenges. As such it first uses a Monte Carlo
approach to look at how underling spatial properties could manifest themselves
in the magnitude of measured segregation. It then uses data on 359 Metropolitan
Statistical Areas to delve deeper into the impact of administrative boundaries
on measured segregation. An innovative approach is proposed to build random
census tracts to test whether actual census tracts deviate from a random
pattern. This approach also offers a new framework of segregation measurement
that lessens the effect of administrative boundaries on measured segregation.
Finally, a new class of segregation measures is proposed that marries two
aspects of segregation: relationships of people within neighborhoods and those
between neighborhoods. By treating these distinct concepts as equals for the
first time in the segregation literature, this project will shed new light on
segregation measurement in general, and on the U.S. urban system in
particular.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;While the legal infrastructure of segregation
was pulled down decades ago, its vestiges remain. Since segregation remains a
part of society, it is important that researchers and policy makers have the
best tools available for its measurement. This research takes a critical eye to
measurement challenges and existing approaches, and proposes innovative new
methods that address missing and underrepresented aspects of this critical
metric on the health of communities. The focus on methods will contribute to
both segregation theory as well as empirical research. Finally, this work will
both utilize and contribute to the open source software community. New
approaches and measures developed as a result of this work will be delivered to
the wider research community through the open source project PySAL (Python
Spatial Analysis Library).