* 1102563
* Diophantine approximation, Nevanlinna theory, and integral points and holomorphic curves in higher-dimensional varieties
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2011,05/31/2014
* Aaron Levin, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Pollington
* 05/31/2014
* USD 120,530.00

The PI will study several interrelated topics connected with the arithmetic of
higher-dimensional varieties, including related questions in the value
distribution theory of holomorphic curves. In one direction, he will study the
problem of proving the finiteness, or more generally bounding the dimension, of
the set of integral points on affine varieties having many components "at
infinity". Results here will constitute progress towards proving the PI's
conjectures for integral points on such varieties, which may be viewed as
higher-dimensional versions of Siegel's theorem for integral points on affine
curves. An additional novel aspect is the PI's plan to adapt effective methods
in number theory to this higher-dimensional setting. Applications of these
results to families of equations, modular varieties, and problems in arithmetic
dynamics will be explored. Among the tools used will be the Schmidt subspace
theorem from Diophantine approximation, a fundamental and deep tool in number
theory. In fact, some of the techniques employed in the proofs of these results
are expected to yield variations and improvements of the Schmidt subspace
theorem itself, for instance to the setting of algebraic points of bounded
degree. From the work of Vojta and others, it has been discovered that many
statements in Diophantine approximation, when stated appropriately, bear a
strong resemblance to statements in Nevanlinna theory, a branch of complex
analysis. Through the dictionary between the two subjects developed by Vojta, it
is frequently possible to take statements and proofs in one subject and develop
analogous statements and proofs in the other subject. In this manner, the PI
expects to prove analogous results in Nevanlinna theory, where Schmidt's theorem
corresponds to Cartan's Second Main Theorem, and qualitatively, to prove results
for holomorphic curves analogous to results for integral
points.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research proposed here revolves around one of
the oldest and most fundamental problems in mathematics: understanding the set
of solutions to a system of polynomial equations in rational numbers or
integers. The proposed research would contribute substantially to understanding
this difficult and basic problem by providing new results and techniques in
several basic contexts. Moreover, the research has ramifications across other
areas of mathematics. Most notably, it is expected to yield results in complex
analysis, and to enrich our understanding of the deep links between complex
analysis and number theory.