* 1102808
* NURTURES: Networking Urban Resources with Teachers and University to enRich Early Childhood Science
* EDU,DRL
* 07/01/2011,12/31/2017
* Joan Kaderavek, University of Toledo
* Continuing Grant
* David Haury
* 12/31/2017
* USD 10,000,000.00

NURTURES (Networking Urban Resources with Teachers and University to enRich
Early Childhood Science) is creating an integrated system of science education
for grades preschool through 3 (PK-3) in the Toledo, Ohio area. The University
of Toledo (UT) Judith Herb College of Education and College of Engineering in
collaboration with the College of Arts and Sciences at UT and Toledo Public
Schools (TPS) along with supporting educational partners (Apple Tree Nursery
School, the East Toledo Family Center Day Care, the Toledo Day Nursery, Olivet
Nursery, Fairgreen Nursery, the Toledo Catholic Schools, informal science
partners (UT Ritter Planetarium, Imagination Station, Toledo Zoo, Toledo
Metropark System, Toledo Botanical Gardens, Toledo Grows, Lourdes College Nature
Laboratory, and the Challenger Learning Center) and community resources (YMCA,
Boys and Girls Club, Lucas County Library, and WGTE Public Broadcasting Station)
are working to transform the way in which PK-3 science is taught through the
development and implementation of a complementary science education learning
model that combines inquiry and learning, formal and informal education,
teachers and parents, schools and the community, in a comprehensive effort to
improve science subject interest and science achievement. Primary objectives
include: increased student interest and achievement in science, increased PK-3
teachers' knowledge of science pedagogy and science standards, increased parent
involvement in in-school and out-of-school educational activities, a replicable
complementary science education learning model, and increased state, district
and school policies supporting PK-3 science education and parent involvement.
The project includes summer institutes, academic year support for teachers, and
parent support. University faculty, master PK-3 teachers, and informal science
educators are developing a summer institute to provide professional development
in challenging inquiry-based, age appropriate science instruction integrated
with reading and math and professional development and practice in engaging
families in formal and informal education. Teacher participants create their own
lessons that include family learning activities. Formal and family science
learning are augmented by annual community science events hosted by the informal
science partners and linked to the TPS science curriculum and Ohio Content
Standards. The project is providing science education professional development
to 495 PK-3 teachers and their principals or directors working in at least 50
community-based early care and education programs and 300 K-3
classrooms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NURTURES is investigating the feasibility of
the complementary science learning model in a mid-sized urban location as well
as how complementary learning might affect student achievement, curiosity, and
interest in science. It is examining the impact of the scientists' and
engineers' involvement on PK-3 science teaching and learning - an area where
little research has been conducted. It is also determining the types of supports
needed to ensure that PK-3 teachers implement inquiry-based science as well as
the supports needed to encourage parents to make use of family science
activities. The results of these investigations will be a stimulating
educational environment for young children that nurtures their natural curiosity
to learn science and to continue to study science.