* 1102183
* QMHP: Multichannel interscale mixing: towards highly-parallel subwavelength imaging and focusing of light
* ENG,ECCS
* 05/01/2011,04/30/2015
* Viktor Podolskiy, University of Massachusetts Lowell
* Standard Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 04/30/2015
* USD 261,265.00

QMHP: Multichannel interscale mixing: towards highly-parallel subwavelength
imaging and focusing of light&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Abstract&lt;br/&gt;The
objective of research is to develop a novel imaging paradigm that eliminates the
need for bulky optical components such as lenses or mirrors and provides
dramatic improvement of resolution. The approach relies on carefully designed
diffractive elements that enable coupling between the waves carrying the
information about different lengthscales of the object, and on advanced
computational algorithms that recover the image based on the set of measured
diffraction patterns. &lt;br/&gt;Intellectual merit: &lt;br/&gt;Proposed
research focuses on the development of fundamentally new approach to imaging
that utilizes diffractive, rather than reflective or refractive optics. The
research has full potential to combine the benefits of deep subwavelenght
resolution, offered by scanning near-field optical microscopy with benefits of
large-area imaging offered by structured illumination microscopy. Diffraction-
assisted imaging is uniquely positioned to utilize the four-fold reduction in
wavelength in typical semiconductors to reduce the pixel size in mid-IR and
long-wave IR detectors by an order of magnitude, opening the road to build
highly-compact optics in these important frequency ranges.&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts&lt;br/&gt;Proposed research presents an opportunity to use recent
progress in computation, materials science, and fabrication to revolutionize the
full spectrum of imaging systems, from table-top microscopes to portable
cameras, affecting life of ordinary people and researchers alike. The developed
paradigm may become the ?workhorse? for optical characterization of novel
nanostructures and for in-situ real-time imaging of small biological systems.
Proposed mentoring, teaching, and outreach programs address the needs of high-
school, undergraduate, and graduate students, and take advantage of the
established productive theory-experiment collaborations