* 1102556
* Student Travel Support for IEEE INFOCOM'2011; Shanghai, China
* CSE,CNS
* 05/01/2011,04/30/2012
* Weiyi Zhang, North Dakota State University Fargo
* Standard Grant
* Darleen Fisher
* 04/30/2012
* USD 25,000.00

The IEEE INFOCOM Conference on Computer Communications will be held in Shanghai,
China from April 10 to April 15, 2011. This flagship technical conference is a
premier venue for presenting new research results in the area of computer
communications, and is widely attended by researchers and practitioners in the
field. Attending conferences such as INFOCOM is of great importance for the
development of graduate students. Participants have the opportunity to present
their work, attend panel and keynote sessions, and interact with hundreds of
others performing leading-edge research in the field. This proposal requests
funds to support approximately fourteen graduate students in the United States
to attend this premier conference. Women and under-represented minorities will
be encouraged to attend.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: The
intellectual merit of the proposal resides in encouraging and supporting
graduate student attendance to INFOCOM 2011. This will continue the tradition of
the previous INFOCOM conferences as a premier venue for bringing together
academia, industry, and government to share newest developments in
communications. Besides technical paper presentations, the conference offers a
wide range of technical activities including workshops and work-in-progress
sessions. Its rich program exposes participants to new ideas and cutting-edge
research and allows for interaction between researchers from all over the
world.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: This project integrates research and
education of graduate students through exposure to a premier technical meeting
in computer networks and communications. Students will have the opportunity to
attend high-quality presentations and interact with senior researchers as well
as peers in the field. The proposed student participation is expected to have a
positive impact on the students' research interests and quality. The project
will also promote diversity by encouraging and enabling women and other under-
represented minorities to participate. Furthermore, the truly international
flavor of INFOCOM is well-known and reflected in the composition of the
Technical Program Committee (TPC) as well as in the authors of the submitted and
accepted papers. As such, it cultivates international research interactions and
presents a real opportunity to students to increase their breadth of ideas,
research approaches, and technical perspectives.