* 1102842
* Crygenic Detector Work for SuperCDMS and Beyond
* MPS,PHY
* 05/01/2011,04/30/2015
* Betty Young, Santa Clara University
* Continuing Grant
* Jonathan Whitmore
* 04/30/2015
* USD 118,959.00

A broad range of observations -- from galaxies and superclusters to distant
supernovae and the cosmic microwave background radiation -- tell us that about
85% of the matter in the universe is not made of ordinary particles, but exists
in some dark form. Deciphering the nature of this dark matter is of fundamental
importance to cosmology, astrophysics, and high-energy particle physics. A
leading hypothesis is that it is comprised of Weakly Interacting Massive
Particles, or WIMPs, that were produced moments after the Big Bang. If WIMPs
exist and are the dark matter, then their presence in our Milky Way may be
detectable via scattering from atomic nuclei in a terrestrial
detector.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Cryogenic Dark Matter Search (CDMS)
Collaboration has pioneered the use of cryogenic phonon-mediated devices to
detect the rare scattering of WIMPs on nuclei and distinguish them from
backgrounds. With this powerful technology, they have operated for four years
the CDMS-II experiment with 30 detectors deep underground in the Soudan mine in
Minnesota, and obtained the best limit worldwide at high WIMP masses. This award
will fund the base program of this group to focus primarily on detector
characterization and optimization, rapid-turnaround initial cryogenic screening
of full-scale CDMS production detectors, rapid-turnaround Tc-testing of tungsten
film samples from the detector production line, detector fabrication support,
collaborative work with scientists and technical staff at new CDMS detector
fabrication and substrate polishing facilities, and assistance with CDMS-related
materials analysis. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Not only are its scientific results
important for astrophysics and particle physics, but its technological
development will also push the envelope of phonon-mediated detectors, whose
applications are increasingly widespread. In addition to working with students
from Santa Clara University (SCU), an undergraduate institution, the PI actively
mentors undergraduates, graduate students and junior research staff at other
CDMS institutions. The close proximity of SCU to Stanford, UC Berkeley and SLAC
makes close collaborations with these groups particularly easy - and
tremendously beneficial to SCU students. Lastly, the SCU group does some
outreach with K-12 students in the San Francisco Bay Area and supports the
public outreach program at Soudan as part of the SuperCDMS collaboration.