* 1102990
* CEEMS: The Cincinnati Engineering Enhanced Mathematics and Science Program
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2018
* Laura Mitchell, University of Cincinnati Main Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Kathleen Bergin
* 08/31/2018
* USD 9,202,392.00

The Cincinnati Engineering Enhanced Mathematics and Science Program (CEEMS) is
led by the University of Cincinnati as the higher education Core Partner in
Partnership with fourteen Core Partner school districts: Cincinnati Public
Schools, Oak Hills, Princeton, Norwood, Winton Woods, and a Rural STEM
Consortium of nine school districts. CEEMS works to meet the growing need for
engineering-educated teachers who are equipped to provide learners with
opportunities to achieve recently revised Ohio State Science Standards
juxtaposed with Universal Skills (21st Century Learning Skills). These standards
are centered in "real world application: connections to engineering." To address
this local, regional, state, and evolving national need, CEEMS offers four
professional development pathways to teacher preparedness: 1. Masters in
Curriculum and Instruction (CI) degree with Engineering Education (MCIEE)
specialization; 2. Summer Institute for Teachers (SIT); 3. Education Pathway
with Licensure for Engineering (EPLE) majors; and 4. Engineering Education
Pathway for Career Changers (EEPCC).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The key to these
pathways are eight new courses focusing on engineering and science content, and
design and challenge-based pedagogy. Leveraging these courses in combination
with existing Course and Curriculum Master's of Education pedagogical courses,
CEEMS develops and deploys two pathways for in-service teachers (MICEE degree
and SIT with certificate) and three pathways for pre-service teachers (MICEE
degree with licensure, dual undergraduate engineering degree with teaching
licensure, and teaching licensure for professionals with a STEM undergraduate
degree). Preparation of SIT participants allows them to (1) integrate the
materials into the courses they teach and (2) disseminate and provide
professional development to their colleagues through a district-level "teacher
leaders" dissemination program and a regional annual STEM education conference.
With this tiered approach, CEEMS is reaching a total of 1,925 teachers (160 pre-
service and 1,765 in-service) over five years. These teachers are impacting more
than 38,500 7-12 grade students per year.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The five
implementation goals of this engineering-based CEEMS MSP are to: (1) Improve
7-12 student science and mathematics achievement to prepare for and increase
interest in the college study of engineering or other STEM careers; (2) Develop
mathematics and science teacher knowledge of engineering and the engineering
design and challenge-based instruction process through explicit training and
classroom implementation support; (3) Recruit engineering undergraduates as
science or mathematics teachers through involvement in teaching experiences with
younger college students in the schools and through a succinct licensure
program; (4) Recruit career changers to science or mathematics teaching through
succinct licensure programs; and (5) Build a collaborative sustainable education
licensure STEM degree-granting infrastructure positively impacting the entire
region.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;CEEMS is firmly rooted in current research in the
fields of science, mathematics and engineering education. It affords a much-
needed opportunity to study how students learn mathematics and science if
engineering is used as the context. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The CEEMS research
effort uses a mixed method design to respond to the following questions: (1) How
do students in a design and challenge-based learning environment engage in
decision making, strategic planning, evaluation and revision of plans, creative
thinking, and task persistence? (2) How do students in design and challenge-
based learning environments perceive their involvement in STEM careers? (3) What
measures and instruments are most effective at capturing and documenting these
learning tasks? (4) How are the teachers' gains in knowledge of engineering
transferred into instructional plans? (5) What supports and barriers do teachers
encounter as they implement their plans with students? and (6) How do the
knowledge gains and implementation factors impact the teachers' pedagogical
content knowledge?