* 1102774
* Probing the Early Universe with Cosmic Microwave Background Polarization Anisotropies and Bringing our Research Into New York City Classrooms
* MPS,AST
* 05/15/2011,04/30/2014
* Britt Reichborn-Kjennerud, Reichborn-Kjennerud     Britt
* Fellowship Award
* Joan Schmelz
* 04/30/2014
* USD 257,000.00

Dr. Britt Reichborn-Kjennerud is awarded an NSF Astronomy and Astrophysics
Postdoctoral Fellowship to carry out a program of research and education at
Columbia University. Contemporary and future experiments that measure cosmic
microwave background (CMB) polarization anisotropies hold the promise of
providing an unprecedented understanding of the origin, composition and dynamics
of the universe, as well as possibly the strongest evidence yet supporting
inflation theory. To push forward the design of a cutting-edge CMB polarization
experiment, Dr. Reichborn-Kjennerud will lead an initiative to characterize the
next generation of polarization-sensitive bolometric detectors in a new
dedicated testing facility at Columbia University. Dr. Reichborn-Kjennerud will
also play a key role in the Antarctic flight campaign and data analysis of the E
and B Experiment (EBEX), a leading CMB polarization instrument. EBEX is unique
among its contemporaries in its combination of high-frequency coverage and
sensitivity to a wide range of scales; these characteristics will allow EBEX to
make unprecedented measurements of the amplitude of the galactic polarized dust
foreground, which will play a critical role in the analysis of data from future
CMB instruments. Additionally, EBEX will probe both of the yet-undetected CMB
polarization B-mode signals that were imprinted during the first fraction of a
second of the universe, and at late times due to the lensing of foreground
matter.

Dr. Reichborn-Kjennerud will also expand an ongoing summer outreach program for
New York City public high school students and teachers into a full-year program
that would be replicable at other institutions. During each year of the program,
one teacher and two students will join the lab during the summer to complete a
hands-on research project and to learn about astrophysics and about the lab and
university environments. The EBEX timeline will allow the experiment to act as
an ideal platform on which the teachers and students will participate in
building experimental hardware and working in scientific teams, and the
participants will gain first-hand experience with an experiment as it travels
from the lab, to Antarctica, and to the edge of space. Each teacher will work
with Dr. Reichborn-Kjennerud to produce an action plan for bringing the research
experience back to the classroom through school-year activities such as analysis
of science data with students, student visits to the lab, and visits by lab
members to the school.