* 1102005
* Leveraging SUNY LSAMP to Build Better STEM Pathways and Prepare Global STEM Scholars  (Louis Stokes Alliance for Minority Participation - Senior Level Alliance)
* EDU,EES
* 07/01/2011,06/30/2017
* Henry Teoh, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Continuing Grant
* Martha James
* 06/30/2017
* USD 2,521,815.00

The State University of New York at Stony Brook (SUNY-Stony Brook), lead
institution for the SUNY Louis Stokes Alliance for Minority Participation (SUNY
LSAMP) will leverage existing infrastructure, networks, and lessons learned to
build better pathways to increased student preparation in science, technology,
engineering and mathematics (STEM) disciplines targeted to historically
underrepresented minority populations, especially first generation college
students. Recruitment emphasis will be placed on the community college to 4-year
college transition during the project period. SUNY-LSAMP will also increase the
number of LSAMP students prepared for entry into STEM graduate programs and
ultimately the STEM workforce, particularly the professoriate. The alliance will
engage in building better STEM pathways by:&lt;br/&gt;--working to support
seamless transitions at critical junctures (high school to college, lower
division to upper division, 2- year to 4-year, UG to graduate, graduate to
professional) with special emphasis on increasing and improving transfers from 2
to 4 -year colleges.&lt;br/&gt;--providing innovative integrated academic and
disciplinary socialization experiences for historically underrepresented
minority STEM students designed to encourage and then support them in
undertaking a STEM undergraduate/graduate course of study.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;Additionally, the project will prepare global scholars by
implementing new activities to strengthen the alliance and individual
institutions and promote transformative change at the local, state and national
level by;&lt;br/&gt;--continuing to increase other sources of financial support
for SUNY-LSAMP so that the program can continue after NSF funding ends;
and,&lt;br/&gt;--taking a leadership role in key New York State initiatives
aimed at reforming UREP STEM curriculum and pedagogy, disseminating best
practices in UREP STEM education, improving transfer success and increasing and
improving international research opportunities.