* 1102356
* Gas Phase Processing for Low Cost Dye Solar Cells
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/2011,07/31/2015
* Brian Logue, South Dakota State University
* Standard Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 07/31/2015
* USD 432,000.00

This project is jointly funded by the Energy, Power, and Adaptive Systems (EPAS)
Program in the Division of Electrical, Communications and Cyber Systems (ECCS)
and the Electronic and Photonic Materials (EPM) Program in the Division of
Materials Research (DMR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Research Objectives and
Approaches: &lt;br/&gt;The objective of this research is to use chemical vapor-
based atomic and molecular layer deposition methods for the development of
highly efficient cost effective organic solar cells with a particular focus on
dye solar cells. The approach is multidisciplinary and uses a combined
experimental-modeling approach. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
Merit:&lt;br/&gt;The research addresses the fundamental issues associated with
the deposition and characterization of ultra-thin metal oxides and organic dyes
on the surface of nanoporous inorganic photoelectrodes along with the
characterization and analysis of charge transport at the gas phase synthesized
organic-inorganic heterointerfaces. The major research tasks include: 1.
Engineering electronic properties of nanostructured heterointerfaces using
ultra-thin atomic layer deposited metal oxides, 2. Developing an organic dye
loading process using a pulsed molecular layer deposition method, 3. Developing
a high throughput DSC process, and 4. Understanding the charge transport and
origin of efficiency enhancement in interface engineered
DSCs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts: &lt;br/&gt;The proposed research is
expected to lead to new methodologies for enhancing electronic quality of
photovoltaic heterointerfaces and loading organic light absorbers onto
nanostructured inorganic photoelectrodes and open new paradigms in processing
and cost-effectiveness of dye solar cells. Topics related to the proposed
research will be integrated into the PI's "Fundamentals of Photovoltaics" and
"Advanced photovoltaics" courses. This research will involve female students and
students from underrepresented groups in the proposed research tasks. A one day
long summer camp will be initiated to raise the awareness of Brookings high
school students to the science and technology of green energy.