* 1102332
* Liquid Crystal Signal Processing Devices for Microwave and Millimeter Wave Operation
* ENG,ECCS
* 04/15/2011,03/31/2014
* Anatoliy Glushchenko, University of Colorado at Colorado Springs
* Standard Grant
* Dimitris Pavlidis
* 03/31/2014
* USD 299,906.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will address the need for microwave
and millimeter wave signal processing devices which operate in the 10 GHz to 100
GHz range and above using liquid crystal based phase shifters. Current prototype
devices show that liquid crystals are promising materials for signal processing
over a wide frequency range. &lt;br/&gt;Objective&lt;br/&gt;1) Simplification of
the current device structures to reduce processing steps.&lt;br/&gt;2) Reduction
of losses in liquid crystal devices&lt;br/&gt;3) Identification of liquid
crystals with the best performance in the microwave and creation of new liquid
crystals materials by doping with high dielectric nanoparticles or ferroelectric
nanoparticles.&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit&lt;br/&gt;The project will result in
devices with several important advantages: 1) they will provide a tunable true-
time delay or a large tunable phase shift, 2) the devices will require almost no
power consumption, 3) there is a low loss tangent over a wide frequency range,
4) the devices will be small and can be integrated into an on-wafer system.
&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact&lt;br/&gt;The expected commercial and social benefits
of the proposed activity will be substantial as the developed devices will have
utility in a variety of photonic devices including phase retarders and true time
delay lines, micro phased array systems, changeable focus lenses, and beam
steering devices. In addition, it will provide new opportunities for the mature
liquid crystal industry by creating new non-display applications of liquid
crystals.&lt;br/&gt;We are planning also for extensive interactions with
industry and outreach activities to undergraduate, graduate, and high and middle
schools students.