* 1102163
* GOALI: Chip-scale single-molecule optofluidic sensing and manipulation
* ENG,ECCS
* 07/01/2011,06/30/2014
* Chee Wei Wong, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Mona Zaghloul
* 06/30/2014
* USD 374,000.00

The objective of this program is to examine the integration of optical and
fluidic networks into microchips, to sense and manipulate complex fluids for
life science applications. The program will examine silicon-based label-free
optofluidic chips with enhanced sensing resolution and manipulation
capabilities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit is to create a
transformative science base for wavelength-scale integrated optofluidics based
on optical resonators, with collaborative efforts with GE Global Research
Center. This technology can perform high spatial resolution sensing, while
seeking to significantly improve the refractive index measurement sensitivity.
Approaches will be pursued for reduced noise and increased specificity. The
second thread of this work will advance concepts such as optofluidic
multiplexers and demultiplexers in the toolbox of microfluidic chips. Optical
waveguide arrays with switchable laser excitation will be examined. A
fundamental advantage of our technology over conventional free-space optical
trapping is that the resolution can be sub-diffraction with the subwavelength
photonic devices. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts are the development
of high-sensitivity universal integrated optical sensors that will enhance Lab-
on-a-Chip functionalities. The proposed silicon-based optofluidic integration is
scalable to large arrays for high throughput analysis, and can be manufactured
within the vast silicon infrastructure. The proposed optofluidic chips can
significantly increase the processing power of microfluidic chips, for
industrial applications such as label-free biomolecule sensing, manipulation,
and active control. The educational components of this interdisciplinary
research include joint PhD student advising, undergraduate internships at GE,
outreach to high-school teachers, and a joint annual industrial-university
colloquium.