* 1102789
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Early Childhood Behavioral Skills and Educational Attainment
* SBE,SES
* 03/15/2011,02/28/2013
* Douglas Massey, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Saylor Breckenridge
* 02/28/2013
* USD 5,770.00

Doctoral Dissertation Research: Early Childhood Behavioral Skills and
Educational Attainment&lt;br/&gt;Douglas S. Massey (PI)&lt;br/&gt;Jayanti Owens
(co-PI)&lt;br/&gt;Princeton University&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Project
Summary&lt;br/&gt; This project examines the following topics: First, to what
degree can higher levels of behavioral skills in early childhood increase an
individual's likelihood of graduating from high school, and entering and
progressing through college? Second, do differences by gender in early childhood
behavioral skills, and in the interplay between behavioral and cognitive skills,
shape what is commonly called the "female advantage" in educational outcomes?
Third, to what degree has the growing trend towards family instability help
explain widely noted gender gaps in early childhood behavioral skills, as well
as the so-called "female advantage" in educational outcomes? To answer these
questions, the study conducts quantitative analyses of a dataset that has
followed children (and their mothers) from birth through their mid-twenties. The
dataset used relies on series of federally funded efforts known as the Early
Childhood Longitudinal Study-Birth Cohort (ECLS-B), the Early Childhood
Longitudinal Study-Kindergarten Cohort (ECLS-K), and the Educational
Longitudinal Study (ELS: 2002). Findings from this study seek to inform
educational researchers interested in the relative impact of family-based and
school-based sources of learning. Findings will also advance research on the
intergenerational dynamics that shape social inequality patterns.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact&lt;br/&gt;The proposed study seeks to offer
new insights for curricular and other intervention programs that seek to boost
children?s academic outcomes by targeting them in early childhood, such as Head
Start. Findings could also be of interest to the general public, as the study
might help document the cumulative and reinforcing effects of behavioral and
cognitive skills for the persistent and growing gender gap in educational
achievement and attainment. Together, this study offers parents, teachers, NGOs,
and policy makers empirical evidence on the origins of and possible policy
alternatives for addressing male disadvantages in educational attainment.