* 1102782
* The Last Glacial Termination in Southern Middle Latitudes
* GEO,EAR
* 10/01/2011,09/30/2015
* George Denton, University of Maine
* Standard Grant
* Paul Filmer
* 09/30/2015
* USD 393,844.00

The spectacular termination that marked the end of the last major ice age
represents the largest and most rapid natural climate change in Earth's recent
history. Identifying the conditions and processes that led to this termination
requires detailed chronologies of sensitive paleoclimate proxies that monitor
the last glacial/interglacial transition across the globe. This grant will
develop such a chronology in the middle latitudes of the Southern Hemisphere for
the reduction of ice volume in the Southern Alps of New Zealand from the last
glacial maximum to today?s conditions. Our chronology will be based on newly
developed state-of- the-art 10Be surface-exposure dating of glacial landforms
produced during this reduction. This grant will determine if the Antarctic
deglacial signal extents to middle latitudes of the Southern Hemisphere, thus
setting up a test of a recent hypothesis that the Principal Investigator
published in Science. The hypothesis posits that large Northern Hemisphere ice
sheets, triggered by rising summer sunshine, produced a self-sustaining flood of
icebergs and melt water into the North Atlantic, leading to cold northern
stadial conditions that altered the global meridional temperature gradients
which in turn regulated the major global zonal wind systems. A poleward shift
and/or intensification of the Southern Hemisphere westerlies warms the Southern
Hemisphere from middle latitudes to Antarctica and purges enough CO2 to the
atmosphere by Southern Ocean upwelling to maintain interglacial conditions
worldwide. Because New Zealand glaciers lie in middle latitudes near the outer
boundary of the Southern Ocean, this hypothesis predicts that their volume loss
should correlate with the Antarctic warming pulse and should be in antiphase
with the northern stadial triggered by freshwater influx into the North
Atlantic. This research will date ice recession in New Zealand?s Southern Alps
and thus test this prediction.

Present-day global warming is front-page news. But scientists still do not fully
understand the underlying mechanisms that caused the great global warming that
ended the last ice age and produced the interglacial conditions of the last
11,700 years, during which human civilization and population has developed. The
team has developed a hypothesis of how this great warming was achieved. The
grant will produce knowledge of the timing of Southern Hemisphere events to test
the hypothesis. This test involves recognition of changes in wind belts and
ocean circulation that accompany a shift in the temperature gradient between
hemispheres. A shift in the interhemispheric temperature gradient is also
expected shortly, as rising atmospheric CO2 is predicted to warm the Southern
less than the Northern Hemisphere. Thus, by studying the past great warming, we
may be able to anticipate how such changes may occur during the ongoing global
warming.