* 1102997
* The NanoBio Science Partnership for Alabama Black Belt Region
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2020
* Shaik Jeelani, Tuskegee University
* Continuing Grant
* Michael Ford
* 08/31/2020
* USD 9,999,999.00

The NanoBio Science Partnership is led by Tuskegee University and includes
partner universities (Auburn University, Alabama State University, Tuskegee
University, The University of Alabama at Birmingham, and The University of
Alabama); community colleges (Central Alabama Community College, Enterprise
State Community College, Shelton State Community College, Wallace State
Community College, Hanceville, and Wallace State Community College, Selma) and
school districts (Barbour, Bullock, Dallas, Lee, Lowndes, Macon, Montgomery,
Perry and Selma). The partnership also includes supporting partners from the
Alabama Math Science and Technology Initiative (AMSTI), the McWane Science
Center, Cornell and Wisconsin Materials Research Science and Engineering
Centers, the Southeastern Consortium for Minorities in Engineering (SECME), and
local industry. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The NanoBio Science Partnership addresses
critical needs in middle grade (6th-8th) science education in the Black Belt
region, an area that has long been characterized as socioeconomically and
educationally disadvantaged. The partnership provides professional development
to 6th to 8th grade science teachers in order to shift their instruction from
conventional teaching strategies to the use of an inquiry-centered approach in
conjunction with the infusion of NanoBio science principles and 3-D simulations
of concepts from their science curricula. Curriculum modules that support
inquiry are being developed for use by the teachers and are tied to the middle
grade science curricular objectives. The project also is recruiting and training
prospective science teachers through the partnering universities' teacher
preparation programs to provide them with an appropriately challenging and
contemporary science curricula and teacher education foundation. Data on student
and teacher performance are collected and analyzed through quantitative and
qualitative methods. Ultimately, the project will directly impact approximately
80 teachers and 10,000 students over five years. The partnership seeks to make a
lasting positive influence on education in the Black Belt region and its
economy. Findings in connection with research questions being studied in the
project and in regards to the overall project evaluation are being synthesized
in order to be disseminated broadly.