* 1102629
* CSR---PDOS: A Benchmarking Framework for High-Availability Distributed Storage Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 09/09/2010,08/31/2011
* Xubin He, Virginia Commonwealth University
* Continuing Grant
* Krishna Kant
* 08/31/2011
* USD 8,020.00

The availability and robustness of the I/O system is crucial to large-scale
applications that generate and analyze terabytes of data. Storage systems are
vulnerable to numerous hardware failures (I/O and metadata server crashes) and
contribute to as much as 25% of all system failures. Actually, highly available
data storage for high end computing is becoming increasingly more critical as
high-end computing systems scale up in size. To achieve high availability
storage systems, a challenging issue is to characterize the availability metric
in addition to performance of these systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research
investigates high-availability data and I/O services and benchmarking. The
investigators take an organized approach to developing a benchmarking framework
to measure the storage performance in consideration of availability under
various faulty conditions. The research involves four tasks: 1) develop
faults/errors model and design fault injection schemes for storage systems; 2)
develop an innovative benchmarking framework for high availability distributed
storage systems under different faulty conditions; 3) implement an Availability
and Performance Evaluation Toolset (APET) to integrate the fault injection and
stress testing libraries and capture raw performance of storage systems at block
level under various faults; 4) validate the benchmarking framework using APET
for block-level storage systems.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This research has direct
contributions to understanding highly available data and I/O services for HEC
systems, establishing a general benchmarking framework for characterizing
storage systems under faulty conditions, and thus benefiting the society by
guiding develop high-availability oriented distributed storage systems which are
crucial to many applications.