* 1102011
* Magneto-Optical Studies of Charge dissociation, Transport, and Collection in Organic Solar Cells
* ENG,ECCS
* 05/01/2011,04/30/2016
* Bin Hu, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* Mahmoud Fallahi
* 04/30/2016
* USD 396,000.00

The objective of this research is to investigate the critical parameters in
controlling charge dissociation at donor-acceptor interfaces, charge transport
in interpenetrating donor and acceptor networks, and charge collection at
electrodes in organic solar cells. The approach is to use unique magneto-optical
measurements: magnetic field effects of photocurrent and light-assisted
dielectric response as effective tools to elucidate internal light-electricity
conversion processes in organic bulk-heterojunction systems. The goal is to
enhance the development of fundamental guidelines for material engineering and
device design to develop highly efficient organic solar cells. The intellectual
merit includes the use of unique magneto-optical measurements for the
investigation of internal photovoltaic processes towards the development of
highly efficient organic solar cells. The unique magneto-optical measurements:
magnetic field effects of photocurrent and light-assisted dielectric response
can function as effective tools to ?visualize? the internal photovoltaic
processes in the generation of photocurrent. The investigation of internal
photovoltaic processes can elucidate the critical parameters to address critical
issues involved in light-electricity conversion in controlling charge
dissociation, transport, and collection processes in organic solar cells. The
broader impact includes the integration of research with education through
curriculum development, class projects, minority and female student training,
and outreach activities in the area of organic solar cells. On one hand, this
project can impact the research and development of highly efficient organic
solar cells. On the other hand, through the integration with education this
project can enhance the preparation of high-quality working forces in renewable
energy-engineering disciplines for economic development in our society.