* 1102348
* Theory, Methods, and Applications of Nonlinear Control Systems with Time Delays
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2015
* Michael Malisoff, Louisiana State University
* Standard Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 08/31/2015
* USD 340,439.00

Objective: This project will develop cutting edge stabilization and tracking
methods for important classes of deterministic nonlinear control problems that
ensure good controller performance under uncertainty or time delays. The work
will include engineering applications that will guide the research and ensure
the practical usefulness of the results. One application will be to a delayed
model of neuromuscular electrical stimulation, which is a technique that has the
potential to help restore function to patients with neurological disorders.
Another will be to experimental real time implementation of surface or
underwater autonomous vehicles in collaboration with Fumin Zhang from Georgia
Tech.&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: Delays and uncertainty are common in
chemical process control, combustion, networked systems, teleoperation, and
other areas because of modeling uncertainty, sensor designs, time consuming
information processing, and transport phenomena, but they are often ignored to
simplify the analysis or because the delays are short. In practice, many
controllers typically perform well under small uncertainty, but rigorous
analysis is needed to understand how the disturbances impact performance, and
how big the delays and disturbances can be before stability is destroyed. This
project will address these crucial issues using adaptive or delayed controllers
that respect the bounds that often arise in applications.&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts: The project will combine the PI's mathematical approaches with the work
of his engineering collaborators. This will increase the control engineering
community's understanding of more rigorous methods. While the applications will
focus on neuromuscular electrical stimulation and marine vehicles, we anticipate
that the work will be general enough to eventually apply to other areas where
time delays are important, such as aerospace and mechanical engineering. The
project will also promote interdisciplinary learning. The work will be carried
out at an institution that attracts many minorities, and special efforts will be
made to recruit students from under- represented groups.