* 1102461
* IINspire LSAMP - An Alliance Modeling How to Broaden Participation in Changing Midwest Demographics
* EDU,EES
* 08/15/2011,07/31/2017
* Kim Linduska, Iowa State University
* Cooperative Agreement
* A.  Hicks
* 07/31/2017
* USD 2,499,842.00

The Iowa (Illinois) Nebraska STEM Partnership for Innovation in Research and
Education&lt;br/&gt;(IINspire) LSAMP project, under the leadership of Iowa State
University, addresses the critical need to broaden the participation of
historically underrepresented minorities (URMs) in STEM education throughout
Iowa, Nebraska, and a segment of Illinois. This is a new NSF Louis Stokes
Alliances for Minority Participation alliance consisting of 16 higher education
institutions, nine in Iowa, three in&lt;br/&gt;Nebraska, and one in Illinois.
The alliance consists of six 2-year institutions, seven private
bachelor&lt;br/&gt;granting institutions, and three public universities. In
addition, there are state agencies, national&lt;br/&gt;laboratories, education
programs, and companies who are affiliated with the alliance. The IINspire LSAMP
has&lt;br/&gt;a goal to more than double the number of STEM baccalaureate
degrees awarded to URM STEM students within five years and build the foundation
for larger increases.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Because students fromm populations
historically underrepresented in STEM disciplines are the only growing segment
of their population, there is a particular statewide urgency to remove the
barriers to progress in developing a diverse STEM workforce.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This comprehensive and holistic work plan is built on a
foundation of available research and resources, focusing on the transitions from
high school and community college to ensure that each student has rigorous
academic preparation, social support, research preparation, and financial
support to complete their STEM degree and continue onto graduate school. The
current increase in the number of African-Americans, Hispanics, Native Americans
and Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islanders entering freshman and community college
transfers into STEM fields provides evidence that Iowa has begun to address all
aspects of student success from the final years of high school through entrance
into undergraduate studies. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed LSMAP activities
will further understand these transitions, develop additional models to increase
the number of students at these entrance points and nurture them through the
completion of the STEM degree with a set of structures and monitored activities.
Critical new programs include a research certification, community based
recruiting and attention to STEM pedagogy. The alliance is designed to connect
these new activities to existing programs within the participating institutions
in order to leverage the resources and expertise. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Finally,
the program and student progress will be evaluated for continuous improvement.
The partnership with the Science Education Resource Center (SERC) at Carleton
College in Minnesota will provide quick access to dissemination of successful
practices in STEM recruitment and retention. The overall project plan will
result in contributions to further research supported models to broaden
participation regionally in Midwestern states and nationally overall.