* 1102729
* MSPinNYC2 -- A New Partnership to Transform Urban Secondary School Mathematics and Science Experiences
* EDU,DRL
* 07/15/2011,08/31/2015
* Denise McNamara, CUNY Hunter College
* Continuing Grant
* Michael Ford
* 08/31/2015
* USD 10,437,160.00

The MSPinNYC2 project builds on a previous MSP-Targeted Partnership project
(DUE-0412413, called the MSPinNYC), with new partners joining most of the
original partners, to extend and deepen a promising program called the Peer
Enabled Restructured Classroom (PERC), which was piloted during the earlier
work. Core partners in the MSPinNYC2 partnership include Hunter College of the
City University of New York (CUNY) as lead, the Brooklyn, Queens, Manhattan and
Bronx High School Districts of the New York City Department of Education, and
three other colleges in the CUNY system: York College, New York City College of
Technology, and The Graduate Center. Additional partners include the College Now
program at CUNY, the CUNY School Support Organization, and New Visions for
Public Schools. The PERC program restructures 9th grade STEM courses to have 7
or 8 Teaching Assistant Scholars facilitate group work on a daily basis. TA
Scholars are average-achieving, i.e., not honors, 10th graders who passed the
course and the associated required state exit examination during the previous
year and are concurrently trained in a TA Scholar course led by the same teacher
as the 9th grade class. Pilot studies with PERC during the MSPinNYC project
suggested that the program reduces failure rates, closes achievement gaps, and
improves graduation rates. Based on lessons learned in the pilot studies with
9th and 10th grades in high schools in Manhattan and the Bronx, the MSPinNYC2
partnership is implementing PERC in nine high schools in Brooklyn and Queens,
while expanding the program within three schools in Manhattan and the Bronx to
incorporate all of grades 9-12 mathematics and science. A TA Scholar-to-College
Pipeline supports TA Scholars throughout high school and prepares them for
success in college. Students from PERC schools in all four boroughs who enter
CUNY colleges are being mentored during the college freshman year, while STEM
faculty and graduate students at the participating CUNY colleges are being
supported to incorporate more student-centered pedagogies into freshman year
STEM courses. PERC experiences are also being integrated into teacher education
programs at the CUNY colleges. The research plan includes studying how PERC
serves as a catalyst for school renewal, how the depth and sustainability of
PERC implementation support scaling the innovation, how participation by
teachers in PERC effects deep change within their practice, and how and why PERC
experiences, as well as other forms of student support, lead to improved
academic outcomes for students. The evaluation examines the fidelity of
implementation and quality of the project's major components to provide
formative evaluation, while the summative evaluation focuses primarily on
assessing student achievement outcomes, their long-term academic success, and
the overall diffusion of PERC into the secondary and post-secondary settings
involved in the partnership.