* 1102743
* A Combined Paleo-Proxy and Modeling Study of Abrupt Climate Change in the Tropical Atlantic and Its Relation to Atlantic Meridional Overturning Circulation Variability
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2011,02/28/2015
* Ping Chang, Texas A&M Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Candace Major
* 02/28/2015
* USD 495,424.00

Both coupled climate model simulations and instrumental data analyses indicate
that variability in the large scale circulation of the Atlantic Ocean (also
called the Atlantic meridional overturning circulation, or AMOC) may be tightly
coupled to tropical North Atlantic and subsurface temperature variability
through both atmospheric and oceanic processes. While a slowdown of the AMOC
results in an atmospheric-induced surface cooling in the entire tropical North
Atlantic, the subsurface experiences an even larger warming due to rapid
reorganizations of ocean circulation patterns. As a result, recent modeling
studies and observational data point to the subsurface of the western tropical
North Atlantic as the most sensitive Tropical Atlantic region to respond to AMOC
variability.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study, co-led by a paleoceanographer and
a climate modeler from Texas A &amp; M University, combines proxy
reconstructions of sea surface and subsurface temperature and salinity with
climate model simulations to identify and understand teleconnections between
ocean circulation, high latitude variability, and tropical Atlantic climate.
Specifically, the researchers will use a time slice approach to investigate the
evolution of vertical temperature and salinity change in the western Tropical
North Atlantic linked directly to atmospheric and ocean circulation changes
during three of the most significant events of the last deglaciation (Heinrich
Event 1, the Bolling-Allerod, and the Younger Dryas). They will also test the
fidelity of model results by generating similar proxy records for the past
60,000 years. Overall they seek to test the hypothesis that cold periods on the
high-latitude North Atlantic correspond to intense subsurface warming in the
western tropical North Atlantic, suggesting that western tropical North Atlantic
subsurface temperature change is a sensitive indicator of AMOC variability.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will improve understanding of the interplay
between ocean circulation and climate change, and could potentially improve
predictive capability of tropical Atlantic climate variability. Funding supports
two graduate students and fosters greater collaboration between two communities
of researchers.