* 1102489
* 2011-2016 Northeast Louis Stokes Alliance for Minority Participation (Senior Alliance Project)
* EHR,HRD
* 09/01/2011,02/28/2017
* Elizabeth Dumont, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Cooperative Agreement
* Martha James
* 02/28/2017
* USD 2,500,171.00

The Northeast LSAMP (NELSAMP) has significantly increased underrepresented
minority (URM) enrollment in STEM baccalaureate disciplines and their graduation
at five independent institutions located in three different states. The Alliance
enables its institutions to implement best practices that ensure student
success, such as research opportunities and formal Supplemental Instruction
programs. It also provides opportunities for NELSAMP students from the five
institutions to interact and find a larger identity group through Alliance-wide
events. The proposed NELSAMP Senior Alliance aims to maintain and build upon its
existing programs, develop intentional pathways for student progression from
community college STEM associate degree programs into NELSAMP, and implement an
NELSAMP-specific international research experience for upper level students. In
addition, it will encourage other NELSAMP students to participate in existing
international research activities by providing travel support funds. The
intellectual merit of the NELSAMP Senior Alliance is reflected in several
aspects of its work. NELSAMP will develop a cohort model to track and support
URM community college students through their combined AS-BS sequence in STEM
majors. Near-peer activities and participation in Alliance-wide events will
improve student persistence during their community college years. The
international research components will, similarly, add to STEM persistence in
the third and fourth undergraduate years. The broader impacts of this proposed
NELSAMP Senior Alliance include the increased pipeline of students from URM
populations in three states who persist from high school ?directly or through
community college -to degree completion in baccalaureate STEM disciplines. In
addition to buttressing persistence in STEM for upper level NELSAMP students,
the success of a dedicated international research experience program in South
Africa ? a country with many institutions eager to partner with Alliances-
should serve as a model to expand dramatically the number of international
opportunities for other LSAMP students.