* 1102803
* Mechano-Electric Regulation at the Plant Cell Periphery
* ENG,CMMI
* 04/01/2011,07/31/2015
* Barbara Pickard, Washington University
* Standard Grant
* David Fyhrie
* 07/31/2015
* USD 300,000.00

The objective of this award is to open up new, biophysical, approaches to
studying regulation of the plant as it undergoes development and as it
experiences environmental viscissitudes. Although one of the most important
sites of regulation the plant cell periphery, which interfaces with neighbor
cells and with the environment has been historically difficult to study with
biochemical techniques, emerging biophysical methods are permitting kinds of
data acquisition and analysis that promise to raise understanding to a new
level. These techniques are valuable because of the very fact that the periphery
of the plant cell is a mechanical structure in which complex load-bearing
elements play feedback roles with biochemical signals and pathways. The system
cannot be understood without mechanical analysis. The experiments of this
project combine high-resolution multidimensional microscopy of living cells with
a mathematical method called finite element analysis to elucidate how one common
but newly discovered set of peripheral structures helps stabilize cells
mechanically under set conditions yet participates in transitions to new cell
states as developmental and environmental parameters change. Particular focus
will be on mechanical stresses such as wind and
desiccation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;These interdisciplinary studies should suggest
new tools for agricultural stress management and approaches to genetic
manipulation of crop plants. More broadly, successes will direct attention to
the timely effort to expand the important field of plant biophysics,
historically overshadowed by biochemistry and molecular biology. Outreach plans
will bring underprivileged public high school girls to Washington University for
"Saturdays with a Scientist": interdisciplinary labs, lectures, historical
perspectives and social interactions to help them realize possibilities offered
by rigorous study of the sciences. Social interactions will be maintained with
these girls throughout high school to provide role models and informal career
counseling as they progress academically, develop their goals and, presumably,
consider application to universities.