* 1102796
* Simulations of AGN in Galaxy Clusters
* MPS,AST
* 08/01/2011,07/31/2014
* Brian Morsony, Morsony                 Brian          J
* Fellowship Award
* Harshal Gupta
* 07/31/2014
* USD 257,000.00

Dr. Brian Morsony is awarded an NSF Astronomy and Astrophysics Postdoctoral
Fellowship to carry out a program of research and education at the University of
Wisconsin-Madison. Dr. Morsony will simulate both cluster-center active galactic
nuclei (AGN) and non-central AGN to assess their relative importance as a
sources of heat and turbulence for the cluster and to determine how they change
the magnetic field configuration of the cluster. Dr. Morsony will also determine
how a range of different cluster environments affect the AGN, with the goal of
creating a general prescription for AGN feedback that can be used in
cosmological simulations where AGN jets are unresolved.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A
feedback mechanism is necessary to prevent the runaway cooling and in-fall of
gas in galaxy clusters. The primary candidate for feedback is AGN powered by
accretion of cool gas, which create jet outflows that heat the cluster gas to
form a self-regulating cycle of cooling, accretion, outflow and heating.
Understanding how feedback operates is critical to our interpretation of
observations of galaxy clusters and to understanding large-scale structure
formation. The proposed research will carry out a series of three-dimensional
numerical simulations of AGN outflows in galaxy clusters. The simulations will
include magnetohydrodynamics, gas cooling and star formation, and a link between
accretion rate and AGN luminosity. This will, for the first time, allow the
complete feedback loop to be simulated self-consistently. Simulations will also
allow the production of synthetic X-ray and radio observations for comparison
with existing observations and to determine the capabilities needed for future
observatories.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dr. Morsony will also develop educational
materials using black holes and associated astrophysical objects, such as AGN,
gamma-ray bursts and supernova, as a tool for teaching and outreach. Materials
developed will include visualization and presentation material and active-
engagement questions aimed at a high-school and introductory undergraduate
level. These materials will be developed through talks to the public and high
school students and by teaching an undergraduate course on the Astrophysics of
Black Holes. Materials will also be distributed online and by incorporation into
planetarium content.