* 1102060
* GOALI:Cooperative Integration of High Efficiency Multijunction Solar Cell Structures
* ENG,ECCS
* 10/01/2011,09/30/2016
* S. Bedair, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Eyad Abed
* 09/30/2016
* USD 460,918.00

The objective of this research is to develop a multijunction solar cell which
has the potential to exceed the current record solar-to-electric energy
conversion efficiency of 41.6%. This cell uses a tandem germanium/gallium
arsenide/indium gallium phosphide structure, which is limited by the current
generated in the top two cells. The approach is to integrate strained layer
superlattices into both of these cells in order to reduce the bandgap. The
resulting potentially significant increase in the current generated by the top
and middle cells with only a small decrease in voltage, should improve the
efficiency of the multijunction photovoltaic device.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
work will impact the science of photovoltaic devices and strained layer
superlattices. The ability to extend the optical absorption of the solar
spectrum beyond that of conventional GaAs solar cells has been a long-standing
problem since the demonstration of the first multijunction PV device. The
proposed work will extend this absorption region while maintaining lattice
matching of dissimilar materials, and thus carrier lifetimes. Strained layer
superlattices have wide applicability in other applications as well, such as
photodetectors and optical modulators for high frequency communications and
sensing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Photovoltaic materials have the potential to
provide a clean and renewable energy source. The project will train students in
a number of skills used in the semiconductor industry such as growth,
fabrication, characterization and device modeling. This will include the
participation of undergraduate, minority students, and high school students and
teachers.