* 1102362
* All Nations Louis Stokes Alliance for Minority Participation Program (Mid-Level Alliance)
* EHR,HRD
* 09/01/2011,12/31/2018
* Steven Dupuis, Salish Kootenai College
* Cooperative Agreement
* Martha James
* 12/31/2018
* USD 4,319,949.00

The All Nations Louis Stokes Alliance for Minority Participation (ANLSAMP)
program is the only Alliance focusing on Native American (NA) undergraduate
students in the science, technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM)
disciplines. The United States continues to fall short in graduating enough STEM
professionals to meet this nation's growing demand, especially NA and other
under-represented minorities (URM). To help address this continuing national
crisis, the ANLSAMP will continue to improve and grow the pipeline for NA and
other URM STEM students through its established network of collaborating partner
institutions. Thirty-eight institutions of higher learning have again come
together to continue the effort toward broadening the participation of NA and
URM in STEM at the baccalaureate level. The increase in the number of STEM
bachelor's degree programs at tribal colleges and universities (TCUs) is a key
indicator that the NA community has a wholehearted interest in strengthening the
knowledge base in STEM. The number of BS STEM degree programs at partner TCUs
has increased from three to eight during the period 2005 - 2010. The goal of the
ANLSAMP program is again to double the number of Native Americans and other
under-represented minorities enrolled in STEM disciplines at partner
institutions and assist them in completing a STEM BS degree. In order to achieve
this goal and related supporting objectives, the ANLSAMP program has built
activities through lessons learned and constructive input from it's established
cohort of partner institutions. Part of what makes the ANLSAMP program unique is
that over the years most the TCUs have been involved in the Alliance at some
point. TCUs are spread out over a fourteen states, primarily in the upper
Midwest. TCUs are targeted because more NA students are pursuing their higher
education at TCUs (IPEDS, 2010). Because many TCUs lack a variety of STEM
degrees, especially STEM BS programs, it is still important to have mainstream
colleges and institutions within the network to transition students from the
associate level to the bachelor level and beyond. The objectives of ANLSAMP are
as follows: 1. Increase by 100%, the enrollment of Native American students in
STEM disciplines at Bachelors of Science degree-granting institutions. 2.
Increase by 100%, the number of Native American students who receive a BS in
STEM. 3. Increase by 100%, the number of ANLSAMP Scholars that transition from a
two-year STEM program into a four-year STEM program. 4. Increase by 20%, the
retention of Native American students in STEM disciplines at BS degree-granting
institutions. 5. To enroll 15% of the ANLSAMP Scholar recipients in STEM
graduate programs. The broader impact of this program reaches beyond expanding
the opportunities for NA and other URM in STEM, ANLSAMP will continue to break
down barriers and expand horizons for the target population of mostly rural and
economically challenged NA students. The intellectual merit of the ANLSAMP
program, through the refinement and process of continual improvement within
state activities, is expected to have a transformative effect on how to
incorporate proven best practices into STEM research and education.