* 1102785
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Fingerprints of Global Warming in Worldwide Public Attitudes
* SBE,BCS
* 04/01/2011,12/31/2012
* Peter Howe, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 12/31/2012
* USD 6,130.00

This research will use local climate variability as the stimulus for a natural
experiment to test for a predicted relationship between individual experience of
anomalous local climate and attitudes about the magnitude of long-term climate
change. From Russia's unprecedented 2010 heat wave to the northeastern U.S.
"snowpocalypse," abnormal weather patterns are often cited as evidence for or
against the existence of climate change. The narratives surrounding these events
suggest that public opinion may be influenced by recent and ongoing weather, but
this hypothesis has not yet been systematically investigated. In this project a
broad multi-country collection of public opinion polls and academic surveys is
coupled with historical climate indicators using a new methodology, spatial
microsimulation, to create a model of the effect of local climate variability on
worldwide public attitudes. The global model is then used to generate predictive
comparisons of future patterns of public attitudes under the local climate
changes projected by the IPCC emissions scenarios. This research is designed to
advance both the methodology of Bayesian spatial analysis and the theoretical
understanding of human risk perception and adjustment to chronic hazards. This
novel methodology takes advantage of a broad collection of existing data to
address critical theoretical questions about human perception and response to
climate change. Few previous observational or experimental studies have
addressed the role of manifest climate experience in attitude formation about
the effects of climate change. The research is fundamentally interdisciplinary,
integrating theory from psychology with climatology and social science data
using methods derived from Geographic Information
Science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Do local climate anomalies influence individual
attitudes about climate change? If so, how will attitudes change over time as
the impacts of global warming are increasingly experienced? Although the ways in
which individuals experience environmental phenomena play a major role in
attitude formation and behavioral response, it is unclear both how people
perceive chronic hazards such as climate change and to what extent those
experiences influence attitudes and behaviors. To address this gap, this
research seeks to explain the effect of individual climate experience on
attitudes about climate change. If the experience of climate variability is
perceived as positive or negative evidence of global warming, it may influence
individual attitudes about climate change and decisions to mitigate or adapt.
Individual behavior change represents a major source of potential greenhouse gas
emissions reductions, and the results of this project will help to explain the
determinants of attitudes that shape such changes. By combining the results with
future climate projections, this project can facilitate prediction of positive
or negative feedbacks between climate change impacts, risk perceptions, and
mitigation behavior. Knowledge about the determinants of such behavior will be a
critical component of climate change policy and risk communication.