* 1102055
* Collaborative Research: Mathematical, Computational and Experimental Modeling of the Multidisciplinary Dynamics of Fluid-Structure Interaction
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2016
* Ivan Catton, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 08/31/2016
* USD 233,982.00

Objective and Intellectual Merits: In an age where multidisciplinary
interactions have become ubiquitous in science and engineering, the interaction
of a flowing fluid and a deformable structure or solid is one of the richest
sources of mathematical challenges and fundamental physical phenomena with
important applications to engineering and technology. Examples of mathematical
challenges are the chaotic, high dimensional modeling of turbulence that
continues to defy rationale predictions from first principles to the many
distinct and complex limit cycle oscillations that emerge from dynamic
stabilities that arise due to fluid-structure interaction. The physical
phenomena of interest range from blood flows in arteries, to airflow over an
oscillating tongue that can lead to clinical dangerous and potentially fatal
oscillations, to flow over flexible long span bridges and tall buildings, to
flow over and around flight vehicles over a wide range of scales from micro air
vehicles to modern passenger airliners, to fluid-structural systems whose limit
cycles may be a source of energy harvesting.

The methods that have been proposed to better understand and exploit these
phenomena include theoretical models of high sophistication including the
continuum models of the fluid and the structure. While analytical solutions
continue to be sought and found, computational models that tax the resources of
the most powerful computers also play an important role as do scale model
experiments based upon a sound fundamental analysis and understanding of the
first principles of the relevant continuum models. Indeed it is by exploiting
the complementary strengths of each approach, theoretical modeling,
computational modeling and experimental scale models that the deepest and
richest insights can be obtained.

Such a collaborative approach is proposed here. Professor Balakrishnan will lead
the theoretical modeling effort, Professor Hodges will be primarily responsible
for the computational models and Professor Dowell will be the lead for the
experimental scale model effort. Taken together this will be a powerful and
highly experienced team It is expected that each investigator and the members of
their research teams will learn much about the multidisciplinary dynamics of
fluid-structure interaction, and also from each other!

There are many physical phenomena that might be chosen to focus our research
program. Based upon our experience and after consultation among the principals,
two have been chosen for this research project, i.e. long span wing-like
structures in a flowing fluid which are found in novel flight vehicle designs
and long span bridges and flapping ?flags? which are studies as models of the
human tongue and also have been proposed as energy harvesting devices from the
natural wind.

Broader Impact: This proposal brings together senior investigators from three
major research institutions covering a wide range of intellectual experience
from modern mathematics to rigorously based computational models to
multidisciplinary experiments to address fluid-structure interaction phenomena.
This research will also provide an opportunity for graduate students and post-
doctoral visitors to participate and learn in this rich environment.