* 1102195
* CCSS-CPS: Collaborative: If the Bridges Can Talk: Toward Autonomous Structure Health Monitoring for Civil Infrastructure
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2015
* Gangbing Song, University of Houston
* Standard Grant
* chengshan xiao
* 08/31/2015
* USD 253,288.00

The objective of the research is to develop fully autonomous Structural Health
Monitoring (SHM) system&lt;br/&gt;consisting of sensors organically integrated
within the structure, free of wire leads and external power sources. Central to
the proposed approach are the multi-functional piezoelectric transducer-based
smart aggregates, which can transform ambient energy to electricity power,
modulate useful information on stress waves for communication, and generate and
receive stress waves for detection of structural
defects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectually, the project will advance the
knowledge regarding communication over concrete conduits&lt;br/&gt;through: i)
Measurement-driven characterization of SA transceivers and concrete channels
under different&lt;br/&gt;loading conditions, and ii) Design of modulation
schemes for acoustic communications in concrete channels. The project aims to
develop a holistic system solution through: i) the development of energy
harvesting and storage modules, in conjunction with low-power circuits, and ii)
Design and evaluation of energy-aware
task&lt;br/&gt;scheduling.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research is
expected to generate far-reaching broader impacts in science, education,
and&lt;br/&gt;society. Our systems-based research integrates innovative research
on hardware, algorithms, and&lt;br/&gt;architectures to enable the next
generation of cyber systems. It also integrates educational activities in real-
life infrastructure building, communications systems, and networking. In the
near term, the basic building blocks developed for communication and energy
harvesting can help extend existing wireless-based,&lt;br/&gt;battery powered
systems, making these systems more fault tolerant and energy efficient. In the
long term,&lt;br/&gt;the project outcomes can provide impetus for wide-spread
integration of fully autonomous SHM systems as&lt;br/&gt;the technology matures,
leading to improved public safety and reduced maintenance costs.