* 1102470
* Astroparticle Detection
* MPS,PHY
* 05/15/2011,04/30/2015
* Daniel Akerib, Case Western Reserve University
* Continuing Grant
* Jonathan Whitmore
* 04/30/2015
* USD 1,932,196.00

A wealth of observations shows that the universe is composed of more than 96%
invisible matter and energy. The nature of these missing components is one of
the most fundamental mysteries in physics, and has attracted broad attention
from the public. The leading candidate for the invisible "dark matter" is a
subatomic particle left over from the big bang known as the Weakly Interacting
Massive Particle (WIMP). Such particles are also predicted by supersymmetry, a
favored class of new particle models. If WIMPs exist, they are also the dominant
mass in our own Milky Way. Although they very rarely interact with conventional
matter, they should nonetheless be detectable by sufficiently sensitive
detectors on Earth, through elastic scattering with atomic nuclei in a target
material.

This award provides base support for work on the LUX (Large Underground Xenon)
dark matter search experiment. LUX features a 300 kg two-phase xenon dark matter
detector, which will be housed in a large water shield located in the Davis
Cavern at the Sanford Lab in the Homestake Mine, South Dakota. LUX is currently
beginning final integration of the detector, with surface operations expected to
start in late 2010 and underground operations in late 2011. The Case group has
had a central role in the design and construction of LUX and will play a major
role in LUX operations and analysis.

Broader impacts: The technology can be applied to other fundamental experiments
such as double beta decay and solar neutrinos, and may give rise to new medical
diagnostic techniques, or applications to Homeland Security and nuclear
proliferation/verification. This group will participate in extensive education
and outreach activities being undertaken by LUX in conjunction with Sanford Lab.