* 1102017
* Collaborative Research:  Reno Atmospheric Mercury Inter-comparison Experiment
* GEO,AGS
* 05/01/2011,04/30/2013
* Robert Talbot, University of Houston
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Edgerton
* 04/30/2013
* USD 150,754.00

This collaborative award will support an inter-comparison of different
measurement systems for atmospheric mercury (Hg). Hg is an important neurotoxin
which bioaccumulates in the food chain. It is an important global pollutant and
the atmosphere is a key site for processing and global transport. However, there
are large uncertainties in our understanding of the atmospheric cycling of Hg,
in part due to significant uncertainties in its measurement.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;The experimental campaign will occur during the summer of 2011 at a
site in Reno Nevada that has previously been used for Hg research, and will
involve four new measurement systems along with the traditional method system
that is currently widely in use for Hg. The new methods will be compared and
challenged using a carefully designed manifold for spiking and interference
tests. The specific goals for this project are: (1) to compare ambient
measurements of gaseous elemental mercury (GEM), gaseous oxidized mercury (GOM)
and particulate mercury (PHg) by multiple groups for four weeks; (2) to examine
the response of all systems to spikes of elemental Hg and mercury halides; (3)
to examine the response to Hg of all systems in the presence of known or
potential interfering compounds, including ozone, water vapor and other
compounds; (4) to analyze the data to quantify the level of agreement and the
results of interference and calibration tests for each measurement system; and
(5) to publish the results in the peer-reviewed
literature.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is aimed at improving the
measurement capabilities for a very important pollutant. The development and
testing of better methods to measure Hg follows on the recommendations of
several national assessments and an NSF supported workshop. This project will
provide training opportunities for a number of undergraduates, graduate students
and post-doctoral fellows.