* 1103201
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Origination and Emergence of Economic Fields: The Case of Cleantech
* SBE,SES
* 05/01/2011,03/31/2013
* Maria Farkas, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Saylor Breckenridge
* 03/31/2013
* USD 10,000.00

Doctoral Dissertation Research:&lt;br/&gt;Origination and Emergence of Economic
Fields: The Case of Cleantech&lt;br/&gt;SES - 1103201&lt;br/&gt;Mark Mizruchi
(PI)&lt;br/&gt;Maria Farkas (co-PI)&lt;br/&gt;University of
Michigan&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Abstract&lt;br/&gt;Historically, economic
scholarship has viewed the graduate buildup of changing practices as a strong
indicator that a new economic field is emerging or forming. Recently, scholars
have also found that labels, schemas, and their use by economic actors acquire
substantive meaning -- in other words: they matter. But to date, we know little
about where these meanings come from, how they are shaped, and to whose
advantage. This dissertation asks the following questions. Who are the meaning
makers in new economic fields being formed? What are actors trying to accomplish
in contributing to meaning construction in a forming field? How do actors assert
their preferred meanings and convince other actors to adopt them? To address
these questions, this dissertation analyzes the emerging economic sector of
cleantech through a mixed methods design. Cleantech is a new sector that
comprises firms across industries working on new technologies that enable better
use of limited environmental resources. Using a content analysis of press
releases form a population of cleantech companies, the project tests hypotheses
about what kinds of organizations succeed in creating meaning in a forming
field. In a related study based on interviews and observations, the project
examines the motivations, strategies and methods cleantech actors use to
influence evolving meanings in their economic field.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts&lt;br/&gt;Typically, scholars treat the
organizational environment in which firms or economic actors operate as an
exogenous force. In contrast, this project will examine the degree to which
individual firms/organizations act purposively to shape the larger environment
in which they operate. Results of this project might inform municipal and state
policies that seek to draw emerging economic sectors to their locales.