* 1103037
* Collaborative Research: P2C2--Synchronizing the North American Varve Chronology and the Greenland Ice Core Record Using Meteoric 10Be Flux
* GEO,EAR
* 09/15/2011,08/31/2015
* Gregory Balco, Berkeley Geochronology Center
* Standard Grant
* Paul Filmer
* 08/31/2015
* USD 35,589.00

Non-technical The North American Varve Chronology (NAVC) is a nearly 6000-year-
long sequence of annual sediment layers that was deposited in glacial lakes
adjacent to the margin of the Laurentide Ice Sheet, which covered much of North
America during the last ice age. At the time these sediments were deposited,
between approximately 12,500 and 18,000 years ago, climate was warming and the
Laurentide Ice Sheet was shrinking rapidly. The sediments that make up the NAVC
are an annually resolved record of events that took place at the retreating ice
margin, including the position and retreat rate of the ice margin, the flux of
water derived from summer melting of the ice sheet, and large glacial-lake
outburst floods that occurred periodically as ice-marginal lakes drained. The
goal of this proposal is to understand the relationship of these events to
climate changes that were occurring at the same time and are recorded in ice
core records from Greenland, which is important because i) it will help to
understand how large ice sheets responded to rapid climate warming, and ii)
because this time period is a potential analog for the current period of rapid
warming and likely shrinkage of glaciers and ice sheets. The obstacle to
comparing the NAVC with Greenland climate records is that, although both records
have been independently dated, the precision of these dates is a few hundred
years, which is not precise enough to accurately determine which climate changes
are related to which glacial events. This project will try to resolve this issue
by comparing records of atmospherically-produced Beryllium-10 in both NAVC
sediments and Greenland ice cores. Be-10 is a naturally occuring rare isotope of
Beryllium that is created by cosmic-ray bombardment of the upper atmosphere and
falls to earth in precipitation. Be-10 production changes through time due to
changes in the Earth's magnetic field, and these changes occur everywhere on
Earth at the same time. Be-10 is captured and preserved in sedimentary archives
such as ice cores and lake sediments. Thus, Be-10 concentrations in the
Greenland ice cores and in the NAVC lake sediments should show the same pattern
of changes. By aligning these changes with each other, we can place the two
records on a common timescale. Thus, even if we do not know the exact time that
a particular climate change recorded in the Greenland ice cores took place, we
will know exactly what ice-marginal events recorded in NAVC sediments were
occurring at that time. We anticipate that we will be able to match these two
records with a precision of several decades, which should be precise enough to
determine the relationship between important climate changes and ice sheet
change.

Technical The North American Varve Chronology (NAVC) is a 5659-year-long
sequence of annually laminated sediments (?varves?) deposited in lakes adjacent
to the retreating Laurentide Ice Sheet (LIS) in eastern North America. It is an
annually resolved record of ice-marginal position, meltwater and sediment flux,
and proglacial lake outburst floods between ca. 12,500 and 18,000 years ago. The
goal of this project is to correlate this varve chronology with contemporaneous
climate records derived from the Greenland ice cores. This is important because
such a correlation would reveal the temporal relationship between terrestrial
ice-marginal events and North Atlantic climate changes, which in turn would shed
light on unresolved aspects of late-glacial ice sheet-climate interactions
including, for example, i) the effect of proglacial lake outburst floods at the
margin of the LIS on North Atlantic climate , ii) the effect of North Atlantic
climate on surface ablation and retreat of the southeastern margin of the LIS,
and iii) the apparent conflict between sustained cold climate in Greenland and
significant ice margin retreat during this time period. The team proposes to
correlate these two records at decadal precision, independently of the absolute
dating of each of the records, by comparing records of atmospherically-produced
(?meteoric?) Be-10 fallout in Greenland ice cores and NAVC sediments. A decadal-
resolution record of Be-10 flux to the Greenland ice cores already exists. Here
we propose to carry out corresponding Be-10 measurements in varved sediments of
the NAVC to i) determine whether or not Be-10 concentrations in these sediments
record changes in Be-10 fallout, and ii) if so, generate a record of Be-10
fallout flux comparable to the existing ice-core record so that the two can be
correlated.