* 1103102
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Cumulative Impacts of Small Reservoir Construction on Evaporation and Water Quality in the Piedmont
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2011,06/30/2015
* Amber Ignatius, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 06/30/2015
* USD 11,992.00

Over the last two centuries independent landowners have constructed several
thousand small artificial reservoirs across the southeastern United States to
provide societal functions such as water supply (livestock, agriculture, golf
courses), recreation (fishing, boating), stormwater retention, and aesthetic
amenity. Typically located near stream headwaters, these small reservoirs
disrupt hydrologic connectivity, fragment habitat, distort water level
fluctuations, contribute to evaporative losses, impact sediment distribution,
alter water temperature, and modify water chemistry. Despite the recognized
impacts of small reservoirs, their effect on hydrological health, evaporative
losses, and water quality is poorly understood at both the individual reservoir
and cumulative watershed scales. To address these issues, this doctoral
dissertation research project examines small reservoir impacts within the Upper
and Middle Chattahoochee watersheds of northern Georgia and northeast Alabama.
This study specifically addresses the following main objectives: 1) development
and assessment of a geographic database of pond construction patterns and
distribution over time, 2) prediction of evaporative losses from small
reservoirs located within different landuse and simulated climate scenarios, and
3) evaluation of physicochemical water alteration trends upstream and downstream
of reservoirs with different trophic conditions. Geographic information systems
(GIS) analysis of historic aerial photography and landcover data will be
employed to characterize and analyze small reservoir construction over time.
Monitoring meteorological characteristics will allow for estimation of local and
cumulative evaporative losses from small reservoirs. Modeling evaporative losses
from small reservoirs under different climate scenarios will provide predictive
statistics to guide reservoir policy and planning. Finally, measurement of
physicochemical parameters above and along the reaches downstream from small
reservoirs with different trophic conditions will reveal how reservoirs alter
water quality. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Development and evaluation of historic
geographic databases of small reservoirs dating back to the 1950s will enhance
our understanding of the changing human impact on landscape and biological
systems. Knowledge of reservoir impacts will also inform strategies to manage
and better protect freshwater habitats, a crucial need to sustain growing
populations and increasingly threatened and endangered aquatic species. In
addition, this research will directly inform the work of urban planners,
policymakers, and small reservoir owners and allow for improved water allocation
strategies both within the U.S. and globally. Small reservoir construction is
especially common in developing areas including regions within Africa where
several thousand small reservoirs have been constructed over the past 30 years
to play an integral role in food production, drought mitigation, and health.
Understanding the cumulative impacts of small reservoirs is vitally important
for sustaining ecological and societal health and is essential for water
management planning at the individual reservoir and basin-wide scales.