* 1103734
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology for FY 2011
* BIO,DBI
* 01/01/2012,12/31/2014
* Melanie Harsch, Harsch                  Melanie        A
* Fellowship Award
* michael vanni
* 12/31/2014
* USD 189,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2011, Intersections of Biology and Mathematical and Physical Sciences. The
fellowship supports a research and training plan in a host laboratory for the
Fellow at the intersection of biology and mathematics. The title of the research
and training plan for this fellowship to Melanie Harsh is "Global assessment of
the variability of plant species response to climate change." The host
institution for this research is University of Washington with sponsoring
scientists Drs. Hille Ris lambers Janneke and Mark Kot.

Managing, and therefore predicting, the effects of climate change is one of the
greatest societal challenges. Developing and prioritizing management strategies,
complicated by variability between species and regions globally, require realism
in analyses and accuracy in predictions. This research seeks to understand and
predict climate change impacts on species limits through models that incorporate
complexity apparent in natural systems, specifically, species sensitivity
(functional traits) and ability to respond to climate change (demographic and
dispersal rates) along with possible interactions with the rate of climate
change. The approach utilizes theoretical mathematical models, based on stage-
structured integrodifference equations, and statistical models, built within a
hierarchical Bayesian framework to address (1) How climate and demographic rates
interact to determine response to climate change; (2) If functional traits or
demographic rates can predict response to climate change. This project also
identifies potential threshold limits of tolerance and relationships not readily
identified through observational studies, thus rapidly advancing the field of
biology and conceptual understanding by encouraging new research questions.

Training goals focus on developing the necessary skills to conduct
interdisciplinary research through advanced training in modern mathematical and
statistical methods, model implementation, and validation techniques, as well as
communication training through oral presentations, written documents, and visual
displays. Broader impacts include the dissemination of the results to
conservation and natural resource organizations through written documents and
presentations as well as public outreach.