* 1103827
* US Egypt Cooperative Research: Mixed Oxide Nanotube Arrays for Solar Energy Conversion: Materials Optimization, Charge Carrier Dynamics and Photothermal Characteristics
* O/D,OISE
* 08/01/2011,07/31/2017
* Mostafa El-Sayed, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Anne Emig
* 07/31/2017
* USD 200,001.00

1103827 &lt;br/&gt;This project supports a cooperative research project by Dr.
Mostafa El-Sayed at Georgia Institute of Technology (Georgia Tech) in Atlanta
and Dr. Nahla Abdel-Salam at the National Research Center (NRC) in Cairo, Egypt.
Included in the collaboration is Dr. Hasan Talaat of Ain Shams University (ASU),
Cairo, Egypt. They plan to study &lt;br/&gt;Mixed Oxide Nanotube Arrays for
Solar Energy Conversion: Materials Optimization, Charge Carrier Dynamics and
Photothermal Characteristics.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Intellectural Merit: The
construction of high-performance, affordable, and air-stable inorganic
photovoltaic and photoelectrochemical devices based on metal oxide nanomaterials
which are cheap, abundant and environmentally benign will enable long-term and
scalable solar energy conversion. Developments in this area, although
encouraging, have failed to achieve wide-scale deployment of new technology to
harness renewable energy. Fundamental studies on the electronic properties of
dye- and quantum-dot-sensitized solar cells have not kept up with recent
advances in nanofabrication of metal oxides. Additionally, efforts to identify
loss mechanisms and quantify the amount of heat produced in solar cells,
critical to performance and stability, have not been made, particularly in 1D
nanoscale materials. This work will extend the synthesis and optimization of
uniquely advantageous 1D nano-architectures of various metal oxides and employ
them to solar energy conversion devices, considering the production of both
current (photovoltaics) and hydrogen (through photocatalysis). Aspects include
materials optimization through the use of mixed oxide nano-architechtures as
well as new synthetic routes, photocurrent measurements, monitoring the dynamics
of charge carriers with ultrafast transient absorption, and quantification of
the amount of heat generated during the operation by photothermal spectroscopy.
The aim is to look for correlation between the conversion efficiency and the
heat evolved or the carrier dynamics and use it to guide modifications to the
material composition or method of synthesis for maximum conversion efficiency.
The observed correlation may help in understanding the basic mechanism of the
conversion process during the operation of such devices. Fundamental and
technological challenges will be met by systematically exploring metal oxide
doping to lower the electrode bandgap and improve conductivity as well as the
use of various sensitizers to improve light absorption. Physical investigations
will consider both the energy converted to fuel or electricity as well as the
energy lost to heat. This combination of material optimization and fundamental
characterization within the same research team is a novel solution to enhance
international collaboration. This project will combine the three research groups
with experience in their respective areas: nanoparticle and nanotube synthesis
and ultrafast dynamics (Georgia Tech.), materials synthesis and characterization
(NRC), and photothermal measurements (ASU). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impact: The research can lead to major technological advances in solar energy
with major impacts on world societies. As the need for more renewable energy
sources is global, the proposed work will be carried out in collaboration with
scientists from Egypt, to increase the training, experience, awareness,
technology, and resources of both countries as well as the wider world. Key
experimental work will be conducted by junior scientists, postdocs, and graduate
students in the U.S. and also in Egypt. Postdocs and junior scientists will be
responsible for experimental planning, and will gain vital experience in
international collaborations. Scientists will travel between countries to
exchange knowledge and materials, give lectures, and improve international
cooperation. Dr. El-Sayed meets with high-school students through the National
Nanotechnology Infrastructure Network youth outreach program and this work will
be featured prominently.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal is supported under
the US-Egypt Joint Fund Program where NSF supports the US side and the
Government of Egypt funds the Egyptian side.