* 1103370
* PostDoctoral Research Fellowship
* SBE,SMA
* 09/01/2011,07/31/2014
* Scott Yamamoto, Yamamoto                Scott          H
* Fellowship Award
* Fahmida Chowdhury
* 07/31/2014
* USD 120,000.00

In the U.S., individuals with disabilities continue to experience higher
unemployment and underemployment and worse employment outcomes than individuals
without disabilities. Research suggests self-employment can be a catalyst for
improving these disparities. Many individuals with disabilities receive
employment-related services, including support for self-employment, through
vocational-rehabilitation (VR) agencies. The rate of self-employment cases
successfully closed by VR across the country, however, has remained low for
decades. Meanwhile, the globalized U.S. economy continues to evolve, as
technological advancements and innovations redefine employment while creating
new markets and business opportunities. Thus, the potential for more individuals
with disabilities to become self-employed through VR and remain successful is
compelling. Agencies will be challenged to adapt to these ongoing changes and
find ways they can improve clients' self-employment opportunities and outcomes.

Intellectual Merit:

The intellectual merit of this postdoctoral project is in contributing new
scientific knowledge to the fields of rehabilitation and special education. The
extant research literature on self-employment of individuals with disabilities
in the U.S. is currently still building an empirical foundation, which only
began in the mid-1990s. A small number of studies tentatively suggest self-
employment success for these individuals appears to be mostly influenced by
individual characteristics, level of supports, and accountability systems.
Further study is needed, however, to draw any valid conclusions. The Fellow will
conduct a postdoctoral study on the role of VR in self-employment of individuals
with disabilities in the U.S. by utilizing a mixed method of multilevel
statistical modeling and qualitative phenomenological interviewing. Data will be
obtained from the Rehabilitation Services Administration and Oregon Vocational
Rehabilitation Services. Seven research questions will address the current state
of self-employment of individuals with disabilities through VR, the individual
and programmatic factors that explain whether clients reach successful case
closure, and recent national and local trends. The combined scope and
methodology of this project are also necessary precursors to designing and
testing interventions in self-employment and, ultimately, deriving substantive
theories.

Broader Impacts:

The broader impacts of this postdoctoral project include (a) improving VR
services in self-employment and clients' outcomes through the use of research
evidence; (b) motivating positive changes in VR agency policies at the county
and state levels; (c) expanding employment opportunities and options to
individuals with disabilities to support their goals for economic independence,
self-determination, and self-worth; (d) raising the visibility of individuals
with disabilities in self-employment to reduce long-held stereotypes and social
stigma, and increase social integration; (e) cross training of VR counselors,
education professionals, and members of the business community to increase their
knowledge of issues and concerns unique to each respective profession and to
reconcile competing professional interests; and (f) collaborating actively and
regularly with university researchers, VR, and education professionals to
advocate, develop, refine, and support STEM focused curricula and experiential
learning opportunities for secondary students with disabilities in preparation
for post-high school life and career.