* 1103027
* Synthesis, Structure, and Properties of Oriented Conjugated Polymer Nanofibers
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2011,05/31/2015
* David Martin, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 05/31/2015
* USD 382,998.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will investigate in detail
the relationship between the chemistry, solid-state microstructure, and
macroscopic charge transport properties of solution-processable conjugated
polymers. Aligned assemblies of conjugated nanofibers will be created and their
performance measured both parallel and perpendicular to the direction of the
molecular backbone. The microstructure will be examined in using optical and
electron microscopy, with a particular focus on defect structures observed by
low dose electron diffraction and high resolution electron microscopy.
Electrical properties will be measured over a range of frequencies using
impedance spectroscopy. The primary materials of interest will be functionalized
poly(propylene dioxythiophenes) (Poly(ProDOT+)) using monomers designed and
synthesized in the PI's laboratory.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NON-
TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research project will provide
fundamental information about the structure and properties of conjugated
polymers; plastics that can conduct electricity. These materials are of interest
for a variety of devices including biomedical electrodes, chemical sensors,
transistors, light-emitting diodes, and photovoltaics. These devices are
providing improvements in health care, national security, and reducing our
energy requirements. The project will provide direct support for graduate
students in science and engineering, and will make it possible to continue
current outreach activities with undergraduate students. The PI's research group
will also continue established interactions with industrial and international
collaborators.