* 1103443
* PostDoctoral Research Fellowship
* GEO,OPP
* 06/15/2011,05/31/2013
* Heather Alexander, Alexander               Heather        D
* Standard Grant
* Neil R. Swanberg
* 05/31/2013
* USD 161,340.00

Global change models predict high-latitude boreal forests will become
increasingly susceptible to fire threat due to climate warming. Because boreal
forests contain a large proportion of terrestrial carbon (C) stocks, any change
to the fire regime will likely have substantial impacts on C exchange and
storage. This project will utilize a chronosequence approach to examine how fire
and permafrost interact to influence forest regeneration and C sequestration
within larch forests near arctic treeline in Far Northeastern Siberia. The
hypothesis is that post-fire soil organic layer depth mediates C storage through
indirect impacts on forest regeneration because of its role as a thermal
regulator and barrier to seed germination. This research will build on
investigations initiated in summer 2010 and will be compared to recent and
ongoing research within Interior Alaska. A cross-polar comparison will increase
our understanding of how C dynamics under an altered fire regime vary across
boreal regions with differing permafrost dynamics and vegetation types. This
fellowship will support the post-doctoral fellow?s career goals by providing
training in arctic boreal forest ecology, experience in executing independent
research, skills in mentoring undergraduate students, and an opportunity to
collaborate with arctic researchers from within and outside the U.S. By
addressing fundamental questions concerning how an altered fire regime
indirectly impacts C cycling of Siberian larch forests, this study will provide
much needed information about an ecologically important yet understudied region
and will improve our ability to predict the impacts of climate change and
altered fire regimes on arctic ecosystems.

Siberian larch forests comprise 20% of all boreal forest ecosystems and are a
critical component of the global C cycle. They are different from other boreal
forests in that they are comprised of a single tree genus (Larix spp.), with a
deciduous growth habit, that often grows on continuous permafrost. Thus, their
response to warming climate and an altered fire regime is likely to differ from
boreal forests in other regions. Our current knowledge of their ecology and
potential susceptibility to climate change remains limited because of logistical
constraints associated with conducting research in Siberia and minimal
translations of Russian scientific efforts into English. Uncertainties regarding
current C pools in Siberian boreal forests remain a significant factor affecting
our ability to predict climate-induced changes to the global C cycle. By
comparing results to the relatively well-studied boreal forests of interior
Alaska, the study will further our ability to detect whether boreal response to
changing fire is similar across zones differing in permafrost characteristics
and vegetation types, or whether more detailed studies are needed for accurate
modeling of ecosystem response to climate change. The study will contribute to
our understanding of how boreal fires impact global C cycling and provide
essential data necessary for scaling-up boreal forest C pools, estimating C
emissions from boreal fires, and calibrating predictive models of future global
C cycling.

Broader Impacts: The research will advance our understanding of Siberian larch
forests, an important yet understudied ecosystem, while advancing the teaching
and mentoring skills of a post- doctoral researcher. The post-doctoral fellow?s
research activities, methodologies, and findings will be integrated into the
education of undergraduate students through participation in the NSF-funded
Polaris Project lecture series and discussion groups and by mentoring of an
undergraduate field assistant in ecosystem ecology. Basing field research out of
the Northeast Science Station in the Russian Far Northeast will provide a venue
for building partnerships between the post-doctoral fellow, other arctic
researchers from the U.S., and Russian collaborators. The collaborations will be
used to integrate research findings with Russian scientific efforts. Scientific
findings resulting from the proposed research will be widely disseminated
through publications in scientific journals, presentations at international
conferences, and more informally, through postings on the post-doctoral
researcher?s web page. Active layer and soil moisture measurements will be
submitted to the Circumpolar Active Layer Monitoring network to provide critical
data for model validations and scaling-up of climate change impacts on boreal
forest ecosystems.