* 1103972
* Interactive Media Design Program
* EHR,DUE
* 02/01/2011,01/31/2015
* James Olson, Moraine Park Technical College
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Teles
* 01/31/2015
* USD 192,830.00

In partnership with industry and K-12 leaders, the college is developing and
implementing an Interactive Media Design Associate Degree program for 60
students; creating a career pathway which allows at least 180 high school
students to receive college credit in Interactive Media Design courses; and
creating articulation agreements with four-year colleges in science, technology,
engineering, and mathematics (STEM) related fields. Project activities include
creating new courses; providing staff professional development in content and
instructional delivery techniques; purchasing the necessary equipment and
software for the program; and implementing a plan to recruit and retain
underrepresented groups such as minorities, women, and disabled. Primary
audiences to be affected by these activities include K-12 and college students,
faculty members, and industry partners.

The project goals are to: a. Develop and implement an Interactive Media Design
Associate Degree program. b. Create a career pathway which allows high school
students to receive college credit. c. Create articulation agreements with four-
year colleges in STEM fields.

There are three objectives tied to the success of this project: a. By June 2012,
new courses are being completed in the Worldwide Instructional Design System
(WIDS) format for the Interactive Media Design Associate Degree, posted to
Curriculum Bank and accessible to other colleges. b. A minimum of five high
school students per year enter the college with transcripted credit from
Interactive Media Design related courses. c. Three program-to-program
articulation agreements are being established with four-year colleges and
universities.

Intellectual Merit: This project addresses the growing need in the district for
interactive media design technicians who possess a range of skills and can
undertake a variety of job duties in the workplace. Graduates are from the
college program are capable of working with animation production, website
production, virtual worlds, and video production. This project is being combined
with the existing NSF S-STEM scholarship program allowing Interactive Media
Design students to receive scholarships through that program. High school staff
are serving on the project steering committee alongside industry
representatives.

Broader Impacts: In consultation with industry experts, advisory committees, and
high school faculty, the new program is providing a foundation for the
interactive media technician. Regional and national workforce indicates a 26%
growth for the interactive media technicians between 2006 and 2016. Graduates
are qualified to obtain a variety of interactive media design positions such as
animator, digital artist, digital media designer, interactive media designer,
Flash developer, graphic designer, motion graphics artist, multimedia production
assistant, video production assistant, video editor, and freelance digital media
producer in companies ranging from advertising agencies to manufacturing plants.
The partnership with the local high schools is creating a career
pathway/educational continuum to ensure that students are learning current
industry competencies.