* 1103468
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology for FY 2011
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2014
* Shermin deSilva, deSilva                 Shermin
* Fellowship Award
* michael vanni
* 08/31/2014
* USD 189,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2011, Broadening Participation. The fellowship supports a research and training
plan in a host laboratory for the Fellow who also presents a plan to broaden
participation in biology. The title of the research and training plan for this
fellowship to Shermin DeSilva is "Social stratification and leadership in
elephants." The host institution for this fellowship is the Colorado State
University, and the sponsoring scientist is Dr. George Wittemyer.

Socioecology explores how social and ecological factors structure animal
societies. This research builds much-needed bridges between theory and empirical
observation in the study of social evolution. It poses three inter-related
questions: 1) How does resource availability influence social cohesion? 2) What
effect does this have on dominance and leadership behavior? 3) How do
individuals adjust to social disruption? Theoretical predictions are tested by
comparing the social behavior of wild Asian and African elephants, sister
species that experience different ecological pressures. It examines how the
spatial arrangement and abundance of resources shape social relationships via
individual movement decisions, whether this in turn drives the emergence of
leadership and dominance hierarchies, and ultimately how individuals cope with
changes such as the loss of a companion.

Training objectives include acquiring experience working with a diverse array of
data ranging from animal movements, to satellite imagery, and social networks.
It also offers a comparative perspective on research and conservation in the
African context relative to the Asian, with direct implications for wildlife
management. Both field sites host local and foreign students at the
undergraduate and graduate level, including those from the U.S. and Europe,
encouraging collaboration and exchange of expertise. Researchers also oversee
community-based education and sustainable livelihood programs seeking to reduce
conflict between people and elephants. Long-term goals are not only to further
the study of behavior, but also to address the challenges people and wildlife
face in living together through participatory science-based conservation.