* 1103573
* IRFP: Climatic Niche Evolution in South American Trees and its Consequences
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2013
* Kyle Dexter, Dexter                  Kyle           G
* Fellowship Award
* Cassandra Dudka
* 08/31/2013
* USD 143,750.00

The International Research Fellowship Program enables U.S. scientists and
engineers to conduct nine to twenty-four months of research abroad. The
program's awards provide opportunities for joint research, and the use of unique
or complementary facilities, expertise and experimental conditions abroad.

This fellowship funds Dr. Kyle Dexter to spend 24 months conducting research
with Dr. Oliver Phillips, of Leeds University, and Dr. Toby Pennington, of the
Royal Botanic Garden Edinburgh.

The focus of the project is to investigate the evolution of climatic niches
through time in South American trees. The 3-way collaboration takes advantage of
several existing large-scale networks of tree plots in diverse climatic zones of
South America, the ecological expertise of Dr. Phillips, the phylogenetic
expertise of Dr. Pennington, and the expertise of Dr. Dexter in integrating
ecological and phylogenetic approaches. More specifically, the research plan is
to synthesize taxonomy across the plot networks, which are found in different
climatic biomes (e.g. rainforest, dry forest, savannah), and to then construct
phylogenies, or evolutionary trees, for all genera of angiosperms and all
species of the Leguminosae present in the plot networks. This will allow the
investigators to examine how evolutionary lineages, be they families, genera, or
species, have shifted among climatic biomes through time.

This project will elucidate the role of climatic preference switching in driving
speciation of trees and give insights into the future of South American forests
under climate change. For example, the investigators will be able to assess
which lineages are more vulnerable under alternative future climatic scenarios
and how much evolutionary history may be lost if specific climatic biomes
disappear.