* 1103500
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology for FY 2011
* BIO,DBI
* 04/01/2012,05/31/2014
* Daniel Allen, Allen                   Daniel         C
* Fellowship Award
* michael vanni
* 05/31/2014
* USD 119,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2011, Intersections of Biology and Mathematical and Physical Sciences. The
fellowship supports a research and training plan in a host laboratory for the
Fellow at the intersection of biology with physics and engineering. The title of
the research and training plan for this fellowship to Daniel Allen is
"Biodiversity and engineering function: integrating physical processes into
biodiversity and ecosystem function research." The host institutions for the
fellowship are the University of Michigan and Virginia Tech, and the sponsoring
scientists are Drs. Bradley Cardinale and Theresa
Wynn.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Some pressing environmental problems are being
exacerbated by human-induced changes to riparian ecosystems that result in
erosion and jointly influence fluid dynamics and materials transport along steam
banks. It is not fully understood how plants modify the physical processes that
control erosion by reinforcing soil with their roots. However, past research in
this area has held a narrow view of biology, limiting ?biota? to a single
species or functional group of plants. A completely separate area of research
has shown that plant biodiversity can increase the density and biomass of roots
produced by plant communities. The goal of this research is to merge these two
areas of research to investigate how biodiversity influences physical processes
and to conduct laboratory and field experiments to test if plant biodiversity
reduces stream bank erosion.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Training objectives include
fluid mechanics and sediment transport and, in biology, biodiversity and species
coexistence theory. Career development activities include learning to publish
proficiently, especially at the interface of biology and physics; mentor
undergraduate students; and improve teaching skills. A practical outcome of the
research is determining which plants best stabilize stream banks, as stream bank
erosion is one of the most pressing environmental problems affecting North
American streams. Educational outreach to undergraduate students and organizing
a stream restoration project with public high school students are also being
conducted.