* 1103668
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2011
* BIO,DBI
* 08/01/2011,07/31/2014
* Kyle Hernandez, Hernandez               Kyle           M
* Fellowship Award
* michael vanni
* 07/31/2014
* USD 189,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2011, Broadening Participation. The fellowship supports a research and training
plan in a host laboratory for the Fellow who also presents a plan to broaden
participation in biology. The title of the research and training plan for this
fellowship to Kyle Hernandez is "Modeling the responses of plants to herbivory
in changing environments." The host institution for this research is the
University of Texas at Austin, and the sponsoring scientist is Dr. Thomas
Juenger.

Tolerance is the degree to which plants are unaffected by plant-eating insects.
The ability of plants to maintain fitness in the face of herbivore damage has
important ecological, evolutionary and applied implications, yet relatively
little is known of its environmental consequences or its genetic basis. This
research investigates the patterns of tolerance in plants in different
environments, identifies possible underlying phenotypic and physiological
mechanisms, determines the genetic architecture of these underlying mechanisms,
and describes the genetic trade-offs associated with tolerance using the model
species Brachypodium distachyon. This research has a strong mathematical
modeling aspect that allows more accurate estimations of important genetic
parameters in continuous traits. Also, Brachypodium is being developed as a
model system for research, as biofuel, and as a food crop. Therefore, this
project explores the basic biology of an important plant with potentially
significant broader impacts for society. Training objectives include developing
a novel perspective for the study of tolerance in plants and acquiring skills in
mathematical modeling to permit comparisons of the relative merits of different
mathematical models for estimating evolutionary parameters of continuous traits.
Career development activities include improved technical writing, mentorship,
leadership, teaching, and outreach skills. Broader impacts include educational
and outreach activities with a diverse body of students in the Austin, TX area,
local communities, and schools.