* 1103767
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology for FY 2011
* BIO,DBI
* 01/01/2012,01/31/2015
* Rori Rohlfs, Rohlfs                  Rori           V
* Fellowship Award
* michael vanni
* 01/31/2015
* USD 189,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2011, Intersections of Biology and Mathematical and Physical Sciences. The
fellowship supports a research and training plan in a host laboratory for the
Fellow at the intersection of biology and statistics. The title of the research
and training plan for this fellowship to Rori Rohlfs is "Developing statistical
tools to examine the evolution of gene expression." The host institution for
this fellowship is the University of California, Berkeley, and the sponsoring
scientists are Drs. Rasmus Nielsen and Sandrine Dudoit.

The regulation of the degree to which a particular gene is used, called gene
expression, has been proposed as an important mechanism explaining much of
species diversity yet a rigorous statistical framework that models gene
expression evolution has not yet been established. This research uses the
Ornstein-Uhlenbeck process to build a model of the evolution of gene expression.
It takes into account the existing phylogeny, relationships between genes and
between species, factors limiting constraints on gene expression, and an
optimally fit expression level. After demonstrating the model's biological and
statistical validity, the research uses a data set of mammalian gene expression,
as measured with new RNA-Seq technology. Specific hypotheses regarding the
evolution of gene expression levels in mammals are tested. For instance, based
on the model, the likelihood ratio test determines if genes expressed in human
brain are undergoing rapid expression adaptation along the human species
lineage. A goal is to produce an open source software package of the model for
broad use in studies of expression evolution across biological disciplines.

Training goals include strengthening scientific collaborations and developing
and distributing tools that will be accessible widely to the scientific
community. Broader impacts include outreach to the public through collaborations
with science media and public museums on the underlying causes of differences
between species. Educational outreach includes designing and teaching a course
at K-12 schools and community colleges.