* 1103878
* US Egypt Cooperative Research: Capacity building for space-based archaeological prospection management and training tools
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/2011,09/30/2016
* Sarah Parcak, University of Alabama at Birmingham
* Standard Grant
* Anne Emig
* 09/30/2016
* USD 104,662.00

1103878 This project supports a cooperative research project by Dr. Sarah
Parcak, U. of Alabama at Birmingham in collaboration with Dr. Elsayed Zaghloul,
National Authority for Remote Sensing and Space Sciences (NARSS), Cairo, Egypt.
They plan to conduct archaeology, geological, and remote sensing exploration in
the el-Lisht region of Egypt. The purpose is to leverage the scientific
capabilities of each participant, and aid in training both US and Egyptian
students in archaeology, geology, and remote sensing. The PIs aim to start a
long-term archaeological and geological research in the el-Lisht region, which
will be used as a base for various forms of training for student and scientist
participants. They will develop plans for extensive future scientific
collaborations between UAB and NARSS, as well as Egypt?s Supreme Council for
Egyptian Antiquities (SCA). The project increases the capacity of the SCA to
carry out its mission to safeguard Egypt?s cultural heritage via training and
data sharing. The work will also increase our archaeological knowledge and
understanding of ancient Egypt, as well as providing enhanced tools for
conserving Egypt?s cultural heritage. This project will focus on two distinct
but interrelated areas of research: the satellite remote sensing of the
archaeology of ancient Egypt, and archaeological and geological explorations in
the el-Lisht region. The satellite remote sensing research will answer broader
questions about settlements and settlement patterns across Egypt, while the el-
Lisht project will apply preliminary results from the UAB-NARSS partnership for
a long term project.

Intellectual Merit: The project findings will test which settlement models can
best be applied to understand how individuals and circumstances influenced
change and organization at multiple levels in ancient Egypt, based on project
results from the el-Lisht region. Archaeologists have not yet located the Middle
Kingdom capital city of It-towy, but the collaborative work between UAB and
NARSS could potentially locate at least a portion of the ancient city. Different
models for understanding settlements may work depending on the time period and
landscape in question. The field research and SRS results from this proposal
will illuminate spatial organization on macro- and micro-scales, focusing on
anthropogenic and natural landscape changes. The project will also redress the
Egyptological bias towards monumental remains and will diversify current
approaches towards understanding Egyptian civilization and survey. The research
is transformative because its settlement data has not previously been available
to test settlement models across large areas and indeed recreate ancient
landscape experiences. It will also define a new landscape survey methodology
for Egyptian archaeology. The project leverages the strengths of the two
collaborating parties from the United States and Egypt, where each partner will
contribute equally to the remote sensing, archaeological, and geological
analyses.

Broader impacts: The validation of project results will be tested against known
archaeological data in collaboration with international Egyptology colleagues.
Educational activities are an integral part of the research agenda, including
K-12 education and outreach, undergraduate and graduate student mentoring, and a
strong emphasis on the education and training of underrepresented minorities.
This is particularly true for the US and Egyptian student participants.
Educational activities and collaborations will include NASA in the US and the
Supreme Council for Antiquities in Egypt. The authors are working on
disseminating their information, and their work will feature in a forthcoming
BBC documentary. The results of their survey (field and satellite-based) should
also refine "site" boundaries, important for legal protection of archaeological
sites in Egypt. The efforts to attract minority undergraduate and graduate
students are particularly impressive. Many educational activities are an
integral part of the research agenda, including K-12 education, and
undergraduate and graduate student mentoring.