* 1103430
* ENSO and West Pacific Warm Pool Climate Variability over the Last Three Centuries
* GEO,OCE
* 06/01/2011,12/31/2013
* Terrence Quinn, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Candace Major
* 12/31/2013
* USD 288,125.00

The Western Pacific Warm Pool (WPWP) is a component of the largest mode of
inter-annual climate variability on the planet, El-Ni√±o Southern-Oscillation
(ENSO). Despite the importance of climate variability in the WPWP, the
climatology of the region over the last three centuries is largely unknown. This
project, involving researchers from the University of Texas at Austin, aims to
produce the first sub-annually resolved, multi-century record of ENSO and WPWP
climate variability utilizing corals from the Western Province, Solomon Islands.
By measuring &amp;#948;18O in three cores of the slow-growing coral species
Diploastrea heliopora, the researchers seek to generate a record of sea surface
temperature and hydrologic variability spanning the last three centuries in the
WPWP. These records will enable assessment of changes in WPWP and ENSO
variability from pre-industrial through modern times. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In
terms of broader impact, funding supports education and training of a graduate
student and an undergraduate student. The research will also develop a
potentially important, high-resolution data series that would provide an
observational basis for relating WPWP changes to global climate conditions and
may find changes in the mean state of the WPWP and ENSO as a result of
anthropogenic climate forcing in the modern era.