* 1103891
* Applied Engineering Technology - Many Pathways To Success
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2015
* Christine Delahanty, Bucks County Community College
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Teles
* 08/31/2015
* USD 152,168.00

This project is responding to the need for the college to develop responsive
programs and innovative strategies that keep pace with fast-growing trends in
technology and dramatic technological advances in industry. The introduction of
an AAS degree in applied engineering technology at the college is designed to
develop outreach strategies that leverage community partnership programs with
industries and educational establishments in the surrounding region.
Occupational majors in engineering technology allow students to take a variety
of technical courses leading to a versatile degree which can be used directly
for employment as a skilled technician or for transfer to a four-year
institution. In addition to industry partnerships with Lockheed Martin and other
firms and an educational partnership with Drexel University, the college plans
to incorporate many companies, four-year institutions, high schools, and other
community establishments into the program, uniting industries and educational
institutions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of this project is
manifested through the introduction of an AAS degree in applied engineering
technology at the college, which stimulates and increases the level of learning
by offering students educational opportunities which far exceed current
curriculum options. By ultimately providing concentrations in a variety of
technical areas, students can choose a path that is compatible with their
academic interests and career choices. This degree encourages the study of
engineering technology by providing a career pathway for students from the
community college to either a technological position in industry or into a four-
year program. Both employment and transfer allow for advancement of the student
leading to an expanded and varied educational experience. In addition students
have the opportunity to increase their educational level in the same field as
their degrees. The versatility of the major allows students the opportunity to
explore other career options through co-ops, internships, and job opportunities.
This allows for further advancement of students, which in turn provides transfer
institutions and industries with a broader, more in-depth intellectual base,
ultimately leading to a better educated, more highly skilled workforce.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts include the development of the AAS
degree in applied engineering technology, which leads to a diverse population of
students entering the program at many different stages in their educational
careers. High schools, the community college, four-year institutions and
industries are connected through educational opportunities, co-ops, internships,
and job opportunities. Students who do not want the mathematical rigor of a
conventional engineering track have the option of studying engineering
technology from an algebra-based hands-on approach. Thus, the AAS degree in
applied engineering technology is available to a much wider array of students
with more diverse backgrounds than the AA degree in engineering. The goal is to
actively recruit women and underrepresented minority students as well as
students with disabilities. Partnerships include research opportunities for
faculty members.