* 1103619
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2011
* BIO,DBI
* 10/01/2011,09/30/2015
* Brooks Miner, Miner                   Brooks         E
* Fellowship Award
* Daniel Marenda
* 09/30/2015
* USD 189,000.00

-------

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2011, Intersections of Biology and Mathematical and Physical Sciences. The
fellowship supports a research and training plan in a host laboratory for the
Fellow whose plan involves innovation at the intersection of biology with
mathematics. The title of the research and training plan for this fellowship to
Brooks Miner is "Evolutionary change and ecosystem properties: how does
herbivore evolution influence nutrient dynamics in a model freshwater
ecosystem?" The host institutions for this research are Cornell University and
Arizona State University and the sponsoring scientists are Drs. Nelson Hairston
and Hal Smith. &#8232;&#8232; This project develops and tests new ecological
theory for how evolutionary changes in a single species can affect an entire
ecosystem using a model system of freshwater organisms composed of microscopic
animals called rotifers and the algae they eat. A recent approach to study how
evolution influences ecological interactions among species is called eco-
evolutionary dynamics; this research extends this approach to the level of the
ecosystem and asks, how can evolution in a critical species affect how much
carbon is consumed from the atmosphere and how quickly are the basic chemical
elements recycled? This project combines the concepts of population genetics,
ecosystem chemistry, and ecological stoichiometry, which considers how the
balance of energy and chemical elements is connected to ecological interactions,
to test predictions about how evolution in a freshwater herbivore affects
important ecosystem processes such as primary production, nutrient uptake, and
nutrient recycling.

Training objectives include mathematical modeling, with an emphasis on
developing mathematical expertise and applying it to ecological and evolutionary
questions. The model freshwater ecosystem of rotifers and algae serves as a
training ground for applying new ecological theory to empirical data. The
broader impacts of this fellowship include elucidating the role of evolution in
freshwater nutrient dynamics, which is critical to maintaining the health of
rivers, lakes, and economically important fish populations worldwide. Because
clean fresh water is a societal imperative, the findings are relevant to both
public health and issues of water security. Broader impacts also include a
teaching option to develop and assess active learning curricula for an
introductory biology course and a set of lab modules focused on quantitative
methods for a majors-level freshwater ecology course.