* 1103375
* PostDoctoral Research Fellowship
* GEO,OPP
* 08/01/2011,07/31/2013
* Daniel Goldberg, Goldberg                Daniel         N
* Standard Grant
* Julie Palais
* 07/31/2013
* USD 134,225.00

Goldberg/1103375

This award supports a postdoctoral fellowship to develop a modeling strategy to
help address one of the largest sources of uncertainty regarding future sea-
level rise (SLR) over the next several centuries that of the contribution of the
West Antarctic ice sheet (WAIS). Current ice sheet models are ill equipped to
reduce this uncertainty because many of the determining factors of its flow are
difficult or impossible to observe directly. In addition the influence of the
internal state of the ice is not properly assessed and there is a need to
characterize the uncertainty associated with the current state of WAIS, and to
improve current data assimilation techniques. This post-doctoral researcher
supported by this award will use a new large-scale thermo-mechanical ice model,
capable of modeling WAIS and will incorporate an adjoint to the model using
automatic differentiation techniques together with analytic methods. The adjoint
will be used to answer questions regarding the relative influence of internal
ice temperature and oceanic forcing on WAIS evolution, and to infer time-
dependent basal behavior using satellite data (something not currently done).
The host scientist will be Dr. Patrick Heimbach of MIT, whose pioneering work in
the generation and use of adjoints in climate modeling will be invaluable. The
intellectual merit of the proposed work is the advent of adjoints to time-
dependent ice models, which promises improvements in data assimilation and in
our understanding of ice sheet dynamics. The broader impact of the proposed work
is quantification of the largest sources of uncertainty of future contributions
of land ice to SLR, which could inform policy decisions and guide future
fieldwork campaigns.