* 1103601
* US-Egypt Cooperative Research: Nano-rubber Toughened Epoxy for Energy Absorbing Composites
* O/D,OISE
* 08/01/2011,07/31/2014
* Mahmoud Reda Taha, University of New Mexico
* Standard Grant
* Anne Emig
* 07/31/2014
* USD 120,305.00

1103601 &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project supports a cooperative research
project by Dr. Mahmoud Reda Taha, University of New Mexico in Albuquerque and
Usama F. Kandil, Egyptian Petroleum Research Institute, Cairo. They plan to
study Nano-rubber Toughened Epoxy for Energy Absorbing Composites. The research
aims at introducing a new generation of multi-scale fiber reinforced polymer
(FRP) composites with enhanced energy absorption. We suggest altering the
microstructure of the polymer matrix used in making FRP composites using
functionalized nanoparticles. The proposed microstructural change will convert
the polymer matrix to a new nanocomposite that when used with reinforcing fibers
will produce a multi-scale FRP composite with enhanced energy absorption. The
new multi-scale FRP will enable expanding the use of FRP in applications
typically governed by the limited toughness/energy absorption and fracture
toughness of current FRP composites when subjected to high strain rate loading.
This research builds on the experience the UNM team gained during a six-month
visit by Dr. Kandil in 2010, during which they acquired all equipment necessary
to synthesize functionalized polyolefin rubber nanoparticles and successfully
produced new nanocomposites. This new work is focused on synthesis, fabrication
and testing of the nanocomposite and the new FRP composite at a variety of
length scales and under different hygrothermal conditions. The work is
multidisciplinary in nature requiring the expertise of the two PIs from Egypt
and the US on polymer chemistry, polymer characterization, composite fabrication
and testing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merits: The research aims at
enhancing the energy absorption of the polymer resin used to produce FRP
composites using a balanced mix of functional polyolefin rubber (EP)
nanoparticles and&lt;br/&gt;montmorillonite (o-mmt) nanoparticles. This new
toughened nanocomposite will be used to produce a&lt;br/&gt;new generation of
FRP composites with enhanced energy absorption. While the use of hard and
soft&lt;br/&gt;nanoparticles in producing toughened polymer nanocomposites is
not new and has been reported in the&lt;br/&gt;literature, functionalization of
these nanoparticles and using this toughened polymer nanocomposite
to&lt;br/&gt;produce multi-scale FRP is new and can lead to significant
enhancement in the energy absorption and&lt;br/&gt;fracture toughness of FRP
composites. The research will contribute to further our understanding on the
role of a modified polymer matrix plays in changing the energy absorption and
fracture toughness of FRP composites.&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: The project will
help enrich the research environment at UNM by attracting minority (Hispanic and
Native American) undergraduate students to Civil Engineering research in the
field of structural composites. The US-PI plans efforts to attract US citizen
students from underrepresented groups including Women, Hispanics and Native
Americans to work on this project. In Fall 2010, the US-PI started a
collaborative effort with UNM Valencia campus where more than 50% of students
are minority students. This new collaboration extends an invitation to the US-PI
and two of his graduate students to visit the Valencia campus once each semester
and give presentations on engineering research to attract top undergraduate
students to conduct research at the UNM School of Engineering. Two undergraduate
students nominated by UNM Valencia campus will join the PI's laboratory. It is
planned that one of these two students from the Valencia campus will be funded
by this grant toward his/her Master?s degree starting in Fall 2011. Furthermore,
the proposed research will have a significant impact on the research and
academic environments at EPRI (Egypt). EPRI houses 15 research and service
centers and is the home of 312 researchers. The US-PI will participate in an
annual short course to be held at EPRI in Summer 2012 and Summer 2013. This
short course will be focused on multiscale mechanical characterization of
polymer composites. This short course will provide an excellent opportunity for
both PIs to interact with young researchers at EPRI. Finally, one graduate
student at EPRI working on this project will visit UNM and join the US-PI
laboratory for six month receiving training on FRP composite fabrication and
testing as well as on nanoindentation of polymer nanocomposites. &lt;br/&gt;This
proposal is supported under the US-Egypt Joint Fund Program where NSF supports
the US side and the Government of Egypt funds the Egyptian side.