* 1103667
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology for FY 2011
* BIO,DBI
* 08/01/2011,12/31/2013
* Kerri Crawford, Crawford                Kerri          M
* Fellowship Award
* michael vanni
* 12/31/2013
* USD 123,000.00

---&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral
Research Fellowship in Biology for FY 2011, Intersections of Biology with
Mathematical and Physical Sciences. The fellowship supports a research and
training plan in a host laboratory for the Fellow at the intersection of biology
with mathematics and geochemistry. The title of the research and training plan
for this fellowship to Kerri Crawford is "Plant diversity and soil development
in a primary successional ecosystem." The host institutions for this fellowship
are the Washington University in St. Louis, Indiana University- Purdue
University Indianapolis, and Indiana University Bloomington, and sponsoring
scientists are Drs. Jonathan Chase, Pierre-Andre Jacinthe, and James
Bever.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Soils provide services that are critical to
ecosystem functioning. For example, plant growth is mediated by soil nutrients,
and soils sequester a large amount of atmospheric carbon dioxide. The chemical
and physical structure of soil determines its ability to fulfill these
functions. Therefore, understanding what factors influence soil properties
provides insights into preserving soil services. Plants and their associated
microbes influence soil properties by altering nutrient cycling, soil stability,
and the amount of soil organic matter. In primary successional ecosystems, such
as the sand dunes along Lake Michigan - where this research is taking place,
soil development has not yet occurred. This provides a unique opportunity to
test what factors influence soil development. Furthermore, this experimental
system allows for direct examination of soil development through time along
chronosequences, where ecosystems of different ages are preserved along a
spatial gradient. In this project, experimental tests of how plants and microbes
influence soil development are being paired with observational studies along
chronosequences, contributing to our understanding of the factors that influence
soil functioning. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The training objectives include
mathematical modeling and gaining knowledge of the role of soils in
sequestration of carbon dioxide from the atmosphere. The broader impacts are
directly applicable to restoration and conservation of the Great Lakes sand
dunes, a critically endangered ecosystem. Outreach and educational activities
include opportunities for undergraduates to engage in interdisciplinary
environmental research.