* 1103236
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Transnational Migration and Health Access
* SBE,SES
* 06/01/2011,05/31/2012
* Michael Bell, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Patricia White
* 05/31/2012
* USD 9,646.00

SES-1103236 Michael Bell Julie C. Keller University of Wisconsin-Madison

For decades, migration research has focused on remittances sent from immigrants
abroad to their families at home. Less discussed and understood is the
transnational transfer of health goods in the reverse direction. This will
extend transnational migration studies by explicitly considering how the
production of health spans national boundaries. This study focuses on a
migration stream of workers between the dairies of western Wisconsin and
workers' communities of origin in central Veracruz, Mexico to answer the
following questions: 1) How does the interaction of various dimensions of social
marginalization-gender, language, ethnicity, citizenship, documentation-shape
migrant health practices? 2) How, and to what extent, do different levels of
incorporation into receiving societies shape the transnational health practices
of migrants? 3) To what extent are the transnational health practices of
migrants gendered? Data used to answer these questions will be collected through
one year of participant-observation methods and in-depth interviews with current
dairy workers in Wisconsin and former dairy workers in Veracruz. A key
theoretical part of this investigation is identifying the role of immigrant
incorporation in the formation of transnational health practices, thus
contributing to current sociological debates in the area of migration. Secondly,
this research will contribute to the sociology of gender and health by tracing
how transnational health practices are shaped by gender relations.

This study is timely given that recent health reform and impending immigration
reform will very likely affect the way immigrants experience health care access
and incorporation in receiving communities. This study offers a window into the
lives of migrants at the margins of society as they negotiate access to health
services and rely on transnational ties to manage health problems. The results
of this research will provide important information not just for scholars, but
for state agencies and immigrant advocates. Reports of findings will be shared
with Wisconsin state representatives and various immigrant advocacy
organizations at the state and national levels. Additionally, co-investigator
will maintain connections with scholars in Xalapa, Veracruz to encourage
dialogue between American and Mexican scholars on migration issues. The results
of the study can inform future health policy and promote international academic
alliances by shedding light on how immigrants get their health needs met in a
context of constrained or restricted health access.