* 1103622
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology for FY 2011
* BIO,DBI
* 04/01/2012,03/31/2014
* Cynthia Chang, Chang                   Cynthia
* Fellowship Award
* michael vanni
* 03/31/2014
* USD 123,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2011, Intersections of Biology and Mathematical and Math. The fellowship
supports a research and training plan in a host laboratory for the Fellow at the
intersection of biology with mathematics and geochemistry. The title of the
research and training plan for this fellowship to Cynthia Chang is "Using
hierarchical Bayesian modeling to understand community assembly after an
eruption and predict responses to global change." The host institution for this
fellowship is the University of Washington, Seattle and the sponsoring
scientists are Drs. Janneke Hille Ris Lambers and Peter Guttorp.

Understanding how natural communities assemble following major disturbances
gives unique insight into the dynamic nature of ecosystems through time. In
plant communities, dispersal strategy, life history, and growth traits are
deterministic factors that influence community interactions. Stochastic factors,
such as random chance, can also dictate how communities assemble. Both types of
interactions influence community species diversity over the course of
succession. Bayesian hierarchical modeling has the unique ability to incorporate
deterministic and stochastic factors, multiple scales, and interactions.
Biological insight, however, is necessary to build meaningful models. Based upon
a 30-year dataset on plant colonization, composition, and trait distribution
after a major volcanic eruption, this research is generating models that further
our understanding of community assembly processes after a major disturbance, as
well as predict future community response to global change based on past
relationships.

Training objectives include developing expertise in statistical and analytical
techniques. Educational outreach includes developing undergraduate and high
school course curricula that use Mount St. Helen?s research as a case study and
involving graduate and undergraduate students with research. The broader impacts
include informing policy makers for future land management of the
characteristics of this and similar ecosystems. The predictive models can serve
as a theoretical framework for understanding how ecological communities may
respond to other major disturbances as well as anticipated global change. The
findings of this research are being disseminated through scientific and popular
talks, meetings with The Nature Conservancy and U.S. Forest Service, and
publications in peer-reviewed journals.