* 1103380
* Collaborative Research: P2C2--Evaluating Controls on Holocene Glacier Fluctuations and Climate Variability in the Southern Peruvian Andes
* GEO,EAR
* 09/15/2011,08/31/2015
* Joseph Licciardi, University of New Hampshire
* Continuing Grant
* Paul Filmer
* 08/31/2015
* USD 206,291.00

Technical description of the project&lt;br/&gt;The main objectives of this
project are to develop accurate and precise moraine ages in the Cordillera
Vilcabamba of southern Peru, and to quantify the sensitivity of Holocene
glaciers to climate changes, with the ultimate goal of elucidating Holocene
climate variability and controls in the tropics. Initial work in the Vilcabamba
has identified prominent glacial advances during the early Holocene and the
'Little Ice Age' interval, revealing a sequence of events that is broadly
correlative with glacial records in Europe. These pilot results suggest climate
teleconnections between the tropics and the North Atlantic region, but a more
extensive array of data is needed to confidently identify regional glacial
patterns and Holocene climate controls. This project will build substantially on
initial findings by reconstructing glacial histories in additional valleys in
the Vilcabamba using cosmogenic 10Be surface exposure dating of moraines, taking
advantage of recent methodological advances that allow determination of
extremely young (&lt;200 year) and precise isotopic ages. Supplementing 14C ages
and paleoclimate proxy data will be obtained from sediment cores recovered from
bogs situated between 10Be-dated moraines. Independent 14C age control for these
moraines offers the potential to develop a new local calibration of the 10Be
production rate. The sensitivity of paleo-glacier mass balances to prescribed
changes in specific climatic variables will be quantified by performing
simulations with a glacier surface energy-mass balance model, thus allowing an
estimation of the relative roles of major forcings such as temperature,
precipitation, and solar radiation on glacier extent. Posited mechanisms of
climate change will be assessed for their degree of consistency with the
integrated age control and modeling results, enabling identification of likely
drivers of Holocene glaciations and climate variability in the tropical
Andes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader significance and importance&lt;br/&gt;The
role of the tropics in triggering, amplifying, and transmitting global climate
signals remains a topic of vigorous debate in climate science. Accurately dated
records of past fluctuations in climatically sensitive tropical mountain
glaciers are among the best indicators of regional trends in past climate
changes and their causes. Peru harbors 71% of the world?s present-day tropical
glaciers, and contains abundant geologic evidence of former glacier expansions.
However, chronologies of past glacier fluctuations in this region are scarce,
particularly during the Holocene epoch (the past ~11,700 years). New results
from this project will contribute significantly toward an understanding of both
the timing of Holocene glacier events in Peru and the predominant climatic
influences on glaciation. Importantly, the new glacier chronologies will augment
records of past climates developed from nearby ice core, lake, and marine sites
as well as other emerging glacial histories, contributing to a more
comprehensive characterization of regional climate changes and their
environmental consequences. Results will thus allow for a rigorous examination
of the underlying causes of tropical climate variability during the Holocene,
including recent climate shifts relevant to understanding modern and future
climate change.&lt;br/&gt;An improved understanding of past Andean glaciations
is crucial for predicting glacier responses to future climate change and
consequences for local water resources, and for identifying environmental
impacts on ancient civilizations in the region, including Inca and pre-Inca
societies. This study will provide training in field techniques, laboratory
methods, and numerical modeling for undergraduate and graduate students at the
University of New Hampshire and Columbia University. The project will also
expand on a productive collaboration between early career U.S. scientists and
collaborators in Canada and Peru. Assembly of this multinational project team
will enhance the development of research programs, facilities, and outreach
activities at each participating institution. Research activities will also
contribute to technique development by refining laboratory methods aimed at
increasing the precision of widely used isotopic dating methods.