* 1103219
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Social Marginalization and Patterns of Family Formation
* SBE,SES
* 04/15/2011,03/31/2012
* Kathleen Hull, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Patricia White
* 03/31/2012
* USD 10,000.00

ES-1103219&lt;br/&gt;Kathleen E. Hull&lt;br/&gt;Timothy A.
Ortyl&lt;br/&gt;University of Minnesota&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The last several
decades have been a period of rapid change in marriage and family structures and
practices. Newer models of relationships often differ from marriage in key
respects, but relatively little is known about these newer, unconventional kinds
of relationships. The research addresses the following research questions: How
do people in unconventional relationships describe their vision of these
relationships? What meanings do they attribute to their relationship choices?
Some theorists have argued that people in unconventional relationships are on
the cutting edge of a broader shift from romantic love to a newer form of
intimacy that puts greater emphasis on individual autonomy, while others argue
that contemporary Americans shift back and forth between differing,
contradictory beliefs about intimacy. By examining relationships that represent
a clear break with dominant practices, the research can assess whether these
unconventional relationship forms represent a trend toward a fundamentally new
conception of intimacy, and whether people in these kinds of relationships make
use of multiple, competing models to construct and explain their relationships.
The project is based on in-depth interviews conducted in a large metro area.
&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts. The study will advance sociological
understanding of trends in relationship and family forms. It will achieve
broader impacts in several ways. Specifically, the research will increase the
visibility and understanding of relationships that have often experienced social
marginalization, incorporate key findings into teaching, and disseminate
findings to a non-academic audience.