* 1103159
* Supersolidity and the Supersolid to Normal Solid Transition
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2011,07/31/2018
* Moses Chan, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Germano Iannacchione
* 07/31/2018
* USD 1,024,050.00

Technical Abstract.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The observation of superfluid-like
behavior in bulk solid helium and solid helium confined in porous media in the
P.I.'s laboratory has been replicated in a dozen other laboratories. Quantum
Monte Carlo simulations suggest superfluidity is not possible in a perfect
crystal but dislocation lines may be superfluid. Shear modulus measurements
indicate that superfluidity in solid helium or supersolidity is the consequence
of a stiffened network of interconnected dislocation lines. This model however,
cannot explain the results in porous media since it is difficult to envision
dislocation lines inside a pore of a few nm. Three questions will be addressed
in this project. One set of experiments will determine if supersolidity is
possible in a perfect crystal with little or no dislocation lines. Secondly,
heat capacity, thermal conductivity measurements will be carried out to
determine how supersolidity in porous media is different from that in bulk
solid. Lastly torsional oscillator measurements will be made to determine the
spatial extent of quantum phase coherence in a supersolid system. The
experiments are exceptionally challenging hence providing an excellent training
ground for the post-doctoral, graduate and undergraduate students in the
project. The P.I. has a very strong and sustained record in training students
for successful scientific careers in academia and in industrial and government
laboratories&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Non-technical
Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;When liquid helium is cooled below -271 Celsius,
or 2 K above absolute zero, it enters the superfluid state with zero viscosity
allowing it to flow relative to the walls of a container with no friction. What
this means is that if a container is being oscillated back and forth, the
superfluid inside will sit perfectly still. Like superconductivity,
superfluidity is a manifestation of quantum mechanics at macroscopic scales. In
2004, the P.I. and one of his former student found evidence that below 0.2K, a
small fraction (on the order of 1%) of a solid helium sample would remain
stationary when its container is being oscillated. This experiment, since
replicated in a dozen laboratories worldwide, indicates the existence of
superfluidity in a solid, more conveniently called supersolidity. The discovery
of this new state of matter has created considerable excitement in the physics
community and beyond. An outstanding question of the phenomenon is whether
supersolidity is possible in a perfect helium crystal or it requires the
presence of defects such as dislocation lines in the crystal. The experiments
proposed in the project are designed to resolve this question and will be
carried out by post-doctoral, graduate and undergraduate students. The P.I. has
a very strong and sustained record in training students for successful
scientific careers in academia, industrial and government laboratories.