* 1103692
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology for FY 2011
* BIO,DBI
* 01/01/2012,12/31/2014
* Silvia Newell, Bulow                   Silvia
* Fellowship Award
* Daniel Marenda
* 12/31/2014
* USD 189,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2011, Broadening Participation. The fellowship supports a research and training
plan in a host laboratory for the Fellow who also presents a plan to broaden
participation in biology. The title of the research and training plan for this
fellowship to Silvia Newell is "Activity of nitrogen fixers and denitrifiers in
coastal sediments." The host institution for this fellowship is Boston
University and the sponsoring scientist is Dr. Robinson Fulweiler.

Coastal systems are acutely vulnerable to nitrogen pollution, resulting in wide-
spread reduced oxygen levels (hypoxia), decreased biodiversity, and increased
harmful algal blooms. Nitrogen loading from wastewater into Waquoit Bay is
documented and has more than doubled since 1938. Hypoxia in eutrophic coastal
ecosystems can also stimulate puzzling microbial responses, including high rates
of simultaneous denitrification (nitrogen removal) and nitrogen fixation.
Continuing to fix nitrogen when fixed nitrogen is available is energetically
unfavorable and leads to the central questions of this research: Why do bacteria
turn on nitrogen fixation under nitrogen-replete conditions? Can nitrogen
fixation exacerbate eutrophication and greenhouse gas production? This research
investigates the distributions and activities of denitrifying and nitrogen-
fixing bacteria within the sediment to determine if the patterns are consistent
with the existence of highly localized, very rapid nitrogen transformations.

Training objectives include learning techniques of biogeochemistry including
core incubation and isotope methods. Broader impacts include participation in
the Women in Science program for 12-14 year olds at the Waquoit Bay National
Estuarine Research Reserve, as well as outreach to local minority-serving high
schools.