* 1103625
* Topological Surface States and New Phases in Superfluid 3He
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2011,07/31/2017
* William Halperin, Northwestern University
* Continuing Grant
* Germano Iannacchione
* 07/31/2017
* USD 825,000.00

Technical Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This individual investigator project
trains graduate and undergraduate students who conduct research on the structure
of various quantum condensed phases with a focus on 3He superfluids at low
temperatures. The central part of this proposal is to characterize certain types
of quantum states which have topological significance and can be found at the
surface of these superfluids. The impact of the research will be felt over a
broad range of condensed matter physics, on field theories basic to the
understanding of neutrinos, and may have relevance to the understanding of dark
matter. New superfluid phases of helium have been predicted to exist within
globally-anisotropic, highly-porous, silica aerogels. These materials will be
grown with assistance from undergraduate students who characterize them using
optical birefringence, and small angle Xray techniques. Additionally, our
aerogels will be provided to a half-dozen laboratories around the world where
there have been specific requests. High-resolution acoustics in resonant
cavities will be used used to investigate surface quantum states in thin samples
of superfluid 3He and a search for direct evidence of broken, time-reversal
symmetry will be conducted. This fundamental broken symmetry is of importance to
studies on various unconventional superconducting materials conducted in other
laboratories.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Non-Technical
Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This individual investigator project supports
graduate and undergraduate education through their research in experimental
physics. The project develops, creates, and characterizes new quantum states of
matter which exhibit symmetry properties that have the potential for impact on
our society, including high speed computation, transfer of mass in the form of
frictionless superfluids, as well as applications of superconductivity. Highly
porous, gel structures, so-called aerogels, will be grown and characterized in
order to control the quantum states of helium superfluids imbibed within. These
highly homogeneous samples will also be provided to a half dozen other
laboratories that have requested them. The basic scientific research conducted
in this project provides student training in high-resolution acoustics, nuclear
magnetic resonance, and low temperature techniques and promotes awareness in
both public and scientific communities to conserve helium as a valuable natural
resource.