* 1103180
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Supply Chain Governance in Supermarkets' Localized Sourcing Strategies
* SBE,SES
* 06/01/2011,05/31/2012
* Jessica Bloom, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Patricia White
* 05/31/2012
* USD 10,000.00

SES-1103078&lt;br/&gt;Cynthia Hinrichs&lt;br/&gt;Jessica Bloom&lt;br/&gt;The
Pennsylvania State University&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research applies
theories of governance to the Wal-Mart corporation?s efforts to increase
localized produce sourcing as part of its current sustainability initiative. As
the largest retailer in the world, Wal-Mart's corporate policies have far-
reaching consequences, both in terms of its internal supply chains and external
influence within the retail sector. Theories of governance outline the specific
mechanisms that are used to manage supply chains, as well as the increased role
that private corporations play in regulating the agri-food system. This
theoretical lens highlights the effects of how resources, risks and benefits are
distributed both within actual supply chains and at a wider societal level. This
research poses three inter-related questions: 1) What explicit and implicit
rules and practices are framed as ?sustainable? in Wal-Mart's localized agri-
food supply chains?, 2) How are these rules and practices implemented as a form
of supply chain governance, including the networks that emerge to help
coordinate any new supply chain relationships?, and 3) How do these shifts in
the framing and implementation of localized produce sourcing affect farmers?
ability to participate as suppliers and consumers' ability to access affordable
produce? &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will use qualitative research
methods to develop comparative regional case studies of Wal-Mart's local produce
sourcing effort in the Southeast United States and Central Honduras. The
approach includes analysis of how sustainability is framed and defined in Wal-
Mart's publicly available documents; interviews with participating producers and
the networks of organizations that form to facilitate the localized sourcing
initiative; and spatial analyses to assess implications for consumer access to
local produce in the study regions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact. This
research advances sociological knowledge about the drivers, processes and
impacts of change and restructuring in the agri-food system by focusing on how
corporate discourse interacts with on-the-ground processes to determine the
governance of localized supply chains. By opening up increased market
opportunities for a diverse range of producers, providing environmental benefits
because of transportation efficiencies and improving access for low-income
consumers, supermarkets may be ideally positioned to facilitate a transition to
a more sustainable local food system. The analysis that results from this
research will illuminate the actual benefits and drawbacks of new local produce
sourcing by large private corporations, thereby informing education,
interventions, and policy more broadly directed at enhancing the sustainability
of the agri-food system