* 1103105
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant: La Iberia: The Emergence and Development of a Secondary Site in the Linea Vieja, Costa Rica
* SBE,BCS
* 03/15/2011,02/29/2012
* Marilyn Masson, SUNY at Albany
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 02/29/2012
* USD 19,513.00

In conjunction with the National Museum of Costa Rica and under the supervision
of Dr. Marilyn Masson, Jared Latimer will conduct archaeological investigations
at the site of La Iberia. Located in the Atlantic Watershed of Costa Rica, La
Iberia was a large village flourishing at approximately A.D. 1000, half a
century before the Spanish Conquest. This was an important time period that was
preceded by large cultural, political and economic changes in the region. For
example, between A.D. 500-1000, populations began aggregating into large
villages. There is an increase in economic trade and exchange, with goods being
acquired both locally and also through long distance trading. There is also
evidence of more powerful rulers, who mobilized substantial labor forces to
build monumental architectural complexes within and between major settlements
where the elite members of society lived.

This project investigates the fundamental research question of how and why these
political developments occurred. Of particular interest is how complex societies
were organized and maintained, and how did they change through time? The
archaeological investigation employs an approach that focuses on elite political
and economic interactions reflected in the archaeological record. The project
will consider strategies for societal integration and the legitimation of
political power in order to understand how elite members of society garnered and
manipulated that power. These strategies varied greatly among different ancient
cultures of the pre-modern world and different political systems correlate with
alternative sets of archaeological signatures. For example, individuals may
garner political power by controlling religious or esoteric knowledge.
Alternatively, they may control basic material resources such as agrarian land,
trade networks and valuable goods. Externally-focused leaders may emphasize the
development of relationships with elites in other communities, and more
internally-focused political systems concentrate their efforts on cultivating
relationships within their own community. Changes through time observed in
archaeological materials and features associated with elite residences reflect
the development and transformations of power strategies. Understanding the key
elements of political systems reflected at the site of La Iberia will determine
how the site itself was founded and maintained in the larger context of a
regional system of centers in Costa Rica's Atlantic Watershed. On a comparative
level, this study contributes information from a new, poorly understood region
to the larger question of the emergence of complex society and major societal
transformations from mobile hunter-gatherer and horticultural groups to
hierarchical agricultural civilizations.

Information gathered by this project will be disseminated to academics and other
researchers through conventional publication venues. A web page linked to the
Institute for Mesoamerican Studies (University at Albany SUNY) will disseminate
new knowledge to the public about La Iberia and Lower Central American
archaeology. Undergraduate students from both SUNY Albany and the University of
Costa Rica have already agreed to participate in this research project,
cultivating international learning and cooperation. Jared Latimer will continue
his outreach activities by giving presentations at high schools and colleges in
the U.S. Furthermore, the looting or outright destruction of archaeological
sites due to agricultural or infrastructural development in Costa Rica has been
pervasive. This project will work directly with the local community to promote
the value of protecting the region's cultural patrimony for future
investigations and for future generations.