* 1103478
* P2C2: Rapid Climate Variations--A Speleothem-based High-resolution Record of Rainfall in the Equatorial South Pacific over the Last 83,000 Years
* GEO,AGS
* 06/01/2011,05/31/2015
* Robert Sherrell, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* David Verardo
* 05/31/2015
* USD 528,195.00

This project seeks to generate a Uranium/Thorium (U/Th) dated record of rainfall
in the southern tropical Pacific at sub-century (~50 year/sample) resolution for
most of the glacial and Holocene periods using stalagmites from the island of
Niue and from Tonga. The speleothem from Niue dates to 83,000 years before the
present. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specifically, the researchers will: 1) analyze
the Niue specimen, as well as a Holocene-age stalagmite from Tonga, for
Oxygen-18, Carbon-13, Magnesium/Calcium ratios, Strontium/Calcium ratios, and
Barium/Calcium ratios; 2) generate a precise absolute-dated U/Th age model for
the specimens; and 3) undertake drip-water sampling to validate paleoclimate
interpretations. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of the project is to examine the
following hypotheses: a) at times of increased Thermohaline Circulation (THC), a
northward shift of the Pacific Inter-tropical Convergence Zone (ITCZ) dominated
over a westward shift in the Walker Cell resulting in decreased rainfall at
Niue; and b) rainfall records at Niue will show rapid shifts in phase with
Greenland ice-core records, but will also show additional changes characteristic
of Antarctic temperature records.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts
include the potential for a high-quality paleoclimate record from an important
and under-studied region. In addition to the scientific importance and support
of a graduate student, the researcher will conduct outreach through a NSF-
sponsored program through which high-school students and teachers from New
Jersey participate in workshops on marine and climate science.