* 1103689
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2011
* BIO,DBI
* 07/01/2011,06/30/2014
* James VanDyken, VanDyken                James          D
* Fellowship Award
* michael vanni
* 06/30/2014
* USD 189,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2011, Intersections of Biology and Mathematical and Physical Sciences. The
fellowship supports a research and training plan in a host laboratory for the
Fellow whose plan involves innovation at the intersection of biology with
physics, applied mathematics, and population biology. The title of the research
and training plan for this fellowship to James VanDyken is "Adaptation in large
metapopulations." The host institution for this research is Harvard University;
and the sponsoring scientists are Drs. Michael Desai and Michael Whitlock (of
the University of British Columbia).

The spread of beneficial mutations (i.e., adaptations) is central to creating
the patterns of biodiversity observed in nature. Yet the empirical study of
adaptation has far outpaced its theoretical study, leaving much about the
underlying process unclear. In particular, most theoretical studies of
adaptation make two assumptions that will often be violated in nature: 1)
populations are not geographically structured and 2) beneficial mutations are
rare, such that a given beneficial mutation will sweep to fixation before
another one arises. The first assumption is violated for most species, while the
second is violated for species with large populations, such as microbes. The
greater mutational diversity maintained in large populations, and the spatial
structuring of these populations, may radically alter the way in which
populations explore the adaptive landscape, leading to different predictions
about the rate, direction, endpoint, and geographic and genetic patterns of
adaptation.

This research determines how population size and population structure interact
to influence the amount of variation available to natural selection, and how
this in turn influences the rate and outcome of adaptation. Training objectives
include the development of theory using methods from physics and applied
mathematics, including stochastic differential equations and branching
processes, and tests this theory using experimental metapopulations of budding
yeast.

Broader impacts include creating a collaboration between scientists in different
institutions, countries, and scientific fields, facilitating a fruitful sharing
of ideas across boundaries that would not otherwise be possible. Community
outreach includes activities to promote scientific literacy and public
understanding of evolution, at the K-12 level.