* 1103096
* Workshop Proposal for a "Deep Time Earth-Life Observatory Network" (DETELON)
* GEO,EAR
* 03/01/2011,02/28/2014
* David Bottjer, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Paul Filmer
* 02/28/2014
* USD 49,970.00

This grant supports a workshop organized around the themes identified by the
broader Earth sciences community at several professional meetings during the
fall of 2010. The Deep Time Earth-Life Observatory Network (DETELON) workshop
will provide a broad community-based platform to develop the concept of an
Observatory Network as an initiative for the paleontological and the broader
soft-rock geological community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The workshop will craft a
white paper around themes identified by forums and by an Executive Committee.
The Executive Committee, aided by particularly active workshop participants,
will turn this white paper into a preliminary science plan. Finally, this
preliminary science plan will be placed on-line for a period of public comment,
and these comments will be used to finalize an official Science Plan for DETELON
by the Executive Committee. This final science plan will be presented to NSF and
to other potential funding sources by May 2011.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Today our
society and our planet face unparalleled environmental and ecosystem pressures,
and we may be heading toward global conditions that are quite unlike anything
experienced in human history. Numerous non-analog conditions relevant for
understanding possible future states of the planet are recorded in the deep,
pre-Quaternary history of the Earth: the past is our window to the future.
Understanding these planetary states requires seamless integration of
paleontological, geochemical, biological, stratigraphic and other data into a
highly resolved temporal and spatial framework that allows development and
testing of quantitative models. The most important problems facing the Earth
sciences today are centered around complex, multi-faceted systems that can only
be approached by interdisciplinary teams of scientists using the best available
technology. Such team-based activities will provide numerous opportunities for
research training and experience in forefront areas of science, particularly for
the growing number of women and other under-represented groups that are
currently entering the Earth sciences.