* 1103533
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant: Late and Terminal Classic Power Shifts in Central Yucatan: The View from Popola
* SBE,BCS
* 02/15/2011,01/31/2012
* E. Wyllys Andrews, Tulane University
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 01/31/2012
* USD 19,965.00

Scott Johnson, a graduate student at Tulane University under the direction of
Dr. E. Wyllys Andrews V, will undertake an archaeological study of the small
site of Popola, Yucatan, Mexico. Although Popola is small, it is near the large
site of Chichen Itza and will likely provide information about how the larger
site's political power affected the region. Chichen Itza became the most
powerful political center of the northern Yucatan Peninsula in the late 800s or
early 900s CE. Around the year 900 CE, Chichen Itza is believed to have defeated
the site of Yaxuna, a large regional center located 18 km SSW of Chichen Itza.
The pattern of artifacts, architecture, and iconography at Yaxuna and Chichen
Itza are quite different. Popola, which likely interacted with Yaxuna and
Chichen Itza, should provide important clues as to how this change of political
power affected the region's small sites and the average person. Artifacts and
architectural information will be gathered by excavations of structures and
should produce a picture of changing regional interactions as Chichen Itza grew
in importance.

To help organize and interpret the data collected at Popola, Johnson will
examine research questions in terms of community organization. Communities are
central units of study in anthropology and archaeology because they are
identifiable social groups. Communities often share traits, such as beliefs,
subsistence practices, architectural ideals, construction techniques, and
artifact types. By identifying and tracing the change of the community at
Popola, it will be possible to identify major changes associated with changes in
the regional power structure. In the past, questions of politics and power have
been focused on the elite segments of society: rulers and power-brokers.
Although the individuals at Popola had little influence on Chichen Itza's rise
to power, they would have been affected by the choices and actions of the new
capital's rulers and elite. Research at Popola is concentrated on understanding
how the non-elite portions of society, such as farmers, potters, and small-time
tradesmen, fared during this time.

The archaeological project at Popola is committed to maintaining its positive
relationship with the modern pueblo of Popola and continuing to support the
training of other graduate students. For the last three years, archaeological
work at the site of Popola has been supported by the local town of the same
name. The project has become a major source of income for modern Popola, as the
entire workforce is drawn from the local community. Project members are
encouraged to discuss with workers the research process and how their labor
helps illuminate the history of their town, region, and culture. The project
holds town meetings throughout the season to explain what has been accomplished
and learned from the work at the site. Over three years, seven students have
been taught field methods such as surveying, mapping, and excavation at Popola,
a tradition that will be continued in the 2011 season. The project at Popola is
focused not only on research goals but also the education of professionals and
the local community.