* 1103715
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology for FY 2011
* BIO,DBI
* 01/01/2012,12/31/2013
* Maria Kamenetska, Kamenetska              Maria
* Fellowship Award
* michael vanni
* 12/31/2013
* USD 123,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2011, Intersections of Biology and Mathematical and Physical Sciences. The
fellowship supports a research and training plan in a host laboratory for the
Fellow at the intersection of biology with physics. The title of the research
and training plan for this fellowship to Maria Kamenetska is "Unwinding DNA:
measuring mechanical stiffness of a single DNA molecule to understand histone
control over gene transcription." The host institution for this fellowship is
Yale University with sponsoring scientists Drs. Lynne Regan and Simon Mochrie.

Histone proteins package DNA into chromatin. This research explores how histones
control the unwinding of DNA to open it for the steps that lead to protein
synthesis. Changes in histones are believed to affect the pliability of
chromatin and thus the accessibility of DNA for transcription. Single molecule
nano-manipulation and force-spectroscopy techniques from physics are being used
to quantitatively assess the affect of histone modification on DNA. Chromatin
re-constituted with exclusively wild-type or modified histones is being prepared
for studies that use optical tweezers and AFM-based force-spectroscopy
techniques to stretch single chromatin tethers and measure their mechanical and
structural properties. These experiments enable an unambiguous comparison of
pliability of individual DNA molecules with different histone compositions and
thus reveal the role of histones in controlling gene expression.

Training objectives include learning molecular biological techniques and
acquiring relevant biochemical skills to prepare homogenous preparations of
chromatin fibers. Broader impacts include educational outreach to biology
students to learn single molecule nano-manipulation techniques and generally
promoting the dissemination of physical approaches in biological science at the
host institution. Also, outreach includes developing and teaching a physics-
based module to supplement the biology curriculum for Breakthrough New Heaven, a
summer program for disadvantaged middle-school students.