* 1103727
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2011
* BIO,DBI
* 08/01/2011,10/31/2013
* Alexandra Harmon-Threatt, Harmon-Threatt          Alexandra      N
* Fellowship Award
* michael vanni
* 10/31/2013
* USD 150,750.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2011, Broadening Participation. The fellowship supports a research and training
plan in a host laboratory for the Fellow who also presents a plan to broaden
participation in biology. The title of the research and training plan for this
fellowship to Alexandra N Harmon-Threatt is: Understanding pollinator community
structure and its effects on pollination service in a naturally fragmented
landscape. The host institution for this fellowship is Washington University in
St. Louis, and the sponsoring scientist is Dr. Tiffany Knight.

In increasingly human-dominated and fragmented landscapes, valuable knowledge
about community dynamics is gained and species losses are prevented by using
both landscape and organism features to understand patterns of biodiversity.
This is especially important for pollinators, which provide a supporting service
to plants and help stabilize plant communities. This study investigates
pollinator communities in the Ozark glades. The location for the research is a
naturally fragmented ecosystem associated with rocky outcrops in a densely
forested matrix where significant efforts to restore glades are occurring. Using
common landscape features, such as patch size, isolation, and dispersal ability;
adding new features, patch age and dietary breadth; and measuring extent of
pollination service, this research poses and seeks to answer two questions: 1)
How do landscape features affect pollinator diversity and composition? 2) How
does pollinator diversity and composition affect pollination service to plants?
Understanding pollinator communities in fragmented landscapes could prove key in
averting a "global pollination crisis" and providing targeted recommendations
for restoration.

The proposed research provides the Fellow diverse opportunities to develop as a
researcher and teacher. The training goals being met are 1) building additional
technical and methodological skills, 2) learning mentoring skills for a diverse
group of students and 3) increasing teaching preparation and experience. To
broaden participation, high school and college students from groups under
represented in science are being included in the research; and guest lectures
are being given in undergraduate courses to expose students to diversity in
academia.