* 1103054
* IRFP: Rainfall and herbivory: characterizing the transmission route for anthrax in grazing wildlife
* O/D,OISE
* 12/01/2011,01/31/2015
* Wendy Turner, Turner                  Wendy          C
* Fellowship Award
* Cassandra Dudka
* 01/31/2015
* USD 241,100.00

1103054 Turner

The International Research Fellowship Program enables U.S. scientists and
engineers to conduct nine to twenty-four months of research abroad. The
program's awards provide opportunities for joint research, and the use of unique
or complementary facilities, expertise and experimental conditions abroad. This
award is co-funded with the ANESA Program in the Office of International Science
and Engineering.

This award will support a twenty-four-month research fellowship by Dr. Wendy C.
Turner to work with Professor Nils Chr. Stenseth and Professor Anne-Brit Kolst√∏
at the University of Oslo in Oslo, Norway and Professor Isaac Mapaure at the
University of Namibia in Windhoek, Namibia.

Many mysteries remain in understanding how herbivorous hosts acquire Bacillus
anthracis, the bacterium causing anthrax infections. Like many other disease
agents, transmission of B. anthracis between hosts involves passage through the
external environment. Changes in environmental conditions, particularly
rainfall, strongly correlate with increases in the incidence of many diseases,
but the mechanistic relationships between rainfall and disease transmission are
often unknown.

Using anthrax in herbivorous wildlife as a model system, this project
characterizes the determinants of a seasonally occurring infectious disease
using consumer-resource interaction theory coupled with field studies and
statistical modeling. It is hypothesized that grazing animals are exposed to B.
anthracis spores when foraging at previous anthrax carcass sites and that the
level of exposure at these sites is rainfall dependent. The PI is testing these
hypotheses with two field studies based in Etosha National Park, Namibia. The
first is a longitudinal observational study at anthrax carcass sites to
determine the abundance of B. anthracis spores on grass leaves and how spore
quantity varies in response to rainfall. The second is a natural experiment
using motion sensing camera traps to determine if hosts selectively forage at
carcass sites and over what time scale. Hierarchical models are used to
determine if the observed correlation between rainfall and anthrax incidence can
be explained mechanistically through variation in rainfall, spore abundance and
host foraging behavior, with a focus on plains zebra (Equus quagga). Results of
this research will provide an understanding of the mechanisms behind
transmission of a widely distributed, seasonally occurring infectious disease of
importance to farming, wildlife management and public health. Only once we
understand the relationships between rainfall and exposure of grazers to B.
anthracis, can we predict how animal exposure and anthrax dynamics may change
with anticipated changes in rainfall patterns under various models of climate
change. Understanding the mechanisms behind anthrax outbreaks in grazing systems
will further provide information on where, when and how control measures need to
be directed in order to lessen animal exposure. Education and training are
essential components of the proposed research. In addition to broadening the
PI's training, scientific expertise and international collaborations, this
project will further develop her skills as a mentor and educator.