* 1103360
* P2C2:  Testing Whether Internal Dynamics is the Pacemaker of the Indian Summer Monsoon Variability on Decadal to Centennial Timescales
* GEO,AGS
* 07/01/2011,06/30/2014
* Ashish Sinha, California State University-Dominguez Hills Foundation
* Standard Grant
* David Verardo
* 06/30/2014
* USD 242,822.00

The researcher aims to develop millennial-length (1,000-2,000), absolute dated,
and high resolution (inter-annual to sub-decadal) oxygen isotope records of
speleothems from caves located in western, southern, and northern India. The
goal of the research is to provide Indian summer monsoon (ISM) histories at the
regional level that are analogous to the instrumental records from distinct
macro-meteorological units.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigator notes that
seasonal precipitation associated with the ISM tends to be dominated by two time
scales of variability: (1) interannual variations which are attributed to slowly
evolving external boundary conditions (e.g., tropical Pacific SST), and (2)
intraseasonal oscillations (e.g., 10-20 and 30-60 day active-break cycles) which
are driven by internal dynamics that modulate convection and propagation of
embedded synoptic systems. There is no conclusive evidence to indicate which one
of these two forcings is the dominant pacemaker of ISM variability on
interannual and longer timescales.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The premise of the
research is that existing instrumentally-calibrated and inter-annually resolved
oxygen isotope speleothem records from central and northeast India supports the
hypothesis that the internal forcing, which manifests in the form of chaotic
rainfall variability during the monsoon season, is the dominant pacemaker of ISM
variability. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;On the basis of the current data, the
research will test the working hypothesis that, on decadal and centennial
timescale, systematic changes in the frequency characteristics of active-break
cycles serve as a medium by which ISM responds to changes in the external
boundary forcing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts involve a better
understanding of Indian Monsoon dynamics and the support of undergraduates in
the research effort from currently under-represented groups.