* 1103894
* US Egypt Cooperative Research: Use of Cold-Formed Steel in Residential Housing
* O/D,OISE
* 08/01/2011,07/31/2014
* Benjamin Schafer, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Anne Emig
* 07/31/2014
* USD 125,000.00

1103904 &lt;br/&gt;This project supports a cooperative research project by Dr.
Benjamin Schafer at Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, Maryland and Dr.
Metwally Abu-Hamd of Cairo University, Cairo, Egypt. They plan to study Use of
Cold-Formed Steel in Residential Housing. In recent years society has begun to
re-evaluate our built environment with the objective of achieving higher
performance, specifically, to minimize loss attributed to natural hazards and to
seek sustainable solutions for long-term needs in the built environment. Low-
rise structures in general and residential housing in particular, represent by
far the greatest percentage of the world?s building stock. In the past cultural
norms largely drove the materials and systems employed for residential housing,
today the situation is in flux and the potential to move towards a more
scientific performance-basis exists. One material that may see significant
increase in use due to its high strength-to-weight ratio, high recycled content,
ease of construction, and proven efficiencies is cold-formed
steel.&lt;br/&gt;This PIs will explores the use of cold-formed steel framing in
residential housing in the U.S. and Egypt&lt;br/&gt;and seek to (a) develop new
non-proprietary systems for cold-formed steel framing with the
potential&lt;br/&gt;to significantly increase building technical performance and
function, and (b) provides a series of&lt;br/&gt;archetype studies that explore
different framing solutions, including the newly proposed cold-formed
steel&lt;br/&gt;option, from economic, environmental, and sustainability
aspects. The building archetypes studies focus&lt;br/&gt;on both rural and urban
areas in Egypt and the U.S. The framing solutions examined include (a)
traditional framing solutions in Egypt (concrete) and the United States (timber)
along with (b) existing repetitive framing in cold-formed steel using commodity
shapes and (c) the new system developed in this proposal for cold-formed steel
framing that employs novel, optimized, cross-section shapes and a new dual
system for load bearing and lateral resistance.&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit:
The research will advance significantly the application of cold-formed steel
framing to residential housing. This is achieved through development of a new
cold-formed steel framing structural system, and through careful building
archetype studies that specifically weigh the balance between engineering
performance and sustainability metrics. In total the research will provide a
template for how to evaluate new framing systems in residential housing with a
worldwide view, and specifically demonstrate this approach for cold-formed steel
framing. The U.S. PI is the driving force behind significant changes in U.S.
design specifications that enable new highly efficient cold-formed steel shapes
to readily be designed and is uniquely positioned to explore and provide novel
solutions for cold-formed steel framing. The Egyptian PI (Abu-Hamd) has a long
experience in the performance of steel structures and construction management of
steel structures. A detailed implementation plan is provided for the research.
The resources required largely utilize the already active work at both
institutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The sociological broader
impact is largely focused on the creation of a new U.S.-Egyptian partnership on
cold-formed steel structures. Personnel exchanges to deepen the experience are
planned for. The PI has a strong record of dissemination to academic and
industry, both channels will be utilized in this research. Specifically,
outreach to industry will include U.S. codes and standards organizations (AISI-
COFS) as well as annual meetings of builders and practitioners (Metalcon).
Cooperation with building contractors shall also include financing the building
of demonstration models of the developed designs in Egypt. The larger goal of
the research is to create residential housing that meets engineering performance
and sustainability targets with much greater efficiency than current solutions.
The partnership with Egypt insures that the full breadth of the problem is
explored and that new solutions will have maximum global
benefit.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal is supported under the US-Egypt
Joint Fund Program where NSF supports the US side and the Government of Egypt
funds the Egyptian side.