* 1103768
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2011
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2013
* Jonathan Dyhr, Dyhr                    Jonathan       P
* Fellowship Award
* Daniel Marenda
* 08/31/2013
* USD 123,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2011, Intersections of Biology and Mathematical and Physical Sciences. The
fellowship supports a research and training plan in a host laboratory for the
Fellow at the intersection of biology and engineering. The title of the research
and training plan for this fellowship to Jonathan Dyhr is "Multisensory control
of insect flight." The host institution for this research is the University of
Washington, Seattle with sponsoring scientists Drs. Thomas Daniel and Kristi
Morgansen.

Coordinated animal movement requires combining multiple and different types of
sensory information whether the movement is on land, in water, or in air through
flight. Moving organisms must parallel process many changing and complex sensory
signals. Individually, these signals carry limited information about the world
and are transmitted with varying latencies and levels of precision. This
research applies quantitative techniques and tools from control theory to better
understand how the hawkmoth, Manduca sexta, integrates sensory information to
orchestrate appropriate behavioral responses during flight. First, the roles of
different sensory systems for maintaining flight stability are measured in
freely flying moths as they recover from external visual and mechanical
perturbations. Second, a control theoretic model of the moth flight control
system is used to characterize the sensitivity of the system to different
parameters, such as the transmission delay of sensory signals. This research
establishes a control theoretic toolbox for studying biological systems.

Experimentally advantageous invertebrate model systems, such as M. sexta,
provide key insights into the basic neural processes that underlie motor control
and new experimental techniques that are economical. Furthermore, broader
impacts include potential applications for treating motor deficits, developing
better prosthetic strategies, and designing biologically inspired robots.
Specific training objectives for the Fellow include expanding expertise in
control theory and biomechanics, gaining teaching experience by designing an
undergraduate short course on control systems in biology, gaining experience
mentoring high school and undergraduate students, and assisting the Pacific
Science Center with new exhibits for communicating science to public audiences.