* 1103598
* US Egypt Cooperative Research - A Novel Approach for Fabrication Technology of Mullite Nanoparticles from Industrial Wastes for Advanced Applications
* O/D,OISE
* 08/01/2011,12/31/2013
* Kevin Powers, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Anne Emig
* 12/31/2013
* USD 114,420.00

1103598 &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This project supports a cooperative research
project by Dr. Kevin Powers, University of Florida, Gainesville and Dr. Mohamed
M. Rashad, Central Metallurgical Research and Development Institute (CMRDI),
Helwan, Egypt. They plan to study a novel approach for fabrication technology of
mullite nanoparticles from industrial wastes for advanced applications. The
objective is to develop advanced technologies to recycle and process silica
effluents disposed from aluminum manufacturing in Egypt, silica fume from Ferro-
silicon Alloys Company, Al dross from Egyptian Aluminum Company and aluminum
effluents disposed from Egyptalum Company for the production of mullite
nanoparticles 3Al2O3.2SiO2 used in refractory, electronic and optical
applications. The technology to be developed is equally applicable to the U.S.
industry centered in the Virginia/North Carolina and Georgia mining districts
and has implications for the U.S. steelmaking industry. The technology depends
on the formation of soluble solutions of sodium aluminate NaAlO2 and sodium
silicate Na2SiO3 chemically treated under specified conditions. The effect of
synthesis conditions, temperature, time, pH, molar ratio and the crystal
modifiers on the crystal structure, size and microstructure will be studied and
the optimum conditions determined. Moreover, the changes in the surface area
SBET, DC resistivity, optical and mechanical properties will be measured. The
research has the potential to transform undesirable by-products generated under
current production methods into a high value added product for the mullite
manufacturing industry. The educational aspects of the proposed work focus on
the training of young Egyptian scientists in advanced characterization
techniques and young U.S. scientists in the use of technological advances to
improve the efficiency and sustainability of traditional mineral production
practices. This project also brings together the international expertise of
particles in USA (PERC) with the particle technology experts in Egypt (CMRDI).
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: The dramatic increase in worldwide
demand for steel and other industrial products brings with it a concurrent
increased demand for mineral resources such as Kyanite, Andalusite, Sillimanite
and Mullite used for refractories, glass, white wares and other ceramic
products. The mining, refining and processing of these diminishing resources is
intensive in energy and water use. The advanced methods investigated herein will
lead to a greater understanding, greater efficiency and potential new uses for
recycled industrial wastes and valuable end products.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: Recycling what once was industrial waste
into a marketable product is a natural avenue toward achieving sustainable
energy and water use practices in both emerging and advanced industrialized
countries. The techniques and processes developed under this proposal can be
implemented in emerging economies and used to revitalize U.S. domestic
production and practices in an environmentally responsible and economically
feasible manner. The project will help educate Egyptian scientists in advanced
characterization techniques and re-introduce traditional mineral engineering
principles to a new generation of U.S. engineering students.&lt;br/&gt;This
proposal is supported under the US-Egypt Joint Fund Program where NSF supports
the US side and the Government of Egypt funds the Egyptian side.