* 1103860
* Novel Phases of Quantum Matter
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2014
* Subir Sachdev, Harvard University
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 08/31/2014
* USD 450,000.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports theoretical research
and education to explore the properties of strongly interacting quantum matter,
as realized in a wide variety of transition metal compounds, and in systems of
trapped ultra-cold atoms. Special attention will be paid to layered compounds
with antiferromagnetism and higher temperature superconductivity: examples are
the cuprates, the pnictide compounds, the Bechgaard salts, and rare-earth heavy-
fermion compounds. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI has proposed a common phase
diagram which has successfully described the variation in physical properties as
a function of temperature, applied magnetic field, and a tuning parameter like
electron density or pressure, across these comprehensive series of materials.
Central actors in this phase diagram are quantum phase transitions, involving
the onset of spin magnetism and other orders, in metals and superconductors. The
PI has described the strong-coupling structure of the theory of such transitions
in two spatial dimensions, and proposed to develop the theory to produce new
experimental tests of our understanding. The theory also allows for more exotic
intermediate phases, with subtle types of quantum entanglement or 'topological
order;' the PI will study their features while making contact with experimental
studies on certain organic insulators. The theories of strong quantum
correlations will also be applied to experiments on trapped ultra-cold atoms,
and to electron spin physics in graphene. Finally, there are also remarkable
connections between the possible phases of strongly interacting quantum matter,
and the states of gravitational theories in anti-de Sitter space, through a
gauge-gravity duality. The PI will continue his research at this interface
area.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award also supports education at the graduate
and postdoctoral level, as well as outreach to the public and the preparation of
the next edition of an authoritative textbook in the field.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
supports theoretical research and education with the aim to explore quantum
matter. Quantum matter is formed when large numbers of interacting particles are
at temperatures low enough so that the concepts of quantum mechanics play a
crucial role in determining its distinguishing characteristics. For electrons in
solids, the needed 'low' temperatures can be even higher than room temperature.
For gases of trapped atoms, ultra-cold temperatures about one billionth of a
degree from the absolute zero of temperature are needed. Remarkably, a common
set of ideas has found application across this wide range of energy scales.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Some of the most interesting phases of quantum matter are
associated with the interplay between magnetism and superconductivity. Electrons
may be thought of as tiny magnets and magnetism arises from the co-operative
arrangement of the magnetic axes of the electrons. Superconductivity is the
ability of pairs of electrons to carry electrical current without dissipation.
The PI will study how by varying material parameters, it is possible to drive a
system of electrons from a magnetic to a superconducting state, across a variety
of 'quantum phase transitions.' Such phase transitions are analogous to familiar
thermal transitions, like water changing to steam, but are associated here with
subtle quantum correlations between the electrons. Concepts from the theory of
quantum phase transitions inform our understanding of the measureable properties
of quantum matter in the laboratory.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI will also
explore emerging connections between the theory of quantum matter, and seemingly
unrelated work on the quantum theory of black hole horizons. These fields share
a common interest in how many particles can become 'entangled' with each other
quantum mechanically across large distances; their distinct approaches to
entanglement have led to mutually beneficial insights.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award also supports education at the graduate and postdoctoral level, as well as
outreach to the public and the preparation of the next edition of an
authoritative textbook in the field.