* 1103398
* US Egypt Cooperative Research: Ultrasmall Silicon nanoparticle technology for renewable energy applications
* O/D,OISE
* 08/01/2011,07/31/2015
* Munir Nayfeh, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Anne Emig
* 07/31/2015
* USD 165,312.00

1103398 &lt;br/&gt;This project supports a cooperative research project by Dr.
Munir Nayfeh the University of Illinois, Urbana, Champaign (UIUC), Dr. Siu-Tung
Yau, Cleveland State University, Cleveland, Ohio and Dr. Noha Elhalawany,
National Research Center (NRC), Cairo, Egypt. They plan to address
science/engineering issues toward innovative technologies for sustainable
energy. The common theme underlying the effort is the contribution of hydrogen
passivated ultrasmall silicon nanoparticles (USiN), an innovative material
developed and patented by Dr. Nayfeh. This research and development and
commercialization initiative is planned for making significant contribution to
using nano technology approaches for harvesting and storing renewable
energy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: Devices based on composites of
semiconductor-polymer have been considered for&lt;br/&gt;harvesting and storing
renewable energy. But the performance and efficiency of those are
drastically&lt;br/&gt;reduced by severe aggregation that reduces the interface
area and electron transport. Recently, silicon&lt;br/&gt;nano material has been
developed at the University of Illinois, which potentially can alleviate
these&lt;br/&gt;problems. The Si-H termination of the particles allows the nano
particle to mix chemically in the polymer&lt;br/&gt;to form homogeneous
composites. The ordered close packing nano particle phase maximizes
interface&lt;br/&gt;area, while forming ordered networks for fast electron
transport. The PIs plan to conduct fundamental studies of the nature of thin
films of semiconductor nano particle-polymer composites, enhanced by one and
two-dimensional Si or carbon structures as well as construct and analyze
advanced energy harvest and storage devices of renewable energy using these
composites. The project is expected to yield totally transformational
technologies, which will get renewable energy to a point where it is
economically competitive with current technology. The research includes:
synthesis of dispersions of silicon nano particles and their nano-composite
films in conducting polymers; construction of advance energy devices using the
nano composites: Photovoltaic solar cells and biofuel cells for energy harvest;
and super capacitors on flexible substrate for energy storage; hybrid LED bulbs
driven by solar cell and super capacitors ; device operation, characterization
and optimization: Exploring the parameter space: nano particle material and size
/ polymer type (hole and electron transporting) / 1-dimenional element,
stability and effect of aging; studies of the basic mechanisms (optimization of
composite and devices): electrical transport and photo dynamic properties vs.
type of polymer matrix and size of the nano particles (band gap &amp; electron
affinity); electro-catalysis, modulation of conductivity and transport vs.
additive material, and power efficiency; Enhancement of power efficiency by
incorporating a variety of one- and two- dimensional structures: Si nano wires,
graphene, carbon nano tubes; and safety studies of nano material and analysis of
CO2 production.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: With an energy crisis
triggered by increasing consumption and cost of energy and fuels, compounded by
the fact that high energy consumption is causing pressing environmental
pollution and global warming, triggering severe climate changes, this project is
to address innovations that can lead to better solar energy harvesting. Research
in Si nano particles transcends energy, as it will impact important questions of
health and safety, effect on the environment as well as nano ethics. Because of
the importance of energy, it is expected to open up new channels for
collaboration with industry. The project will provide training and valuable
international experience and perspectives for the graduate and undergraduate
students working on the project, due to the involvement of the National Research
Center in Cairo, Egypt and the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
(UIUC), and Cleveland State University.