* 1103413
* RUI: P2C2--Reconstruction of Recent and Late Holocene Tropical Cyclone Landfalls in Northwestern Australia using Flood Deposits in Aragonite Stalagmites
* GEO,AGS
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2014
* Rhawn Denniston, Cornell College
* Standard Grant
* David Verardo
* 08/31/2014
* USD 98,000.00

This award helps develop a record of tropical cyclone activity from speleothems
recovered from the Kimberley region of tropical Western Australia and dated to
the late Holocene (~4,000 yr B.P.).

Previous research by the researcher demonstrated that aragonite stalagmites are
abundant in caves in the Kimberley through the late Holocene and up to the
present time, are characterized by extremely high growth rates, and the caves
trap clays deposited on stalagmite surfaces only during tropical cyclone-induced
flooding.

Because these stalagmites contain elevated Uranium abundances, high delta
234-Uranium values, and are largely devoid of detritus (other than in flood
deposits), they can be dated with extremely high precision using Uranium-Thorium
mass spectrometry (Â±1 year within the last century).

In order to constrain the cyclone distance/intensity threshold required to flood
the caves, the researcher will combine the stalagmite sedimentological flood
records with stable isotopic analyses over the last 100 years of growth; an
interval for which historical records of tropical cyclone intensity and storm
track are available. This analysis will help establish a baseline for estimating
the intensity-distance ratio of past storms recorded as clay layers in
individual caves.

The broader impacts involve the potential for greater understanding of the
history of cyclonic activity and the developement of a new climate proxy. The
research also involves substantive undergraduate student participation in the
project.