* 1103195
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Directive-Response Sequences and Statistical Experimentalism
* SBE,SES
* 03/15/2011,02/29/2012
* Douglas Maynard, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Saylor Breckenridge
* 02/29/2012
* USD 10,000.00

Doctoral Dissertation Research: Directive-Response Sequences and Statistical
Experimentalism SES - 1103195 Douglas W. Maynard Matthew Hollander University of
Wisconsin, Madison

Abstract The Milgram experiment has iconic status in the social sciences.
Conducted in the wake of World War 2 and the atrocities associated with that
period, the experiment examined Why and under what conditions people show
obedience to authority even if it results in harm to others? The study, which
has been replicated many times and in different settings, has informed public
and science policy, and it has shaped professional ethics training for
generations of scholars. However, we actually know very little about what
happened during the original experiment, especially as it concerns incidents
where people chose to resist orders, including those that might cause harm to
others. This dissertation addresses the following question: What exactly did
disobedient subjects say and do that enabled them to sustain resistance? Why did
obedient subjects fail despite sporadic displays of seemingly strong resistance?
What generalizations can be made from participants' concrete actions to attempts
to resist power in other settings? How did Milgram's use of the "hybrid
statistics" endemic to 1950s experimental social psychology influence his
interpretation of what subjects did? To answer these questions, the project uses
an analytical strategy known as conversation analysis to examine a large
collection of Milgram's original audio and video recordings made in 1961-62
during more than 900 experimental sessions (archived at Yale University).
Preliminary findings suggest that many study participants who expressed verbal
resistance to the experimenter's directives nevertheless displayed willingness
to be guided by further commands, for instance by requesting clarification about
directives. In contrast, ultimately disobedient subjects seem to have resisted
orders more effectively by making reference to the desires of the victim, a
practice that involved explicit and sustained refusals to continue the
experiment.

Broader Impacts Thus study seeks to generate new insight into an iconic
experiment whose legacy has affected the way we "do science." The Milgram
experiment, and interpretations derived from the data have had a strong
influence on leading sociological and psychological paradigms about people's
obedience to authority. It has also affected basic science procedures in a broad
set of disciplines via human subjects regulations and institutional review
boards, as well as experimental norms taught in methods classes. Thus, findings
from this research may be of interest to a broad set of researchers in the
social and life sciences, as well as science policy makers. In addition, the
project provides a training opportunity for undergraduates.