* 1103434
* Glacial-Interglacial Change in California Current System Dynamics: A New Alkenone Perspective
* GEO,OCE
* 06/01/2011,05/31/2015
* Fredrick Prahl, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Candace Major
* 05/31/2015
* USD 324,959.00

The California Current System (CCS) is a setting where several recent studies,
focusing on the mechanisms and effects of glacial/interglacial climate change in
North America and the North Pacific Ocean, employ the unsaturation patterns of
alkenone biomarkers as a proxy for mean annual sea surface temperature (SST).
However, the CCS is also a setting where dramatic changes in upwelling are known
to occur in response to the very climate variation that these SST proxy records
are employed to reconstruct. Knowing that the seasonal and depth distribution of
phytoplankton, including alkenone producers, can depend heavily on the nutrient
regime, what ramifications might this fact hold for interpretation of down core
alkenone based SST records along the California margin? The investigators at
Oregon State University hypothesize that changes in upwelling behavior and
nutrient input along the northeast Pacific margin during glacial periods have
shaped the SST proxy record and, thus, the research community's current
understanding of how North Pacific climate responds to external forcing.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigators will measure alkenone unsaturation
patterns and hydrogen isotopic composition in sediments from the modern
northeast Pacific margin to track the effects of nutrient stress on the alkenone
signal exported to the sea floor. Measurements will then be made on sediments
from the same region at the last glacial maximum, as well as with roughly
4,000-year resolution at three representative sites through the last full
glacial cycle. Through comparison of latitudinal trends in the results, the
investigators will test their hypothesis that significant shifts occurred in the
pattern of alkenone production through the glacial history of the CCS. If
demonstrated, paleotemperature records from this region can be re-evaluated with
the benefit of this improved ecological context. Current conceptions of the
relationship between North Pacific climate and CCS strength, drawn from these
fossil signatures, may be refined. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is best
summarized as an effort to resolve important open questions surrounding the
mechanisms and timing of North American/North Pacific climate change while
simultaneously evaluating the utility of a powerful new tracer of paleo ecology.
Fundamental understanding of these relationships is of direct importance as the
scientific community attempts to determine the significance of recent anomalous
CCS upwelling seasons and their ties to the currently changing atmospheric
conditions in the North Pacific. Funding will support an advanced graduate
student who has been centrally involved in developing the ideas upon which this
research project is based.