* 1103508
* Collaborative Research:  Quantifying the Ocean's Responses to Solar Forcing:  Multidecadel Century-scale Variability of North Atlantic SSTs Over Recent Millenia
* GEO,OCE
* 09/15/2011,08/31/2015
* Scott Lehman, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Candace Major
* 08/31/2015
* USD 243,806.00

The purpose of this project is to develop the first detailed, calendrically-
dated records of North Atlantic Sea Surface Temperature (SST) variability in
order to investigate the ocean's response to natural solar forcing at multi-
decadal to century time scales over the last 3000 years. Despite the
availability of reliable SST proxies and of sampling sites with the necessary
high deposition rates, there exist no reconstructions of the North Atlantic
basin-scale SST field over past millennia based directly or substantially on
ocean observations. This is due almost entirely to the lack of adequate age-
dating control in marine sediments. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This collaborative
project, undertaken by a team from both Columbia University's Lamont-Doherty
Earth Observatory and the University of Colorado, Boulder, develops a new marine
application of the so-called radiocarbon "wiggle-match" dating method in which
reliable calendar age estimates are obtained free of assumptions regarding the
size and past variability of the local marine reservoir age, which is the
principle source of dating uncertainty. Because the method objectively maps
down-core marine sediment radiocarbon variations to the late Holocene
radiocarbon calibration in tree-rings, which also contains a record of initial
atmospheric radiocarbon activity controlled (at the timescale of interest here)
largely by variations in the Sun's open magnetic flux, it provides for direct
comparison of SST and solar proxy variability in the same sediments. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;The researchers makes use of eight high-accumulation rate sediment
cores with a basin-wide distribution selected to capture the spatial expression
of the leading modes of Atlantic temperature variability today (the NAO and
AMO). Chronologies for each core are based on AMS radiocarbon dating (at a
nominal resolution of 40 years) with calendar ages assigned objectively using an
automated wiggle-match algorithm developed for this project. SST reconstructions
will be based on foraminiferal oxygen isotope stratigraphy and Mg/Ca, which
provide a reliable estimate of past calcification temperature. Together these
data will provide the observations necessary to test for any possible basin-wide
SST pattern response to solar forcing and whether this response has features in
common with the North Atlantic Oscillation (NAO), Atlantic Multidecadal
Oscillation (AMO) or with other previously simulated responses. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: &lt;br/&gt;This work directly addresses the need to
characterize natural climate variability as needed in order to separate ongoing
responses to natural and anthropogenic forcing agents and to improve predictive
models. Such characterization is presently lacking over the oceans although
ocean regions are spatially and, in many instances, energetically dominant. The
project will also support education and research training for a PhD student at
Columbia University.