* 1103489
* P2C2: High-Resolution Records of Rapid Climate Change in Speleothem Records from the Bahamas
* GEO,AGS
* 09/15/2011,08/31/2016
* Peter Swart, University of Miami
* Continuing Grant
* David Verardo
* 08/31/2016
* USD 827,865.00

This award supports team of researchers to investigate the hypothesis that
aridification in Northern Africa and cooling in the North Atlantic Ocean,
associated with Heinrich events, are recorded in the chemical composition of
stalagmites from the Bahamas during periods of low sea
level.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The team's science strategy is to combine
geochemical analysis of speleothems with regional modeling in order to gain a
better understanding of the signatures and physical mechanisms of rapid climate
change in the tropical/sub-tropical Atlantic. The Bahamian stalagmites occur in
caves which are now flooded by seawater. The researchers have collected
submerged samples from depths up to 35 meters below the present sea level.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;These stalagmites formed during periods when sea-level was
lower than the present time and ceased growing either when sea-level flooded the
caves or when climate conditions became arid and there ceased to be sufficient
water to support speleothem formation. The speleothems have been preliminarily
dated and separated into three age groups of 14,000-80,000 yrs, 200,000-250,000
yrs, and 300,000-350,000 yrs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts include
outreach activities in the Bahamas, where the researchers will work with local
environmental organizations to raise awareness of the effects of sea-level rise.
The project also includes support for two graduate students and opportunities
for undergraduate students and high school interns to obtain laboratory and
research experience.