* 1103183
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: New Urban Territories and the Geography of Precarious Labor
* SBE,BCS
* 07/15/2011,12/31/2012
* John Pickles, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 12/31/2012
* USD 11,975.00

Like many other cities in developing nations, the urban periphery of Buenos
Aires, Argentina, has long been a site of high poverty and precarious living
conditions. Many neighborhoods lack potable water and sewage systems, residents
survive on informal employment, and occupants build their own houses, often
alongside landfills or in other hazardous locations. These areas suffered
enormously during Argentina's 2001 economic crisis, creating unemployment levels
of up to 50 percent in some areas and causing many people to lose access to
basic services, including electricity and running water. This doctoral
dissertation research project will examine grassroots responses in the urban
periphery to the economic crisis, especially the organization of the Movements
of Unemployed Workers (Movimientos de Trabajadores Desocupados -- MTDs), which
were created to provide alternative social and economic opportunities in the
wake of the 2001 economic crisis. The doctoral student will address the
following questions: (1) How have the MTDs used territorial organizational
strategies to respond to the specific conditions in the urban periphery? (2)
What are the alternative economic practices of the MTD and what effects have
these practices had in terms of meeting the basic needs of participants and
producing new social relations? The project will focus on three MTDs in
different parts of the urban periphery that employ different strategies and
practices in order to sustain the livelihoods of their members and challenge the
increasing paucity of predictability or stability of everyday life. The student
will use a variety of qualitative methods in order to answer these questions,
including in-depth interviews, participant-observation, and participatory
mapping with each MTD.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will take an
interdisciplinary approach to understanding changing labor relations in the
global economy. By starting from the perspective of the unemployed, the project
will explore the effects of contemporary capitalism on marginalized populations
and the responses of those people. The project will contributes to work in
geography, development studies, and anthropology on diverse and alternative
economies, exploring the different ways in which people form economic, social
and spatial relations. The project will provide insights from the perspective of
unemployed movements, enhancing capabilities to glimpse how those most affected
by economic downturns experience them and create their own means of survival in
times of crisis. As a Doctoral Dissertation Research Improvement award, this
award also will provide support to enable a promising student to establish a
strong independent research career.