* 1103402
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology for FY 2011
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2014
* Sarah Pabian, Pabian                  Sarah          E
* Fellowship Award
* michael vanni
* 08/31/2014
* USD 189,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2011, Broadening Participation. The fellowship supports a research and training
plan in a host laboratory for the Fellow who also presents a plan to broaden
participation in biology. The title of the research and training plan for this
fellowship to Sarah Pabian is "From soils to songbirds: movement of calcium,
aluminum, and mercury in food webs of forest ecosystems impacted by air
pollution." The host institutions for this fellowship are Syracuse University,
Colorado State University, and State University of New York College of
Environmental Science & Forestry, and the sponsoring scientists are Drs. Charles
Driscoll, Colleen Web and Colin Beier.

Air pollution, including acid rain and mercury deposition, has the potential to
negatively affect entire forest ecosystems through decreased availability of
calcium and increased availability of aluminum and mercury in forest soils.
These three changes in soil conditions could act synergistically to negatively
affect songbird reproduction. However, little is known about the availability of
aluminum and mercury in terrestrial systems, their interactions with calcium
supply, or the mechanisms of trophic transfer to songbirds. Also, modeling these
complex interactions requires advanced mathematical and analytical techniques.
This research evaluates and compares trophic pathways for calcium, aluminum, and
mercury acquisition by forest songbirds using a combination of field studies and
dynamical network modeling. A better understanding of the availability and
interactions among these elements permits an evaluation of the degree to which
air pollution is posing threats to the health and structure of forest
ecosystems.

Training objectives include acquiring new skills in environmental chemistry,
community ecology, and mathematical modeling. In addition, the Fellow gains
skills in advising graduate students, scientific outreach, and managing
multidisciplinary collaborations with scientists working at different
institutions. Broader impacts of the research include providing undergraduates
with research opportunities and sharing results with scientific, policy, and
public audiences. The Fellow uses her knowledge and enthusiasm in science to
work with many different organizations, including 4-H, Women in Science and
Engineering, and nature centers, to stimulate science interest in a diversity of
young people.