* 1103262
* RUI: Using opal and organic carbon as proxies for wind-driven upwelling during the onset and termination of the African Humid Period in a transect of African margin cores
* GEO,OCE
* 08/15/2011,07/31/2015
* Louisa Bradtmiller, Macalester College
* Standard Grant
* Candace Major
* 07/31/2015
* USD 137,359.00

Marine and terrestrial records from northern Africa have greatly enhanced our
understanding of both the causes and effects of climate change in the geologic
past. Specifically, proxy records of changes in paleoproductivity yield
information about upwelling strength, and therefore wind strength along the
North African margin. Changes in wind strength, in turn, have been shown to
correlate with changes in the relative aridity of the Sahel: periods of
increased precipitation in the past were periods of weaker trade winds and
decreased upwelling, and vice verse. Today the population of the Sahel region is
highly vulnerable to changes in effective precipitation, making it all the more
important to understand the connections between aridity, wind-strength, and
climate change, and how abruptly changes can occur.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
work, led by an early career faculty member at Macalester College in Minnesota,
focuses on the environmental changes associated with the African Humid Period
(AHP, 11,000 to 5,000 years before present), a time when northern Africa was
characterized by a much wetter environment than it is today. Specifically, the
work will assess the timing and abruptness of changes in upwelling associated
with the onset and termination of the AHP across a 20-degree span of latitudes
along the northwest African margin. The lead researcher will determine changes
in upwelling intensity using the percentages of opal and organic carbon
preserved in sediment cores, and combine these data with 230Th data from a
separately funded project to calculate fluxes of each constituent. These efforts
will provide an extraordinarily rich and detailed dataset of proxies related to
wind strength, upwelling, and aridity in the Sahel region throughout the
deglaciation and the Holocene. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In terms of broader impact,
this project will offer the opportunity for a number of undergraduates at a
small mid-western liberal arts college to engage in ocean sciences research.
Funding also supports collaboration between two early career scientists.