* 1103731
* Nanotechnology Partnership for Rural Education Pathways (NANOprep)
* EDU,DUE
* 08/01/2011,07/31/2015
* Deb Newberry, Minnesota State College - Southeast Technical
* Standard Grant
* Virginia Carter
* 07/31/2015
* USD 830,372.00

The Nanotechnology Partnership for Rural Education Pathways (NANOprep) project
is an effort that builds on the success of Minnesota State College-Southeast
Technical (MSC-ST)'s NANOredi initiative. There is a strong partnership with ATE
NanoLink, the University of Minnesota Nanofabrication Center, and ATE NACK that
will help facilitate program development and implementation. The goal of
NANOprep is to create a new cultural model to improve public awareness and
increase enrollment and retention of students in nanoscience leading to their
development as skilled nanotechnicians. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The basis for the
creation of the project is to address the nanotechnology workforce challenge.
According to experts, the key challenge for nanotechnology development is the
education and training of new, skilled workers to meet the demands of the
emerging field. This will require effective strategies for recruitment and
retention, especially of students from rural and other underrepresented
communities. To meet this challenge, NANOprep implements the design of a newly
developed nano survey course that targets a broad audience of students and
faculty (high school and beyond), incumbent workers, and the general public.
Modules from the NANOprep survey are also embedded in general education STEM
courses and technical courses, making them part of the requirements for the 22
credit Nanoscience Technician certificate offered by MSC-ST. A minimum of three
survey courses are offered each year with more than 225 students enrolled, many
of which are female and other ethnic minorities. Each section of 25 students
enrolls 4-5 high school and college faculty and 4-5 incumbent workers, with dual
credit options for high school students. The project also provides a community
awareness event in partnership with the City of Rushford and RINTek as a means
of improving community understanding of nanotechnology and associated career
opportunities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NANOprep serves as a replicable model for
the development and implementation of nanoscience programs, as well as a
strategy for other technical programs that have similar recruitment challenges.