* 1103403
* P2C2: Northern and Southern Low-Latitude Precipitation Histories--Testing Ideas about Millennial and Orbital-Scale Climate Change
* GEO,AGS
* 06/01/2011,05/31/2016
* Hai Cheng, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* David Verardo
* 05/31/2016
* USD 557,957.00

This research team seeks to extend absolute-dated records of the oxygen isotopic
composition of speleothem calcite from the Northern Hemisphere (southeast Asia)
and from Southern Hemisphere (South America) low latitude sites. For each of
these regions, the investigators aim to: (i) extend the records deeper in time;
(ii) broaden the geographic coverage within the region; (iii) increase the
oxygen isotope resolution within key time ranges; and (iv) apply newly developed
dating techniques to refine and extend chronologies. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;For
the northern site, the team plans to extend the record an additional three
glacial-interglacial cycles back to about 650,000 years ago and also establish a
record in the mid-Quaternary (1.3 to 1.5 million years ago). For the southern
site, the researchers seek to develop a record covering the last few glacial-
interglacial cycles.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With these new records, the principal
investigators will test hypotheses related to: (1) the causes of millennial-
scale climate change; (2) the causes of ice age terminations; (3) the mechanisms
for long-term monsoon variability; and (4) the controls on the oxygen isotopic
composition of rainfall in regions affected by monsoon
rainfall.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A better understanding of the temporal and
spatial variability of precipitation over low latitude sites would be of great
scientific value to the wider science community. Through this project, the
researchers will continue to develop strong international collaborations with
Chinese and Brazilian scientist. The project also supports a post-doctoral
scholar.