* 1103333
* Collaborative Research: GEM: Investigation of UT Dependence of Magnetic Storm Strength
* GEO,AGS
* 05/01/2011,04/30/2015
* Thomas Immel, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* Carrie E. Black
* 04/30/2015
* USD 300,000.00

This is a three-year project to investigate a remarkable new finding, that the
intensity of geomagnetic storms displays distinct universal time dependence, and
that it varies in concert with middle latitude ionospheric plasma abundance
during storms. Geomagnetic indices provide our most consistent measure of
physical processes occurring in geospace since their creation over the last
century. The strength of geomagnetic storms, most notably, is captured in the
so-called Dst index, calculated from a set of four ground-based magnetometer
measurements located strategically around the Globe. This project will utilize a
newly derived, improved Dst index dataset to carry out a detailed examination of
trends in the storm-time Dst with UT, season and solar cycle. Ionospheric plasma
adds greatly to the pressure, pressure gradients, and currents in the
magnetosphere, the last of which are measured on the ground to indicate magnetic
storm strength. Ion outflow in the auroral zone, particularly in the dayside
?cusp? and nightside tail-reconnection region, provides most of this plasma. The
abundance of ionospheric plasma at high latitudes has recently been shown to be
a more complex process than previously thought, with a number of processes
delivering plasma from middle to high latitudes in rapid fashion during periods
of enhanced magnetic activity. A UT-dependent modulation of outflow during
enhanced magnetic activity is one possible explanation for the observed
variation in magnetic storm strength. The examination of how ionospheric ion
outflow into the magnetosphere may vary during different storms and impact the
UT dependence of the Dst index is the main overarching objective for this
project. A parallel effort will examine whether the UT dependence in the
observations is also reproduced by first-principles models of the coupled
physical system. The project will use the suite of ionosphere-thermosphere-
magnetosphere models that make up the University of Michigan Space Weather
Modeling Framework.

The project has impacts beyond the immediate benefits of improved scientific
understanding. Students will participate in all aspects of the work, both at U.
Michigan and Berkeley, results will be submitted to widely-read publications,
and the team will work with the Center for Science Education at Berkeley to make
the findings accessible to the network of teachers that it works with around the
country on magnetometer data and magnetism. The importance of determining
whether magnetic storms are indeed more powerful in the afternoon in the United
States during summer can hardly be overstated, particularly in light of recent
National Academy findings of the likely economic costs to the U.S.A. of a truly
major geomagnetic storm.