* 1103087
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology for FY 2011
* BIO,DBI
* 12/01/2011,06/30/2015
* Rudolf von-May, von-May                 Rudolf
* Fellowship Award
* michael vanni
* 06/30/2015
* USD 189,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2011, Broadening Participation. The fellowship supports a research and training
plan in a host laboratory for the Fellow who also presents a plan to broaden
participation in biology. The title of the research and training plan for this
fellowship to Rudolf von May is "Habitat shifts and physiology of high-elevation
Andean frogs." The host institution for the fellowship is the University of
California, Berkeley and the sponsoring scientist is Dr. Craig Moritz.

In a rapidly changing world, many species are faced with shrinking native
habitat, expanding new habitats, and novel climatic conditions. Tropical montane
regions are of special concern because they are centers of unique biodiversity.
While much attention has been given to modeling and predicting habitat-related
range shifts in montane organisms, especially in the context of climate change,
the underlying evolutionary factors and mechanisms of response to habitat change
remain poorly understood. This research is improving our understanding of the
evolutionary history of Andean frogs and explaining how major shifts in habitat
are also influenced by physiological attributes and distributions of related
taxa. It maps the distributions of ground-breeding frogs within forested and
open habitats across elevations, tracing habitat preferences using an existing
phylogeny constructed with molecular genetic data. Empirical data on
physiological characteristics including thermal tolerance, desiccation
tolerance, and locomotion of sister taxa pairs are being collected for species
distribution modeling to gain insights of current and past species distributions
and to improve predictions on future distributions. Training objectives include
molecular systematics, phylogeography, physiology, and species distribution
modeling. Broader impacts include capacity-building and advanced training for
minority students from the United States, students in Latin America, and an
outreach program to promote ecological literacy about local and tropical
biodiversity. Outreach focuses on developing a science education partnership
with local teachers. The teaching option includes a short course on tropical
ecology and evolution for undergraduate students from universities in the US and
Peru.