* 1103843
* US Egypt Cooperative Research: Evaluating Subsidence in the Nile Delta Using Radar Interferometry
* O/D,OISE
* 10/01/2011,09/30/2015
* Mohamed Sultan, Western Michigan University
* Standard Grant
* Anne Emig
* 09/30/2015
* USD 124,300.00

1103843 &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project supports a cooperative research
project by Dr. Mohamed Sultan, Western Michigan University, Kalamazoo and Dr.
Omar Cherif, National Authority for Remote Sensing and Space Sciences (NARSS) in
Cairo, Egypt. They plan to use temporal satellite radar data to measure the
spatial and temporal variations in subsidence rates across the entire Delta,
identify the nature of the factors controlling modern subsidence, and predict
the Delta response to these forcing factors over the next century. The interplay
between natural and anthropogenic parameters controls subsidence rates and
determines whether a delta progrades or erodes. Natural parameters include
tectonic movements and millennial-to-decadal climate changes accompanied by wide
swings in aridity and moisture and sea level fluctuations,
whereas&lt;br/&gt;parameters based on human activity are probably largely
related to extraction of groundwater and&lt;br/&gt;natural gas and impoundment
of the Nile River by the Aswan High Dam. The PIs? radar
interferometric&lt;br/&gt;(ERS-1 and ERS-2) studies over the northeastern
section of the Nile Delta indicate that modern&lt;br/&gt;subsidence rates are
high (up to 8 mm/yr) compared to average Holocene subsidence rates and that
their&lt;br/&gt;spatial distribution is inconsistent with the distribution
reported for the Holocene. The PIs propose to&lt;br/&gt;expand the ERS-based
study area to include the entire Nile Delta. A geodetic component will
be&lt;br/&gt;included to provide ground based measurements and calibrate the
motions inferred from the&lt;br/&gt;interferometric analyses.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual merit: The research will produce an
assessment of subsidence rates throughout the entire Nile Delta and the
identification of the factors controlling the subsidence. Because the PIs will
be developing predictive tools that can potentially identify areas of high
subsidence rates that are prone to sea water encroachment, the findings could be
used to develop sound strategic plans for combating and/or modulating these
adverse effects. In this respect our findings could be vital to the livelihood
of at least half of Egypt?s 80 million citizens that inhabit the Delta and
depend on it for their sustenance. The conditions described for the Nile Delta
are typical of many of the world?s deltas, now witnessing destructional phases.
To date, applications similar to those advocated here for the assessment of
ongoing deformation in deltas and their controlling factors and for making
realistic projections for subsidence over tens to hundreds of years have not
been fully explored. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impact: The project results
should lead to a successful demonstration of the advocated procedures in the
Nile Delta which will invite similar applications for deltas elsewhere and could
potentially be beneficial to the lives of hundreds of millions of people who
inhabit these fragile systems. Also, the proposed activities will initiate and
provide a vehicle for long-term collaborations between scientists with common
interests (remote sensing, GIS and environmental Sciences) from NARSS, WMU, and
UT. Two Graduate students and three undergraduate students will trained in new
research techniques. Results from these studies will be incorporated in
graduate/undergraduate remote sensing and GIS courses. All
proposed&lt;br/&gt;tasks will be accomplished jointly by US scientists (from
Western Michigan University and the&lt;br/&gt;University of Toledo) and their
Egyptian colleagues (from the National Authority for Remote
Sensing&lt;br/&gt;and Space Sciences) who will be receiving training in Egypt
and USA on radar interferometric and&lt;br/&gt;geodetic
applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal is supported under
the US-Egypt Joint Fund Program where NSF supports the US side and the
Government of Egypt funds the Egyptian side.