* 1103012
* 2011 IEEE 38th International Conference On Plasma Science and 24th Symposium On Fusion Engineering; Summer 2011; Chicago, IL
* MPS,PHY
* 06/01/2011,05/31/2012
* Ahmed Hassanein, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Steven J Gitomer
* 05/31/2012
* USD 8,000.00

ICOPS and SOFE are internationally renowned, well-attended conferences involving
topics of direct interest to the NSF, Universities, DOE, Air Force, and many
others. Both meetings are sponsored by the IEEE Nuclear and Plasma Sciences
Society (NPSS). ICOPS has been held annually since 1974. Recent meetings were
held in Norfolk VA (2010), San Diego CA (2009), Karlsruhe Germany (2008),
Albuquerque NM (2007). SOFE has been held biennially since 1965. Recent meetings
were held in San Diego CA (2009), Albuquerque NM (2007), Knoxville TN (2005).

In 2011, the conference organizers are projecting a combined attendance of
approximately 800 participants. It is anticipated that 25% will be
Government/Federal attendees and 75% will be non-federal attendees. The
conference will include plenary, oral, and poster sessions on research in plasma
science and technology and a Prize Address by the recipient of the Plasma
Science and Applications Committee Award. Oral sessions will include both
invited and contributed papers.

Applications of plasma technologies are expanding in many new areas for
materials processing, lighting, environmental protection, and medical research
and treatment. All of these technologies depend on a strong underpinning of
basic research traditionally supported by the meeting. The program of the 38th
ICOPS will emphasize both the traditional areas of plasma science and these new
areas of growth through the plenary talks and the regular technical program.

This award provides funding to partially support student travel grants,
particularly for underrepresented minorities, activities to promote women in
engineering, and help in awards costs. The travel grants will be awarded to
those students who will be presenting papers (oral talks and posters) as first
authors.