* 1103441
* RAPID: Rescue excavation of fossils of late Middle Pleistocene Homo from the Kapthurin Formation, Kenya
* SBE,BCS
* 12/15/2010,11/30/2011
* Sally McBrearty, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* Carolyn Ehardt
* 11/30/2011
* USD 55,197.00

The origin of our species, Homo sapiens, is one of the most contentious and
poorly understood topics in the study of human evolution. While both fossil and
genomic evidence supports an African origin for Homo sapiens, fossil evidence
from the appropriate time range is scanty. Fossils of genus Homo were
encountered in Middle Pleistocene sediments in the Kapthurin Formation, Kenya,
but operations were suspended due to the start of the rainy season, which
renders work impossible. NSF funds will support a rescue operation to recover
more fossils, to determine their precise stratigraphic position, and to prevent
destruction of the site. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The nature of the events leading
to the origin of our species is of one of the critical unresolved issues in the
study of human evolution today. These events are of intense interest both to
scientists and to the general public. They cannot be understood without new
African fossils such as those provided by this research. This research will
provide training opportunities for one postdoctorate student and two graduate
students from the University of Connecticut, as well as ten Kenyan technicians
and local participants. Results will be shared with the local community
including children at two local primary schools. Results will be disseminated in
both scholarly and popular media.