* 1103664
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology for FY 2011
* BIO,DBI
* 01/01/2012,12/31/2013
* Fulton Rockwell, Rockwell                Fulton         E
* Fellowship Award
* Carter Kimsey
* 12/31/2013
* USD 123,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2011, Intersections of Biology and Mathematical and Physical Sciences. The
fellowship supports a research and training plan in a host laboratory for the
Fellow whose plan involves innovation at the intersection of biology with
physics and applied mathematics. The research and training plan for this
fellowship to Fulton Rockwell is entitled, "Is water lost from plant leaves as a
liquid or a vapor?? The host institutions for this research are Cornell
University and University of Chicago; and the sponsoring scientists are Drs.
Abraham Stroock and Charles Kevin Boyce.

A fundamental gap in our understanding of leaf structure and function is whether
transpiration follows a predominantly vapor or liquid path between the leaf
veins and the `valves' on the leaf surface, the stomata. Answering this question
will inform not only our understanding of leaf function, but also stomatal
regulation of transpiration and the contributions of leaf structure to
instantaneous water use efficiency, that is, carbon gained per water molecule
transpired. The dominant mode of transport inside transpiring leaves remains an
open question precisely because it occurs at the intersection of biology,
chemical thermodynamics and transport phenomena. To address the question of
competition between liquid and vapor, a combination of modeling and experimental
determination of the internal geometry and material properties of leaves is
being employed.

Training in coupled heat and mass transport is provided by the Stroock lab at
Cornell University, whose members combine expertise in chemical engineering and
microfluidics with an interest in bio-mimetic design. Expertise in obtaining
structural information from analysis of micro-CT scans of leaves comes from
training in the Boyce lab, at the University of Chicago, which seeks to
reconstruct the physiology of fossil plants based on structure-function
relations observed in extant lineages. Broader impacts include developing
educational materials appropriate to both adults and school groups on the life
of trees that incorporate a perspective on plants informed by the research
results.