* 1103511
* Collaborative Research: DRIFT-III: Engineering for A Large Directional Dark Matter Detector
* MPS,PHY
* 09/15/2011,08/31/2016
* Daniel Snowden-Ifft, Occidental College
* Continuing Grant
* Jonathan Whitmore
* 08/31/2016
* USD 908,000.00

In this era of precision cosmology, measurements suggest that ordinary matter
(protons and neutrons) represents only a fraction of the total matter density in
the Universe. The rest, whose effect we can see only gravitationally, is unknown
in its nature and is termed Dark Matter. Particle physics models suggest that
dark matter is composed of relic Weakly Interacting Massive Particles (WIMPs)
left over from the Big Bang. Experimental efforts to directly detect WIMPs are
challenging due to the predicted small interaction probabilities and the
existence of large backgrounds that mimic the expected signal. However, a number
of unique dark matter signatures exist that can be used to discriminate against
backgrounds and decisively identify WIMP interactions. The largest and most
robust signature is the predicted dependence of the WIMP flux on the Sun-Earth
velocity through the galaxy, yielding a day-night modulation of the nuclear
recoil direction in the laboratory. Of current searches with directional
detectors, the Directional Recoil Identification From Tracks (DRIFT) experiment
is a leader, having a decade of experience. The intellectual merit of this
proposal resides in DRIFT's unique and powerful capabilities being brought to
bear on one of the most important questions in science today.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;These advances in background rejection, combined with the
fact that further limit setting capabilities are hampered by the small volume of
DRIFT-II, suggest that DRIFT should scale-up. This award will enable the
collaboration to continue running DRIFT-II in the Boulby mine in England. In
addition to running DRIFT-IId, these funds will provide hardware for a second
detector, DRIFT-IIe.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts of this work include
the training of a diverse set of undergraduates and graduate students (including
underrepresented minorities) in increasingly rare small-scale experiments,
giving them exposure to a wide range of hardware and software experience.
Finally, the DRIFT detector technology has promising applications to Homeland
Security and double-beta decay experiments.