* 1103761
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology for FY 2011
* BIO,DBI
* 01/01/2012,12/31/2013
* Christopher Kenaley, Kenaley                 Christopher    P
* Fellowship Award
* michael vanni
* 12/31/2013
* USD 123,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2011, Intersections of Biology and Mathematical and Physical Sciences. The
fellowship supports a research and training plan in a host laboratory for the
Fellow whose plan involves innovation at the intersection of biology and
robotics. The title of the research and training plan for this fellowship to
Christopher Kenaley is "A novel approach to exploring form, function, and
behavior in the deep sea using experimental biorobotics." The host institution
for this fellowship is Harvard University; and the sponsoring scientists are
Drs. George Lauder and Rob Wood.

Predatory deep-sea fishes are the primary consumers of crustaceans and
intermediate-sized plankton in what is known as the ocean's "twilight zone,"
that depth in the ocean to which only a small amount of light penetrates, thus
driving the largest and most frequent mass movement of animals on Earth. These
fishes possess some of the most dramatic feeding morphologies among vertebrates,
including huge fangs set on enormous jaws. Because of the inherent difficulties
associated with studying deep-sea animals in the laboratory, how morphology
limits prey choice in these fish, i.e., the ecomorphology of these fishes,
remains largely unexplored. Previously, biologists have relied on manipulation
of museum specimens and, more recently, on simple biomechanical models to
explore how morphology limits the behavioral repertoire of these fishes.
Although these models show promise for the study of feeding ecomorphology, they
are limited by current understanding of the hydrodynamics of jaw adduction in
fishes. To study relationships between form, function, and feeding behavior in
deep-sea fishes, an innovative approach is being taken, one that does not rely
on laboratory study, yet is based on empirical analyses. This fellowship
supports the experimental study of feeding performance based on robotic models
of stomiid dragonfishes, the most diverse group of pelagic predators. Using
biorobotic models of a dragonfish lower jaw and head, this project is the first
to gather empirical data for the major forces that resist jaw adduction.
Experimental analysis of kinematics and fluid dynamics of biorobotic
dragonfishes can answer longstanding questions surrounding feeding in deep-sea
fishes and provide the empirical information needed to refine existing
biomechanical models of jaw adduction and assist in studying the ecomorphology
of rare, fragile, or extinct vertebrate fish.

Training goals include developing skills in biomechanics and biorobotics.
Broader impacts include mentoring students, presenting to K-12 classes, and
revising public museum displays to showcase the importance of combining physical
and biological sciences in the study of the natural world.