* 1103316
* P2C2: Megadrought--Local versus Remote Causal Factors for Medieval North America
* GEO,AGS
* 05/01/2011,04/30/2014
* Clinton Rowe, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Standard Grant
* David Verardo
* 04/30/2014
* USD 469,398.00

The researchers will investigate the relative roles of (1) remote forcing of sea
surface temperatures (SST) and (2) local land surface-atmosphere interactions
and feedbacks on the medieval drought in North America, approximately 900-1300
A.D. During this time, a series of multi-decadal droughts occurred which, in
total, lasted longer than any 'severe' drought that has occurred during the
instrumental period (e.g. the 1930's Dust
Bowl).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specifically, the NCAR community atmospheric model
(CAM4.0) will be used to investigate the impacts and mechanisms of SST anomalies
in the tropical Pacific as well as the more certain and persistent basin-wide
warm SST anomalies in the North Atlantic on medieval drought. Additionally, the
Weather Research and Forecast (WRF) model, forced by output from CAM4.0, will be
used to evaluate the role of devegetation and soil moisture in prolonging,
enhancing, or modifying the drought. In particular, WRF will be used to examine
the role of devegetation in the unprecedented wind shift which took place in the
central U.S. during the Medieval Period.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Undergraduate and
graduate students will participate in the project. In addition, the research
team will collaborate with the National Drought Mitigation Center (NDMC) and
other outreach groups at the University of Nebraska-Lincoln (UNL) to increase
awareness of potential water crises due to megadroughts. Drought-related
information from the project would also be disseminated through the NDMC's
quarterly newsletter and Nebguide (one of the UNL extension publications) and
distributed free to the public.