* 1103078
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:  Modeling the Diffusion of Non-normative Ideas and Behavior
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2011,07/31/2012
* Michael Hout, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Patricia White
* 07/31/2012
* USD 10,000.00

SES-1103078 Michael Hout Sarah Cowan University of California Berkeley Diffusion
theory describes the process of how information or behavior spreads within a
community or a social system. How does that diffusion change when the object of
the diffusion is a secret that is concealable and stigmatized? While studied
widely across the social sciences, there remain several gaps in diffusion
theory. This project addresses two of those gaps. First, while nearly all
diffusion studies examine items that diffuse widely, this dissertation research
examines a truncated diffusion process. Second, this research focuses on the
diffusing items' qualities and how they facilitate this truncation. This is
rarely emphasized in previous diffusion studies. The research will test two
hypotheses. First, the research hypothesizes that individuals will disclose
their secrets only to people they think will be supportive and their confidants
will behave similarly. Those the secret-keeper believes will react hostilely to
the information will not be told the secret. Second, the study assumes that an
abbreviated diffusion will occur that is distorted in the direction of
confidants who already hold accepting attitudes toward the secret. The result
would be polarization whereby one group knows secrets and therefore has personal
exposure with stigmatized individuals whereas one group does not know the
secrets and does not knowingly have contact with stigmatized individuals. To
test these hypotheses, the research will measure respondents? knowledge of the
abortion history of women whom they know personally. Abortion history is an
archetypal secret for this study, due to its prevalence, ability to be concealed
and associated stigma. One in three American women has an abortion during her
lifetime; 1.2 million abortions were performed in 2005; a quarter of pregnancies
end in abortion. This study will collect data from a nationally representative
survey of American adults that will be used to compare knowledge and diffusion
of information regarding miscarriage and abortion histories.

Broader Impacts

Diffusion theory is employed to explain attitude and behavior change in a wide
variety of social situations, from dropping out of high school, teenage
pregnancy, obesity and the adoption of prescription drugs use. An improvement in
the theory would be useful in helping to better understand these and other
social problems as well as opinion formation and maintenance.