* 1103235
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Assessing the Hydrologic Implications of Glacier Recession and the Potential for Water Resources Vulnerability at Volcan Chimborazo, Ecuador
* SBE,BCS
* 06/15/2011,05/31/2013
* Jeff La Frenierre, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Kelley Crews
* 05/31/2013
* USD 11,988.00

The rapid retreat of mountain glaciers is a notable consequence of global
climate change. Glaciers help ensure the viability of downstream irrigation
systems, hydroelectric facilities, and domestic water supplies during otherwise
dry periods and therefore significant ice loss in the world's mountain areas is
a water resource management issue of paramount concern. In Ecuador, 35% of
Volc√°n Chimborazo's glacier cover has been lost in the past quarter century.
Located in a semi-arid portion of the Ecuadorian Andes, Chimborazos glaciers
serve as headwaters for four river systems, upon which more than 200,000 people
directly rely for their water supply. At present, very little is known about the
exact role these glaciers play in the hydrologic system of the mountain or the
specific water usage patterns of the people living in the catchment area. This
research project will address these uncertainties by answering the following
questions: How fast are Chimborazo's glaciers melting, how much further will
they melt under various climate change scenarios, how will additional glacier
retreat impact overall water supply, and how socially and economically
vulnerable are watershed stakeholders to these potential hydrologic changes?
This project employs an integrative methodological approach that combines data
analysis from hydrology, climatology and glaciology as well as integrative
modeling, analysis of remotely-sensed data, and qualitative social science
research techniques such as focus groups and key-informant interviews to answer
the questions it has posed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research has the potential
to assist the people of Chimborazo in identifying spatial and temporal patterns
of potential water resource vulnerability and better position them to make
informed water management decisions in the face of potentially disruptive
changes to their hydrologic environment. The results of this study will
therefore provide critical guidance to a range of internal (watershed
stakeholders) and external (governmental agencies and non-governmental
organizations) actors seeking to understand and mitigate local impacts resulting
from global climate change. Furthermore, the methodology employed in this
research will be of particular interest to others who seek to move past
traditional disciplinary divisions in order to perform similar research.