* 1103080
* Promoting Excellence in Arizona Middle School Mathematics: Increasing Student Achievement through Systemic Instructional Change
* EDU,DRL
* 03/15/2012,02/28/2018
* Trey Cox, Maricopa County Community College District
* Continuing Grant
* Kathleen Bergin
* 02/28/2018
* USD 9,055,411.00

The Math and Science Partnership (MSP) project Promoting Excellence in Arizona
Middle School Mathematics: Increasing Student Achievement through Systemic
Instructional Change involves 10 Core Partners: Scottsdale Community College (as
the lead), Chandler-Gilbert Community College and Glendale Community College,
and the Deer Valley, Scottsdale, Fountain Hills, Chandler, Florence, J.O. Combs
school districts, as well as Salt River Pima-Maricopa Community Schools.
Supporting partners are: Arizona State University, Maricopa County Community
College District, and the Glendale, Mesa, and Peoria school districts. This MSP
Targeted project supports teachers in advancing their knowledge about the
teaching and learning of middle school mathematics, as well as developmental
mathematics in community colleges. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Promoting
Excellence in Arizona Middle School Mathematics (PEAMSM) project provides a
systemic model of sustainable professional development in partner schools and
colleges to achieve the goal of increasing student achievement in middle school
mathematics courses, thus enabling these students to make a successful
transition to more challenging courses and curricula in high school. Project
activities are in four areas: Teacher Knowledge Development; School-Based
Collaborations; Capacity-Building; and Research. The project also produces
research about the characteristics and mechanisms of a sustainable professional
development program, as well as contributes to the body of knowledge for
understanding teachers' and students' mathematical thinking and beliefs. PEAMSM
targets 300 in-service middle school mathematics teachers, 32 middle school
mathematics teacher-leaders, 40 middle school administrators and 140 pre-service
middle school teachers in the Phoenix, AZ metropolitan area and impacts a total
of 24,000 students in grades 5-8. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PEAMSM possesses a
substantial research portfolio. The primary research question is "In what ways
does the teacher professional development experience promote sense-making,
computational fluency, problem solving and conceptual understanding of
mathematical ideas among middle school mathematics teachers?" There are several
other research questions that involve investigating different aspects of the
professional development and its effects on teachers and the students they
teach. Project findings will be prepared for publication in peer-reviewed
journals of mathematics education and for presentation at state and national
conferences. The project provides a national model for professional development
and teacher education conducted by community college faculty trained in
mathematics education research.