* 1103423
* PostDoctoral Research Fellowship
* GEO,OPP
* 12/15/2011,11/30/2013
* Kerri Pratt, Pratt                   Kerri          A
* Fellowship Award
* Henrietta Edmonds
* 11/30/2013
* USD 139,200.00

Arctic climate change is resulting in rising temperatures and decreasing sea ice
extent. Interactions between sea ice and the atmosphere lead to unique halogen
chemistry, resulting in significant losses of atmospheric ozone and mercury.
However, significant uncertainty remains in our understanding of the spatial
distribution and conditions associated with Arctic ozone depletion events, due
to measurement challenges. This research project involves analysis of in-situ
ozone and BrO data from long-term O-buoy measurements across the Arctic Ocean,
as well as field campaign measurements in Barrow, Alaska. O-buoy data will
enable development and evaluation of both simple (zero- and one-dimensional)
air-sea ice models, as well as regional atmospheric chemistry models to examine
the oxidation pathways in the Arctic. This will improve our ability to predict
the impacts of future climate and sea ice changes on the Arctic atmosphere. This
integrated understanding is essential to better inform decision-makers about
future Arctic system changes. Given the importance of educating the public about
science, and climate change in particular, public outreach activities will be
integrated into this research in the form of elementary school activities and
through the Purdue Climate Change Research Center.