* 1103819
* RAPID/Collaborative Research: San Bruno, California, September 9, 2010, Gas Pipeline Explosion and Fire
* ENG,CMMI
* 12/15/2010,11/30/2011
* James Kendra, University of North Texas
* Standard Grant
* Dennis Wenger
* 11/30/2011
* USD 14,937.00

This Grant for Rapid Response Research (RAPID) provides funding to study the San
Bruno explosion and fire. On September 9, 2010, in San Bruno, California, a
suburb of San Francisco, a 30-inch steel natural gas pipeline exploded in
flames, igniting a fire that ultimately killed seven residents and damaged or
destroyed dozens of houses. An interdisciplinary field team will provide a
holistic account of the event across the engineering and social sciences by
gathering data on pre-event building, topography, and weather conditions; the
rate and modes of fire spread and suppression; and elements of
multiorganizational coordination and decisionmaking. The aims of the project are
to: (a) improve understanding of how urban fires spread and are suppressed, (b)
support development and validation of next-generation urban fire simulation
models, and (c) advance theories of resilience. Scholars are now at work on the
next generation of fire spread modeling, employing physics-based approaches that
encompass many more variables and that explicitly consider variability in
building composition, contents, and urban design. As the next generation of
models, however, these have lacked opportunities for validation in actual fire
scenarios. Thus analysis of the San Bruno fire will appreciably advance
knowledge by improving understanding of urban fire spread and suppression, and
by permitting validation and refinement of existing models. Management
structures such as the Incident Command System (ICS) depend on information flow
amongst organizations that are familiar with its use, in situations with
recognized procedures. By studying coordination where system familiarity was
present, but information was sketchy and ambiguous and procedures improvised,
the study will refine our knowledge of the relative strengths of command
structures as tools for interorganization decisionmaking. By explicitly
considering the interaction of infrastructure capacities and management systems,
the project recasts critical infrastructure to include human operators and their
deliberate decisionmaking and interventions.

The research team anticipates a number of broader impacts. These include the
development and dissemination of improved fire-spread models for conflagrations
in residential neighborhoods. These models, once validated, can inform the
knowledge base of fire protection engineers and urban planners in their design
of structures and spaces, as well as firefighters who may be confronted with
such situations following earthquakes, landslips, or terrorist activity. Ground-
level decisionmaking and coordination approaches will be bolstered by findings
on the multiorganizational coordination of the event. The PIs teach numerous
engineering and emergency management courses which will ensure that findings
reach the user community both directly and through publications and
presentations at relevant conferences and symposia. In addition, graduate
students will develop skill in post-disaster fieldwork, to include engineering
and social-science data gathering, analysis, and theory development. On a larger
scale, recent sizable infrastructure failures, such as the collapse of the I35
bridge in Minneapolis, have highlighted the age and condition of US
infrastructure. Information developed through this study may inform policymaking
regarding burgeoning vulnerabilities in vital systems.