* 1103858
* Precise Acid Copolymers and Ionomers: Morphology, Dynamics and Mechanical Properties
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2011,06/30/2015
* Karen Winey, University of Pennsylvania
* Continuing Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 06/30/2015
* USD 518,000.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY

Precise acid copolymers are novel materials having functional groups spaced
exactly evenly along a linear polyethylene. For example, a phosphonic acid group
can be placed on every 9th, 15th or 21st carbon. The proposed project involves
nine precise acid copolymers and one random acid copolymer having carboxylic
acid and phosphonic acid groups with mono- or geminal-substitution. These
materials have established synthetic routes. Winey's morphological studies of
the acid copolymers will use X-ray scattering, HAADF STEM, and electron
diffraction to establish the crystalline structure of the polyethylene segments
and the nature of the acid group assemblies. The acid copolymers will be
neutralized with Li, Na, Cs, and Zn to form partially- and fully-neutralized
ionomers in which Winey will probe the size, shape, spatial arrangement, and
composition of the ionic aggregates. The precision of these acid copolymers and
ionomers is known to yield remarkable uniformity in the morphologies, making
data interpretation and comparisons with simulations more rigorous. The dynamics
and mechanical properties will be studied for the first time in three precise
acid copolymers and one random acid copolymer, along with their ionomers. The
property measurements will include melt rheology, small-strain compression
testing to explore elastic deformations, and large-strain, cyclic compression
testing to study plastic deformation. The PI's group has highly specialized
expertise to study the morphology, dynamics, and mechanical properties of these
remarkable polymers in terms of both demonstrated prior work and existing
collaborations.

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY

The PI will study an extraordinary set of functional polymers with the ultimate
goal of knowing how the functional groups are arranged and thereby how their
arrangement dictates their mechanical properties. These functional polymers have
an acid group on every 9th, 15th or 21st carbon atom along a polyethylene
molecule. The unprecedented precision in these molecules will lead to better
structural order at both the micro- and nanoscale, which, in turn, enable
improved correlations between molecular structure and properties. The PI has
established collaborations with synthetic chemists, spectroscopists, and
theorists to explore these remarkable materials, and within this
interdisciplinary team the teaching, learning, and training of more students and
researchers will be significantly enriched. These precise polymers are based on
polyethylene, which constitutes the largest class of commercial polymers. This
project involves the first dynamical and mechanical property measurements of
these materials and in so doing will evaluate their commercial potential.