* 1103550
* Holocene Climate Change in Southwestern Patagonia: New Insights from Large Lake Paleolimnology
* GEO,EAR
* 04/15/2011,03/31/2015
* Robert Dunbar, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* Paul Filmer
* 03/31/2015
* USD 592,251.00

This project combines climate system modeling and field data collection to
examine causes and expressions of Holocene climate change in Southern South
America. This is the only significant land mass that extends into the core of
the southern westerly wind field, the most energetic wind system on Earth. The
project is collects information on past climate change from Lago Sarmiento, a
large closed-basin alkaline lake located at 51Â°S. Precipitation in the area, and
therefore the hydrology and water balance of the lake, is demonstrably
controlled by the intensity of the wind field. Abundant carbonate sediments are
present and they precipitate in equilibrium with lake waters. These sediments
are analyzed using stable isotope and trace element methods to reconstruct past
variations in moisture balance. An excellent chronology can be developed using a
combination of AMS radiocarbon, an existing tephrochronology, and U/Th. Lago
Sarmiento is located adjacent to Lago del Toro, a similar but open-system lake,
as well as a marine fjord of the SW Chilean archipelago. Additional core samples
from these systems are being collected and will enable the project to deconvolve
the effects of changing temperature, precipitation, and evaporation. The project
will use three methods to reconstruct westerly wind variability at this site.
The 1st method exploits the strong connection between lake hydrology and oxygen
isotope fractionation of biogenic carbonate phases. The 2nd uses carbon isotopes
to constrain periods of lake stratification due to reduced wind stress on the
lake. The 3rd involves grain size analysis of sediments in areas affected by
wind wave-driven redeposition. By combining geochemical &amp; sedimentological
methods the project develops high resolution paleoclimate records that provide
important information on Holocene climate variability. The study also includes a
substantial modeling component, using a General Circulation Model and an
embedded high resolution regional climate model to identify climate forcings and
feedbacks and for model-data intercomparison.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts and Significance. The project delivers a well-dated Holocene chronology
of past variability in rainfall, water balance, and temperature from the Pacific
margin of southwestern Patagonia. The record is of high intrinsic value as few
high quality climate reconstructions are available from the core of the southern
westerly wind field. However, the greatest merit comes from model-data
intercomparisons and modeling experiments where the causes of climate change in
the SE Pacific over timescales of centuries to millennia are examined. Results
aid in climate forecasting for southernmost South America, particularly with
regard to water availability. The Holocene westerly wind reconstructions should
also provide a useful constraint in climate studies throughout the Southern
Ocean. One benefit is likely to be an improved understanding of the capacity of
the Southern Ocean to take up anthropogenic carbon dioxide. Benefits to society
include greater knowledge of climatic influences on water balance (directly
important to farmers, ranchers, &amp; land-use planners in Chile &amp;
Argentina) as well as better understanding of how atmospheric flow may be
related to global climate change and how it interacts with the ongoing rise in
atmospheric CO2 levels. During the project two 1-week workshops for North &amp;
South American graduate students, post-doctoral fellows, and new faculty members
on: 1) Large lake limnology, sedimentology and stratigraphy, &amp; 2) Tools for
examining past variability in the hydrologic cycle are being organized.