* 1103606
* GORDON RESEARCH CONFERENCE ON LIQUID CRYSTALS
* MPS,DMR
* 02/01/2011,01/31/2012
* Liang-Chy Chien, Kent State University
* Standard Grant
* Linda Sapochak
* 01/31/2012
* USD 12,000.00

TECHNICAL The 2011 Gordon Research Conference (GRC) on Liquid Crystals (LCs),
partially supported by the Solid State and Materials Chemistry and Biomaterials
programs in the Division of Materials Research will explore the new advances in
liquid crystal science and technology and their role in novel forward thinking
applications. The conference will be held at Mount Holyoke College, South
Hadley, MA from June 19-24, 2011. Liquid crystal science has played a
significant role in many basic and applied fields, including physics, chemistry,
biology and engineering. Composed of anisotropic organic and biological
molecules, liquid crystals interact with external fields and surfaces to
influence strongly their orientational order, structure and properties. From the
basic perspective, the orientational order and collective molecular behavior are
central contributions to the biological science of self-assembly of membranes,
to the dynamics of tissues and muscles activities, and to DNA assemblies. The
extraordinary values and contributions of liquid crystals to the modern photonic
and information display technologies have revolutionized the way we visualize
and present information in so-called information displays, ranging from mobile
to projection devices, flat panel TVs to 3D displays, and eco-friendly e-papers.
The GRC on LCs will focus on their role in self-assembly, nanoscience and
biotechnology. The conference will address the most important current themes in
liquid crystals presented by the world?s leading scientists in the fields of
biomedical science, engineering, and nanotechnology.

NONTECHNICAL The 2011 Gordon Conference on Liquid Crystals will provide
participants with an unique forum to disclose unpublished data, deliberate and
challenge novel ideas outside the realm of accepted thought, and ultimately push
outward the frontiers of science and innovation for a particular field. The
meeting will provide a forum for career networking and career advancement and
will support and encourage young scientists and graduate students as they take
their first steps in the vibrant and intrinsically interdisciplinary research
field of liquid crystals, helping them establish initial scientific and personal
contacts. As a part of the outreach activities of the Conference, the funding
will be used to support graduate students, postdoctoral fellows, and junior
scientists from underrepresented groups and enable the opportunity of building
networks of friends and mentors, and forge long-term professional contacts.
Seven women and minority speakers/discussion leaders are included in the
preliminary program. To ensure large participation from the underrepresented
groups, advertisements will be posted at societies such as National Society of
Black Physicists (NSBP), National Society of Black Engineers (NSBE) and Women in
Science and Engineering (WiSE) and to increase number of women and minorities
participation at the meeting.