* 1103915
* Strategic Experts
* SBE,SES
* 06/30/2010,07/31/2011
* Alvaro Sandroni, Northwestern University
* Continuing Grant
* Nancy Lutz
* 07/31/2011
* USD 101,807.00

Forecasting is a central activity to economic development. Consumers,
governments, and firms base their decision partly on professional forecasters.
In complex environments, self-declared experts both volunteer and sell
predictions on a plethora of subjects like health, the economy, the stock
market, politics, and the weather. However, it is not easy to determine whether
professional forecasts are a product of any relevant knowledge. Hence, a basic
question is whether (and how) it is possible to distinguish the predictions of
knowledgeable experts from the predictions of
impostors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This leads to the question of how to empirically
test forecasts. This project uses tools from economic theory to consider one
particular problem with forecast testing. If professional forecasts must be
empirically tested, then this may induce the experts to forecast strategically
to pass the test. This is problematic; testing forecasts (because we do not know
the quality of the experts) may induce the experts to misrepresent what they
know. This research project considers whether or not many empirical tests
(including tests that are frequently used in practice) can be manipulated by
fraudulent experts. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In particular, the research studies
whether or not it is possible to construct forecasting strategies, based on no
relevant knowledge, that are guaranteed to pass the test no matter how the data
evolves in the future. If such a strategy exists, a fraudulent 'expert' can make
this kind of forecast confident that he will pass the test even though he has no
real knowledge of the subject.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;A good example of a
manipulable test is the calibration test: it requires that the empirical
frequency of an event to be close to p in the days that the event in question
was forecasted to occur with probability p. However, the calibration test is
just one example of a manipulable test. Preliminary results suggest that many
empirical tests used in practice are manipulable. This shows that it is
difficult to dismiss fraudulent, but strategic, experts. In addition, the
project also constructs novel empirical tests that true experts will pass and
that cannot be manipulated by fraudulent experts. In the process, the project
delivers a better understanding of how data and theory must comply with each
other. Moreover, the project also delivers new insights on a series of basic
concepts in science such as the need for classification, falsification, the use
of priors, and the use of paradigms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit
of the project arises from the innovative ways in which strategies for
manipulating empirical tests are employed and also from the development of novel
empirical tests that are immune to manipulation. The project may have a broad
impact as it shows how ideas in economics and game theory can be combined with
concepts in probability and statistics to deliver a formal analysis of several
basic concepts in science. This leads to a better understanding of these
fundamental concepts and also to novels ways to test theories. &lt;br/&gt;