* 1103395
* Kalman Filtering and Smoothing of Sediment Records from the Atlantic Ocean over the last 20 KYRS
* GEO,OCE
* 06/01/2011,05/31/2015
* Olivier Marchal, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* Candace Major
* 05/31/2015
* USD 437,445.00

Paleoclimatology is a rapidly evolving field, with a sustained production of
records with improved accuracy and chronology. As the number of such records
increases, the question of how to interpret them in the presence of a dynamical
model has emerged. This work, led by a researcher at the Woods Hole
Oceanographic Institution in Massachusetts, develops an inverse method for
assimilating long time series of sea surface temperature and other oceanic
properties, such as those generated from the analysis of sediment cores, into
three-dimensional models of ocean circulation. The computational challenge posed
by data assimilation over geologic time scales will be addressed by relying on a
model with simplified dynamics and on a partitioned Kalman filter &amp;
smoother. The filter &amp; smoother will be applied to drive the model with a
collection of sediment records over the last 20,000 years from the North
Atlantic Ocean. The movements of large-scale hydrographic fronts and the
attendant circulation changes over this time interval will be estimated in a
manner that is consistent with both sediment data and ocean dynamics, thereby
allowing various paleoceanographic hypotheses to be tested. By estimating the
time-dependent state of the North Atlantic Ocean over the last 20,000 years, the
project will provide a perspective on ongoing changes in ocean circulation that
are postulated from instrumental records. This project brings together an ocean
modeler, a paleoceanographer, and two physical oceanographers to ensure a robust
approach to the various aspects of the project. These participants include two
collaborators from French institutions. Funding supports a graduate student and
a post-doctoral scholar at the Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution.