* 1103583
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology for FY 2011
* BIO,DBI
* 08/01/2011,07/31/2013
* Julie Jedlicka, Jedlicka                Julie          A
* Fellowship Award
* michael vanni
* 07/31/2013
* USD 123,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2011, Intersections of Biology and Mathematical and Physical Sciences. The
fellowship supports a research and training plan in a host laboratory for the
Fellow at the intersection of biology with mathematics and statistics. The title
of the research and training plan for this fellowship to Julie Jedicka is "Prey
selection by high order predators: modeling Western Bluebird foraging in patchy
environments." The host institution for this research is University of
California, Berkeley with sponsoring scientists Drs. Rodrigo Almeida, Perry de
Valpine and Wayne Getz. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Insectivorous birds are
ubiquitous, multi-trophic-level predators, whose ecological function is poorly
understood, primarily because their consumption patterns elude researchers due
to their high mobility and predation of relatively small organisms. This
research develops novel experimental techniques that quantify the prey of a
model predator, the Western Bluebird (Sialia mexicana). Diet is analyzed through
fecal DNA of nestling and adult bluebirds foraging in patchy environments. By
pairing these data with arthropod availability in the field and prey consumed,
customized mathematical models are being developed drawing from hierarchical
statistical models, dynamic state variable models, and a biomass transformation
approach to model populations in food webs. The scientific payoff includes
interdisciplinary techniques for quantifying foraging niches not previously
attainable and for understanding the ecological consequences of high order
predator extinctions or exotic invasions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Training goals
include gaining expertise in mathematical modeling and statistics.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts of this research include outreach to diverse student
groups through workshops and existing programs to broaden participation.
Mathematical models and sequence data are being made available on the web and
through existing open databases.