* 1103230
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: A Geographic Analysis of U.S. Border Patrol Humanitarian Initiatives
* SBE,BCS
* 05/15/2011,04/30/2013
* Deborah Martin, Clark University
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 04/30/2013
* USD 11,965.00

Since the early 1990s, U.S.-Mexico border enforcement efforts have pushed
unauthorized migration routes into the harsh terrain of southern Arizona,
thereby unintentionally causing an exponential increase in unauthorized migrant
deaths in this region. In response, humanitarian initiatives aimed at reducing
unauthorized migrant deaths have been launched by the U.S. Customs and Border
Protection Agency and implemented by the U.S. Border Patrol. Despite these
efforts and decreased migration flows, migrant mortality rates continue to
climb, with mortality rates increasing from 1.1 persons per 10,000 migrants to
5.5 persons per 10,000 migrants between 2000 and 2008. Furthermore, there is a
yet-to-be-explained gendered dimension of migrant mortality rates, with female
migrants being 2.6 times more likely to die than male migrants. While research
has pointed to a number of factors like migration routes, jurisdictional
structure, and pre-crossing conditions that influence migrant mortality rates,
little is known about the institutional policies and daily practices through
which humanitarian interventions are implemented by the U.S. Border Patrol and
how these factors may affect the efficacy of humanitarian initiatives. This
doctoral dissertation research project will draw on scholarship in the fields of
feminist and political geography to examine the gendered dimensions of the
adoption and implementation of U.S. Border Patrol humanitarian initiatives in
order to understand how state policies are put into practice and how they result
in uneven and/or ineffective outcomes. The doctoral student will ask the
following questions: (1) How have gender ideologies (i.e. belief systems) and
discourses (i.e. systems of representation) influenced the integration of
humanitarian objectives into border enforcement practices? (2) How does the
gender of unauthorized migrants in need affect the daily practices of the U.S.
Border Patrol as it engages in humanitarian interventions? A combination of
qualitative and quantitative methods will be used to assess the complex ways in
which gender shapes the development of state policies and their implementation.
Document and legal analysis, key informant interviews, and participant
observation with governmental and non-governmental organizations will provide
data on the integration of humanitarian objectives into border enforcement
efforts. A survey of Border Patrol agents in the Tucson sector will provide
quantitative data on the degree to which the gender of unauthorized migrants
shapes humanitarian interventions.

This project will place Border Patrol responsibilities for humanitarian
assistance in context with national border enforcement objectives, thereby
contributing to understandings of how states negotiate national and
transnational responsibilities in the transnational era. The project will
contribute to theoretical understandings of the complex and paradoxical ways in
which gender shapes state actions and their uneven effects while expanding
knowledge of the process and effects of U.S.-Mexico border enforcement efforts
in particular. The migrant mortality rates in southern Arizona landscape
necessitate a better understanding of humanitarian interventions if they are to
be more effective. By providing a more complete understanding of Border Patrol
humanitarian efforts and their effects, this project will inform public debate
and policies associated with U.S. border enforcement measures and contribute to
the development of more effective border regulation policies. As a Doctoral
Dissertation Research Improvement award, this award also will provide support to
enable a promising student to establish a strong independent research career.