* 1103471
* Microlensing Theory and Planet Detection: Bridge to the Future
* MPS,AST
* 08/01/2011,07/31/2015
* Andrew Gould, Ohio State University
* Continuing Grant
* James Neff
* 07/31/2015
* USD 339,477.00

This award will continue operation of the Microlensing Follow Up Network in
order to search for and analyze new exoplanets using high-magnification
microlensing techniques. The consortium makes use of numerous small-to-moderate
size aperture wide-field telescopes to conduct the surveys, as well as larger
instruments for quick target-of-opportunity follow-up observations. Data
analysis will be used to measure relative planet frequency in the Galactic bulge
and disk, constrain models of 3-body planetary systems, and determine orbital
information of planets using new mathematical techniques and statistical
analysis. As part of the survey they will also obtain and analyze high-
resolution spectra of highly magnified dwarf stars in the Galactic bulge in
order to measure or put limits on lithium abundances in unevolved stars.

This project will exploit the advantages that the microlensing technique has
over other methods for detecting new planets, such as being more sensitive to
planets with lower masses and higher semi-major axes. This will help produce a
better understanding of the planetary system distributions in the Galaxy. The
dwarf spectra are critical because lithium is a key element in constraining
stellar evolution models. The group includes contributions from both
professional and amateur astronomers at international locations. Scientific
training of the amateur astronomers, and graduate students is also part of the
project.