* 1103066
* Collaborative Research: Absolute-dated records of Late Quaternary paleohydrology in the Bonneville Basin, western U.S., from novel cave archives
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2011,03/31/2015
* Jay Quade, University of Arizona
* Continuing Grant
* Paul Filmer
* 03/31/2015
* USD 205,889.00

TECHNICAL ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;Water balance in the U.S. Great Basin largely
reflects the position and intensity of the westerly storm track, suggesting that
records of past hydrologic changes offer important insights into the behavior of
the storm track in different climate states. The limited dating precision and
sample resolution of presently available records of past water balance, however,
leave scientists unable to address questions about the precise timing and rates
of past water balance changes and their relation to abrupt events recorded in
other paleoclimate archives. Further, few well-dated records extend past the
last glacial period, allowing little understanding of previous interglacials and
glacial terminations. &lt;br/&gt;This project will use cave deposits to
reconstruct past abrupt water balance changes in the Bonneville Basin, the site
of the largest of the Great Basin's paleolakes during the last glacial period.
The work draws upon both a) lacustrine cave deposits formed in a series of caves
flooded by lake waters and b) speleothems from Lehman Cave on the southwestern
edge of the basin. Using stable isotope measurements and a combination of U-Th
and 14C dating, this group will be able to produce records with unprecedented
dating precision and sample resolution covering the most recent glacial
termination as well as the previous two interglacials and terminations.
&lt;br/&gt;Data from lacustrine cave deposits, a novel paleohydrologic archive,
indicate that they formed during periods of the last 30 kyr when the lake was
both above a given cave?s elevation and hydrologically closed. The deposits thus
record the passage of the lake through each cave's elevation and the onset and
cessation of basin overflow; they also preserve high-resolution records of the
lake's oxygen isotope composition and chemistry. Importantly, the deposits can
be precisely dated by U-Th methods, providing the first high-precision,
absolute-dated records of Lake Bonneville's water balance changes. Calibrated
14C ages match U-Th ages in lacustrine cave deposits, indicating that 14C
reservoir effects were minimal in the lake. As a part of the project, a series
of paired U-Th and 14C ages will be used to improve the 14C calibration dataset,
focusing on the period between 19 and 25 calendar ka.&lt;br/&gt;Lehman Cave
speleothems comprise an important complement to the lacustrine cave carbonates,
extending back through substantial portions of the last 300 kyr. Stable isotope
records from the cave's stalagmites, anchored by U-Th dates, will provide some
of the first well-dated archives of regional hydrology during the previous two
interglacials and glacial terminations. Together, Lehman Cave and lacustrine
cave records promise key insights into the eastern Great Basin's response to
both abrupt and orbital-scale climate changes during the last three glacial
cycles.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NON-TECHNICAL ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;Models
consistently predict that the world's drylands will become drier on average in
response to greenhouse warming, but it is unclear how this drying will affect
specific regions. In the U.S., there is particular interest in understanding the
potential for future drying in the Great Basin, a drought-prone region that has
experienced substantial population growth over the last two decades. Records of
past water availability provide a key starting point for forecasting future
changes in the Great Basin by showing us the region's responses to a wide
variety of climates.&lt;br/&gt;The balance of precipitation and evaporation in
the Great Basin in the western interior of the U.S.A. has changed dramatically
over the past 30,000 years, leaving dry lake beds and hypersaline lakes today
where extensive lakes existed during glacial times. Water availability in the
region largely depends upon precipitation brought by the winter storm track,
suggesting that records of past hydrologic changes offer important insights into
the behavior of the storm track in different climate states. The limited dating
precision and sample resolution of present records, however, leave us with only
a general sense of past hydrologic changes, and no well-dated records currently
extend to past interglacial warm periods.&lt;br/&gt;This project will use cave
deposits to reconstruct past water balance changes in northern Utah's Bonneville
Basin, the site of the largest of the Great Basin's paleolakes. These deposits
record changes in precipitation in the basin over much of the past 300,000 years
and are able to be precisely dated, offering us the opportunity to construct a
detailed and extended picture of past climate changes in the region.
Importantly, stalagmites from Lehman Cave on the western edge of the basin
record the last two interglacial warm periods, allowing us the opportunity to
study the mean state and variability of the region's hydrology during times when
the region was as warm as or slightly warmer than at present.&lt;br/&gt; This
work represents an important contribution to our understanding of past climate
changes and will help calibrate models seeking to reproduce past changes in
order to better forecast the future. In addition, these records will assist us
in interpreting past ecological changes in the basin and the history of early
human occupation in the region.