* 1103016
* GSE/DIF SciGirls CONNECT - A Diffusion Scale Up Project
* EDU,EES
* 04/01/2011,03/31/2018
* Richard Hudson, Twin Cities Public Television
* Continuing Grant
* Jolene Jesse
* 03/31/2018
* USD 1,143,791.00

Twin Cities Public Television (TPT) will lead a five-year Scale Up project to
support SciGirls CONNECT, an initiative to train 100 organizations in the use of
SciGirls programming. Scale-up funding will allow training, support, and the
ability to engage participating projects beyond the startup year and to sustain
projects into the future.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: SciGirls has
grown from a small, experimental, media-based outreach effort into a national
demonstration project that combines video, printed activity guides and
professional development for educators, all linked through dedicated websites.
All of the SciGirls components focus on a singular goal: to inspire and
encourage STEM learning and participation for all girls and develop their
interest in STEM careers. SciGirls programming has been tested with many
different types of girl-serving organizations including PBS station outreach
teams, community-based organizations and science centers, and Latina-serving
organizations, including Spanish translations of SciGirls resources. The
approach to SciGirls training, outreach and educational materials, is based on
academic research into how to best engage girls in STEM. Strategies are applied
across all the STEM disciplines in a real-world, holistic approach, linking
science with technology with engineering with math. Partner organizations are
provided with SciGirls videos, Activity Guides and professional development
workshops, both on-site and online. The approaches to building a larger
community are based in both research and in an iterative experience working with
and training past SciGirls partners.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The
strength of SciGirls lies in its multimedia approach, and unique videos that
model authentic STEM experiences for girls, including the new PBS SciGirls TV
series. All of the SciGirls videos provide unique, real-world role models for
girls. In each video, girls see their peers using science, technology,
engineering and math to answer questions about their favorite activities. STEM
is no longer an abstraction; it becomes real and relevant to girls? lives. The
presence of the national SciGirls TV series on PBS provides unique and powerful
promotion of SciGirls CONNECT. No other program dedicated to girls and STEM has
the visibility of national television broadcasts to interest girls in pursuing
STEM activities. SciGirls CONNECT will build on strategic partnerships with The
National Girls Collaborative Project (NGCP) and the other GSE Extension
Services. The work will be guided by an advisory board of leaders in STEM
programming for girls, with specialties in museums, Hispanic communities and
technology. Ultimately, the key goal of SciGirls CONNECT will be to build a
vibrant community of empowered, well-informed professionals devoted to
encouraging more girls to take part in STEM activities and pursue STEM careers.