* 1103921
* Technology and Innovation in Manufacturing and Engineering (TIME) Center
* EHR,DUE
* 08/15/2011,06/30/2014
* Dennis Faber, Community College of Baltimore County, Essex
* Standard Grant
* Virginia Carter
* 06/30/2014
* USD 498,011.00

The TIME Center has been instrumental in ensuring that Maryland's secondary and
post-secondary programs keep pace with the rapid transformation of manufacturing
from a mass-production, product-based industry to a customized production,
knowledge-based, demand-driven industry.

The TIME Center's goals and objectives are focused on educating manufacturing
and engineering technicians (MET) to meet regional workforce demands and
enhancing the advanced technical skills sets of new and incumbent technicians.
Regional MET careers are evolving to demand broader and deeper skills and more
integration of emerging and converging technologies. The goals, objectives and
activities extend the work the Center has begun.

Objective 1: Developing and enhancing secondary/post-secondary manufacturing and
engineering technology (MET) curricula in demand-driven program areas.

Objective 2: Providing professional development opportunities for secondary and
post-secondary MET faculty that enhance their technical knowledge, improve their
pedagogical skills and broaden their awareness of MET & STEM careers.

Objective 3: Collaborating with partners and key stakeholder groups to increase
the visibility and improve the image of manufacturing and engineering technology
as viable career options.

Objective 4: Implementing innovative approaches to improve and enhance MET
learning, providing broader access to MET learning opportunities and better
integrating partner college efforts with economic development needs in their
regions.