* 1103126
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Social Context and Perceived Membership-  A Comparative Study of Latin Americans in New York and Madrid
* SBE,SES
* 06/01/2011,05/31/2013
* Richard Alba, CUNY Graduate School University Center
* Standard Grant
* Patricia White
* 05/31/2013
* USD 9,727.00

SES-1103126&lt;br/&gt;Richard Alba&lt;br/&gt;Jessica Sperling&lt;br/&gt;CUNY
Graduate School&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This doctoral dissertation research studies
the ways in which different socio-historical contexts shape the process of
immigrant assimilation and perceived possibilities of social membership. It
examines these issues in a comparative perspective, specifically in New York
City (a historic immigrant destination) and Madrid (a recent immigrant
destination). The principal research questions are: What boundaries do children
of immigrants see as the dominant dividing lines between social groups in their
country of residence, and how flexible are these boundaries? To what degree do
children of immigrants feel receiving society national membership is available
to them, and what role, if any, does immigrant-descent or ethno-racial minority
status play in limiting membership? Research methods are both comparative and
qualitative; analysis is principally based upon in-depth interviews with members
of the Latin American 1.5 and second generation in each
location.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will contribute to an improved
understanding of the current and possible future courses of diversity in
receiving societies. For instance, the comparative framework and focus on
perceived boundaries contributes to research on the contextual basis of social
boundaries, and this has direct implications for research on racial and ethnic
integration. Existing comparative transatlantic research often focuses on
measures of integration and immigrant success, such as educational and economic
outcomes. Yet perceived opportunities of belonging - the focus of this study -
both reflect and affect these outcome measures. Moreover, since dominant
assimilation theories were developed with an eye towards the U.S., their
assumptions about the placement and salience of social boundaries (e.g., the
perceived permissibility of diversity, and the presence of established
minorities) may not accurately reflect other settings. It therefore broadens
assimilation theory to consider boundaries and membership possibilities in other
socio-historical contexts. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Most research on migrants in
Europe focuses on Muslim populations, but this study focuses on a non-Muslim
group. This study adds to the body of literature on migrant-descent populations
in Europe, and it highlights the role of race and ethnicity, rather than
religion, as potential social divides. The focus on Latin Americans in Europe
also contributes to the study of Latin American migration, which has been
overwhelmingly focused on immigration to the United States. Finally, despite
Spain?s relative prominence as a receiving country within Europe, most research
on Europe has focused on Northern and Western Europe. This study?s focus on
Spain will therefore contribute to the regional diversity of immigration
research and improve understanding of a key immigrant receiving area.