* 1103231
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: The State, Intellectual Property Rights, and the Rise of India's Pharmaceutical Industry
* SBE,BCS
* 05/15/2011,10/31/2012
* Yuko Aoyama, Clark University
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 10/31/2012
* USD 12,000.00

Although the global pharmaceutical industry is largely dominated by firms from
Europe and North America, India now has the third largest pharmaceutical
industry in the world when measured by production volume. Many other developing
countries attempted to establish domestic pharmaceutical industries, but India
had the most success by far, emerging as the "generics pharma capital of the
world" and as supplier of most of the world's anti-retroviral drugs. This
doctoral dissertation research project will explore how India, which had weak
patent laws and a so-called "failed developmental state," has developed such a
significant pharmaceutical industry. Most recent explanations have examined
intellectual property rights, which now are a condition of World Trade
Organization membership, but have not considered as extensively the roles of
other state policies including price controls, restrictions on monopolies, and
foreign investment. The doctoral student will conduct interviews with key
stakeholders in the industry (Indian pharmaceutical firms, industry association
groups, and government policymakers) and will gather secondary data from
archival research of government policy documents, company reports, and industry
association group publications. This project will produce a historically
grounded investigation of the emergence of India's pharmaceutical industry. The
results of the research are expected to illuminate how the Indian state and the
pharmaceutical industry interacted, often with unintended consequences, to
develop a high-tech industry in a developing nation.

This project will focus on a surprising case of industrial development, the
Indian pharmaceutical industry, which has defied a series of adverse global
political and economic circumstances over the course of its historical
evolution. It is currently restructuring as a result of ongoing measures towards
liberalization as well as the impact of changing patent laws. By providing a
detailed account of the political-economic development of the Indian
pharmaceutical industry, the project will contribute to basic understanding of
the roles of intellectual property regulations and the state in
industrialization and their implications for development policy. This project
has potential implications for the strategies to be employed by developing
nations to counter unfavorable terms of trade with developed nations, and it may
suggest new forms of global governance that might offer fairer developmental
opportunities. As a Doctoral Dissertation Research Improvement award, this award
also will provide support to enable a promising student to establish a strong
independent research career.