* 1103422
* WORKSHOP: Social Remote Presence Robots
* CSE,IIS
* 12/01/2010,05/31/2012
* Cynthia Breazeal, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 05/31/2012
* USD 17,500.00

This is funding to support participation by faculty and graduate students from
the United States in a jointly funded NSF-JST workshop on the topic of human
interaction with remote presence robots, to be held November 30 and December 1,
2010, in Menlo Park, California at Willow Garage. In both the U.S. and Japan we
are seeing the first successful commercial remote presence robots, but these
efforts are rudimentary and primarily involve adding limited indoor mobility and
the ability to direct a camera at a video conference screen. For the potential
of the field to be realized, research is sorely needed to better understand
complex issues such as the nature of remote social embodiment, how human-looking
the robots should be, the psychological impacts of remote robot presence for the
user as well as the interlocutor, what sorts of user interfaces mitigate
cognitive load, and how to better support situational awareness. New directions
in remote presence research could include other robot abilities such as outdoor
mobility and dexterity. In addition, potential societal impacts and ethical
considerations need to be addressed, especially when telepresence robot
technologies are designed for applications targeting vulnerable populations
(e.g., children and the elderly). Finally, telepresence robots have global
implications, in that they will allow people from different cultures and
different countries to interact both physically and socially. Someday,
telepresence robots may even be endowed with knowledge of language, culture, and
non-verbal communication cues from multiple cultures so that they can carry out
multimodal, fully embodied translation. Thus, this joint Japanese-U.S. workshop
is both timely and important. It will build upon two prior preliminary meetings
on the topic, and bring together a diverse set of researchers who can speak to
the issues from a technical, human, and global/societal standpoint. Workshop
participants will share their research experiences and findings, and identify a
set of challenge problems that can guide ongoing research in this field.
&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: Participation in the workshop will be by
invitation. The Japanese delegation will consist of leading researchers in
human-robot interaction from some of their top universities. U.S. participants
have been carefully selected because they either have done research in tele-
presence robots, have worked with social robots in the context of special
populations (e.g., children, the elderly, the physically disabled, or people
with learning disabilities), or can speak to societal or ethical considerations.
The organizers have taken pains to promote diversity with respect to gender
(half of the U.S. invitees are women) and ethnicity (two are Asian, one is of
Hispanic background, and one is African American). About ten graduate students
will also be included in order to foster new learning and training experiences
for young researchers; again, the selection will be based on their interest in
the workshop topic and also on diversity considerations. The primary workshop
outcomes will be a white paper that summarizes the key ideas resulting from the
meeting, including challenge problems that should define a research roadmap for
the field. Presentation materials will be gathered and made available to
participants, with the goal of fostering a community dialog that crosses
international boarders and academic disciplines.