* 1103652
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology for FY 2011
* BIO,DBI
* 01/01/2012,03/31/2014
* Talina Konotchick, Konotchick              Talina
* Fellowship Award
* michael vanni
* 03/31/2014
* USD 123,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2011, Intersections of Biology and Mathematical and Physical Sciences. The
fellowship supports a research and training plan in a host laboratory for the
Fellow at the intersection of biology and mathematical science. The title of the
research and training plan for this fellowship to Talina Konotchick is
"Comparative Metatranscriptomics of Marine Phytoplankton Communities." The host
institution for this fellowship is the J. Craig Venter Institute (JCVI) with
sponsoring scientists Drs. Andrew Allen and Shibu Yooseph.

Marine phytoplankton communities contribute a significant fraction of the
primary productivity of the planet. Large-scale datasets of community-level gene
expression, termed the metatranscriptome, have become available for these
important organisms in the oceans. This research examines metatranscriptomes
from several real-world eukaryotic marine phytoplankton communities to
understand the collective physiological and biochemical processes and
evolutionary relationships that define phytoplankton growing in a particular
environment. The research advances our ability to predict phytoplankton response
and resilience to increased ocean temperatures, shifts in pH, and changes in
stratification due to changing climate. The rapidly growing field of
environmental genomics and the recent availability of several eukaryotic
phytoplankton genomes have increased capacity for comparative analyses and
provide a unique opportunity to develop analytical and modeling tools that may
extend beyond this group of organisms.

Training objectives include establishing the mathematical and statistical
background to translate biologically motivated questions into testable
hypotheses. Mathematical modeling of physical data with the diversity,
abundance, and expression level of genes involved in various aspects of
metabolism plays a central role in characterizing the physical-biological
aspects of marine phytoplankton distributions. Broader impacts include
educational outreach to encourage the next generation of genomic researchers
through the development of K-12 educational modules with the JCVI education
department and through active mentoring and training of undergraduate interns.