* 1103676
* Sustainability in Concrete Technology
* EDU,DUE
* 06/01/2011,05/31/2014
* Don MacMaster, Alpena Community College
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Teles
* 05/31/2014
* USD 200,000.00

The college in collaboration with the World Center for Concrete Technology is
developing a sustainability concrete technology project. Activities include
educational materials development, research, professional development, and
outreach to industry through seminars and job fairs. The primary audiences
affected are two-year community college students, secondary school teachers,
secondary school students, and concrete technology faculty.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project has five deliverables:&lt;br/&gt;(1) Research
by two-year technology students into CO2 sequestration in concrete masonry
product based upon a range of mix designs, admixtures, and curing
methods.&lt;br/&gt;(2) Professional development for regional secondary school
science instructors and their students through webinars, site visits to the
center, and participation in the research project.&lt;br/&gt;(3) Outreach to
industry by sponsoring job fairs to connect employers and two-year community
college students.&lt;br/&gt;(4) An online certificate for industry professionals
with capstone courses in sustainability, energy conservation, kiln optimization,
and CO2 capture.&lt;br/&gt;(5) Formation of a four-year degree in Concrete
Technology offered through the college.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit:
There is a documented connection between CO2 emissions, cement production, the
extensive use of concrete as a primary construction material worldwide,
greenhouse gases, climate change, and global warming. The research component of
this project is quantifying the carbon sequestration potential of concrete
masonry according to range of production factors. Because no substitute for
concrete as a construction material currently exists, establishing the potential
of concrete as a sequestration agent has merit in the U.S. and across the
developing world.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: The project is (1)
enhancing technical education in two cohorts of concrete technology students who
can then enter their careers backed with extensive research experience; (2)
developing science, technology, and mathematics instruction among regional
science instructors; (3) developing a four-year degree in Concrete Technology at
the college; (4) contributing research that has potential impact on CO2 emission
levels worldwide; (5) promoting sustainability to industry professionals through
the development and delivery of an online certificate; and (6) establishing the
WCCT as a national center of sustainability research. An advisory committee of
industry leaders, community college educators, and public/private sector
employers meet quarterly to provide guidance to the project.