* 1103444
* PostDoctoral Research Fellowship
* SBE,SMA
* 08/01/2011,07/31/2014
* Michelle Brown, Brown                   Michelle
* Fellowship Award
* Fahmida Chowdhury
* 07/31/2014
* USD 180,000.00

Intellectual Merit: This three-year project focuses on inter-group dynamics of
agressive behavior. Referred to as aggressive inter-group encounters (IGEs),
face-to-face confrontations between groups typically involve the participation
of one or a few group members, which means that the costs of aggressive
competition are borne by only a few participants. Although this pattern is
widespread, it remains unclear which social, ecological, and physiological
factors cause some individuals to participate in an IGEs, but not others.
Previous studies focused on factors like dominance rank, food and mate
availability, and the degree of relatedness to group-mates. This research
includes assessments of these traditional factors but also includes the
contribution of previously unexamined variables - temperament and energetic
balance. Both variables are likely to be meaningful predictors of participation
in inter-group encounters and will affect the understanding of collective
aggression in a wide range of taxa. This research studies four groups of vervet
monkeys at the Mawana game reserve in KwaZulu-Natal, South Africa, with
laboratory analysis conducted at the University of New Mexico, USA, and data
analysis and write-up conducted at the University of
Zurich.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The topic of inter-group
aggression and insights gained from this project will be of great relevance to
behavioral ecologists, anthropologists, and psychologists. Project results will
be disseminated through peer-reviewed publications, conference presentations,
and public media in South Africa, Switzerland, and the United States.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In addition, the Fellow intends to mentor a minority
undergraduate student and hire as an intern based on his or her level of
interest in animal behavior at the University of New Mexico. The Fellow will
also create and maintain a blog about data collection in South Africa and
laboratory analysis at UNM. With collaboration with Peter Rouget Middle School
in Brooklyn, NY (most of students are minority, first-generation immigrants
students from household of low socio-economic status), the blog will introduce
to the students observational behavioral research, field work in the natural
environment, primate socioecology, and conservation through the Fellow's
personal narrative, photos, videos, and a question-and-answer section.