* 1103575
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2011
* BIO,DBI
* 07/01/2011,07/31/2014
* Katherine Mackey, Mackey                  Katherine      R
* Fellowship Award
* michael vanni
* 07/31/2014
* USD 189,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2011, Intersections of Biology and Mathematical and Physical Sciences. The
fellowship supports a research and training plan in a host laboratory for the
Fellow at the intersection of biology and chemistry. The title of the research
and training plan for this fellowship to Katherine Mackey is "Photosynthetic
strategies for iron limitation in Earth's most abundant photosynthetic
organism." The host institutions for this research are the Marine Biological
Laboratory and the Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution with sponsoring
scientists Drs. Anton Post and Mak Saito.

Photosynthesis is a complex process in which cells use energy from light to
grow, and optimizing this process can be difficult when nutrients needed for
growth are scarce. In freshwater algae and marine diatoms, numerous strategies
have evolved to optimize photosynthesis during iron and nitrogen limitation and
are well-studied. However, less is known about the photosynthetic strategies
employed by picocyanobacteria to cope with less than optimal levels of iron and
nitrogen. These small, single-celled algae are the most abundant photosynthetic
organisms on Earth, and their diversity and global ubiquity provide an ideal
model system in which to characterize responses to iron and nitrogen limitation,
using both wild type and laboratory cultures. This research probes the short-
term (acclimation) and long-term (adaptation) responses of picocyanobacteria to
iron and nitrogen limitation and determines how these strategies impact iron,
nitrogen and carbon cycling in the environment. Training goals include learning
cutting-edge methods in global and targeted proteomics, automated gene
sequencing, and trace metal analysis, allowing the Fellow to branch into
geochemistry.

This project offers new insights on photosynthetic strategies in the global
distributions of photosynthetic organisms from algae to land plants and on how
nutrient stress drives the evolution of photosynthesis in nature. Broader
impacts include one-on-one mentoring of students in the laboratory and outreach
to local schools. A teaching option supports the Fellow to develop a
photosynthesis course for the Partnership Education Program for minority
students at WHOI and other institutions.