* 1103368
* Gromov-Witten theory
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2011,06/30/2015
* Yongbin Ruan, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 06/30/2015
* USD 300,100.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Award: DMS-1103368&lt;br/&gt;Principal
Investigator: Yongbin Ruan&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;During the past twenty years,
there has been a great deal of&lt;br/&gt;interaction between mathematic and
physics. Various&lt;br/&gt;correspondences or dualities arising from physics
have had a&lt;br/&gt;great impact on mathematics. One of these correspondences
is the&lt;br/&gt;Landau-Ginzburg/Calabi-Yau correspondence. This proposal offers
a&lt;br/&gt;comprehensive program to establish this correspondence
in&lt;br/&gt;mathematics with mathematical rigor. There is a wide range
of&lt;br/&gt;applications such as global mirror symmetry, the computation
of&lt;br/&gt;Gromov-Witten invariants of compact Calabi-Yau manifolds, and
to&lt;br/&gt;modular forms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Since the era of Newton,
mathematics has been a key tool in&lt;br/&gt;helping us to comprehend the
universe. An example is&lt;br/&gt;differential geometry via Einstein's theory of
general&lt;br/&gt;relativity. During the last twenty years there has been a
great&lt;br/&gt;deal of activity in building so-called string-theoretic models
of&lt;br/&gt;the universe. The string-theoretic model of the universe
is&lt;br/&gt;ten-dimensional, our usual 4-dimensional space-time togeher
with&lt;br/&gt;a very small 6-dimensional space called a Calabi-Yau
manifold.&lt;br/&gt;Such a small internal space will affect our space-time
through&lt;br/&gt;certain mathematical quantities such as Gromov-
Witten&lt;br/&gt;invariants. The computation of these invariants has been
a&lt;br/&gt;central problem in geometry and physics. This is the area
in&lt;br/&gt;which mathematical tools can be very useful. The
current&lt;br/&gt;proposal envisages a theoretical framework as well as
developing&lt;br/&gt;technical tools to compute Gromov-Witten invariants