* 1103104
* Topics in the theory of random Schrodinger operators
* MPS,DMS
* 09/15/2011,08/31/2016
* Peter Hislop, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Bruce P. Palka
* 08/31/2016
* USD 199,093.00

One- and many-particle random operators describe the interaction of electrons
and acoustic waves with randomly perturbed media. The primary example is the
propagation of electrons in a crystal with impurities. The impurities are
modeled by a random process and the expectations of observable quantities, such
as diffusivity, conductivity, and the density of states, represent the average
over these quantities over many measurements. Several models are studied: the
impurities may be located at the lattice points of the crystal representing
alloy-type models, or they may be localized at interstitial sites whose location
is given by a Poisson process. In a perfect crystal, the electrons propagate
freely provided their energies lay in fixed energy bands determined by the
crystalline structure. The spectrum is absolutely continuous and the
conductivity is infinite. The addition of random impurities changes this
description. If the disorder is sufficiently large, all electron states are
localized in space and the conductivity is zero. At weak disorder, and in
dimensions greater than two, it is believed that there is finite conductivity at
certain energies, whereas there are localized states at other energies near the
edges of the bands. This is an open conjecture and one of the main motivations
for the proposed research. The main projects of this proposal concern spectral
and transport aspects of random one- and many-body random Schrodinger operators.
The regularity of the density of states and higher-order correlation functions,
including the conductivity measure and the inter-band light absorption
coefficients, will be thoroughly investigated. The behavior of these quantities
in the weak disorder regime is particularly interesting. Very little is known
for even the simplest correlation functions, such as the density of states. The
dynamical properties of random Schrodinger operators are also manifest in the
spectral statistics of various models. For many one-particle Schrodinger
operators, the local spectral statistics in the disorder regime is Poissonian.
This is expected for many-particle Schrodinger operators and is part of the
proposed research. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The propagation of electrons and waves
in random media is a hallmark of the physical world. Random impurities in
semiconductors impact the electronic properties of these devices. Although the
one-electron model is a good description of many phenomena, a complete picture
requires the use of multi-particle Schrodinger operators. The behavior of these
random models is just beginning to be studied and is one of the components of
this research proposal. The investigator, together with several doctoral
students at the University of Kentucky, will investigate transport and spectral
phenomena of several random models. One of the main goals is to understand
correlations between various particles and how the disorder influences them.