* 1103264
* Collaborative Research: GEM: Global Modeling of the Magnetosheath Using Comparisons Between MHD, Hybrid Simulations and Observations
* GEO,AGS
* 06/01/2011,09/30/2016
* Jean Berchem, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing Grant
* Janet U. Kozyra
* 09/30/2016
* USD 415,000.00

This project will perform of a series of systematic comparisons between the
results of global three-dimensional magnetohydrodynamic (MHD) simulations and
hybrid simulations of Earth's magnetosheath and magnetopause. The hybrid
simulations will treat the electrons as a fluid but will treat the ions as
kinetic particles. The simulations will be compared with each other as well as
with observations from the THEMIS and Cluster spacecraft missions. Results of
these comparative studies will make it possible to determine where, how, and to
which extent local kinetic processes occurring in the magnetosheath and at its
boundaries alter the MHD predictions of its large-scale properties and dynamics.
The research will considerably improve the understanding of the effects of local
processes on the large-scale transport of mass, energy, and momentum from the
solar wind to the magnetosphere and will ascertain the solar wind plasma regimes
and IMF orientations for which global MHD simulations can be used reliably.

Global MHD simulations have been the standard approach to modeling how the solar
wind interacts with Earth?s magnetosphere. Such modeling is crucial to
predicting space weather effects such as magnetic storms. Spacecraft
observations, however, have revealed a number of effects in that interaction
that cannot be described by MHD simulations. This project will improve our
understanding of when and under what conditions MHD simulations can be relied on
for space weather forecasting. The project will also include an educational
component by involving a graduate student who will participate in every aspect
of the research.