* 1103934
* CONFERENCE: 2011 Rustbelt RNA Meeting to be held October 21-22, 2011 in Dayton, OH
* BIO,MCB
* 06/01/2011,05/31/2012
* John Means, University of Rio Grande
* Standard Grant
* Karen Cone
* 05/31/2012
* USD 12,000.00

Intellectual Merit &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The 2011 Rustbelt RNA Meeting will be
held October 21-22, 2011, at the Crowne Plaza in Dayton, Ohio. The Rustbelt RNA
Meeting is the major Midwest regional meeting of RNA researchers. The Rustbelt
RNA Meeting was created in 1999 to address the need of RNA researchers in the
Midwest for a regional meeting that includes not only faculty but also
postdoctoral fellows and students (trainees). The intellectual objective of the
Rustbelt RNA Meeting is to provide an inexpensive, high-caliber,
interdisciplinary meeting for RNA researchers in the Midwest. Novel functions
beyond the classical role for RNA as a product of transcription, a template for
translation, or as structural/catalytic components of spliceosomes and ribosomes
are constantly being discovered. At the same time, the methods used to study RNA
are becoming increasingly diverse, ranging from synthetic and physical chemistry
to biochemistry, genetics, and biophysical approaches all the way to cellular
imaging and computational methods. Consequently, research groups need a forum
where they can hear and discuss new results and techniques covering a broad
range of RNA research areas that can ultimately result in furthering an
individual lab's aims. The topics presented at the Rustbelt RNA Meeting are
selected from the submitted abstracts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts
&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact of the Rustbelt RNA Meeting is in trainee and
junior faculty development. The Rustbelt RNA Meeting strongly emphasizes trainee
participation. One major feature of the Rustbelt RNA Meeting is the
participation of graduate and undergraduate students from a wide range of
institutions (from large research-intensive universities to small, primarily
undergraduate colleges). In addition to offering opportunities for interactions
with principal investigators and other trainees, the Rustbelt RNA Meeting
provides invaluable experience for trainees to present their research in an
educational and supportive atmosphere. Trainees account for the majority
(approximately 90%) of both poster and oral presentations. To encourage top-
notch presentations, prizes are awarded for outstanding oral and poster
presentations. Finally, the Rustbelt RNA Meeting is an excellent forum for
junior investigators to network as well as to showcase their emerging research
programs and develop new collaborations.