* 1103987
* Particle Astrophysics at Princeton: Solar Neutrino and Dark Matter Studies with Borexino and DarkSide
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2016
* Frank Calaprice, Princeton University
* Continuing Grant
* Jonathan Whitmore
* 08/31/2016
* USD 3,141,472.00

This award will provide support for operations on two experimental initiatives
in particle astrophysics: solar neutrinos with the Borexino liquid scintillator
detector and dark matter with the DarkSide-50 liquid argon Time Projection
Chamber (TPC). The nascent dark matter project will take advantage of the
expertise in and facilities for low background methods accumulated by the
Borexino collaboration in over two decades of research. DarkSide-50 will take
advantage of the Borexino Counting Test Facility (CTF) and of the scintillator
and water purification equipment built at the underground lab at Gran Sasso,
Italy by the Borexino collaboration. While the Borexino and DarkSide
collaborations remain two separate entities, almost all of the Borexino groups
have joined the DarkSide Collaboration, and will work on both
activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Borexino is a detector designed to observe low-
energy solar neutrinos. It is the most recent large-scale, real-time solar
neutrino detector to become operational and has been in operation for a little
more than three years, during which time it has acquired solar and terrestrial
neutrino data. The solar neutrino goal is to improve the measurement of
Beryllium-7 neutrinos to an uncertainty less than 5%, and to make the first real
time measurements of other neutrino branches, especially the pep, and possibly
also the pp and CNO neutrinos. DarkSide-50 is a 50-kg dual-phase argon detector
under development for the direct detection of dark matter particles. It is
designed to test innovative low background methods to ensure background-free
operation. It will initiate the use of underground argon for dark matter
applications. It will be deployed, enclosed in a liquid scintillator neutron
veto, within the CTF water tank. The scintillator-water combined shield provides
background-free operation for ton-year exposures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;For
Broader Impacts, the proposed activity will advance the scientific and
educational mission in a variety of ways: (1) it will offer an excellent
opportunity for the training of students, who will have a chance to contribute
to the success of a cutting edge project in fundamental science and advanced
engineering; (2) it will benefit society by developing techniques that could
find application in areas ranging from national security to medical imaging; and
(3) it will support continued development of successful E&amp;O programs such as
the Princeton-Abruzzo-South Dakota summer school for high school students.