* 1103332
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Marine Conservation Law and Gendered Access During Madagascar's Political Crisis
* SBE,BCS
* 05/01/2011,10/31/2012
* Louise Fortmann, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Antoinette WinklerPrins
* 10/31/2012
* USD 10,820.00

Protected areas are seen as the cornerstone of most biodiversity conservation
strategies. Since the mid 1990s improving protected area outcomes has become an
increasing concern for funding agencies, natural resource managers, and
conservation scientists. Central to this concern and a topic of intense debate
has been identifying the best way in which to manage protected areas, some
arguing for a top-down (or state-led) approach, while others argue for a bottom-
up (or community-led) approach. This research project is an in-depth,
comparative case-study analyzing four marine conservation projects in Madagascar
that are managed by different entities (the community, the state, and one that
is co-managed between the community and the state). The research focuses on how
the political crisis in Madagascar that started in 2009 influences management
practices. The project looks specifically at (a) how the history of a specific
marine resource management project influences the way in which locals change
their resource use in reaction to the political crisis and (b) the ways in which
differences between women and men in marine resource use and participation in
management influence who benefits from marine conservation and use, and (c) how
local laws influence access to and control of marine resources and vice-versa.
Different protected area management approaches determine who decides the rules
concerning rights to resources, and therefore is a rich site to investigate the
way in which claims concerning resource use and control are mobilized by
different actors. These questions will be answered using a mixture of
qualitative and quantitative methods including semi-structured interviews, oral
histories, participant observation, surveys, as well as with the creation of a
map of fishing locations linked to their specific history, references to current
use, and points of contention between different 'stakeholders.' These methods
will allow information from and the opinions of a wide variety of actors to be
represented in the comparative analysis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research
project is important for understanding contemporary conservation trends in terms
of protected areas. It will contribute to what is known about natural resource
politics, specifically work related to community-based conservation and gendered
resource use. By recognizing the dynamics among state, international
conservation, and local actors in the context of marine conservation management,
this study will provide an analysis of the factors shaping the way in which
marine resources are used, by whom, when, and why. This research will provide
critical information for organizations funding and implementing conservation
globally, and contribute to the growing literature investigating the link
between resource use and political conflict. This research will help inform how
future conservation efforts can plan for political instability or changes in
governmental involvement in conservation efforts. Additionally, because of its
specific focus on differences between women and men in their resource use and
participation in conservation management, this research will illuminate ways in
which the application of resource use rules and regulations as well as
conservation strategies can be more equitable. Because this research will
advance an understanding of the inner workings of conservation in the context of
political upheaval, it may be applicable to numerous other countries that are
rich in biodiversity and politically unstable.