* 1103904
* US Egypt Cooperative Research: Luminescent Molecularly Imprinted Polymer Sensor Arrays
* O/D,OISE
* 08/01/2011,07/31/2015
* Ken Shimizu, University South Carolina Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Anne Emig
* 07/31/2015
* USD 125,000.00

1103904 &lt;br/&gt;This project supports a cooperative research project by Dr.
Ken Shimizu, University of South Carolina, Columbia, SC and Dr. Hasan Azab
(Ibrahim) of the Suez Canal University, Ismailia, Egypt. They plan to study
luminescent molecularly imprinted polymer (MIPs) sensor arrays by combining (1)
the selective luminescent properties of lanthanide-analyte coordination
complexes with (2) the shape and functional group selectivity of molecular
imprint polymers (MIPs).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: The increasing
use of pesticides has led to greatly improved crop yields&lt;br/&gt;and
agricultural productivity. However, this has also lead to the increasing problem
of the&lt;br/&gt;contamination of water supplies and food products with
pesticide residues. The goal of this&lt;br/&gt;project is to develop luminescent
polymeric sensor arrays that can identify and measure
the&lt;br/&gt;concentrations of common pesticides in water. The luminescent
imprinted polymer sensor arrays&lt;br/&gt;will have long shelf-lives, yield
rapid results, and require minimal of instrumentation.&lt;br/&gt;The sensor
arrays are comprised of different molecularly imprinted polymers that contain
lanthanide&lt;br/&gt;binding sites. Each polymer in the array will be
synthesized in the presence of a different&lt;br/&gt;pesticide or pesticide
analog, which will allow the sensor arrays to be rationally
tailored&lt;br/&gt;with selectivity to specific groups or classes of analytes.
The arrays will be highly sensitive&lt;br/&gt;and selective due to the
luminescent lanthanide coordination sites that have high affinity&lt;br/&gt;and
provide a very strong and easily measured change in emissive properties upon
binding the&lt;br/&gt;target analytes. The collaboration involves DR. Hassan
Azab who is an expert on the synthesis and characterization of luminescent
lanthanide sensors and Dr. Ken D. Shimizu who is an expert&lt;br/&gt;the
synthesis and analysis of molecularly imprinted polymer sensor
arrays.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The technological broader impact
will be the development of new rapid and&lt;br/&gt;inexpensive methods for
monitoring water purity and food safety. In addition, the new
sensing&lt;br/&gt;platform can also be readily adapted to target other analytes
of interest such as pharmaceuticals,&lt;br/&gt;environmental pollutants and
disease indicators. This international collaboration will also&lt;br/&gt;provide
a venue for the exchange of scientific expertise and the training of
participating&lt;br/&gt;graduate students. Monthly video-conferencing meetings
will be held to allow participants&lt;br/&gt;to practice their presentation and
communication skills, as well as, to exchange information.&lt;br/&gt;The PIs
will have exchange visits in each of the first two years to coordinate the
project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal is supported under the US-Egypt
Joint Fund Program where NSF supports the US side and the Government of Egypt
funds the Egyptian side.