* 1103686
* Implementation of Advanced Land-Ice Models in the Community Earth System Model
* GEO,OPP
* 05/15/2011,04/30/2015
* Mariana Vertenstein, University Corporation For Atmospheric Res
* Standard Grant
* Lisa Clough
* 04/30/2015
* USD 304,090.00

This award provides support for "Implementation of Advanced Land-Ice Models in
the Community Earth System Model" from the Antarctic Integrated System Science
and Arctic Natural Science programs within the Office of Polar Programs. Future
rates of sea-level rise in a time of climate change are highly uncertain, but
global mean sea level could rise by more than one meter by the year 2100 if
contributions from melting ice sheets continue to increase. Understanding future
global sea level is hindered by the fact that full coupling of the Glimmer
Community Ice Sheet Model (Glimmer-CISM) into the Community Earth System Model
(CESM) has not been completed. This award will provide support for a software
engineer to complete the task of coupling the ice model to the climate model in
a fully dynamic mode. The software engineer will also serve as a liaison between
the Land Ice Working Group (LIWG) and the climate
modelers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: The authors propose to fully
couple a land-ice sheet model (Glimmer-CISM) to a GCM (CESM). The coupling, when
successful, will deliver the dynamic coupling called out as missing in the last
IPCC report. The lack of a dynamic component for the ice-sheets led the last
IPCC AR4 authors to exclude the contribution of ice-sheets to sea-level rise.
Following the successful coupling of the models, the team (including the LIWG)
will determine the range of sea-level rise associated with the loss of land-ice
to support the IPCC AR5.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: While funding will
go specifically to one individual, the work is being done on community models,
so the results will be available to the entire research community. With regards
to the global broader impacts, the overall goal of improving future predictions
of global sea-level rise is of obvious importance to anyone who lives on the
coast.