* 1103073
* GSE/EXT: NGCP: Building the Capacity of STEM Practitioners to Develop a Diverse Workforce
* EDU,EES
* 04/01/2011,10/31/2015
* Brenda Britsch, EdLab Group Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Jolene Jesse
* 10/31/2015
* USD 3,011,904.00

Intellectual Merit: The EdLab Group proposes to leverage aspects of the National
Girls Collaborative Project (NGCP) model, successfully implemented in a previous
NSF-funded project, to expand the reach and impact of the NGCP. The proposed
extension services project would use the comprehensive program of changed
developed and tested in the previous project that uses collaboration to expand
and strengthen STEM-related opportunities for girls and women. The NGCP model
accomplishes this by creating a network of researchers, extension service agents
and practitioners, facilitating collaboration within this network, and
delivering high-quality research-based professional development. The proposed
project will expand the network and type of professional development offered,
serving more leaders and practitioners in the field and, ultimately, impacting
more girls.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The NGCP's collaborative model changes the way
practitioners and educators work to advance girls participation in STEM. It
facilitates the development of practitioners in their knowledge of good gender
equitable educational practices, awareness of the role of early education in
STEM workforce development, and mutual support of peers locally and cross the
country. Nearly 3 million girls are currently served under the umbrella of NGCP,
and this next phase project will continue to serve them with greater quality,
effectiveness, and provide a broader reach to a minimum of 500,000 additional
girls and approximately 13,000 additional STEM practitioners. It will contribute
to greater science and engineering literacy, and STEM workforce
development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: This proposed second-phase
effort will develop 11 new Regional Collaboratives, increasing the number of
states served from 28 to 41 and incorporating geographical areas with
significant representation of ethnic minorities who are greatly underserved in
STEM. The project will focus training and professional development activities
for practitioners to engage and serve underrepresented girls; for Regional
Collaboratives to improve sustainability; and to expand outreach and
dissemination to better equip school counselors to accurately inform and
encourage girls in STEM. The EdLab Group will partner with the American School
Counselor Association, Assessing Women and Men in Engineering Project, and DO-IT
(Disabilities, Opportunities, Internetworking, and Technology) to expand the
reach and impact of NGCP.