* 1103356
* PostDoctoral Research Fellowship
* SBE,SMA
* 08/01/2011,07/31/2013
* Nicholas Duran, Duran, Nicholas D
* Fellowship Award
* Fahmida Chowdhury
* 07/31/2013
* USD 120,000.00

Intellectual Merit. There is well-established evidence that deception often
leaks into a deceiver's actions; however, there is little to no explanation as
to how these movements are directly connected to the cognitive processes of
deception. To address this problem, the Fellow presents a new research paradigm
that is motivated by the inextricable connection between body and mind. In doing
so, the proposed research makes several unique contributions by 1) using a
common cognitive framework based on action and coordination dynamics to evaluate
a range of deceptive behaviors, 2) forging connections between methods for the
study of nonlinear dynamical systems and deceptive phenomena, 3) using state-of-
the-art technologies to capture deceptive behaviors, 4) optimizing prediction
algorithms for distinguishing deception from truth.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts. A society in the 21st century has a fundamental mandate to protect its
vital national security interests from emerging threats. According to the U.S.
Department of Homeland Security, a necessary objective in doing so is to develop
superior methods for detecting and preventing an individual's attempt to employ
deception. This research provides a unique opportunity to pursue this objective
within a global society. Researchers from the U.S. and U.K. will take advantage
of insights from the forefront of cognitive science theory, methodology, and
analysis to identify novel behavioral markers of deception. The dissemination of
this research into the public domain will introduce scientifically-based
measures that offer a non-invasive, low-risk, and high-impact alternative to
other measures. Furthermore, because the Fellow's approach is based on an
impartial assessment of guilt, it does not suffer from subjective and sometimes
prejudiced biases that have been a contributing factor in the wrongful
convictions and false accusations of certain minority
groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Finally, this research program has the potential to
pique students' interest in all STEM-related fields: Science in the reliance on
cognitive and dynamical theory, Technology in the use of motion tracking tools,
Engineering in developing techniques to detect deception, and Mathematics in
employing sophisticated dynamical analysis. The Fellow is already an active
mentor at a major urban University in the U.S. where 40% of the students come
from traditionally underrepresented groups. This Fellowship allows the PI to
broaden the scope of mentorship in student participation and in providing
opportunities for students to explore STEM-related research in their future
careers.