* 1103659
* Algebraic Surfaces: Rational points and Cox rings
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2011,06/30/2015
* Anthony Varilly-Alvarado, William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Pollington
* 06/30/2015
* USD 101,149.00

The investigator will work on two different projects in arithmetic geometry. The
first project involves studying the transcendental part of the Brauer group of
an algebraic surface that is defined over a number field. The existence and
distribution of points with rational coordinates on a variety is often hampered
by cohomological obstructions arising from the Brauer group of the variety. The
focus of this project is on K3 and Enriques surfaces, as these are among the
simplest kind of surfaces that have nontrivial transcendental Brauer classes.
The basic problem is to find unramified Azumaya algebras representing
transcendental classes that arise in geometric constructions (e.g., in the
twisted universal bundles of moduli spaces of stable sheaves on K3 surfaces).
The Azumaya algebras must have a description that is concrete enough to
determine the ramification behavior at places of bad reduction for the surface.
The PI will examine the extent to which these classes explain the absence or
scarcity of rational points on such surfaces. The second project focuses on an
explicit study of universal torsors of smooth, projective rational surfaces.
Over number fields, universal torsors have been used to prove that certain
cohomological obstructions suffice to explain all failures of local-to-global
principles on large classes of algebraic varieties. When finitely generated, Cox
rings give rise to explicit presentations of universal torsors. The aim of this
project is to catalogue classes of smooth rational surfaces with finitely
generated Cox rings and give explicit presentations for these
rings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Arithmetic geometry is a subject that lies at the
crossroads of number theory and algebraic geometry: one aim is to study the
solutions of a system of multivariate polynomial equations whose coordinates are
all, say, rational numbers or integers (e.g. 19/7, or -5). Sometimes, these
systems of polynomials have very few such solutions, or none at all! This
project seeks to understand the phenomena that prevent the existence of these
special solutions, with restrictions on the systems of polynomials equations
studied. These restrictions arise naturally from the geometry of the systems.
The study of such solutions has amply documented connections to cryptography and
the transmission of information on noisy channels. This project does not address
these applications; rather, it deals with foundational questions that underly
them.