* 1103184
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Interdependent Livelihood Strategies Among the Elderly in Northern Region, Ghana
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2011,12/31/2013
* Kelsey Hanrahan, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Kelley Crews
* 12/31/2013
* USD 11,980.00

The ways in which differently aged persons participate in livelihoods is not
well understood. The elderly are often cast as dependent, yet many make
significant contributions to the food security and social support of their
families and communities. Despite this, international development projects and
the empirical research on which they are based, including those focused on
livelihood studies, are predominantly youth-oriented and focus on the material
exchanges of young and middle-aged persons that supply income and subsistence to
households. This research project builds on previous research within
gerontology, geographies of age, feminist geographies and geographies of care to
re-conceptualize the way in which the social construction of age has
implications for livelihood strategies. By employing a variety of methods,
including comprehensive household surveys, individual life histories interviews,
focus groups, participant observation and participatory mapping, this research
will document the social relationships through which livelihood strategies are
practiced by elderly persons in a rural community in Northern Ghana. Findings
from this research will demonstrate that diverse livelihood strategies are not
just found and fostered within the activities of individuals, but also in the
politics of inter-generational relationships within households. This project
expects to demonstrate that the elderly face particular opportunities and
limitations as a result of the socio-spatial relations associated with later
life, rendering their livelihood strategies distinct from those practiced by
younger persons.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will help inform development-
oriented livelihood studies which have tended to focus on programs for young and
middle-aged adults and have underplayed the importance of the role of the
elderly in household livelihood strategies. This research connects with the
growing awareness of the rights and needs of older persons in developing
countries where the neglect of the elderly continues, despite international
policies, including the United Nation's International Plan of Action on Ageing
ratified in the early 21st century. Result of this work will contribute both
empirically and theoretically to the goals of feminist geography and the
importance of gendered perspectives in development studies.