* 1103935
* US Egypt Cooperative Research: Nanomaterials for Improving Biomedical Imaging and Early Diagnosis of Cancer
* O/D,OISE
* 08/01/2011,07/31/2014
* Stanislav Emelianov, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Anne Emig
* 07/31/2014
* USD 115,000.00

1103935 &lt;br/&gt;This project supports a cooperative research project by Dr.
Stanislav Emelianov, University of Texas at Austin and Dr. Hassan Talaat, Ain
Shams University, Cairo. They plan to study nanomaterials for developing devices
for Improving Biomedical Imaging and Early Diagnosis of Cancer. Photothermal
therapy, a targeted, non-invasive treatment of cancer where heat is used to
cause tumor necrosis, is a suitable alternative to traditional surgery when
surgery is impossible. The PIs plan a combined ultrasound and photoacoustic
imaging system to non-invasively assist, guide and monitor photothermal cancer
therapy. Metal nanoparticles will be developed as optically tuned photoabsorbers
to efficiently transfer light irradiation into thermal energy to the tumor.
Further, bioconjugation protocols will be designed to specifically target the
photoabsorbers to cancerous cells. Ultrasound imaging will be utilized to
identify the anatomy of the tumor while photoacoustic imaging will be used to
ensure the presence of photoabsorbers before beginning therapy. Both ultrasound
and photoacoustic imaging will be used to monitor temperature during therapy to
ensure tumor necrosis and protect the surrounding healthy tissue. Finally,
ultrasound imaging can track thermal damage in real-time during and after
therapy to ensure cancer destruction. Ultrasound-guided molecular photoacoustic
imaging and photothermal therapy will have a major impact in breast oncology.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual merits: The main objective of this proposal
is to design a prototype device for biomedical imaging based on using the
photoacoustic tomography technique and different nanomaterials as contrast
agents. The activity does carry a potential to advance our knowledge and
understanding within the photoacoustic and ultrasound imaging field as well as
nanotechnology and medicine. Nanomaterials and photoacoustic biomedical imaging
are both emerging technologies in its own field. Integrating these two
technologies in this proposed study will form an important foundation and
guidelines to design and develop a hybrid imaging/therapy system for biomedical
applications such as cancer treatments. The multi-disciplinary team consists of
experts in nanotechnology and photoacoustic biomedical imaging. The roles of
each coordinator are well defined and the collaborating mechanisms are
adequately planned. This project involves exploring original and potentially
transformative concepts of combining novel imaging strategies and advancing
potentially new cancer therapies. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts: Highly
beneficial education and training of students, postdoctoral fellows, and junior
faculties in the wide spectrum of the research areas of nanotechnology,
biomedical imaging and medicine are expected. The already established network
between UT and ASU will be strengthened and the successful outcomes of this
project may lead a strong industrial partnership between US and Egypt with high
potential. If successful, this hybrid technology may eventually bring an
important imaging/therapy tool for the cancer treatments in clinic. The activity
aims to broaden the participation of under-represented groups specifically
women. Successful outcomes could greatly improve the multi-modal imaging
techniques and would significantly advance the field. Indeed, the developed
technology will be able to identify molecular composition of cancer and
functional changes during image-guided photothermal therapy. The research will
impact the fields of cancer research and clinical oncology as the developed
methods and approaches can be applied in wide range of
applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal is supported under the US-Egypt
Joint Fund Program where NSF supports the US side and the Government of Egypt
funds the Egyptian side.