* 1103522
* PostDoctoral Research Fellowship
* SBE,SMA
* 08/01/2011,07/31/2013
* Kristin DeLucia, DeLucia                 Kristin
* Fellowship Award
* Fahmida Chowdhury
* 07/31/2013
* USD 120,000.00

The proposed archaeological research will explore variation in economic
strategies employed by commoner households in order to better understand and
characterize the emergence of larger-scale economic and social systems in
Early/Middle Postclassic (A.D.900-1350) central Mexico. The goal of this
research is to examine variation in household economic activities and social
interactions under varying political and economic conditions in order to better
understand household decision-making strategies and the influence of those
strategies on regional change and development. The Fellow (PI) asks the
following questions: What makes some households more successful than others? Do
households seek to minimize risk or maximize production yields? Do households
act as unified entities with harmonious goals, or are they political arenas
characterized by internal power struggles? How do differences in household
economic strategies influence social interaction and gender roles at the
domestic and regional levels? To address these questions the PI takes a
comparative perspective, contrasting households at the prominent city-state of
Cerro Portezuelo, with the rising city-state center at Xaltocan, and a
subordinate tribute-paying village in the northern Valley of Mexico. This
research will be carried out in three main phases: (1) library research and
archaeological survey to identify the locations of houses on the landscape, (2)
excavation of test pits to characterize variation in household production and
consumption, (3) full-scale excavation of houses to document activity areas and
social organization.

Intellectual Merit: This research highlights the importance of households,
women, and children to the development of complex societies. The household and
its domestic products are often deemed the "private" domain of women (as opposed
to "public" sphere and craft products associated with men) and, consequently,
are often dismissed by archaeologists as irrelevant to regional-level change and
development. My research argues that household economies are central to the
development of ancient economic and political systems. Methodologically, the
strength of this research is its integration of multiple lines of evidence,
including micro-artifacts, soil chemistry, and the analysis of space to document
activity patterns associated with house floors. In addition, the PI integrates
multiple methods of materials and data analysis, including Instrumental Neutron
Activation Analysis (INAA) of ceramics and ICP-AES analysis of house floors. The
goal is not simply to reconstruct where activities took place, but rather to
characterize household economies and divisions of labor. Moreover, by studying
production and consumption in conjunction, rather than as distinct processes,
this research sheds considerable light on individual household decision-making
strategies, which are essential to understanding broader economic and political
growth. By focusing on households as strategic actors in broader political and
economic events, we can gain a more comprehensive picture of change and
stability in ancient civilizations.

Broader Impacts: This research will provide undergraduates and graduate students
with opportunities to learn artifact analysis including micro-artifact and soil
chemistry analysis. In addition, this research will ultimately become a field
project that will train students in archaeological methods. These excavations
will provide educational opportunities for children and adults in Mexico through
tours of the excavations and working with local schools to develop lesson plans
based on my research. The PI will consult with the local community to find out
their interests and desires for my research and hire members of the community to
work on the project so that local people will at all times be involved in the
project, instilling an appreciation for archaeological research, preserving
cultural heritage, and fostering local group identity. Finally, this research
will be disseminated broadly through multiple venues, including papers presented
at professional meetings and articles published in peer-review journals. In
addition, to make the research results accessible to the general public, the PI
will create a project website. The PI also intends to publish data in an
electronic online database to make the results widely accessible to the academic
community.