* 1103157
* Constraining Temporal Movement of the ITCZ in the Eastern Equatorial Pacific Using Radiogenic Isotopes
* GEO,OCE
* 08/01/2011,07/31/2014
* Franco Marcantonio, Texas A&M Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Candace Major
* 07/31/2014
* USD 234,035.00

Dust levels in the atmosphere have important potential effects on climate,
including impacts on the Earth's radiative balance and on marine primary
productivity, and thus atmospheric CO2, via "fertilization" of surface waters.
Information about changes in dust provenance and flux is critical to ground
truth atmospheric circulation models, which are are used to investigate the role
that dust has on feedbacks which connect continental conditions and global
climate.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research, conducted by scientists at Texas A
&amp; M University, investigates dust provenance changes in the eastern
equatorial Pacific during the late Quaternary. The researchers will perform a
temporal study along a transect of sediment cores crossing the equator, as well
as a spatial study of modern sediments from a wide area of the eastern
equatorial Pacific, analyzing the radiogenic isotope and trace element
geochemistry of the dust fraction. In addition, they will determine radiogenic
isotope signatures of various end members samples representing the potential
dust sources to the Eastern Equatorial Pacific (China, NW South America, SW
North America, Australia, northern Africa). This paleo-provenance study will
lead to better understanding of the large-scale meridional atmospheric
circulation variability of the tropics, which in turn can shed light of past
climate forcing mechanisms. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Funding supports a PhD student
and provides opportunities for undergraduate involvement in research. Results
will be incorporated into courses taught by the lead investigator.