* 1103113
* Collaborative Research: MIP: How Responsive are Bacterial Endosymbionts to Physiological and Eological Variation in Their Ant Hosts?
* BIO,MCB
* 08/16/2010,01/31/2014
* Jennifer Wernegreen, Duke University
* Continuing Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 01/31/2014
* USD 26,491.00

Numerous organisms require vital nutrients provided by beneficial bacteria to
live, grow and reproduce. Many insects are hosts to specialized bacteria that
live only inside host cells and provide essential functions. Our current
understanding of these functions comes primarily from the sequenced genomes of
bacteria. We know what genes the bacteria have but we know very little about how
and when they are used. In this study, a mutually beneficial symbiosis between
Blochmannia bacteria and Camponotus ants will be used to examine dynamic
interactions between bacteria and their insect hosts and to learn if bacteria
are flexible enough to respond to ant needs under different conditions.
Camponotus, with over 1,000 species worldwide, offer a wide variety of diets and
natural environments. Also, Camponotus, like other ants, have different types of
adults, or castes (e.g., queens and workers) and different developmental stages
(larva, pupa, adult). This project will address the question, are Blochmannia
capable of adjusting their contributions to changing and differing needs of
their hosts? The PIs will compare bacterial gene expression patterns and cell
densities across hosts that include distinct ant species, developmental stages,
and castes, in order to clarify links between microbial functions and host
physiology. Through experiments eliminating bacteria from hosts, the PIs will
also explore the roles bacteria play in host development and the establishment
of new ant colonies. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The wide distribution and
significance of mutualistic interactions with bacterial symbionts have only been
appreciated relatively recently. This collaborative effort combines expertise in
comparative and functional genomics, host-symbiont interactions, and insect
nutritional physiology and ecology. The project interconnects these disciplines
to explore associations between microbes and animals in the natural environment.
This project will advance the bacterial-ant symbiosis as a new model system and
will develop novel experimental approaches to study specific functions of
ecologically important bacteria that grow only within hosts. Results of this
work will shed light on how microbes respond to the dynamic environment of
animal hosts and the various processes that shape host-symbiont coevolution.
This basic research will be used as a platform for curriculum development,
education spanning grade school to professional training, and community
outreach.