* 1103172
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:  Connectivity and Discontinuity in River Systems
* SBE,BCS
* 05/15/2011,10/31/2014
* Francis Magilligan, Dartmouth College
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 10/31/2014
* USD 11,995.00

The interchange of water, sediment, nutrients, pollutants and other matter is a
fundamental process of river systems that affects channel form, ecologic
integrity, and human activities. Contemporary river restoration and
rehabilitation theory calls for process-based approaches that aim to protect and
reinstate this connectivity at watershed scales. There are fundamental
unanswered questions about this connectivity, however, which hinder efforts to
understand and safeguard the physical and biological systems of rivers. In
particular, it is unclear how disturbance and the recovery from disturbance,
such as dam removal, affect connectivity and channel form; over what time and
spatial scales does this recovery occur; and what characterizes the natural
rates and dimensions of continuity and discontinuity. Recent developments in the
use of isotopes as both tracers and chronometers can be applied to quantify the
spatial and temporal aspects of connectivity and how it affects channel form,
sediment residence time and nutrient flux. In addition, large-scale river
restoration projects, such as dam removals, enable watershed-scale experiments
to test predictions on connectivity. This doctoral dissertation research project
will analyze the connectivity of riparian processes in pristine and disturbed
river systems and investigate the effects of restoration on sediment transport,
channel form and nutrient flux. The doctoral student will conduct a series of
field experiments in New England, using innovative applications of lead-210,
beryllium-7, and carbon-14 isotopes to determine residence time of instream
sediment and add a temporal dimension to a widely used metric of instream
sediment storage, V*. These same isotopes will be used in another manner in the
riparian zone to establish the flux of sediment and nutrients between
floodplains and channels. Building on recent advancements on effects of dam
emplacement on channel morphology, this project will test predictions on channel
adjustments due to dam removal, which reestablishes continuity of
sediment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will advance both basic
understanding of riverine systems and practical knowledge to guide river
restoration efforts. Reestablishing the multiple dimensions of connectivity is a
paramount goal in river restoration. This group of field experiments will
examine what controls the spatial and temporal scales of sediment continuity,
how connectivity is affected by dam emplacement and removal, and how variation
in connectivity affects river channel form and nutrient exchange. These
questions collectively typify the foremost challenges facing fluvial
geomorphology and the science of river restoration -- the delineation and
prediction of the multiple, interacting temporal and spatial scales of river
response to disturbance. The field work will be conducted in New England, which
is currently experiencing more than ten dam removals per year. In addition to
advancing basic knowledge of river restoration and river response to
disturbance, the results of this research will be leveraged by key stakeholders
and agencies to advance their ongoing studies, and it will help managers and
scientists guide restoration efforts regionally and nationally. As a Doctoral
Dissertation Research Improvement award, this award also will provide support to
enable a promising student to establish a strong independent research career.