* 1103274
* Topics in Global Behavior of Solutions to nonlinear dispersive PDE
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2011,07/31/2015
* Svetlana Roudenko, George Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Bruce P. Palka
* 07/31/2015
* USD 125,000.00

This project pursues several avenues of research in the theory of evolution
partial differential equations. The principal investigator will study global
behavior of solutions to nonlinear dispersive equations. These equations
describe the evolution of waves, in particular in situations where different
groups of waves propagate at different velocities so that waves "disperse" over
time. Typical equations are the nonlinear Schrodinger and wave equations, since
mathematically they represent the simplest nonlinear dispersive models and
physically they describe wave propagation in applications such as nonlinear
optics, hydrodynamics, plasma physics, quantum mechanics, and Bose-Einstein
condensates. The nonlinear terms in dispersive equations create complicated but
fascinating dynamics such as moving and interacting solitons, contracting or
fixed singularities, collapses, etc. The study of solutions exhibiting such
properties will be the focus of this proposal. The phenomenon of collapse is
arguably "the most" nonlinear occurrence possible in an evolution equation, so
it is, in general, very difficult to study. Recently there have been significant
analytical strides made in the understanding of singular solutions to dispersive
equations, hence it is quite timely to focus a research effort in this
direction. Thus, the thrust of the project will be to provide descriptions of
both the formation and the dynamics of singularities and to investigate the
various thresholds that separate different types of global behavior in solutions
to nonlinear dispersive equations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project studies
differential equations that describe dispersion of waves appearing in various
physical contexts: laser optics, fluid and air dynamics, and quantum and plasma
physics, to name just a few. The methods developed here can be applied to
problems not only in mathematics and physics, but also in statistics,
engineering, biology, and medicine (for example,to study phenomena as wide-
ranging as the formation of tsunamis or errant cardiac rhythms). Understanding
when and how singularities occur is important for numerical simulations and
real-time engineering applications as well. The principal investigator will
disseminate the results of this project online, through a (freely accessible)
institutional website and various free preprint servers, and she will present
the latest advances at national and international conferences. Furthermore, this
proposal includes mentoring and training activities at the highest levels of
scientific and mathematical competency. The principal investigator will organize
seminars, colloquia, undergraduate talks, and similar activities specifically
designed to instruct students on the topics of the project, as well as on the
general areas of partial differential equations and analysis. Her participation
in the summer "Research Experiences for Undergraduates" programs organized by
her home institution and nearby universities will be enhanced by this project.
In particular, she will extend and develop her mini-courses and guest lectures
at the "Summer Program for Women in Math" at her home institution in order to
encourage women to pursue careers in mathematics and science.