* 1103185
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: The Political Mapping of Palestine: Open Spaces, Open Futures Beyond the Israel-Palestinian Impasse
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2011,06/30/2013
* Altha Cravey, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Daniel Hammel
* 06/30/2013
* USD 12,000.00

Cartographic renderings of territories often bound places and fix then in space,
thereby erasing the actual interactions between people across boundaries. This
is particularly so in regions of national or territorial struggle wherein one
group may be rendered less visible than another on official maps. This project
will investigate the ways in which Palestine has been constructed
cartographically and how maps have been used and misused in working toward a
resolution of the Israeli/ Palestinian impasse. By theoretically grounding the
research in critical cartography, the production of space, and geopolitics, and
through the use of an integration of archival, ethnographic methods with
discourse analysis, the project will reconstruct the cartographic genealogy of
Palestine from the 19th century to the present, and will consider how Palestine
has become bounded and how its form has changed over time. The project will also
analyze how maps created by official entities have been used to inform political
strategies adopted by the Palestinian movement today. Another component in the
project considers the spatial practices of Palestinians in present-day everyday
life and how these 'maps' correspond or differ from the official bounding of
Palestinian space.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will contribute to
remedying deep misunderstandings about the region and conflict by considering
the ways different groups have been portrayed cartographically. This will have
policy implications. In addition to this project contributing to the scholarly
development of a graduate student, it will provide educational materials about
the cartographic dimensions of the Palestinian/ Israeli conflict to university
students at the PIs' home institution as well as Hebrew, Bethlehem and Birzeit
Universities. Results from the project will be disseminated through a book and
lectures, as well as through visual media including maps and a visually rich
multi-lingual website.