* 1103661
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology for FY 2011
* BIO,DBI
* 01/01/2012,12/31/2014
* Nyeema Harris, Harris                  Nyeema
* Fellowship Award
* Daniel Marenda
* 12/31/2014
* USD 189,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2011, Broadening Participation. The fellowship supports a research and training
plan in a host laboratory for the Fellow who also presents a plan to broaden
participation in biology. The title of the research and training plan for this
fellowship to Nyeema Harris is "Impacts of predator losses on communities in a
diverse African ecosystem." The host institution for this fellowship is
University of California, Berkeley and the sponsoring scientist is Dr. Justin
Brashares.

Local extinctions of apex predators can lead to cascading effects throughout
food chains and ecosystems. However, some communities are buffered against these
trophic cascades because species can shift their diet, behavior, or distribution
over time. Unfortunately, much of our knowledge about predator losses comes from
diminished ecosystems in North America where trophic cascades and community
compensation are difficult to detect. In contrast, many African ecosystems
support a greater assemblage of predator and prey species and offer a rich
research environment. This research uses a community viability framework to
compare the numerical and behavioral responses of species at lower trophic
levels across replicated areas with and without apex predators in West Africa.
Focal apex predators include African lions (Panthera leo), leopards (Panthera
pardus) and spotted hyena (Crocuta crocuta).

Training objectives include enhancing technical skills in occupancy and niche
modeling through the collection of data from observational surveys, stable
isotope and scat analysis, and camera trapping efforts. Understanding which
species interactions are more sensitive to changes in community composition
informs the resilience and health of ecosystems. Broader impacts include the
first estimates of distribution and density of many small mammal and
mesopredator species in Ghana, thus building local capacity for carnivore
conservation and apprising global patterns of species diversity. Collaborations
with scientists at Kwame Nkrumah University of Science and Technology and the
University of Ghana add an international dimension. A citizen science component
involves distributing disposable cameras to visitors to photograph wildlife
inside the study areas.