* 1103116
* Doctoral Dissertation  Research: Civic Engagement and Differentiated Citizenship
* SBE,SES
* 06/01/2011,05/31/2012
* Patrick Heller, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* Patricia White
* 05/31/2012
* USD 8,350.00

SES- 1103116 Patrick Heller Shruti Majumdar Brown University

Citizens' daily interactions with their government to seek access to basic
public goods are at the heart of the exercise of citizenship. Particularly for
the marginalized and poor, these interactions are necessary not only for the
enjoyment of full citizenship, but they also have serious implications for
survival. Preliminary ethnographic work in four slums in Calcutta, one of
India's most populous cities, suggests that these interactions between the state
and the poor can vary in important ways. Interactions not only vary in terms of
how the poor engage the state; some make claims by knocking directly on the
doors of public bureaucracies while others' engagement is indirect or brokered.
Interactions also differ in of self-organization; some make claims more
autonomously, while others are more dependent on the state for articulation of
their demands. This research studies this variation first, and then examines
possible explanations of these varying modes of civic engagement or degrees of
citizenship among the poor. The research questions the basic assumption of most
theories on citizenship that the urban poor are an undifferentiated mass that
engage with the state in one particular way, which is different from the
engagement of elites. The study integrates state and society centered
explanations for citizenship practices and contributes to a better understanding
of political processes, social movements and development. Broader Impacts

The research has the potential to contribute to a better understanding of
citizenship and patterns of civil participation among the urban poor. The
comparative data and lessons learnt from the interviews will be made available
to community-based organizations. Research findings will be shared with a multi-
disciplinary audience in Calcutta, through the academic contacts established at
the institute of affiliation -- Centre for the Study of Social Sciences,
Calcutta (CSSSC).