* 1103207
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Producing Urban Space and the Transformation of Informal Retailing in Delhi, India
* SBE,BCS
* 05/15/2011,10/31/2012
* Yuko Aoyama, Clark University
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 10/31/2012
* USD 11,985.00

Megacities in developing nations are undergoing rapid transformation, but extant
scholarship tends to focus on the manifestation of urban transformation rather
than the preceding interactions among multiple stakeholders that determine
precisely how and by whom urban space is used. This doctoral dissertation
research project will explore how negotiations and struggles among multiple
stakeholders produce urban space through an examination of the informal retail
sector in Delhi, India. The informal retail sector is an important source of
livelihood for Delhi's urban poor, but it is under threat from the expansion of
large retail firms as well as zoning policies that criminalize informal economic
activity. Informal retailers develop adaptation and resistance strategies in
response to these threats, engaging in complex negotiations and struggles with
multiple stakeholders, such as municipal authorities, neighborhood associations,
property development firms, and nongovernmental organizations. Through in-depth
interviews with informal retailers and key informants, the doctoral student will
compare how the struggles and negotiations among multiple stakeholders in
contemporary urban India produce diverse urban space in three unique locations
in Delhi. The three research sites represent a range of stages of formal retail
expansion, with varying power dynamics between informal retailers and other
stakeholders. By comparing three unique research sites, this project will
demonstrate how urban space is produced beyond the analysis of outcomes and
manifestations. It also will show how the urban poor create locally based
livelihood strategies in spite of globally induced pressure for urban
transformation, and it will show these strategies influence the production of
unique space in developing nations.

This project will analyze how negotiations and struggles among multiple
stakeholders influence the transformation of the urban environment. It will show
how urban development projects and zoning policies come to fruition in the
context of Delhi's informal retail sector. While urban planners, the growing
middle class, and private sector firms are seeking to create a "world-class"
city, their vision of urban development threatens the livelihoods of informal
retailers. This project will demonstrate how the adaptation and resistance
strategies employed by informal retailers to maintain their livelihoods
influence the production of urban space. It will contribute new insights
regarding the dynamics of urbanization in developing nations by analyzing the
ability of those who are seemingly disempowered to cope with threats to their
livelihoods and to exert influence on their environment. The results of this
research will contribute to policy debates on how to balance two objectives, one
to reduce the vulnerability of a large and marginalized population and another
to foster equitable economic growth and stability. As a Doctoral Dissertation
Research Improvement award, this award also will provide support to enable a
promising student to establish a strong independent research career.