* 1103199
* EAGER/Collaborative Research:  Electromagnetic Pulse Induced Cutting (EPIC) of Metallic Components
* ENG,CMMI
* 02/01/2011,01/31/2012
* Indranath Dutta, Washington State University
* Standard Grant
* Zhijian Pei
* 01/31/2012
* USD 56,000.00

The research objective of this Early Concept Grant for Exploratory Research
(EAGER) award is to demonstrate proof-of-concept of a novel manufacturing
process for cutting thin sheet and plates in a tool-less, freeformed fashion.
The process, termed Electromagnetic Pulse Induced Cutting, is based on the
controlled advance of a fine crack under combined electromagnetic and mechanical
loading. The approach will be to utilize electromagnetic forces associated with
a series of electric pulses to advance the crack front while using a mechanical
load to define the crack direction. In effect, the goal is to move a crack in a
highly controlled manner in virtually any direction on a sheet or plate.
Conceptually, the process is akin to a microsized, tool-less, electromagnetic
jigsaw with a kerf measured in microns. As part of the proposed research, the
principles of electromagnetic Lorentz force generation, localized heating at the
crack-tip due to current-crowding, and mixed mode fracture mechanics will be
combined to derive the conditions required to advance and turn the crack using a
simple experimental prototype.

If successful, the benefit to society of the research will include the emergence
of a new manufacturing process for precision-cutting of mesoscale thin sheets
and foils of brittle, hard-to-process materials. As such, the process has the
potential to serve as a new enabling technology for the nation?s manufacturing
base. In addition, this project will integrate research and education by
advancing discovery and understanding by graduate students at two American
universities.