* 1104708
* Simulation studies of ground state phases and criticality in correlated quantum matter
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2014
* Anders Sandvik, Trustees of Boston University
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 08/31/2014
* USD 375,000.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY

This award supports research and related educational activities in computational
quantum many-body physics, with a focus on collective quantum phenomena in spin
systems. Quantum spin systems are important models for describing the magnetic
properties of Mott insulators. In addition to their important role in direct
modeling of experimentally studied materials, quantum spin models can also be
used as simplified prototypical models capturing essential physics of various
many-body phenomena that are currently subjects of ongoing theoretical and
computational investigations. The main objective of this award is to gain new
generic insights into the physics of collective quantum many-body states through
unbiased computer simulations, primarily using quantum Monte Carlo methods. Of
particular interest are quantum phase transitions, phase transitions that take
place at zero temperature with associated scaling behavior also at finite
temperature, as a function of some model parameter that regulates the strength
of the quantum fluctuations in the system. The PI has devised a class of spin-
one-half lattice systems in which the standard antiferromagnetic Heisenberg
exchange interaction is supplemented by multi-spin interactions engineered to
destroy the antiferromagnetic order. This transition in two dimensions may be
associated with fractionalization of elementary excitations. Normally, the
excitations of the Neel state are spin waves carrying spin one, and in the
valence-bond-solid state there are gapped spin-one "triplon" excitations.
However, close to the phase transition, previous analytical and numerical
studies indicate that these excitations may fractionalize into spinons carrying
spin-one-half. This deconfinement of spinons has far reaching consequences both
for the theoretical description of the phase transition and for experimental
signatures of it. Spinons may play an important role in many strongly-correlated
electron systems, for example in the "strange metal" state of underdoped high-Tc
superconductors. The PI is carrying out quantum Monte Carlo studies in order to
characterize the nature of the spinons and their manifestations in physical
observables. Both pristine and disordered systems are considered. Work on novel
and improved simulation methods will be carried out as an integral part of the
award. The methods to be developed through this award are contributing to the
emerging "toolbox" of software enabling simulations of magnetic properties of
Mott insulators. These methods have broader applicability, beyond the main
scientific questions addressed, and are of interest in other fields, for example
studies of ultracold atoms in optical lattices and in quantum information
theory. Graduate students supported by this award will receive training in these
advanced methods and their applications. The PI is also actively teaching
graduate students and postdoctoral researchers at summer schools, and is also
developing on-line instructional material for learning quantum Monte Carlo
simulations and other numerical many-body techniques.

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY

This award supports research and related educational activities in computer
simulation studies of quantum spin models. These systems of interacting
microscopic magnetic moments represent electrons localized at individual atoms
or molecules in certain electrically insulating materials. Various magnetic
properties can be achieved, depending on the crystal structure and the chemical
composition of the material. The objective of the award is to carry out computer
simulation studies to aid experimental investigations carried out by other
researchers, as well as to study fundamental aspects of the model systems to
gain further insights into what kind of properties are possible to achieve in
principle. These simulations relate to existing analytical theories and
influence developing theoretical concepts. In analogy with the three common
phases of matter encountered in daily life - liquid, solid, and gas - a system
of a large number of electronic spins can also from different phases. The
possibilities are very rich, with many different phases analogous to the three
common ones. Spins can "solidify" into states in which the individual electronic
magnetic moments or pairs of moments form various regular patterns. These
patterns can "melt" at phase transitions where new liquid-like spin states
appear. Understanding these quantum phases and quantum phase transitions is very
challenging and important, both from a fundamental scientific perspective and
for ultimate technological applications involving the special properties of
electronic spins. The PI has previously developed computational methods and
devised a class of spin models in which certain magnetic quantum phase
transitions can be studied in unprecedented detail. The PI will study the nature
of the elementary excitations of spin systems close to quantum phase
transitions. An excitation can be thought of as a defect propagating as a wave
through the system. These waves carry certain amounts of magnetic moment and
normally there is a smallest unit of it. An exciting possibility with both
experimental and theoretical consequences, is that this smallest unit can split
up into two independently propagating waves. The PI is investigating these
spinons in model systems. Information gained from computer simulations will give
unique insights into the properties of these intriguing quantum entities and the
role they play in various circumstances. New and improved computational methods
will be developed to this research. These computational tools will contribute to
the software infrastructure of computational quantum physics. Graduate students
supported by the award are developing expertise in advanced simulation methods
and many-body quantum physics. The PI is also actively involved in various other
educational activities, including lecturing at international summer schools and
developing pedagogical on-line material for learning the advanced computational
techniques related to the award.