* 1104078
* Creating a Regional Workforce for Rural Manufacturing
* EHR,DUE
* 07/01/2011,06/30/2014
* James Gregson, Lewis-Clark State College
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Teles
* 06/30/2014
* USD 200,000.00

This interdisciplinary education initiative is developing and testing a model
for rural, regional workforce development that supports small rural
manufacturers and enhances their ability to be innovative and agile in the
global economy. With renewed emphasis on high tech regional economic development
planning and implementation as the road to economic diversity and regional
prosperity, the project seeks to address the struggle for rural schools to
address the technical needs of the emerging workforce and the challenges for
rural areas to retool themselves for the global economy in manufacturing. This
project is (a) creating and documenting a process for establishing and
maintaining a rural, regional workforce consortium to support technical
education and local manufacturers; (b) piloting the integration of a common
manufacturing solid modeling computer-aided-design tool into high schools which
encourages innovation and problem solving across science, technology,
engineering, and mathematics (STEM) curricula; (c) developing and testing an
active mentoring program that provides practical technical skill development in
a contextual manner that can be transferred from school to the world of work;
and (d) building career pathways related to STEM-rich technical fields. The
primary audiences to be affected are secondary school students and secondary
school teachers in six, local school districts. They are being supported by a
team of education and economic development professionals that includes the
college, the University of Idaho, Clearwater Economic Development Association,
Northwest Intermountain Manufacturers Association, Kamiah High School, and
Valley Vision.

Intellectual Merit: Students work in project-based teams on activities situated
in the local community. The project-based/problem-based student experiences are
learner-centered in that they employ engineering design principles in which
students design, build, analyze, and produce. It is delivered through secondary
career and technical education (CTE) programs with an experiential, real work
application approach to teaching and learning. Deliverables include a four day
solid modeling professional development workshop and two two-day curriculum
professional development workshops focused on using solid modeling in STEM
curricula; accredited courses for secondary educators using STEM team activities
for course projects for students; student independent electronic learning
modules developed from manufacturer project ideas; a mentoring program guide and
project activities; articulation agreements for career ladders; and
dissemination materials. Broader Impacts: This project is preparing CTE
professionals to teach STEM in rural regions where resources are scarce and
population density is lacking. Throughout the project, the model and all its
elements are being evaluated by analyzing learning effectiveness through three
test systems; improving student team work and problem solving through project
outcomes and student evaluations; and analyzing the effectiveness of educator
teams.