* 1104779
* Homological Mirror Symmetry for Calabi-Yau Hypersurfaces
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2011,05/31/2015
* Eric Zaslow, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 05/31/2015
* USD 247,000.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Award: DMS-1104779&lt;br/&gt;Principal
Investigator: Eric Zaslow&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Mirror symmetry in string theory
has, quite famously, linked&lt;br/&gt;disparate fields of mathematics. The
central theorem in the&lt;br/&gt;subject is Kontsevich's homological mirror
symmetry (HMS)&lt;br/&gt;conjecture. The principal investigator proposes to
prove this&lt;br/&gt;conjecture using his recent work with collaborators.
Connections&lt;br/&gt;between mathematical physics and topology, representation
theory,&lt;br/&gt;and combinatorics have been revealed through the PI's
research&lt;br/&gt;with Nadler and with Fang, Liu and Treumann. What emerges is
a&lt;br/&gt;language for studying mirror symmetry and other advances
in&lt;br/&gt;mathematical physics from a simple, geometric viewpoint
which&lt;br/&gt;easily lends itself to computation. This perspective
renders&lt;br/&gt;some formidable hurdles of HMS rather tractable. The PI
will,&lt;br/&gt;with collaborators and graduate students, aim to prove HMS
in&lt;br/&gt;several stages. First, by defining a category, the
Constructible&lt;br/&gt;Plumbing Model (CPM), which models the Fukaya category
of a&lt;br/&gt;Calabi-Yau manifold at its large radius limit by defining
a&lt;br/&gt;formal Lagrangian skeleton and gluing together categories
of&lt;br/&gt;constructible sheaves made from pieces of the skeleton.
Second,&lt;br/&gt;by proving that CPM is equivalent to the category of
perfect&lt;br/&gt;complexes on the mirror Calabi-Yau at its large complex
limit&lt;br/&gt;point. After these steps, a deformation-of-categories
argument&lt;br/&gt;can be made to establish a mirror map and prove
HMS.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The aim of string theory is to merge the two pillars
of modern&lt;br/&gt;physics: Einstein's theory of gravity and the quantum theory
of&lt;br/&gt;particles. Models of the universe from string theory rely on
a&lt;br/&gt;class of geometric spaces called Calabi-Yau
manifolds.&lt;br/&gt;Calculations in these models are quite formidable, but are
often&lt;br/&gt;made tractable through the phenomenon of mirror symmetry.
The&lt;br/&gt;idea of mirror symmetry is that one theory can look
totally&lt;br/&gt;different from another theory, but the two lead to the
same&lt;br/&gt;predictions. Hard calculations using one Calabi-Yau manifold
can&lt;br/&gt;become easy calculations in the completely different
"mirror"&lt;br/&gt;Calabi-Yau manifold. But to be truly useful, one must
have&lt;br/&gt;complete confidence in the equivalence, namely that
the&lt;br/&gt;calculations in the mirror theory can be trusted. This
requires&lt;br/&gt;a rigorous mathematical formulation of the model, a
rigorous&lt;br/&gt;statement of how to apply the equivalence, and a rigorous
proof&lt;br/&gt;that the equivalence is, in fact, true. The statements in
mirror&lt;br/&gt;symmetry have been made rigorous by Fields Medal laureate
Maxim&lt;br/&gt;Kontsevich. What is still lacking is a general proof
of&lt;br/&gt;Kontsevich's conjecture. The principal investigator proposes
to&lt;br/&gt;prove this conjecture in several steps, using a simple
geometric&lt;br/&gt;model which easily lends itself to calculations. The model
can&lt;br/&gt;also serve as a framework for exploring other predications
and&lt;br/&gt;phenomena of modern theoretical physics.