* 1104263
* Discover, Relate, Engage, Attract, Motivate with Interactive Technologies (DREAM-IT)
* EHR,DUE
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2015
* Patricia Frederick, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Michael Erlinger
* 08/31/2015
* USD 300,000.00

The Discover, Relate, Engage, Attract, Motivate with Interactive Technologies
(DREAM-IT) project provides awareness and increases interest in information
technology as a STEM career for high school students. The project team is
addressing the challenge of inspiring underrepresented and first generation in
college students and convincing them that a STEM degree is attainable.
Objectives include using interactive computer programming to create awareness
and interest in STEM careers, fostering a connection with Del Mar College,
familiarizing parents with college admission and financial aid opportunities and
enhancing high school teacher awareness of STEM careers. The ultimate goal is to
increase the number of students successfully completing introductory computer
programming courses. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The innovative project-based summer
camp exposes high school students to information technology. Students are
divided into digital media and computer programming teams that form the basis
for extended projects. Teams reverse roles during the second week. Programming
assignments are completed using the Scratch environment developed at MIT. The
teachers arrive three days early to learn the curriculum and technologies. They
then serve as leaders during the camp. This exposure is expected to impact
classrooms in their local communities. Ongoing activities throughout the year
are provided for students and parents to learn more about information technology
careers and Del Mar College opportunities. In total, the three camps are
expected to serve thirteen teachers and one hundred students.