* 1104530
* Nanometallicity in Si-based Amorphous Thin Films
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2011,07/31/2014
* I-Wei Chen, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Z.  Ying
* 07/31/2014
* USD 360,000.00

Abstract Technical: This project aims for the discovery of new random materials
that exhibit metal-insulator transitions when the sample size is comparable to
electron's localization length. Such materials, recently observed in perovskite
solid solutions and in SiO2 atomically dispersed with Pt, may find potential
applications for resistance switching in non-volatile memory. These materials
are solid solutions of an insulator and a metallic component. By varying the
composition and the thickness of the thin films, we will engineer a tunable
metal-insulator transition of the Anderson variety, being insulating at larger
thickness, but metallic at smaller thickness. The transition can also be
triggered by a voltage due to charge injection/removal, which alters the
localization length. Local atomic structures and metallicity will be determined
using synchrotron radiation, electron energy loss spectroscopy, and optical
spectroscopy, whereas long range metallicity and transitions will be established
using transport/dielectric measurements and atomistic simulations. Integrated
research and educational activity built around PhD education, laboratory
experience and remote laboratory access will benefit local and distant
undergraduate and graduate students, as well as high school and university
teachers. Nontechnical: The project explores fundamental material research at
the nanoscale level where the prediction of quantum physics can be directly
applied to material design with a potentially high payoff. The research is
motivated by the insatiable need for new memory materials with a smaller
footprint and a faster speed, to be used in computers and especially hand-held
digital devices. Unlike conventional approaches that focus on materials of ever
increasing perfection and purity, such as silicon single crystal, this project
turns to random materials with a high concentration of impurities. If the
project is successful, it will open a new avenue of technological opportunities.
An education plan is integrated with the research: it emphasizes integration of
instruction learning and laboratory learning, for both local and distant
undergraduate and graduate students who, via on-line access, will gain
laboratory experience.