* 1104642
* Measurements of Total Water on the Gulfstream-V for Deep Convective Clouds and Chemistry (DC3)
* GEO,AGS
* 01/01/2012,12/31/2016
* Darin Toohey, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* Nicholas Anderson
* 12/31/2016
* USD 374,112.00

Combined influences of water vapor, ozone, aerosols and cirrus clouds in the
upper-troposphere/lower-stratosphere (UTLS) region serve to strongly modulate
radiative forcing of the earth's climate system. The composition of this region
is affected not only by chemical processes, but also by dynamical ones such as
cross-tropopause exchange and convective transports originating near the earth's
surface. The Deep Convective Clouds and Chemistry (DC3) field campaign, to be
conducted May-June 2012, will support study of the contrasting impacts of
continental midlatitude thunderstorm systems on UTLS composition and chemistry
within three regions (viz. northeastern Colorado, western Oklahoma and Texas,
and northern Alabama) characterized by differing background chemistry and
characteristic storm behavior. This award will support adaptation of an existing
tunable diode laser-based instrument, the University of Colorado closed-path
laser hygrometer, to make measurements of total water (from which condensed
liquid and ice water contents may be derived) aboard the NSF/NCAR GV research
aircraft during DC3. A new inlet specific to the selected sampling location
aboard the GV will be designed and built in collaboration with a consultant from
Embry-Riddle Aeronautical University to enable accurate sampling of a wide range
of cloud particle sizes (10-400 micrometers).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
intellectual merit of this research rests on provision of precise and accurate
measurements of total water at high spatial resolution within the upper reaches
of midlatitude convective cloud systems, which will in-turn allow investigators
to describe differing transport properties of shear-driven vs. airmass-type
thunderstorms, their attendant evolving microphysical properties over cloud
lifecycles, and how anvil radiative environments differ from region to region
and with time during the interval 12-48 hours after cessation of active
convection. Broader impacts will include graduate student training and public
outreach, but will ultimately extend to improved understanding of controls on
atmospheric ozone and associated links to climate assessment and policy
formulation.