* 1104468
* CONFERENCE: 2011 CSHL Conference on Eukaryotic DNA Replication &amp; Genome Maintenance to be held September 1-5, 2011 at Cold Spring Harbor, NY
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2011,07/31/2012
* David Stewart, Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory
* Standard Grant
* Karen Cone
* 07/31/2012
* USD 7,000.00

Intellectual Merit &lt;br/&gt;The 2011 Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Conference
(CSHL) on Eukaryotic DNA Replication and Genome Maintenance will be held
September 1-5, 2011 at the Cold Spring Harbor Lab in Cold Spring Harbor, NY. The
meeting has been held every second year since September 1987. This meeting is
the only regularly occurring meeting that is exclusively focused on eukaryotic
DNA replication. The specific aims for the 2011 meeting include: 1) promote
collaboration and bring together scientists interested in all areas of
eukaryotic DNA replication and genome surveillance and maintenance, 2) foster
discussion for participants in new areas in the field; and 3) provide attendees
an opportunity to present data. The meeting will include eight plenary sessions,
with each presentation being fifteen minutes long. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts &lt;br/&gt;CSHL has an established record of ensuring there is a balance
of young scientists and established scientists. Young scientists are encouraged
to present at the meetings. In addition, CSHL seeks to ensure underrepresented
groups are given equal representation at the meetings. The CSHL meetings and
programs are announced via channels that would certainly target underrepresented
groups.