* 1104820
* RUI: Monte Carlo Simulations in Exploring Non-Equilibrium Systems
* MPS,DMR
* 12/01/2011,11/30/2012
* Jiajia Dong, Hamline University
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 11/30/2012
* USD 79,986.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award made on an RUI proposal
supports research and education aimed at integrating fundamental concepts in
non-equilibrium statistical mechanics, molecular biology and population dynamics
with the practical skills of Monte Carlo simulations. Under the overarching
theme of exploring biology-inspired systems with similar underlying physics, the
projects are designed to bring students in contact with cutting edge research
topics which exhibit originality, interdisciplinary relevance to their knowledge
base and opportunities to hone their programming skills in the context of the
study of physical systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The specific projects explore:
&lt;br/&gt;1.) Protein synthesis in bacteria. During protein synthesis in
bacteria, a chain of amino acids is formed when ribosomes move along the mRNA
template, translating genetic information from the sequence to functioning
proteins. Due to the degeneracy in the genetic code, however, the same protein
can be produced by different mRNA sequences with a range of sequence-dependent
rates. This process can be studied using a lattice gas model: The totally
asymmetric simple exclusion process. The totally asymmetric simple exclusion
process is one of the paradigms in nonequilibrium statistical mechanics; it is
well suited to be introduced to undergraduate students as their first exposure
to this field. The PI plans to explore over 4000 gene sequences in E. coli and
the limits on their protein production rates first through Monte Carlo
simulations. Using analytic methods, the PI will investigate these rates by mean
field theory. The intellectual merits include but are not limited to: Insights
on the existence of non-optimal sequences; effects of quenched randomness on the
totally asymmetric simple exclusion process; and guidance to experimentalists on
"fine-tuning" mRNA sequence for optimal protein production.&lt;br/&gt;2.) Host-
parasite dynamics. Contrary to the ubiquitous applications of the predator-prey
model, the host-parasite dynamics model is less systematically explored and
fundamentally different. In a simple model, parasites conduct a random walk on a
square lattice and reproduce only when encountering a host at the same lattice
site. The parasite population is not conserved in the system. As the frequency
at which they "find" the host controls their population, the spatial and
temporal distributions of the parasites are intricately connected to that of the
host. The PI plans to study the relation between host and parasites in a
methodical manner. Preliminary simulations by one of the PI's students suggest
that elucidating a non-trivial phase transition from unstable to steady state
parasite population may be possible. The other avenues of study include a
comprehensive description on the host-parasite-like interactions and potential
applications in epidemics control.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI intends to
establish a quality research program in a primarily undergraduate institution.
This award supports eight undergraduate students and creates an ideal backdrop
for them to learn a number of subjects, including: cell biology, non-equilibrium
statistical physics, formulation of mathematical models, and high performance
computation, that are absent from traditional physics
curricula.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NON-TECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award made on an RUI proposal supports
theoretical research and education at the interface of the statistical mechanics
of systems that are far from the balance of equilibrium, molecular biology and
population dynamics while integrating the practical skills of Monte Carlo
computer simulations. Under the overarching theme of exploring biology-inspired
systems with similar underlying physics, the projects are designed to bring
students in contact with cutting edge research topics which exhibit originality,
interdisciplinary relevance to their knowledge base and opportunities to hone
their computer programming skills in the context of the study of familiar
physical systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The specific projects use the
quantitative tools of statistical physics to explore: a) the protein synthesis
process in bacteria, for example E.Coli, through a particle transport model, and
b) the host-parasite dynamics, inspired by flea infestation in household pets,
using Monte Carlo simulations and analytical approaches. Focused on examples of
microscopic and macroscopic systems in biology respectively, both projects share
a unifying theme: each involves the study of a complex system of many components
and rich features that may be illuminated by applying the tools of statistical
physics. In the process, the theory of statistical mechanics for systems far
from the balance of equilibrium is advance. Such a theory will have wide
applicability from biological systems to materials processing. The former
project is expected to provide insights into the existence of non-optimal gene
coding sequences in bacteria. The latter is intended to provide a comprehensive
description of some host-parasite-like interactions and may have potential
applications in epidemics control.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI intends to
establish a quality research program in a primarily undergraduate institution.
This award supports eight undergraduate students and creates an ideal backdrop
for them to learn a number of subjects, including: cell biology, non-equilibrium
statistical physics, formulation of mathematical models, and high performance
computation, that are absent from traditional physics curricula.