* 1104832
* Shape Restrictions, Empirical Processes, and Semiparametric Models
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2011,06/30/2015
* Jon Wellner, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 06/30/2015
* USD 366,097.00

The investigator carries out research on problems involving shape restricted
inference, empirical process methods and tools, and new theory for
semiparametric and nonparametric models. In particular, the investigator and a
University of Washington graduate student conduct research on new confidence set
procedures in the context of convex function estimation and new semiparametric
models involving shape restrictions. The investigator and a University of
Washington graduate biostatistics graduate student conduct research on improved
estimation methods for semiparametric models with two-phase designs with missing
data (by design). This research also involves development of new asymptotic
theory for a variety of complex sampling methods and multi-phase designs. Some
of the research on empirical process methods and tools is carried out jointly
with colleagues in the Netherlands. Some of the research on inference under
shape constrained estimation is carried out jointly with colleagues in France,
Switzerland, and Canada. These investigations involve nonstandard asymptotics
for maximum likelihood estimators, likelihood ratio statistics, and new
nonstandard limit distributions. Part of the proposed research involves better
understanding of bootstrap and other resampling procedures in high-dimensional
settings. The research also involves development of basic empirical process
tools and methods, and applications of these new tools and methods to
statistical problems concerning semiparametric models, shape restricted models,
and high-dimensional data. One key goal involves improved theory for empirical
likelihood and generalized empirical likelihood estimation methods. Another goal
is to understand the effect of heavier tailed distributions in high-dimensional
statistical problems. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Applications include regression
models with high-dimensional covariates, models for survival data with missing
covariate data, and non- and semi-parametric maximum likelihood estimators used
in HIV-AIDS research. The work on two-phase data dependent designs has
application to new designs with increased efficiency for clinical trials and
case-cohort sampling in epidemiology. The tools of empirical process theory
allow investigations of many problems of current interest in other areas of
statistics involving high-dimensional data and parameter spaces. The research
benefits education and human development by the training of graduate students
and the inclusion of the resulting new statistical methods in graduate level
courses for the Departments of Statistics and Biostatistics at the University of
Washington.