* 1104637
* Self-assembly and motility far from equilibrium
* MPS,DMR
* 09/15/2011,08/31/2016
* Andrea Liu, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 08/31/2016
* USD 545,000.00

Technical Summary

The Division of Materials Research and the Division of Molecular and Cellular
Biosciences contribute funds to this award. This award supports theoretical and
computational research and education to understand the physical mechanism by
which living organisms propel themselves.

Certain motile biological objects, such as the bacterium Listeria monocytogenes
and replicating chromosomes in asymmetric bacteria like Caulobacter crescentus
and Vibrio cholerae, generate their propulsion by polymerizing or depolymerizing
protein filaments. This establishes a concentration gradient in the protein so
that there are more filaments on one side of the object than the other.

A colloid that maintains an asymmetric concentration of a small solute around it
will propel itself through a fluid with a well-defined velocity. This
phenomenon, known as self-diffusiophoresis, has been exploited as a means of
propulsion of micro- or nano-swimmers. In a typical example, the concentration
gradient is controlled by an active region on the colloid that catalyzes a
chemical reaction, leading to more product and less reactant near the active
region than on the far side of the colloid. The distribution of solute around
the colloid is determined by a combination of diffusion and advection. An
interaction between the colloid and solute sets up fluid flow that ultimately
propels the particle. If the solute is small, so that its diffusion is rapid
compared to advection, it is known that only two conditions are needed to
achieve motility: the motile object must be able to maintain an asymmetric
solute distribution in steady state, and there must be a net interaction between
the solute and the object.

This award supports theoretical and computational research aimed at
understanding a new regime relevant to Listeria, Caulobacter and Vibrio, in
which the particle surface catalyzes self-assembly or disassembly rather than a
chemical reaction involving simple ions or molecules. Questions to be addressed
include: Can the mechanism of self-diffusiophoresis explain effects of
biological perturbations that have been studied experimentally? Does it suffice
to produce an asymmetric concentration profile of a solute when the solute is
large and has an effectively vanishing diffusion constant, as in the biological
examples? How does self-diffusiophoresis differ in the advection and diffusion-
dominated regimes? Might motility driven by self-assembly and disassembly of
filaments be more robust to opposing forces than motility driven by chemical
reactions involving simple solutes?

The project will train students at the interface of physics and biology to
combine biophysics and far-from-equilibrium physics, two areas that have been
identified as grand challenges for condensed matter and materials physics in the
NRC CMMP-2010 study. Students will be trained both in interdisciplinary model-
building and in computational methods, providing versatility for their entry
into the workforce.

Nontechnical Summary

The Division of Materials Research and the Division of Molecular and Cellular
Biosciences contribute funds to this award. This award supports theoretical and
computational research designed to understand how certain living organisms -
particularly bacteria or components within bacteria such as chromosomes - propel
themselves. Such organisms live in a fluid environment so they must swim.
Bacteria such as Listeria monocytogenes, responsible for listeriosis, generate
branched filaments at their rear that propel them forward so that they can
infect other cells, while chromosomes in Vibrio cholera, responsible for
cholera, disassemble protein filaments in front of them in order to move across
the cell before the cell divides. It is known that micron-sized particles that
are coated on one side with a chemical reaction enabling material such as
platinum can propel themselves through a fluid by enabling a chemical reaction
at the surface. In that case, an interaction between the product or reactant and
the particle surface drives fluid flow that ultimately propels the particles
forward. But the interplay of filament assembly and disassembly on fluid flow is
very different from that of simple chemical reactions with fluid flow. The aim
of this research is to understand the physical mechanism by which the assembly
or disassembly of filaments can drive motion, and to explore whether such
locomotion might be more robust to physical and biochemical perturbations than
the simple reaction-driven locomotion that has been studied in the materials
community.

Filament-assembly-driven propulsion is key to many immune processes in living
organisms, including how immune cells move, how cancer cells spread and how
cells migrate during wound healing. A better understanding of the physical
mechanism underlying how these cells move may be important to developing ways of
helping or hindering them. These biological realizations, which have evolved to
be remarkably robust, may also inspire better motile materials such as micro- or
nano-swimmers that can move forwards against large opposing forces and may be
useful for applications including drug delivery.

This award will prepare graduate students for rapidly evolving challenges in the
workforce by training them in model-building and computational methods at the
intersection of the physical and life sciences. The exposure to different fields
and opportunity to work directly with biologists as well as theoretical,
computational and experimental physicists will prepare them to collaborate and
communicate effectively with colleagues with very different areas of expertise.