* 1104650
* Versatility in Templated Solid-State Reactions
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2011,06/30/2014
* Leonard MacGillivray, University of Iowa
* Continuing Grant
* Michael J. Scott
* 06/30/2014
* USD 405,000.00

Technical Summary:&lt;br/&gt;The general goal of this project is to increase the
versatility of small-molecule templates in controlling chemical reactivity in
the organic solid state. With support from the Solid-State and Materials
Chemistry program in the Division of Materials Research, the research aims to
increase versatility by determining the ability of the templates to: (i) serve
as supramolecular catalysts of [2+2] photodimerizations of olefins, (ii) make
available cross-photodimerizations, and (iii) direct the construction of
paddlanes. The research is motivated by the fact that although small molecule
templates have, in recent years, provided a high level of control of bimolecular
reactivity in organic solids, there remains a need for the templates to go
beyond previous methodologies. Being able to control reactivity in the organic
solid state is attractive for applications in molecular and polymer synthesis
(e.g. products unavailable in solution, stereocontrolled reactivity), green
chemistry (e.g. solvent-free synthesis), inorganic chemistry (e.g. ligand
design), and materials science (e.g. data storage). Effects of crystal packing
have largely prevented chemists from achieving a degree of control of reactivity
in solids akin to solution. The templates circumvent the packing problem by
preorganizing olefins within supramolecular assemblies for reaction. We expect
to generalize a grinding method based on principles of mechanochemistry that
facilitates supramolecular catalysis in solids to hydrogenbond-donor and
-acceptor catalysts, as well as different molecular recognition groups. We plan
to use the templates to direct cross-photodimerizations within co-crystal solid-
solutions and ternary co-crystals. We also aim to employ templates to direct the
supramolecular construction of polyhedral molecules in the form of [23](1,3,5)-
and [24](1,2,4,5)cyclophanes, or paddlanes. The approach will take advantage of
the ability of the templates to enforce reactive alignment of multiple C=C bonds
to make available the new target molecules.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Non-Technical
Summary&lt;br/&gt;With support from the Solid-State and Materials Chemistry
program in the Division of Materials Research, the general goal of this project
is to increase the versatility of small-molecules to serve as templates to
control the reactivity of organic molecules in crystals. Being able to control
reactivity is attractive for applications in molecular and polymer synthesis
(e.g. products unavailable in solution, stereocontrolled reactivity), green
chemistry (e.g. solvent-free synthesis), inorganic chemistry (e.g. ligand
design), and materials science (e.g. data storage). The broad training
experienced by the undergraduate and graduate students, which will involve
underrepresented groups and minorities, will continue to enable the participants
to immediately enter the workforce. The proposed activities will result in a new
undergraduate laboratory at the University of Iowa that employs computational
chemistry to assess the stability of reactive supramolecular complexes derived
from the solid state. An annual "Career Day" for undergraduates will be
developed, which will integrate a "Working Weekend" workshop on X-ray
crystallography and powder diffraction developed by the PI. The PI will also
develop a website to support the Midwest Organic Solid State Chemistry Symposium
(MOSSCS), which is an annual meeting in the Midwest region of the United States
that supports undergraduate and graduate student presentations. Our proposed
laboratory experiment, along with our previously reported and recently developed
experiments on solid-state reactions, will be published and disseminated
electronically with access from the MOSSCS website. That our research
encapsulates many core principles of green chemistry (e.g catalysis, solvent-
free synthesis) means that we can use organic solid-state chemistry as a vehicle
to positively impact the perception of the role of synthetic chemistry in
society.