* 1104268
* Midwest Center for Information Technology
* EDU,DUE
* 08/01/2011,07/31/2015
* Bradley McPeak, Applied Information Management (AIM) Institute
* Continuing Grant
* David B. Campbell
* 07/31/2015
* USD 1,925,369.00

The Midwest Center for Information Technology (MCIT) builds on the
collaborations developed under previous grants to further the regional
cooperation among ten rural community colleges in Nebraska, Iowa, South Dakota,
and North Dakota in partnerships with secondary schools, four year educational
institutions and industry. Prior work emphasized the faculty. From lessons
learned, the Center now focuses on the student. A centralized virtual portal for
student participation and tracking, with direct college and employer
participation, is added to the CareerLink website supported by the Applied
Information Management Institute. The CareerLink site also facilitates more
careful tracking of IT graduates from all ten colleges. The Center educates the
entrepreneurial technicians required by small and medium sized enterprises
through the development of scenario-based learning modules that can be infused
into many technical classes and can be shared through virtualization. The Center
also builds on past work to test, refine and research the efficacy of strategies
to retain more women in IT programs and place them in IT-related positions. The
extensive evaluation determines the impact that scenario-based learning has on
student learning, retention and employability. The effectiveness of the
virtualization platform in delivering course content relative to faculty
collaboration across colleges, student performance and retention and business
engagement is evaluated. The evaluation also investigates how the technological
systems and shared evaluation increase the cooperation between the colleges.