* 1104403
* Explorations in Quantum Pseudorandomness
* MPS,PHY
* 09/15/2011,08/31/2016
* Lorenza Viola, Dartmouth College
* Standard Grant
* Alexander Cronin
* 08/31/2016
* USD 201,765.00

In analogy to the fundamental role that random numbers play in classical
information theory, random quantum states and unitary operators are a key
resource in quantum information science. Unfortunately, generating a random
unitary transformation is intractably inefficient, motivating the investigation
of a weaker notion of quantum pseudorandomness that may be achieved efficiently
while remaining practically useful. In this program, fundamental properties and
implications of quantum pseudorandomness will be explored from a mathematical,
information-theoretic, and physical standpoint, by focusing on the generation of
pseudorandomness using so-called random quantum circuits. Primary emphasis will
be placed on (i) characterizing the behavior of random circuits under more
general conditions than considered thus far; and (ii) performing a dedicated
study of the effect of implementation errors and decoherence. In doing so, the
bigger goal of understanding whether random quantum circuits may serve to model
the dynamics of generic many-body quantum systems will be kept in mind, with
anticipated connections to the field of quantum chaos.

The scientific impact of this program will be twofold. First, a substantially
improved understanding of the complexity involved in generating pseudorandom
states and operators using random quantum circuits is expected to emerge. Beside
providing a firm theoretical foundation for quantum information protocols that
presume randomness as a resource, this could eventually find application in
enhanced quantum algorithm design. Second, additional fundamental insights will
also be gained on the emergence and characterization of apparent randomness in
the properties of complex quantum systems. Intensive training on subjects at the
cross-disciplinary boundary between quantum information theory, applied
mathematics, and many-body physics will be provided to the graduate student
supported by this grant.