* 1104380
* Workshop on Averaging Methods for Multiscale Phenomena in Engineering Materials; Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania; September 2011
* ENG,CMMI
* 05/15/2011,10/31/2012
* Amit Acharya, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* george hazelrigg
* 10/31/2012
* USD 61,000.00

The objective of this workshop is to bring together international experts in
engineering, mathematics, and physics to have an open discussion on the
possibility of multiscale modeling for engineering applications, and the
potential and shortcomings of existing mathematical and physical approaches for
solving such problems. A set of talented graduate students will be invited to
these deliberations by open competition. The workshop will be held over three
days in the latter half of September, 2011. Fifteen international experts will
be invited to give lectures and participate in a panel discussion. A student
poster session will be held for which fifteen students will be selected. In
addition, ten other technical participants will be invited in the audience.
Lecturers and student participants will be provided partial financial
assistance. A Workshop reception and a banquet are planned as social
events.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The societal benefit of the proposed workshop lies
in the fact that it is driven by core engineering-application-needs, but intends
to involve pre-eminent mathematicians and physicists in a dialog with engineers
to foster a three-way cross fertilization of ideas and practical methodology to
address perhaps the most important problem of modern science and technology. The
workshop is expected to produce a basis for understanding and evaluating
multiscale modeling methodology that can serve as a common inter-disciplinary
standard for the future and lead to strong collaborations between engineers,
mathematicians, and physicists. Education of students in a non-standard but
meaningful and prestigious format will take place.