* 1104752
* Engineering Polymers for Stem-Cell-Fate Regulation and Regenerative Medicine
* MPS,DMR
* 04/01/2011,03/31/2012
* Sarah Heilshorn, Materials Research Society
* Standard Grant
* David A. Brant
* 03/31/2012
* USD 8,000.00

ID: MPS/DMR/BMAT(7623) 1104752 PI: S. Wolf/S. Heilshorn ORG: Gordon
Conf/Stanford U&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Title: Engineering Polymers for Stem-Cell-
Fate Regulation and Regenerative Medicine&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;INTELLECTUAL
MERIT: &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This proposal will support travel awards for
graduate students, post-docs, and underrepresented and junior faculty to attend
and present at a 2.5-day symposium on Engineering Polymers for Stem-Cell-Fate
Regulation and Regenerative Medicine at the Spring Materials Research Society
National Meeting in San Francisco, CA, April 25-29, 2011. The broad focus of the
symposium is to assess how the recent advances in molecular design, synthesis,
and micro and nano-scale fabrication of polymeric materials can be integrated
with stem cell biology to develop new strategies in stem cell-based therapies
and regenerative medicine. In particular, the emphasis will be placed on using
novel technologies in polymer science and engineering to control both
biochemical and biophysical signals, to regulate these signals in space and
time, and to investigate stem cell behavior and fate in such engineered
microenvironments and their implications for regenerative medicine.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;BROADER IMPACTS:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of
this symposium is to define an inclusive community of researchers with
interdisciplinary perspectives working at the intersection of polymer science,
engineering, and stem cell biology toward the goal of revolutionizing stem cell-
based therapies over the coming decade. Thus, the broader impacts of this
project are to initiate exchange of ideas and promote new multi-disciplinary
collaborations among materials scientists, life scientists, engineers, and
clinicians. The project will also enable junior scientists, including graduate
students, postdoctoral scholars, and junior faculty, particularly those in
underrepresented groups, to present their research findings and to interact with
the community of established researchers in this field. The event will also
publicize recent advances in the design and synthesis of polymeric biomaterials
and their use in both fundamental discovery-driven stem cell biology and applied
regenerative medicine therapies.