* 1104994
* Heterojunction Solar Cells Using Chemically co-doped Titania Nanotube Arrays for Simultaneous Light Absorption and Carrier Transport
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2011,03/31/2015
* Hao Zeng, SUNY at Buffalo
* Continuing Grant
* Z.  Ying
* 03/31/2015
* USD 575,360.00

Technical: This project centers on the fundamental understanding of the band gap
engineering of nanowires, the band alignment at the nanowire heterojunction, and
their effects on carrier injection and transport. The research aims to engineer
both the TiO2 band gap by co-doping and the TiO2 surface with a p-type
semiconductor heterojunction for solar cells in order to increase absorption, to
separate charge separation via control of band alignment, and to minimize
surface recombination. The research activities are at the intersection of
physics, chemistry, and engineering, involving density functional theory,
material synthesis, device fabrication, and structural and physical property
characterizations and modeling. An important project goal is to develop a
heterojunction solar cell based on chemically co-doped titania nanotube coated
with a solution processed p-type semiconductor. Nontechnical: The project
addresses basic research issues in a topical area of materials science with high
technological relevance. Energy sustainability is expected to be the main
potential benefit to the society of this research project on solar cells. The
material systems and devices developed, as well as the fundamental knowledge
gained, can be extended to other areas such as solid state lighting, chemical
sensing, and flexible electronics. The project provides interdisciplinary
training of graduate and undergraduate students.