* 1104102
* The Reinhardt and Ulam Conjectures
* MPS,DMS
* 09/15/2012,08/31/2016
* Thomas Hales, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 08/31/2016
* USD 175,000.00

In 1934, Reinhardt considered the problem of determining the shape of the
centrally symmetric convex disk in the plane whose densest packing has the
lowest density. In informal terms, if a contract requires a miser to make
payment with a tray of identical gold coins filling the tray as densely as
possible, and if the contract stipulates the coins to be convex and centrally
symmetric, then what shape of coin should the miser choose in order to part with
as little gold as possible? Reinhardt conjectured that the shape of the coin
should be a smoothed octagon. The smoothed octagon is constructed by taking a
regular octagon and clipping the corners with hyperbolic arcs. The density of
the smoothed octagon is approximately 90 per cent. Work by previous researchers
on this conjecture has tended to focus on special cases. Research of the PI
gives a general analysis of the problem. It introduces a variational problem on
the special linear group in two variables that captures the structure of the
Reinhardt conjecture. An interesting feature of this problem is that the
conjectured solution is not analytic, but only satisfies a Lipschitz condition.
A second noteworthy feature of this problem is the presence of a nonlinear
optimization problem in a finite number of variables, relating smoothed polygons
to the conjecturally optimal smoothed octagon. The PI has previously completed
many calculations related to the proof of the Reinhardt conjecture and proposes
to complete the proof of the Reinhardt conjecture.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
research will solve a conjecture made in 1934 by Reinhardt about the convex
shape in the plane whose optimal packing density is as small as possible. The
significance of this proposal is found in its broader context. Here, three
important fields of mathematical inquiry are brought to bear on a single
problem: discrete geometry, nonsmooth variational analysis, and global nonlinear
optimization. Problems concerning packings and density lie at the heart of
discrete geometry and are closely connected with problems of the same nature
that routinely arise in materials science. Variational problems and more
generally control theory are have become indispensable tools in many
disciplines, ranging from mathematical finance to robotic control. However,
research that gives an exact nonsmooth solution is relatively rare, and this
feature gives this project special interest among variational problem. This
research is also expected to further develop methods that use computers to
obtain exact global solutions to nonlinear optimization problems. Applications
of nonlinear optimization are abundant throughout science and arise naturally
whenever a best choice is sought among a system with finitely many parameters.
Methods that use computers to find exact solutions thus have the potential of
finding widespread use. Thus, by studying this particular packing problem,
mathematical tools may be further developed with promising prospects of broad
application throughout the sciences.