* 1104409
* RUI - New Statistical Methods for Modeling 3-Dimensional Rotations with Advances in the Study of Human Motion
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2011,06/30/2016
* Melissa Bingham, University of Wisconsin-La Crosse
* Standard Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 06/30/2016
* USD 121,900.00

This research project focuses on the development of statistical methodology for
3-dimensional rotation data. As skeletal mammals move, their bones rotate around
various joints, making data in the form of 3-dimensional rotations common in the
study of biomechanics and human motion. While the investigator's previous work
has made advances in modeling 3-dimensional orientations, there are many types
of statistical inference that have not yet been studied for rotation data. This
project models data from the study of human motion by developing (1) a
nonsymmetric class of distributions, (2) a median estimator, (3) nonparametric
methods, and (4) clustering methods for 3-dimensional rotations. The new
statistical inference techniques produced provide answers to open questions in
the study of biomechanics and human motion.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;As the
statistical inference methods for 3-dimensional rotation data developed through
this research project are used in the study of human motion, they will lend
solutions to scientific problems in physical therapy. Thus, this project
promotes interdisciplinary collaboration between the mathematics and physical
therapy departments at a predominantly undergraduate university. Additionally,
this project includes the mentoring of undergraduate student research
experiences, exposing students to interdisciplinary research collaboration at an
early stage in their education. While the statistical methodology developed by
this project is used primarily to answer open questions in the study of human
motion, it has the potential to impact other areas where 3-dimensional rotation
data arise, such as vectorcardiography and materials science.