* 1104294
* Student and Teacher Technology Transformation Teams (ST4)
* EDU,DUE
* 08/01/2011,07/31/2014
* Janet Brite, Maricopa County Community College District
* Standard Grant
* Keith Sverdrup
* 07/31/2014
* USD 707,017.00

The Student and Teacher Technology Transformation Teams (ST4) project is
increasing the ability of secondary STEM teachers and students to
collaboratively learn and apply STEM skills using information and communications
technology (ICT). The performing unit is the National Center for Teacher
Education (NCTE), a permanent part of the Maricopa County Community Colleges
District in Arizona. NCTE is partnering with the Maricopa Advanced Technology
Education Center (MATEC), Maricopa Center for Learning and Instruction (MCLI),
and International Society for Technology in Education (ISTE). ST4 is providing
workshops and blended, online training for secondary STEM teachers and students
in four Arizona Career and Technical Education (CTE) programs: bioscience,
engineering, information technologies, and agriscience. Teachers and "student
leaders" from these programs are receiving direct training, then implementing
the ICT tools and collaborative learning methods in their courses. The
innovative and transformative elements of this project lie in the incorporation
of ICT training, design-based learning, and student participation in teacher
professional development. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: Secondary
students are prepared for college and the workforce only if they can use the
technologies that are critical to learning, collaboration, and professional
work. Yet, schools have failed to harness the full power of ICT and pre-existing
motivation and skills many young adults possess relative to ICT. Students tend
to be less apprehensive about adopting new ICT tools than their teachers, and
many have become highly skilled in using ICT to enhance their communications,
expand their entertainment options, and increase their ability to interact
socially. In this project, these conditions are being leveraged by (1) training
students to use ICT to collaboratively learn and apply STEM knowledge and
skills, and (2) enabling students to help their teachers become more confident
and competent ICT users. The ST4 project is designed to tap these two
potentials. A research component is embedded in the project to identify pre-
existing student motivation, ICT abilities, and behaviors that can be further
leveraged to improve STEM learning. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: ST4
aims to train 40 STEM teachers and 200 "student leaders" in an extensive series
of face-to-face and online training events. The ICT tools and design-based,
collaborative learning methods are being implemented in CTE courses as an
integral part of the training, thus ultimately providing ICT training and
collaborative, team-based learning for 1,800 STEM students. ST4 impacts are
being expanded further by the delivery of training webinars to STEM teachers and
students nationwide.