* 1104386
* Computational Studies of Model Hamiltonians for Pnictides and Multiferroic Manganites
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2014
* Elbio Dagotto, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 08/31/2014
* USD 420,000.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY

This award supports computational studies on the pnictide superconductors and on
manganese-based multiferroics. The research will be based on Hubbard model
Hamiltonians for families of complex materials that require a multiorbital
formalism to properly describe their electronic properties. Simulations will be
carried out employing a combination of Hartree-Fock, Exact Diagonalization, and
Density Matrix Renormalization Group techniques, applied to models with several
3d orbitals. Phase diagrams in the space of the Hubbard repulsion U, Hund
coupling JH, and electronic density n will be constructed.

More specifically:

(i) The discovery of the Fe-based superconductors has established a new
challenge for ideas based on electronic mechanisms to explain high critical
temperature superconductivity, since two to five Fe orbitals must be
simultaneously considered for a proper theoretical description of these
compounds. The PIs will employ a variety of computational and mean-field
approximations to establish realistic couplings for these pnictides, as well as
the pairing channels that are in competition. Comparison of the theoretical
predictions against experimental results, especially those based on neutron
scattering, angle-resolved photoemission, and scanning tunneling microscopy,
will be pursued. Our results will be of value for other materials that also
require a multiorbital formalism.

(ii) The field of multiferroics has potential technological relevance and
presents the opportunity for fundamental conceptual advance. The PIs will focus
on a novel topic: the detailed analysis of two-orbital double-exchange models
for hole-doped multiferroic compounds based on manganese, particularly in the
regime of small bandwidth; recent work has unveiled the presence of several new
magnetic states that become ferroelectric via the inverse Dzyaloshinskii-Moriya
interaction. The PIs intend to carry out a detailed analysis of these new phases
and investigate the origin of their exotic properties. In addition, the PIs will
continue their study of colossal magnetoresistance effects in manganites, based
on the competition between metals and insulators, focusing on the special
characteristics of the charge/orbital/spin ordered insulator required for
colossal magnetoresistance to occur.

This research has implications beyond the particular classes of materials
studied; it will lead to an advance in understating of complex materials. This
project supports the training of graduate students who will obtain a broad
education in condensed matter and materials physics, and computational physics.
Researchers and students from Latin America will also participate in this
project, including female scientists, which will contribute to efforts to
broaden participation in science.

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY

This award supports theoretical research on fundamental aspects of condensed
matter and materials physics involving superconductors and multiferroic
materials. The PIs will focus on theoretical and computational studies of
several interesting novel materials. These include recently discovered
superconducting compounds that contain iron and exhibit superconductivity at
higher temperatures than most known superconductors, and compounds that are
simultaneously ferroelectric and magnetic, known as multiferroics. Multiferroic
materials have considerable potential for applications in information
technology. Superconductors are materials that display no resistance to the flow
of electrical charge, in contrast to ordinary metals, such as copper, which have
resistance to the flow of electricity and actually heat up when current flows. A
deeper understanding of superconductors may lead to a way to increase the
highest temperature at which they exhibit superconductivity, the critical
temperature, well above temperatures where the atomospheric gas nitrogen is a
liquid, perhaps up to temperatures as high as room temperature. This would lead
to applications in power transmission and energy savings. The PIs will use
computer simulations, models that contain essential physics and materials
details, and theory to advance understanding of the behavior of electrons in
these compounds, attempting to unveil the deep fundamental reasons for their
magnetic properties and the reason behind their superconducting behavior. The
PIs will also study multiferroic compounds; their importance resides on the
potential use of electric fields to 'flip' the magnetic orientation of bits in a
recording medium, providing a more efficient method than the use of magnetic
fields currently used to achieve this goal. In conventional magnetic materials,
an electric field would only slightly affect the magnetic properties because
their electric and magnetic behaviors are nearly decoupled. However, in
multiferroic compounds, they are strongly linked and magnetic behavior can be
controlled with an electric voltage.

This project also includes the training of PhD graduate students to enable them
to develop research abilities and intuition on the fundamental science of an
exciting class of materials. They will also learn how to use computation to
solve problems in condensed matter and materials. A close connection with young
Latin American scientists, both residing in the USA and abroad, will be
developed which is expected to contribute to an increase in the number of
Hispanic young researchers that develop an interest in physics, materials
science, and computational science.