* 1104725
* RUI: Microstructuring and Catalytic Behavior of Electrodeposited Nanoporous Alloys
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2011,05/31/2016
* Jennifer Hampton, Hope College
* Standard Grant
* Birgit Schwenzer
* 05/31/2016
* USD 134,626.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this research program is to
characterize nanoporous alloys formed by the dealloying of electrodeposited
ternary and quaternary alloys. Assistant Professor of Physics Jennifer Hampton
and a team of undergraduate students at Hope College will fabricate complex
nanoporous alloy materials using electrochemical deposition and dealloying,
characterize the dealloying process for these materials, and measure the
catalytic behavior of the resulting structures. Specifically, the work will
focus on nickel-based alloys with iron, cobalt, copper, and zinc. By
characterizing the chemical composition, morphology, and active surface area of
the materials before and after the dealloying step, they will advance the
understanding of the dealloying process, extending it to complex multi-component
alloys. Measurement of catalytic behavior using two model reactions, hydrogen
evolution and methanol oxidation, will uncover the roles played by both
composition and morphology on the reactivity of these nanoporous alloy
materials. This work is funded by the Solid State and Materials Chemistry
program of the Division of Materials Research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NON-
TECHNICAL SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Nanoporous metal structures have a
variety of interesting properties, including low density, high surface area, and
enhanced optical and catalytic behavior. Their enhanced reactivity makes them
promising materials for catalytic applications. Similarly, metal alloys often
have enhanced reactivity towards specific reactions. The focus of this research
program is to study nanoporous alloy thin films, combining the characteristics
of both porous structures and alloyed materials. Assistant Professor of Physics
Jennifer Hampton and a team of undergraduate students at Hope College will
fabricate thin film nanoporous alloys using electrochemical methods. They will
then screen the resulting samples for catalytic behavior using two model
reactions which are important for the nation's energy future- the production of
hydrogen gas from water and the oxidation of methanol as a fuel. By doing so,
they will advance the understanding of the fabrication processes for these
complex multi-component nanostructured materials and will learn how chemical
composition and structure contribute to the resulting reactivity. This
interdisciplinary research program will involve undergraduate students with
interests in physics, chemistry, and materials engineering. They will contribute
to an exciting area of research at the boundaries between the different
disciplines. This work is funded by the Solid State and Materials Chemistry
program of the Division of Materials Research.