* 1104256
* Novel Electronic Properties of Unconventional Superconductors
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2011,07/31/2015
* richard greene, University of Maryland, College Park
* Continuing Grant
* Tomasz Durakiewicz
* 07/31/2015
* USD 399,000.00

****Technical Abstract****&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will pursue
experiments to significantly advance the understanding of the origin of
superconductivity in the high-Tc cuprate superconductors and the pairing
symmetry of iron-based superconductors. The goal is to study and understand the
low-temperature normal state properties of the electron-doped high-Tc
superconductors and to use this new knowledge to impact the understanding of all
the cuprates, hole- and electron-doped. The electron-doped cuprate research will
be carried out via a variety of transport experiments in ambient magnetic field
and in fields above the upper critical field down to milliKelvin temperatures.
Some transport experiments will be done under hydrostatic pressure or strain.
The iron-based superconductor research will be attempted via phase-sensitive
Josephson tunneling experiments in a SQUID or corner junction arrangement, as
proposed in several theoretical papers. An important goal of all these
experiments is to understand the mechanism of superconductivity in these two
classes of unconventional high-Tc materials, a major unsolved problem in
condensed matter physics. A comparison of the normal state and superconducting
properties of these two systems is expected to lead to new and important
insights into the role of electronic correlations in high-Tc superconductors.
This project will support the education of one postdoctoral fellow in the
physics, materials science and measurement techniques necessary to carry out the
proposed research. From past experience, this type of research has shown itself
to be an excellent training for many scientific careers from academia to high
technology industries.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;****Non-Technical
Abstract****&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The cause of the high-temperature
superconductivity found in some copper oxide and iron-based materials is one of
the most important unsolved problems in condensed matter physics. These
materials have great potential for use in energy related technologies, such as
improved motors and electricity generation and transmission. It is crucial to
understand the mechanism of superconductivity in these materials in order to
develop the knowledge to discover new superconductors that will work at room
temperature and above. This project will pursue experiments designed to solve
this basic scientific question, and which may also help to develop useful
technology. This will be accomplished by employing advanced transport
measurement techniques, novel synthetic methods for making new materials and
improved thin-film versions of known materials, and by using national laboratory
facilities for measurements under extreme magnetic field and temperature
conditions. This project will support the education of one postdoctoral fellow
in the physics, materials science and measurement techniques necessary to carry
out the proposed research. From past experience, this type of research has shown
itself to be an excellent training for many scientific careers from academia to
high technology industries. If room temperature superconductors can be
discovered they will have a significant impact on many current technologies,
from energy to communication.