* 1104755
* Photophysics of Mid-Infrared Colloidal Quantum Dots
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2015
* Philippe Guyot-Sionnest, University of Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Z.  Ying
* 08/31/2015
* USD 360,000.00

This project is co-funded by the Electronic and Photonic Materials (EPM) and
Condensed Matter Physics (CMP) Programs in the Division of Materials Research
(DMR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical: This project is on synthesis,
spectroscopy and dynamic studies of colloidal quantum dots and represents a
comprehensive effort to evaluate the photophysics of colloidal dots in the mid-
infrared spectral range from 3 to 10 micrometers. The research uses quantum
confinement to create mid-infrared electronic transitions. The materials are the
semimetal HgTe and the wide band gap semiconductors Cd(Te, Se, S). HgTe becomes
a tunable mid-infrared gap semiconductor at small sizes while the Cd(Te, Se, S)
colloidal dots have strong intraband transitions in this mid-infrared spectral
range. The effects of confinement on energy relaxation, thermal properties, and
low- and high-excitation levels are investigated by using picosecond mid-
infrared time-resolved laser spectroscopy. Ligands on the colloidal dots
introduce coupling of the infrared electronic excitations to molecular
vibrations. Processing is developed to eliminate or reduce the effect of organic
ligands, which will allow slower phonon relaxation and Auger processes,
facilitating photodetection and lasing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Non-Technical: The
project addresses basic research issues in a topical area of materials research,
with potential technological impacts. Success of the research will expand our
fundamental understanding of the infrared properties of colloidal quantum dots
in a spectral range from 3 to 10 micrometers. Potential applications of these
quantum dots include infrared photodetector and lasers. Infrared detection is
useful for thermal imaging and molecular detection. Infrared lasers are useful
for spectral analysis of atmospheric contaminants and telecommunications. In
this project, graduate and undergraduate students are trained in an
interdisciplinary environment that combines materials science, physics, and
chemistry.