* 1104424
* A Quantum Hybrid System for Linking Rydberg Atom Quantum Gates
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2015
* James Shaffer, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Alexander Cronin
* 08/31/2015
* USD 470,000.00

There has been significant progress constructing neutral atom quantum gates
based on Rydberg atoms over the last year. These quantum gates are good
candidates for building a scalable quantum computer because they possess the
distinct advantage that the atomic ground states, where quantum information is
stored, are weakly interacting while the Rydberg states, where gate operations
are performed, are strongly interacting. These features make Rydberg atom
quantum gates relatively immune to environmental noise and therefore show great
promise as scalable systems for quantum devices. Theoretically, Rydberg atom
ensembles can also be made to behave collectively as 'superatoms' using Rydberg
atom dipole blockade to make Rydberg atom neutral quantum gates even more
robust. One important element necessary to make Rydberg atom quantum gates
useful and scalable is a way to transfer information between gates via the
electromagnetic field. Our research focuses on developing this piece of the
Rydberg atom quantum computation toolbox. We are investigating a new type of
quantum hybrid system that can be used to transfer quantum information between 2
distinct clouds of Rydberg atoms. Rydberg atoms can interact strongly with
surface polaritons and the surface polaritons can be used to transfer
information between 2 distinct points in space. Surface polaritons are mixtures
of crystal vibrations and light that can propagate along the surface of a
dielectric solid, such as quartz.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt; The project will
support 2 graduate students who will complete the work described. The research
program will also enable undergraduate students to participate through the
senior thesis and NSF-REU programs at OU. Our research group has been successful
with undergraduate research participation as demonstrated by the completion of
31 different senior theses and NSF-REU projects over the last 10 years. To help
recruit new students to and teach the students working on the project, the PI
will include topics relevant to this research in the summer course in advanced
research topics that he has taught in the past, interrupted only by a
sabbatical, to faculty, graduate students and summer undergraduate research
students, most recently at OU-Tulsa. Our work will also open, to our knowledge,
an almost unexplored atom field interaction, that which occurs between Rydberg
atoms and surface phonon polaritons. This area of research can contribute to a
better understanding of surfaces and to the development of polaritronic devices.
This is important because the frequencies spanned by polaritons are at the
interface between photonic and electronic devices. This work will also help to
develop readout schemes for other atomic based devices that can be integrated
into atom chips and interfaced to conventional electronics.