* 1104512
* Organic Superconductors and Conductors in High Magnetic Fields
* MPS,DMR
* 09/15/2011,08/31/2015
* Andrei Lebed, University of Arizona
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 08/31/2015
* USD 255,000.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;This award supports theoretical research and
education to study experimentally observed magnetic phenomena in quasi-one-
dimensional (TMTSF)2X (X = PF6, ClO4, etc.), (Per)2M(mnt)2 (M=Pt, Au) and quasi-
two-dimensional (ET)-, (DMET)-, and (BETS)-based organic superconductors and
conductors. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The main distinctive feature of these
materials is that they demonstrate unique physical properties in a magnetic
field. Among them are the Lebed magic angles and other Fermi liquid and non-
Fermi-liquid angular oscillations, magnetic field-induced spin-density-wave
phases and associated three-dimensional quantum Hall
effect.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI will investigate the following
topics:&lt;br/&gt;(1) The unique features of the 3D quantum Hall Effect in the
field induced spin density wave and charge density wave phases, including
experimentally observed fractional quantum magnetic oscillations of the 3D
quantum Hall effect in (TMTSF)2ClO4;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;(2) The unusual
properties of a novel "super-crystalline" phase proposed by the PI. The PI aims
to explain the recently observed field induced charge density wave phase
diagrams in (Per)2M(mnt)2 and alpha-(ET)2KHg(SCN)4 in terms of the super-
crystalline phase;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;(3) Fermi liquid versus non-Fermi liquid
behavior with an emphasis on the recently discovered non-Fermi liquid Lebed
magic angles in Nernst and Hall effects in (TMTSF)2X materials and non-linear
Lebed magic angles phenomena;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;(4) Explanation of the
triplet-singlet controversy in the experimental properties of (TMTSF)2X
superconductors;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;(5) The reentrant superconducting phase
and the traditional and novel Larkin- Ovchinnikov-Fulde-Ferell phases, observed
in (TMTSF)-, (ET)-, and (BETS)-based superconductors;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;(6)
The singlet-triplet mixing phenomenon in quasi-2D and quasi-1D
superconductors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research will be carried out in close
collaboration with experimental groups at the NYU, UCLA, Boston College,
Tallahassee and Los-Alamos branches of the National High Magnetic Field
Laboratory, Clark University, and investigators in Japan and Germany with an
emphasis on physical properties of real materials. This research may have impact
more broadly on condensed matter physics, such as in the area of high
temperature superconductivity and the search for new superconducting materials
with higher transition temperatures. This project provides a research
environment to train one full-time graduate student and one part-time
undergraduate student in scientifically and technologically vital areas of
materials physics such as superconductivity, correlated electrons, and
computational physics. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NON-TECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;This award supports theoretical research and education to
study experimentally observed magnetic phenomena in a class of organic materials
where the quantum states of electrons are restricted to one or two dimensions by
virtue of the properties of the molecular building blocks from which they are
made and the way they assemble themselves to form solid materials. These
materials are rich with new phenomena and states of matter that emerge when a
magnetic field is applied to them. Among these states of matter that appear in a
magnetic field is one where the density of electronic charge varies in a
periodic way that is superimposed on the normal distribution of electronic
charge in a crystal. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI will use theoretical methods
to predict new and explain experimentally discovered phenomena and states of
electronic matter that arise in these materials in an applied magnetic field.
The theoretical effort here is directly relevant to ongoing experimental efforts
and will aid in the understanding of these very complicated materials. For
example, the PI plans to study the possibility that a novel kind of mixed
superconductivity proposed by the PI may explain unusual properties of
superconducting states observed in particular quasi-one dimensional organic
metals. Superconductivity is a cooperative state of electrons which can conduct
electricity without the losses that degrade electric currents in, for example a
copper wire, causing it to heat up. The PI plans to explore other possible
superconducting states that may explain puzzles in these materials. The PI plans
to carry out research in 5 additional areas that cut across the richness of
phenomena and states of matter that occur from the interplay of an applied
magnetic field and the one- or two-dimensional nature of these
materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will be carried out in close
collaboration with experimental groups at various laboratories and universities
in the United States, Europe and Japan with an emphasis on advancing
understanding of real materials. This research may have impact more broadly on
condensed matter physics, such as in the area of high temperature
superconductivity and the search for new superconducting materials with higher
transition temperatures. This research contributes to the intellectual
foundations of new electronic device and information technologies. This project
provides a rich research environment to train one full-time graduate student and
one part-time undergraduate student in scientifically and technologically vital
areas of materials physics such as superconductivity, correlated electrons, and
computational physics.