* 1104298
* Operations, Construction and Architecture Technical Education (OCATE) Professional Development
* EHR,DUE
* 09/15/2011,08/31/2015
* Todd Sanders, Portland Community College
* Continuing Grant
* Yvette Weatherton
* 08/31/2015
* USD 1,115,315.00

The High Performance Design, Build and Operations (HP-DBO) project is to supply
regional building related industries with workers who are skilled in sustainable
development particularly for the conditions in the Pacific Northwest. The
project builds on previous activities to provide professional development to
faculty and teachers in fields such as architectural drafting and design,
building construction technology, building maintenance technology, energy
management and landscape technology in the Pacific Northwest on sustainable
development. Regional businesses in these fields have already identified the
need for workers educated in sustainable technologies, which minimizes impact on
ecosystems and maximizes resource efficiency. The Summer Sustainability
Institutes introduce 60 instructors annually to broad concepts, theories and
issues central to sustainable design, building and operations so that they can
incorporate them into their courses. Activities to help instructors address the
needs of underrepresented minorities will be provided. Fourteen instructors
participate in funded externships with regional industry. Sustainability-related
educational materials and videos are developed and disseminated through a
website. Scholarships are provided to increase the diversity of students in the
program. An evaluation measures the extent to which the activities lead to the
goal.