* 1104790
* The Quantum-Classical Correspondence for Nonlinear Resonator Systems
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2015
* Miles Blencowe, Dartmouth College
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 08/31/2015
* USD 235,000.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY

This award supports theoretical research and education on nonlinear resonators
and the how the microscopic quantum world leads to the macroscopic classical
world of our everyday experience.

Nonlinear resonator systems can exhibit qualitative differences between their
derived quantum and classical dynamical behavior. Both the nature and extent of
these corresponding quantum-classical differences depend crucially on the
strength and type of environment and measurement probe to which the resonator
couples. Recent advances in the development of low-decoherence electronic
devices that are strongly coupled to high quality factor mechanical or
superconducting microwave resonators present an ideal opportunity to investigate
the quantum-classical correspondence for these nonlinear resonator-environment
systems. Such an investigation is relevant for understanding how the macroscopic
classical world emerges by approximation from the quantum world, as well as for
the very practical task to develop quantum-limited measurement schemes that
exploit the resonator system nonlinearities.

The PI research consists of two nonlinear resonator projects. In project one,
the PI will develop the theory for recent and planned experiments that
investigate the dynamics of a macroscopic mechanical resonator interacting
piezoelectrically with electrons tunneling through a quantum point contact that
is embedded in the resonator. In project two, the PI will develop the theory for
experiments underway that investigate the dynamics of a novel, low noise
superconducting microwave resonator scheme with embedded Josephson junction
device.

The projects will provide training for one graduate student and two
undergraduate students in the craft of theoretical physics, gaining expertise in
such areas as many body theory, mesoscopic quantum physics, nonlinear dynamics,
quantum optics, and advanced computing techniques.



NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY

This award supports theoretical research and education to study the operation of
resonators that lie precariously at the boundary of the world of quantum
mechanics that governs the behavior electrons, atoms, and molecules, and the
world of classical mechanics that we experience every day. Common examples of
mechanical resonators include a pendulum that swings or a beam that vibrates at
a characteristic frequency when plucked. To approach the quantum world, the
mechanical resonators the PI will investigate are tiny beams some 10,000 times
smaller than the width of a human hair. The PI will investigate more complex
examples of resonators involving mechanical, electrical, and optical systems
that are specially designed to probe the emergence of the classical world from
the quantum mechanical world. The research is carried out in close connection to
experiments and builds on fundamental principles of condensed matter and
materials physics to test and to advance fundamental understanding of the world.
One theme of the research is to advance our fundamental understanding of the
limitations quantum mechanics places on how accurately physical quantities can
be measured.