* 1104135
* Sustainable Studies Clean Energy Programs and Certificates
* EHR,DUE
* 07/01/2011,06/30/2015
* Kathleen Maiolatesi, Holyoke Community College
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Teles
* 06/30/2015
* USD 199,995.00

This project is a collaborative alignment of programs at secondary and
postsecondary institutions with regional industry and community-based
organizations. It is designed to provide new college and career pathways through
the implementation of a clean energy associate degree and clean energy
certificates in solar, wind, and geothermal energy. The project builds on the
current Sustainability Studies associate degree options in the Liberal Arts and
Sciences Program at the college. The new certificate programs are being
developed in response to industry requests for trained technicians in wind and
solar energy. Students who complete these certificate programs are being
prepared to enter the clean energy job market as installers of wind or solar
thermal systems as well as energy efficiency auditors. Those students who select
the Sustainability Studies Clean Energy option graduate with an A.S. degree
prepared to enter the industry as trained energy technicians. Regional industry
partners for the proposed project include the FloDesign Wind Turbine
Corporation, Beyond Green Construction, Energ√≠a LLC, Alteris Renewables,
NorthEast Solar, TerraClime Geothermal, Pioneer Valley PhotoVoltaics, and member
businesses of the Western Massachusetts Green Consortium. Articulation with area
technical high schools is being facilitated through the Career Vocational
Technical Education Linkages (formerly Tech Prep) program coordinated by the
college. Academic collaboration between the college and its higher education
partners in western Massachusetts is designed to meet growing student interest
in sustainability and clean energy courses and is responsive to a statewide need
for technical personnel in occupations related to the installation and
monitoring of clean energy systems.

Intellectual Merit: The Multidisciplinary Sustainability Studies options at the
college have evolved from NSF/NEH/FIPSE supported curricular restructuring
investments in Massachusetts community colleges. This project is allowing the
college and its academic and industry partners to create new college and career
pathways for the growing clean energy economy of the state. Within the framework
of the Sustainability Studies curriculum, students enrolled in the new technical
certificate programs (wind, solar, and geothermal) and the A.S. degree in
Sustainable Energy are integrating technical skills with liberal arts
instruction by selecting a concentration of general education coursework in
environmental science, business, communications, or social equity.

Broader Impacts: Careful 2+2+2 articulation with secondary schools and four-year
institutions is ensuring that increased numbers of better prepared students are
in the technical education pipeline. In addition, the project is emphasizing the
recruitment, retention, and graduation of underrepresented, low-income, and
first generation college students who reflect the changing K-12, college, and
workforce demographics of the region. Curricula, courses, and certificates
developed through the project are being shared across the state through the
MassGREEN initiative of the 15 Massachusetts community colleges that was
established in 2009 to develop and deliver clean energy workforce training
programs and through the educational programming of the Western Massachusetts
Green Consortium.