* 1104347
* High-Fidelity, Long-Term Coherent Memory with Bose-Einstein Condensates for Implementation of Quantum Repeater Architectures
* MPS,PHY
* 09/15/2011,08/31/2015
* Lene Hau, Harvard University
* Continuing Grant
* John D. Gillaspy
* 08/31/2015
* USD 560,000.00

In the laboratory of the PI, light pulses are stored for 1.5 seconds in a
coherent optical memory formed by a Bose-Einstein condensate. In the
experiments, a light pulse is injected into the BEC, where it is converted to a
matter imprint. Atom interactions in the condensate are manipulated with use of
magnetic fields, and the system enters a phase separating regime: much like oil
and water separate, the created matter imprint digs a hole for itself in the
host condensate. The imprint is nestled in this void and avoids collisions with
condensate atoms, thereby minimizing losses. As a result, the matter imprint can
be stored over extended time scales. The imprint is then moved to the outer tip
of the condensate where it is converted back to light, and, from this location,
the light pulse exits the condensate with minimal loss. With optimization of the
atom-trap design and optical storage mechanism, the efficiency for optical
imprinting and retrieval is being increased ten-fold, and the storage time for
the matter imprint is being extended to the one-minute regime. Such observations
represent a milestone and will allow for entanglement distribution with quantum
repeaters over distances well beyond what can be achieved with optical pulses
and direct fiber coupling. Actual construction of a prototype quantum repeater
setup is being carried out and the performance will be tested by Bell
measurements. The results have important applications for creation of long-
distance quantum networks for distributed quantum computing, teleportation, and
cryptography for secure data transfer.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project, the
extreme manipulation of light is achieved and is being utilized for powerful
optical information processing. The experiments are based on slowed and stopped
light in ultra-cold Bose-Einstein condensates. Light pulses are injected into a
condensate, where they are slowed and spatially compressed by factors of 100
millions, then extinguished and converted to matter copies. A resulting matter
copy can easily be manipulated with lasers and magnetic fields, and can be
stored over extended time scales: for seconds and even minutes. This is long
enough for light -- under normal circumstances -- to travel back and forth to
the Moon. The achieved storage times and control over the matter imprints have
important applications for creation of entangled states of light and matter and
for creation of long-distance quantum networks for quantum computing,
teleportation, and quantum cryptography for secure data transfer. The research
also continues to create tremendous interest among scientists and laymen alike.
The research is getting exposure in media and at events that target very diverse
audiences, including the Annenberg Online class on Manipulating Light, and
Chicago's Museum of Science and Industry's new permanent exhibition and
associated interactive games that are aimed at kids. The PI and her students
dedicate significant amounts of their time to convey their excitement about
science and to help educate the public about scientific research.