* 1104880
* Measurements of HOx Radical Chemistry in a Changing Forest Environment
* GEO,AGS
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2014
* Philip Stevens, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Edgerton
* 08/31/2014
* USD 446,119.00

The overall goal of this project is to measure the concentration and chemistry
of hydroxyl and hydroperoxyl radicals in a forest environment in order to
improve understanding of the influence of biogenic emissions on the complex
photochemistry of the atmosphere. Although the number of hydroxyl radical
measurements in forested environments has grown over the past few years, there
are few measurements at a single site designed to address whether these
individual measurements are representative of the overall chemistry of these
regions and whether there are still unknown interferences with the measurement
technique. The research will focus on minimizing potential interferences with
the detection of hydroxyl using laser-induced fluorescence techniques, as well
as extending the record of hydroxyl, hydroperoxyl, and hydroxyl reactivity
measurements both above and below the forest canopy at the PROPHET (Program for
Research on Oxidants: PHotochemistry, Emissions and Transport) tower site in
Northern Michigan. In addition, laboratory experiments will be conducted to
measure the rate constants of reactions of some of the oxygenated products of
various biogenic volatile organic compounds in order to improve understanding of
their oxidation mechanisms. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The inability of current
numerical models of atmospheric chemistry to explain measured concentrations of
hydroxyl and hydroperoxyl radicals in forested environments has important
implications to current issues of air quality and climate change, as it calls
into question understanding of the contribution of biogenic emissions to the
production of ozone and aerosols in the atmosphere. In addition to being a
greenhouse gas, ozone has known impacts on humans and the biosphere, while
atmospheric aerosols have also been shown to have serious health impacts in
addition to impacting solar radiation. The results of this project will help to
improve understanding of the chemistry of biogenic emissions, their impact on
ozone and aerosol formation, and how this chemistry will change with future
climate change. This project will also provide research and educational
opportunities for postdoctoral associates, graduate students and undergraduates,
including several students from underrepresented groups. At the new Teaching and
Research Preserve laboratory facility near the Indiana University Bloomington
campus, instruments will be operated for periods during the academic year as
part of a laboratory-based atmospheric chemistry curriculum for courses at both
the undergraduate and graduate levels, allowing students to participate in
obtaining and analyzing ambient measurements of hydroxyl, hydroperoxyl, ozone,
and nitrogen oxides, allowing them to experience the excitement of science
through discovery.