* 1104343
* THz Magneto-Optical Study of Topological Invariants in Dirac Materials and the GaAs 2DEG
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2011,07/31/2015
* H. Dennis Drew, University of Maryland, College Park
* Continuing Grant
* Tomasz Durakiewicz
* 07/31/2015
* USD 375,000.00

****Technical abstract****&lt;br/&gt;This program addresses the physics of
topological invariants of several condensed matter systems through measurements
of their magneto-optical response at terahertz frequencies. These include the AC
quantum Hall Effect in GaAs heterostructures and graphene and the predicted
quantized Faraday rotation in topological insulators. Topological insulators are
a predicted new quantum state of matter that are expected to have exotic
properties including a topologically protected spin polarized conducting surface
state, an intrinsic magneto-electric effect and Majorana fermions induced by the
proximity effect with a superconductor. Both graphene and topological insulators
offer potential innovations in miniaturization of electronics, multifunctional
sensor and data storage applications, energy storage, spintronics, and quantum
computing. The Hall quantization in all these systems is topologically protected
only at zero frequency. The experiments will examine the breakdown of these
topological invariants with frequency which is important to our understanding of
these important fundamental constraints. The PI has developed unique THz
polarization modulation techniques that will allow measurements of the Faraday
and Kerr rotation and circular dichroism with unprecedented sensitivity. The
program also includes the development of a systematic battery of educational
optical laboratory demonstrations and tutorials to be used for undergraduates at
the University of Maryland and in the community as a
whole.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;****Non technical abstract****&lt;br/&gt;Topology is
a branch of mathematics that studies the properties of objects that are
invariant under smooth deformations, a classic example being a doughnut
transforming into a coffee cup. As in the case of symmetries, topology has
profound implications on the behavior of physical systems. Thus the extreme
precision of the quantization of the Hall conductivity in the Quantum Hall
Effect is a consequence of the topology of the quantized electron states at the
edges of two dimensional electron systems. This effect is the basis of the
standard of electrical resistance. Similarly topological effects lead to the
existence of a conducting metallic boundary of certain insulators. Topological
invariants "protect" these metallic boundaries making them good conductors,
insensitive to defects and disorder. These topological insulators are a
predicted new quantum state of matter that has recently attracted much attention
for their predicted exotic properties. However, the topological protection in
topological insulators and quantum Hall systems is strictly valid only for the
DC properties. Because of the increasing awareness of the importance of these
topological effects in matter, it is important to understand how the topological
protection is lost at finite frequencies. This program addresses the physics of
the topological invariants of several condensed matter systems utilizing
measurements of their magneto-optical response at terahertz frequencies. The
program also includes the design and implementation of a systematic battery of
educational optical physics demonstrations and tutorials to be used to train
high school teachers and in local area K-12 schools.