* 1104470
* Symplectic Geometry and Dynamics
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2011,05/31/2015
* Helmut Hofer, Institute For Advanced Study
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 05/31/2015
* USD 210,100.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Award: DMS-1104470&lt;br/&gt;Principal
Investigator: Helmut Hofer&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The first subproject will be
concerned with the completion of&lt;br/&gt;symplectic field theory (SFT). This
is currently the most&lt;br/&gt;general and most comprehensive theory of
symplectic&lt;br/&gt;invariants. There are three ingredients to this project,
namely&lt;br/&gt;the polyfold Fredholm theory, the scale-smooth analysis and
the&lt;br/&gt;formulation of SFT as an algebraic presentation of the
solution&lt;br/&gt;count of a polyfold Fredholm problem with operations. The
second&lt;br/&gt;subproject, a by-product of the polyfold Fredholm
theory,&lt;br/&gt;attempts to construct a homology theory based on
equivalence&lt;br/&gt;classes of Fredholm problems. The resulting advantage
would be&lt;br/&gt;that transversality issues in studying nonlinear
partial&lt;br/&gt;differential equations would actually not occur explicitly.
They&lt;br/&gt;would be hidden in the (one-time) proof that the new
homology&lt;br/&gt;theory of a space would be naturally isomorphic to the
rational&lt;br/&gt;singular homology. A third subproject is concerned with
finite&lt;br/&gt;energy foliations, either in the context of area-
preserving&lt;br/&gt;disk-maps or the restricted planar three-body problem.
Finite&lt;br/&gt;energy foliations were introduced by the PI and his
collaborators&lt;br/&gt;and are an important tool in the study of the dynamics
of&lt;br/&gt;low-dimensional Hamiltonian systems. The restricted
circular&lt;br/&gt;planar three-body problem is not only interesting from a
purely&lt;br/&gt;academic viewpoint, but is also used in the orbit design
for&lt;br/&gt;scientific space missions. In certain regimes of the
Jacobi&lt;br/&gt;energy, finite energy foliations allow to reduce the dynamics
of&lt;br/&gt;the restricted three-body problem to that of the dynamics of
an&lt;br/&gt;area-preserving disk-map. Then again the same theory
facilitates&lt;br/&gt;the understanding of the long-term behavior of
iterated&lt;br/&gt;area-preserving disk maps. The project will study
the&lt;br/&gt;relationship between the theory of finite energy foliations,
a&lt;br/&gt;symplectic construction, and core dynamical systems notions
like&lt;br/&gt;entropy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;It is a surprising fact that many
physical systems evolving in&lt;br/&gt;time, allow a description as a
Hamiltonian system. Systems of&lt;br/&gt;this kind describe the flow of an
incompressible ideal fluid, the&lt;br/&gt;movement of a satellite under the
gravitational forces of&lt;br/&gt;celestial bodies, or the movement of charged
particles in a&lt;br/&gt;magnetic field. Hamiltonian systems are a very
particular class&lt;br/&gt;of dynamical systems, which can be studied not only
by the&lt;br/&gt;methods from dynamical systems theory, but also by a more
exotic&lt;br/&gt;kind of geometry called symplectic geometry. This is a
geometry&lt;br/&gt;based on the notion of area, in contrast to usual
geometries,&lt;br/&gt;which have length and distance as their
fundamental&lt;br/&gt;notions. Recent advances in this field already found
some&lt;br/&gt;practical uses. For example, this novel point of view has
been&lt;br/&gt;used in accelerator physics in algorithms controlling
and&lt;br/&gt;insuring stability of a beam of particles and called
symplectic&lt;br/&gt;tracking. It is the explicit purpose of this research
to&lt;br/&gt;integrate the approaches to Hamiltonian systems coming from
these&lt;br/&gt;two different perspectives. This should result in new
methods,&lt;br/&gt;which should make it possible to attack problems, which so
far&lt;br/&gt;seemed unreachable. For example it seems long term be feasible
to&lt;br/&gt;use the new methods to develop algorithms, which would
find&lt;br/&gt;fuel-efficient orbits for scientific space missions.
Current&lt;br/&gt;technology can verify the properties of proposed orbits
extremely&lt;br/&gt;fast. However, currently there is no good method for finding
such&lt;br/&gt;orbits. It rather compares to finding a needle in a
haystack,&lt;br/&gt;using very large amounts of computing time.