* 1104547
* Exploring Quantum Effects in Two-Dimensional Multilayered Superconductors
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2012
* Aharon Kapitulnik, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Daniele Finotello
* 08/31/2012
* USD 50,000.00

****Technical Abstract****&lt;br/&gt;Studies of the phase diagram of two-
dimensional superconductors has been intimately connected to finding new
materials. With each materials system a different set of properties is
highlighted. Over the years, NSF support enabled the optimization of a variety
of materials for studies of thin superconducting films in general and the
superconductor to insulator transition (SIT) in particular. These include
amorphous-MoGe films that allowed the discovery of "metallic phases," amorphous-
InOx films that allowed the studies of the regime of strong disorder, amorphous
TaNx that allowed for the detailed study of the Hall effect near the transition,
and amorphous- MgB2 films which in addition to the overlap in parameters with
MoGe, TaNx, and InOx, also provide a new knob in the form of controlling spin-
orbit interaction. This project explores the rich phase diagram near the
superconductor-insulator transition with emphasis on the intervening metallic
states. In particular we will concentrate on understanding of what is the true
phase diagram of two-dimensional SIT in the presence of a metallic background
(i.e. dissipation); what is the electronic microstructure of a 2D SIT system;
can we infer the various length scales from experiments such as transport, Hall
and Nernst effects, etc.; and, starting from artificial films made of orderly
metallic dots on a metal films, what is the range of validity of this approach
as we increase disorder. The proposed work is expected to shed new light on the
nature of quantum phase transitions in reduced dimensions and impact the
understanding of the material science of amorphous superconducting
films.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;****Non-Technical Abstract****&lt;br/&gt;Quantum
phase transitions continue to attract intense theoretical and experimental
interest. Such transitions -- where changing an external parameter in the
Hamiltonian induces a transition from one quantum ground state to another,
fundamentally different one -- have been invoked to understand experimental data
in many electronic systems, as well as to analyze more challenging quantum
phenomena such as the limitations of quantum computing. A paradigm for quantum
phase transitions has been the superconductor to insulator transition in two-
dimensional films. This transition is found to have a variety of realizations
depending on intrinsic properties of the materials used. Controlling the
strength of superconductivity, disorder, or dimensionality of the films will
impact the nature of the transition, which is accessed through the variation of
external parameters such as temperature and magnetic field. This award supports
a project to explore a series of unique quantum states near the superconductor
to insulator transition in amorphous films, particularly amorphous-MoGe, MgB2,
InOx and TaNx. The uniqueness of this set of systems is the ability to control
the strength of superconductivity and disorder over a very wide range of
parameters, and and in particular allow access to the poorly understood
ubiquitous metallic states that have been first identified by our group. The
program involves graduate students in this area of great interest to physics and
future applications.