* 1104426
* Nonlinear Models for Functional Data Analysis
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2011,06/30/2015
* Hans-Georg Mueller, University of California-Davis
* Continuing Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 06/30/2015
* USD 309,998.00

Nonlinear methods for Functional Data Analysis lead to flexible and versatile
statistical models, inference and analysis methods for data that include samples
of random functions. Such data accrue in the study of time-dynamic phenomena
such as electricity consumption curves or biological trajectories and also in a
large number of longitudinal studies across the sciences. Methods for functional
data analysis have been rapidly evolving over the past few years and are
increasingly viewed as essential for the analysis of time-dynamic phenomena. To
date, linear models for functional data have been relatively well investigated,
both in terms of theoretical and practical aspects, and statistical tools that
are based on these methods are available for data analysis. However, the class
of linear functional models is quite narrow and often not adequate in practical
data analysis. In contrast, relatively little is known about more general and
more flexible nonlinear approaches. This research seeks to remedy this situation
by developing a class of nonlinear functional methods. The potential value of
such models for applications is high, especially in scenarios where one observes
repeated functions in time or space, or where one wishes to study regression
relations that include functional components as predictors or responses.
Nonlinear functional methodology includes representations of samples of
trajectories by means of nonlinear components or through mixture models. These
approaches are useful for applications where random time warping plays a role,
and for the construction of quantiles in functional regression settings. The
proposed methodology and associated software provides a sensible balance between
increased flexibility and structural constraints.

The investigator and his research group develop new methods aimed at the
statistical analysis of repeatedly observed trends and trajectories. Such data
are increasingly common due to new sophisticated sensors, measurement systems
and the widening recognition that a deep understanding and interpretation of
time trends and their patterns is often key to better individual and societal
decision making. This new methodology is useful to gain insights into the
dynamics of time-dependent processes such as human growth, characteristics of
freeway traffic patterns, or the comparison of lifetables across countries and
calendar years. The proposed nonlinear approaches to such functional data lead
to improved and more compact descriptions and to better predictions of outcomes
that are related to observed time trends.