* 1104773
* Polymer self-assembly directed hybrid nanostructures: from amorphous to polycrystalline to single crystal materials
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2011,07/31/2014
* Ulrich Wiesner, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 07/31/2014
* USD 396,000.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY:

With a program on polymer self-assembly of directed hybrid nanostructures the PI
will pursue the synthesis, characterization and structure-property correlation
studies for novel classes of nanostructured amorphous, polycrystalline and
single crystal materials with expitaxial relations to their substrates.
Networked morphologies are targeted as obtained from self-assembly of ABC
triblock terpolymers used as structure directing agents for inorganic materials
including oxides, metals and semiconductors. The aim of the proposed program is
to understand the underlying fundamental chemical, thermodynamic, and kinetic
formation principles enabling generalization of results over a wider class of
materials systems. The research includes synthesis of all necessary
organic/polymer and inorganic components, characterization of assembly
structures using various scattering and electron microscopy techniques, study of
specific properties, and investigation of optoelectronic devices.
Interdisciplinarity will be a central feature of the effort. The project will
also involve extensive interactions with several researchers at Cornell and
abroad (Cambridge and Oxford Universities, UK) who have complementary expertise.

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY:

The PI proposes to study the fundamental principles for successfully
nanostructuring various materials such as oxides, metals, and semiconductors
with the help of specially designed polymers. These polymers should enable
assembly of highly complex structures. If successful, this program will have
significant impact in a broad range of areas from microelectronics to energy
conversion and storage enabled by novel ways to organize matter into
nanostructures with functionalities not previously available. The program will
promote an interdisciplinary way of teaching, training, and learning for
students at all levels. It will further involve the participation of
underrepresented groups, enhancement of the infrastructure for research and
education, and industrial outreach. The PI will work with high school teachers
in a nearby school district to promote learning and understanding related to
materials science and engineering.