* 1104372
* Resilience and Vulnerability to Climate Change: A Collaboration between NABO and LTVTP
* GEO,OPP
* 02/01/2011,01/31/2014
* Margaret Nelson, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Anna M. Kerttula
* 01/31/2014
* USD 66,185.00

Vulnerability to climate change is a pressing policy issue at local, state,
national, and global scales. Public and private organizations, policy makers,
and resource managers are concerned with how communities at these scales can
adjust to climate change and an increasingly uncertain future. With the future
inherently unknowable and policies derived from understandings based on narrow
windows of time and space, management for "long-term sustainability" is a
daunting task. Archaeology has a strong contribution to make to climate-change
policy because it investigates long sequences of social and climate change at
multiple scales. In essence, the sequences of changes in human-landscape-climate
interactions represent examples of outcomes that can help to think about the
impacts of climate change.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal requests funds to
initiate a Research Collaboration Network involving two research teams - the
North Atlantic Biocultural Organization (NABO) in the circumpolar North Atlantic
region and Long-Term Vulnerability and Transformation Project (LTVTP) in the
arid and semi-arid deserts of the southwestern US and northern Mexico. Each team
investigates the relationship between climate change and social change in
extremely different settings and over many centuries. This proposed work will
address 1) how rigidity of social systems influences adjustments to climate
change and 2) whether infrequent climate changes (outside of human memory) are
more impactful than frequent changes. The teams request funding to support
initiation of a Research Collaboration Network involving archaeologists,
modelers, climate scientists, and experts on sustainability from NABO and LTVTP,
who will synthesize archaeologically known sequences in ways that are relevant
both to archaeology and current policy. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will
address the impacts of social responses to climate change, an issue central to
contemporary policy and relevant to public and private organizations, policy
makers, and resource managers interested in promoting resilience to climate
change. The comparative work, engaging long sequences from contrasting regions
of the world, will expand knowledge beyond the short-term and the regionally
specific. Research results will synthesize resilience and vulnerability over the
long term. This synthesis will include understanding of the social processes of
rigidity and path dependence that affect human impacts on environmental
conditions and human responses to climate change. The proposed project
represents the first collaboration within the new Global Human Ecodynamics
Alliance. The archived data will provide a permanent resource of long-term
climate, social, and demographic data for a range of scientists. The research
collaborations will include a range of students, offering them a unique, cross-
regional and interdisciplinary educational experience.