* 1104212
* Cattle Feed Efficiency Data Technician Development Program
* EHR,DUE
* 10/01/2011,09/30/2013
* Marcy Ward, Colby Community College
* Standard Grant
* Herbert H. Richtol
* 09/30/2013
* USD 96,000.00

The project is designed to develop a training program for the growing field of
electronic data application in the U.S. beef industry. Colby Community College,
located in Northwest Kansas, is at the center of this large industry. The
project is the first of its kind, attracting more students to this rural
community. Graduates of the program are certified as Feed Efficiency Data
technicians. Specifically, students are trained on how to use and maintain the
GrowSafe® Feed Intake and Behavior Monitoring Systems (GrowSafe Systems Ltd.).
These systems measure efficiency based on how well cattle convert feed to pounds
of gain through digital monitoring. Beyond the training component, students
understand the basic principles of research. Students are involved in conducting
studies that demonstrate intake, behavior, and genetic parameters in cattle.

The global impacts of increased population and energy demand have forced
livestock producers to become more efficient. The project offers valuable
applied research for producers to help improve efficiency of their operations.
More importantly, students understand the impact of genetic selection on
efficiency. This unique opportunity will help them, as future technicians or
beef producers. There is a wide range of employment opportunities for graduates.
The GrowSafe® Company is growing, with systems in both research and production
settings around the world. The project introduces students to applied research,
allows them interaction with industry personnel, and helps them graduate with
skills unique and valuable to the beef industry as a whole.