* 1104229
* DeafTEC: Technological Education Center for Deaf and Hard-of-Hearing Students
* EDU,DUE
* 08/01/2011,07/31/2016
* Myra Pelz, Rochester Institute of Tech
* Continuing Grant
* Virginia Carter
* 07/31/2016
* USD 4,459,327.00

The National Technical Institute for the Deaf (NTID), one of the eight colleges
of the Rochester Institute of Technology (RIT), is developing and implementing
the ATE Center of Excellence, DeafTEC: Technological Education Center for Deaf
and Hard-of-Hearing Students. DeafTEC serves as a resource for high schools and
community colleges that educate deaf and hard-of-hearing (deaf/hh) students in
STEM-related programs and for employers hiring deaf/hh individuals. The Center
outcomes include: (1) a comprehensive website providing a clearinghouse for
information related to technical education and technician careers for deaf/hh
students, including career awareness materials, teaching strategies for
improving student access to learning, developmental math and English curricula,
and information for employers to help them provide a more accessible workplace;
and (2) a model within three targeted regions of the country, California,
Florida, and Texas, that creates partnerships among high schools, community
colleges, and industry to improve access to technological education and
employment for deaf/hh students. The goal is to successfully integrate more
deaf/hh individuals into the workplace in highly skilled technician jobs where
these individuals are currently underrepresented and
underutilized.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Center is impacting the knowledge and
attitudes of high school teachers, community college faculty, employers, and the
deaf/hh students themselves in terms of the educational and employment
opportunities and options available to these students. DeafTec is providing
professional development experiences in STEM subjects and in pedagogy that
provides greater access to learning for deaf/hh students, as well as all
students in the classroom including those with language difficulties. Finally,
it is establishing, expanding, or improving pathways for deaf/hh students to
transition from high school to college in several STEM areas.