* 1104824
* Influence of polymer structure on heterogeneity and cooperativity in segmental and fast dynamics
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2011,07/31/2014
* Alexei Sokolov, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 07/31/2014
* USD 381,254.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY:

Many unique properties of polymers and their processing are controlled by
molecular motions. Thus, understanding fundamentals of polymer dynamics is
crucial for rational design of novel materials with desired properties. This
research is focused on experimental studies of dynamic heterogeneity and
cooperativity in polymers. The main goal of the proposed research is to develop
deeper understanding of the role of chain connectivity, rigidity and inter-
molecular interactions in segmental and fast dynamics of polymers. Several
experimental techniques (neutron and light scattering and dielectric relaxation
spectroscopy) will be employed in this program to provide detailed microscopic
information on collective dynamics, heterogeneity, and cooperativity in
segmental and fast dynamics. Studies of macromolecules with different rigidity,
molecular weights, and various inter-molecular interactions will reveal the
influence of their chemical structure on relaxation phenomena and viscoelastic
properties of polymers. The project also targets the development of
phenomenological models describing heterogeneity and cooperativity in polymer
dynamics.

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY:

Understanding molecular motion in polymers is crucial for their large number of
applications -- from energy related fields (e.g. batteries, carbon
sequestration) to biomedical technologies. This project focuses on fundamental
understanding of microscopic mechanisms controlling the dynamical motions of
these polymer molecules. It will impact various fields of materials science,
physics, and biophysics, and might have implications for rational design and
synthesis of novel materials for current and future technological applications.
A significant part of the proposed program is training of specialists for future
technologies through active involvement of graduate and undergraduate students
in this research and in international collaborations, as well as through
development of graduate courses. Attention is also paid to work with
underrepresented groups and outreach to K-12 students. The proposed program
promotes active international collaborations; also collaborations with national
multi-user facilities at Oak Ridge National Laboratory and National Institute of
Standards and Technology.