* 1104367
* Preparation and Properties of Vesicles with Highly Controlled Lipid Asymmetry
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2014
* Erwin London, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Continuing Grant
* Joseph A. Akkara
* 08/31/2014
* USD 345,000.00

This award by the Biomaterials program in the Division of Materials Research to
State University of New York at Stony Brook is to investigate basic structure
and function of membranes using asymmetric lipid vesicles. Lipid asymmetry, a
difference in the lipid composition in the inner and outer layers of a
biological membrane, is a prominent and crucial property of the lipid bilayer of
many cell membranes. Artificial vesicles (liposomes) composed of lipid bilayers
are biomaterials that have proven invaluable models of biological membranes.
Using cyclodextrins, preliminary studies by the investigator indicated the
feasibility of preparing asymmetric lipid vesicles by selectively introducing
lipids into the outer monolayer of a lipid vesicle via lipid exchange. This
project will systematically study the conditions that control the extent of
lipid exchange using a wide range of lipids, and will investigate important
basic questions about membranes. Conditions that provide most efficient lipid
binding by cyclodextrins will be identified, and then conditions will be
optimized for maximal lipid exchange while maintaining asymmetry. The second
goal is to study biologically-important physical properties of vesicles that
control asymmetry and its impact on membrane structure. The first property to be
studied is coupling between the physical state of lipids in the outer and inner
leaflets as a function of lipid structure. This interleaflet coupling may
transduce signals from the outside to the inside of membranes. These experiments
are expected to distinguish between alternate hypotheses for how lipids and
proteins promote or inhibit interleaflet coupling. The second property to be
studied will be lipid transverse diffusion (lipid flip-flop) between leaflets,
and how this is impacted by lipid structure and membrane proteins. It is
important, both to define the conditions and identify proteins that can be used
while maintaining stable lipid asymmetry, and to understand what membrane
protein sequences affect transverse diffusion. This project will have a broad
impact on career development of future scientists, including minority students,
at the educational level by training both graduate and undergraduate students.
They will receive specialized training in a wide variety of biochemical
techniques used to study membrane proteins and lipid, including spectroscopic
techniques that emphasize the fluorescence and fluorescence quenching
approaches. The students will also be trained in proper conduct of scientific
studies, writing and speaking, and preparing them for careers in field of
biological/biophysical research and/or teaching. This project should allow
facile applications of the methods by other labs, with applications that have a
significant impact upon human (and animal) health, including drug delivery
applications. Nanomaterial applications in which molecular-width layers with
different chemical compositions are needed will be developed by this research
project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Living cells are surrounded by membranes composed
of membrane lipids (specialized fat molecules) and proteins. These membranes
control the uptake of nutrients into cells, and the communication between cells
and their environment. Cell membranes are very complex, consisting of thousands
of types of different proteins and lipids. Artificial membrane vesicles,
composed of small variety of membrane lipids and proteins which form an envelope
similar to a cell membrane, are important tools for understanding how membranes
function. Natural membranes have two layers of membrane-lipids and are
asymmetric, with different types of lipids in each layer, but a key limitation
in the utility of artificial membranes has been their lack of lipid asymmetry.
The recently developed method to prepare asymmetric artificial membranes by the
investigator will be studied in detail to allow it to be used with a wide
variety of different lipids and proteins. The use artificial membranes will
greatly expand the knowledge base on membranes. This project will also have a
broad impact on career development of future scientists, including minority
students. At the educational level, both graduate and undergraduate students
(including via contacts with other local institutions) will be trained in the
conduct of research, experimental principles, and the science of studying
membrane structure and function including spectroscopic techniques. These
students will also be trained in proper conduct of scientific studies,
scientific writing and speaking, and preparing them for careers in field of
scientific research and teaching.