* 1104786
* Synergistic experimental and theoretical studies of the growth and characterization of near-single crystal semiconductors on glass
* MPS,DMR
* 09/15/2011,06/30/2014
* Toh-Ming Lu, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Z.  Ying
* 06/30/2014
* USD 268,257.00

Abstract Technical: This project aims at the fundamental study of the growth of
near-single crystal Ge on non-crystalline substrates such as glass. A glass
substrate does not have a well ordered atomic lattice and therefore cannot
induce the growth of epitaxial semiconductors. A key challenge is whether it is
possible to grow a single crystal film on glass at all. In this project it is
proposed to use a biaxial CaF2 buffer layer on glass to induce an epitaxial
growth of near-single crystal Ge films. The biaxial CaF2 layer, which possesses
strong out-of-plane and in-plane texture orientations, will be grown using an
oblique angle deposition technique. The aims of the proposed research are to (a)
understand the fundamental mechanism of the heteroepitaxial growth of near-
single crystal Ge films on biaxial CaF2 buffer layer, and (b) to characterize
the structural defects and electronic properties of the epitaxial Ge films, and
(c) to understand the fundamental nature of the defects in the Ge films, in
particular, the small angle grain boundaries, using classical and quantum
mechanical atomistic methods. The expectation is that these near-single crystal
Ge films may possess superior device quality properties compared to those
polycrystalline films fabricated by conventional means on glass where the grains
are randomly oriented. The strategy proposed in this research is robust and may
stimulate more study on the growth of other semiconductors on amorphous
substrates. Nontechnical: To date, high performance semiconductor devices are
made out of single crystal semiconductor films grown on single crystal
substrates. However, single crystal substrates are too expensive for large area
applications such as display and solar cells. Most low-cost commercial large
area devices are made of either polycrystalline or amorphous semiconductors on
glass or metal substrates with less than ideal efficiency and long term
stability problems. In this project the PIs are aiming to create a near-single
crystal semiconductor films such as Ge grown on glass. The knowledge gained from
this study can aid researchers to design and functionalize textures to obtain
the desirable physical properties of thin films. It is projected that these
near-single crystal semiconductor films should possess substantially better
performance than that of the films deposited by conventional means on glass for
large area electronics applications. This interdisciplinary work, research will
be integrated with education and outreach activities. In addition to training
graduate students, students supported through the NSF-REU and Rensselaer-
sponsored URP (Undergraduate Research Participation) programs will also
participate in the research. Outreach activities will include open houses and
summer programs on campus for high school juniors/seniors. These efforts will
enhance and stimulate students' interest in pursuing science or engineering
careers.