* 1104770
* Molecular Mobility in Polycarbonate Glasses During Active Deformation
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2011,06/30/2014
* Mark Ediger, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 06/30/2014
* USD 405,000.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY:

When a polymer glass is deformed, molecular mobility in the glass can be
enhanced by many orders of magnitude even when the sample temperature does not
change appreciably. Researchers from the University of Wisconsin-Madison will
use a recently developed optical photobleaching technique to quantify changes in
molecular mobility during the deformation of polycarbonate glasses. Within the
framework of current models, changes in mobility are responsible for the non-
linear mechanical response of polymer glasses. During deformation, the position
of the system on the potential energy landscape can be altered. Understanding
these changes is the central objective of this work because it is critical for
an improved understanding of polymer glass deformation. Both constant strain-
rate and constant stress deformations will be utilized. Constant strain-rate
experiments provide controlled access to yield and thus allow changes in
molecular mobility to be observed as the system is pulled up the energy
landscape. Stress-aging experiments have been interpreted as the system being
pulled down the energy landscape; mobility measurements during stress-aging will
test this interpretation. The comparison of experimental results with
simulations and model predictions should result in an increased fundamental
understanding of glass deformation and better prediction capabilities.

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY:

Polymer glasses are widely used in our society. These materials can be seen
everyday as bulletproof glass, compact disks, safety glasses, and automobile
headlamp covers. In next generation commercial aircraft such as the Boeing 787,
the wings and fuselage will be made of polymer glass (in a composite with other
materials). For such applications, polymer glasses are used because of their
ability to deform under stress without breaking. By increasing our fundamental
understanding of polymer glass deformation, this research project at the
University of Wisconsin-Madison will likely lead to an improved ability to
predict the mechanical properties of polymer glasses. Better predictions, in
turn, will lead to further applications for these materials in areas like the
transportation sector, where lightweight materials save energy and thus
contribute to a decrease in greenhouse gas emissions. Each year, these
researchers will conduct a three-week summer enrichment course for 15 high
school students, most of whom will be from groups underrepresented in science
and engineering. For two hours each day, these researchers will provide
activities designed to increase interest in science/engineering and to develop
critical skills required for success in college.