* 1104341
* Workshop: 2011 International Conference on Noncontact Atomic Force Microscopy;   Lindau at Lake Constance, Germany; September 18-22, 2011
* ENG,CMMI
* 04/15/2011,03/31/2012
* Santiago Solares, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Clark Cooper
* 03/31/2012
* USD 10,000.00

This grant provides funding for a delegation consisting of researchers from the
University of Maryland, College Park, Purdue University and Harvard University
to attend the 2011 International Conference on Noncontact Atomic Force
Microscopy (NC-AFM) to take place in Lindau, Germany. The delegation consists
mostly of graduate students and junior researchers. Additionally, it includes
two members of the provisionally approved 2013 NC-AFM Conference Organization
Committee, who will be updating and seeking final approval from the Conference
Steering Committee on the proposed conference plan to be carried out in 2013 in
Washington D.C.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The delegation will have the opportunity to
learn from and interact with the most prominent researchers in the field of NC-
AFM, most of which reside in Europe and Japan. One of the most relevant
conference topics to be presented (by others) is the nascent field of sub-atomic
chemical force microscopy, which holds significant promise in the electronic
structure probing of nanoscale surfaces. This is particularly important for
energy-related applications, such as lithium ion diffusion tracking and enhanced
fuel cell materials. Hosting the conference in the U.S. in 2013 will enable a
large number of U.S. researchers to attend and acquire knowledge on the latest
NC-AFM techniques, which will in turn help raise the level of interest in the
U.S.