* 1104546
* Collaborative Research: Topological States and Quantum Information in Semiconductors and Cold Atom Superfluids
* MPS,PHY
* 08/15/2011,09/30/2012
* Chuanwei Zhang, Washington State University
* Standard Grant
* Ann Orel
* 09/30/2012
* USD 150,000.00

This program is for theoretical research and education for a revolutionary
recent idea for quantum computation, known as topological quantum computation
(TQC). TQC has been shown to be free of many of the serious problems facing
other more conventional means of quantum computation. Although this has been
proved as a point of principle in mathematics, suitable platforms to support TQC
are yet to be found in nature and this program addresses this issue. In the
absence of suitable natural platforms, the PIs will devise practical methods to
artificially induce the desired properties for TQC on cold atom systems and
semiconductors. They will also develop the appropriate TQC architectures on the
considered physical systems and study the fundamental limits on quantum
coherence due to thermal and disorder effects in the various TQC platforms. In
contrast to other, more "conventional" means of quantum computation, TQC is
inherently fault-tolerant and scalable. The studies performed in this program,
consisting of TQC platforms, limits on quantum coherence, and suitable
computation architectures, will result in TQC being one step closer to
experimental realization.

The program will seek to realize synthetic TQC platforms and to design
appropriate TQC architectures. A deep theoretical understanding of the
fundamental limits of quantum protection in these systems would not only pioneer
coherent control of quantum information, but would also influence the basic
strongly-correlated atomic and electronic physics in the classroom. The latter
has broader impact beyond the field of quantum computation. This research will
foster training of graduate students at both Washington State University and
Clemson University at the interface of quantum information science, atomic
physics, condensed matter physics, and numerical methods. The diverse nature of
this training will prepare the students in a multidisciplinary employment
market. This research will also help both universities update the physics
curriculum to reflect the modern trends in science and technology. Per NSF
mission of promoting science and engineering education, these integrated
research and education activities will promote the participation of
undergraduate and graduate students from the state of Washington and the EPSCoR
state of South Carolina in science and technology, and will improve the two
states' long-term infrastructure.