* 1104988
* Collaborative Research: Plug and Play Photosynthesis for RuBisCO Independent Fuels
* BIO,EF
* 03/01/2011,02/28/2014
* Ichiro Matsumura, Emory University
* Standard Grant
* Gregory W. Warr
* 02/28/2014
* USD 409,059.00

While solar bioenergy is potentially an abundant and environmentally benign
energy source, natural photosynthesis is relatively inefficient owing to slow
steps in the conversion of carbon dioxide into biomass. This project seeks to
increase energy capture by photosynthesis by diverting energy away from the
normal slow steps to potentially more efficient processes. The first major goal
of the project is to demonstrate that energy, in the form of electrical current
produced by photosynthetic organisms, can be transmitted from a photosynthetic,
energy capturing cell to an energy-storing "factory cell" via biological
nanowires (biowires). The second major goal of the proposed work is to show that
the factory cell can be engineered to use energy to produce useful fuel
compounds.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt; Broader Impacts: This project will create the
foundation for new directions in bioenergy research, with potential for dramatic
increases in the efficiency of solar energy capture and storage, while training
the next generation of scientists and engineers needed to compete in emerging
areas of bioenergy and biotechnology. The project will demonstrate that energy
can be transferred directly between cells as bio-electricity. Furthermore, the
biowire to be developed will serve as a future generic connector for
electrically connecting distinct cell types to create novel, functional
biofilms. The photosynthetic components constructed in this project will serve
as prototypes to establish a new design paradigm. In addition to these benefits,
the project will 1) provide valuable resources to catalyze other important
research projects, 2) train undergraduate and graduate students and postdoctoral
fellows in areas of technology relevant to critical national needs, 3) establish
productive international collaborations, and 4) disseminate information relevant
to basic and applied research and development in energy and biotechnology.