* 1104718
* Optical Studies of Tunneling and Coulomb Correlations in Mixed-Type Quantum Wells
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2015
* Hailin Wang, University of Oregon Eugene
* Continuing Grant
* Paul Sokol
* 08/31/2015
* USD 345,000.00

****Technical abstract****

This project will investigate electron-hole bilayers formed in semiconductor
quantum well structures, in which electrons and holes reside respectively in
wide and narrow wells separated by a thin barrier. A special feature of this
structure is that the carrier density can be controlled via optical excitations
of the narrow quantum well. Two closely related research directions will be
pursued. The first direction explores how manybody Coulomb correlations between
electrons and holes across the barrier affect carrier tunneling. The
correlation-induced tunneling will also be exploited as a new mechanism for
excitonic nonlinear optics. The second direction aims to engineer an array of
localized holes, realizing a system where two-dimensional electrons interact in
the presence of the electrostatic potential of a hole lattice. A near term goal
is to use this tunable semiconductor system to explore and possibly simulate
strongly-correlated phenomena such as Mott insulators. This project will support
the education of two graduate students in areas of both scientific and
technological importance. This training will prepare the students for careers in
academia, industry, or government.

****Non-technical abstract****

Tunneling of electrons across a barrier in a semiconductor is an interesting
quantum mechanical process and serves important roles in many electronic
devices. Tunneling is traditionally viewed as a process involving single
electrons. This project explores phenomena in semiconductor nanostructures where
tunneling processes can depend strongly on interactions or correlations between
electrons across the tunneling barrier. This correlation-induced tunneling
process will be exploited for applications such as photonic switching devices.
Effects of correlations between electrons also play important roles in
understanding a variety of fascinating physical phenomena such as high Tc
superconductors and magnetism. A second and closely related research direction
of this project is to develop a system, in which electrons in a two-dimensional
semiconductor structure interact in the presence of a periodic array of
positively-charged holes. This system can be used to vary or tailor effects of
electron correlations, serving as a platform for investigating and understanding
effects of electron correlations in condensed matter systems. This project will
primarily be carried out by two graduate students. The research activities will
provide these students solid training in areas of both scientific and
technological importance, preparing the students for careers in academia,
industry, or government.