* 1104159
* MATEC NetWorks National Resource Center II
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2015
* Linda Maier, Maricopa County Community College District
* Standard Grant
* Virginia Carter
* 08/31/2015
* USD 761,447.00

MATEC NetWorks is an Advanced Technological Education (ATE) National Resource
Center that supports teaching about semiconductors, automated manufacturing, and
electronics. In addition to faculty development opportunities, the center
provides venues for creating, sharing, and using its collection of digital
resources. These include a web site; a digital online library of classroom-ready
technology lessons and other pedagogical resources; a web seminar series; a
virtual community with forums; and a national
conference.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The center continues to provide resources to
technical and community college programs across the country and expects to
expand services with an additional focus on students and impact measures.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this effort there are four major goals for the project:
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Goal 1: Expand the contribution to and usage of the
Digital Resource Library by the technician education community. This goal is
focused on developing enhanced Digital Library resources and services.
&lt;br/&gt;Goal 2: Establish effective approaches and programs for broadly
disseminating learning material and faculty professional development. This goal
is focused on Dissemination. &lt;br/&gt;Goal 3: Accelerate the ability of the
technician education community to adapt as learner needs and technologies
change. The focus is on of technician education. &lt;br/&gt;Goal 4: Identify and
apply appropriate frameworks for evaluation. This goal is focused on the impact
of NetWorks' activities on improving student, faculty and technician learning.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: Focus on Use and Usability
&lt;br/&gt;The goals and objectives lead to the generation and acquisition of
resources and to an integrated approach to implementation of those resources.
The strategies, events, webinars, podcasts, conferences and other activities all
focus on helping the community utilize the resources and services to enhance the
content of and pedagogical approaches to STEM technician education programs and
curricula. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: Exemplary Resource Collection
Influences Teaching &amp; Learning &lt;br/&gt;NetWorks' collection of classroom-
ready technology lessons and pedagogical resources are accessed by an increasing
number of users each month. Almost all users of the searchable database report
that they incorporate NetWorks' materials directly into their teaching and
laboratory activities. NetWorks' coordination with other ATE resource centers,
ATE Central and the National Science Digital Library connects educators with an
even wider array of resources.