* 1104498
* Physics of Strong Disorder and Correlation
* MPS,DMR
* 09/15/2011,08/31/2014
* Patrick Lee, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 08/31/2014
* USD 345,000.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY This award supports theoretical work on the physics of
strongly correlated electronic systems. It is known that many important
phenomena in materials science originate from the strong repulsion between
electrons in solids. These include all of magnetism, metal-insulator transitions
and, more recently, superconductivity. A particularly exciting recent
development is the discovery of materials which are candidates for the long
sought quantum spin liquid. In these systems the electrons are localized by
correlation but their spins do not form an ordered state down to the lowest
temperature due to quantum fluctuations. Past theoretical work has predicted
that many novel phenomena may emerge at low temperatures, such as specific heat
and thermal conductivity which behave like metals in these materials which are
charge insulators. These predictions have recently been observed experimentally.
The plan is to build on the past success to achieve a deeper understanding of
this novel phenomenon. Theory will be developed which aims to explain in detail
the experimental observations and to predict new ones. It is possible that an
understanding of the quantum spin liquid will pave the way towards an
understanding of the high temperature superconductors, especially in the under
doped region, where the formation of quantum spin liquids may be the driving
force behind the many anomalous properties observed there. Theoretical work on
the high temperature superconductors will be pursued armed with new insights
gained from the studies of quantum spin liquids. Progress on these long standing
problems represent a new paradigm and will have strong impact on condensed
matter physics and materials science.

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY This award supports theoretical research and education in
condensed matter physics. The theoretical work takes it inspiration from
experimental discovery in new materials and aims to explain and predict novel
phenomena. Such novel phenomena often arise in materials where electrons are
strongly interacting with each other, and this work will focus on this rich
arena. Past examples include Nobel winning discoveries such as the fractional
quantum Hall effect and high temperature superconductivity. This research area
is particularly well suited for the training of graduate students and
postdoctoral fellows because both mathematical sophistication and an
understanding of real materials are required to make progress.