* 1104126
* Collaborative - Engineering Technology Pathways: The Food and Foodstuff Supply Chain
* EDU,DUE
* 08/15/2011,07/31/2015
* Vearl Turnpaugh, Ivy Tech Community College of Indiana
* Continuing Grant
* Tom Higgins
* 07/31/2015
* USD 415,663.00

"The Engineering Technology Pathways: Food and Foodstuff Supply Chain" project
is the first Engineering Technology program in which a community college and
major land grant research university offer articulated degrees with a
concentration in the food and foodstuff supply chain. Ivy Tech Community College
and Purdue University College of Technology recognize that the food and
foodstuff supply chain consists of industries that utilize raw material crops in
value-added markets such as feed and alternative energy production. The variety
of the supply chain is a crucial characteristic to maintaining sustainability in
commodities and processing industries. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With this project,
high school graduates have the opportunity to begin their education in this
field by earning an Associate of Science degree in Engineering Technology
(A.S.E.T.) at Ivy Tech Community College and then seamlessly transfer credits to
Purdue University in order to earn a Bachelor of Science degree in Engineering
Technology (B.S.E.T.) at Purdue's College of Technology Statewide. This
innovative educational pathway is preparing a technical workforce to address the
challenges facing both producers and manufacturers in the food and foodstuff
industry, which has an expanding but largely unfilled need. Through this
collaborative approach, Ivy Tech and Purdue students benefit from a Web-
compatible curriculum that encompasses the trans-disciplinary nature of the food
and foodstuff industry, incorporating fields such as technological innovation,
mechanical engineering technology, electrical engineering technology, food
studies, and communication.