* 1104667
* Probing the Mechanisms of Deformation Twinning in Nanocrystalline fcc Metals
* MPS,DMR
* 09/15/2011,02/28/2015
* Jagdish Narayan, North Carolina State University
* Continuing Grant
* Gary Shiflet
* 02/28/2015
* USD 360,000.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY: Nanocrystalline (nc) materials have high strength but usually
low ductility, which has been a major issue for use in structural applications.
Deformation twinning has been shown to be effective in simultaneously improving
strength and ductility, thus it is critical to understand the mechanisms of
deformation twinning so that design nc materials can be designed for superior
mechanical properties. However, there is no theoretical model to describe all of
the experimental observations on deformation twinning in nc materials, in large
part because several factors are not well understood. These include the
mechanisms governing the effects of grain size and generalized planar fault
energies (GPFEs) on the nucleation of deformation twins and stacking faults and
the effect of GPFEs on the spacing of twin boundaries. These issues constitute
the basis of the proposed research. Experiments will be done on nanocrystalline
fcc Al, Ni, and Cu films with controlled grain sizes and very narrow grain size
distributions synthesized using pulsed laser deposition. The films will be
deformed by nanoindentation, and subsequently investigated by high-resolution
transmission electron microscopy to obtain statistical information on
deformation twins and stacking faults as a function of the deformation
variables. Nanocrystalline Al, Ni and Cu samples processed by surface mechanical
attrition, which produces a range of nano-grain sizes from the sample surface to
a depth of several tens of micrometers, will also be investigated. The
fundamental mechanisms derived from these experiments will provide a basis for
future modeling that can take into account the effects of both grain size and
GPFEs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY: This project will provide
insights into the physics of nanomaterials and fundamental knowledge for guiding
the design of tough and strong nanomaterials. This is critical for industrial
applications such as medical implants, aerospace structures and energy efficient
transportation vehicles. The project addresses training of graduate and
undergraduate students at NCSU, and collaborations with NC A&amp;T State
University to attract minority students into the graduate program at NCSU. The
outreach will also involve the annual ASM Materials Camp for High-School seniors
and a new Science Saturday Program for high-school and middle school students.
These students will be exposed to recent developments in new materials,
nanoscale experimental techniques, and correlations with materials properties.
The PIs have an established record of research collaboration and supervision of
graduate and undergraduate students from NC A&amp;T (a minority institution).
The PIs teach a series of courses, through distance education, to students from
this minority institution.