* 1104121
* VIII Glion Colloquium: Global Sustainability and the Role of Universities
* O/D,OISE
* 04/01/2011,03/31/2013
* James Duderstadt, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* John Tsapogas
* 03/31/2013
* USD 98,882.00

The research proposes to generate knowledge that will allow us to better
understand the roles that can be played by the world?s research universities in
addressing the various elements of global sustainability (e.g., global climate
change and environmental impact, global health and disease, the increasing
fragility of economic markets, and rapidly changing demographics). Of particular
interest will be discussions of how the imperatives of global sustainability are
driving change in higher education around the world. This will include
considerations not only of how research universities are adapting to the
imperatives of global sustainability (e.g., social diversity, resource
management, academic programs, research and scholarship), but also how they can
develop new curricula, student experiences, research paradigms, social
engagement and international alliances to better address the challenges of
global sustainability, while producing globally identified citizens. The
Colloquium will also consider a discussion of longer-term possibilities that
might pose even greater threats to global sustainability and how universities
could prepare graduates for such eventualities. The proposal intends to do this
by bringing US participants to the VIII Glion Colloquium. This meeting intends
to raise the awareness and understanding of university leaders of the essential
role their institutions must play in addressing global
sustainability?particularly in the developing world?and to provide assistance in
developing appropriate strategies. The unusually broad distribution of
publications (papers, books, and digital assets provided through the Glion
website (http://www.glion.org) resulting from the papers, discussion, and
conclusions of the Colloquium will convey to a global audience both the urgency
and guidance in deploying the considerable intellectual assets of the world?s
leading universities to address the greatest challenge facing humankind. Funding
for this award is provided by NSF's Office of International Science and
Engineering, NSF's Directorate for Education and Human Resources, and NSF's
Directorate for Geosciences.