* 1104106
* Program Development in Cybersecurity with Focus on Business and Healthcare Concepts
* EDU,DUE
* 09/15/2011,08/31/2016
* Martha Austin, River Valley Community College
* Standard Grant
* R. Corby Hovis
* 08/31/2016
* USD 451,294.00

This project is a collaboration between River Valley Community College and the
Institute for Information Infrastructure Protection (I3P), a consortium managed
by Dartmouth College. The goals of the project are:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;* to
transfer the expertise of the I3P consortium by integrating content in
information assurance (IA) and business skills into existing community college
information technology (IT) curricula;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;* to increase the
capacity of New Hampshire's community colleges to provide education in IA
through faculty professional development; and&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;* to develop
a certificate in IA and an Associate of Science degree in IA, both of which give
students the knowledge and skills needed to ensure the security of the IT
systems used by local healthcare providers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As the
foundation for the IA curriculum, the investigators are adapting courses from
the Cyber Security Education Consortium (CSEC), an Advanced Technological
Education (ATE) center of excellence in cybersecurity education, as well as from
other ATE centers. With the advice of experts from Dartmouth and other I3P
member institutions, health care providers, and businesses, the investigators
are embedding into the curriculum essential business concepts, so that students
can effectively communicate with business leaders and protect business
processes, and case studies based upon real-world scenarios and problems derived
from the experience of healthcare providers with issues of cybersecurity. The
certificate and the AS degree in IA (with healthcare concentration) are
initially being piloted at River Valley Community College and White Mountains
Community College, with an eye toward adoption by other colleges in the
Community College System of New Hampshire
(CCSNH).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Concurrent with the curriculum development, the
project team is providing training to CCSNH faculty in foundational IA courses,
so that system colleges can collaboratively offer training in IA to IT
professionals in business and industry through each college's business and
industry outreach programs.