* 1104027
* US-Egypt Planning Visits: Characterization and Assessment of Industrial Wastewaters in Egypt
* O/D,OISE
* 08/01/2011,12/31/2016
* Robert Peters, University of Alabama at Birmingham
* Standard Grant
* Paul Filmer
* 12/31/2016
* USD 35,988.00

1104027 This project supports a cooperative research planning project by Dr.
Robert Peters, University of Alabama at Birmingham (UAB) and Dr. Mohamed
Darwish, Alexandria University, Egypt, with participation from Misr University
of Science and Technology (MUST) in Cairo, Egypt. They plan to study issues and
to explore possible research areas aimed at improving water quality in Egypt.
Intellectual merits: The PI lists a number of tasks including prioritizing the
pollutant loads/impacts of wastewaters from different industrial sectors;
identifying specific industrial sectors that contribute significant quantities
of pollutants to wastewaters and surface waters; identifying techniques to
collect and analyze the chemical constituents and wastewater characteristics of
wastewaters being emitted by various industrial firms; targeting pollution
prevention assessments/audits of selected industrial firms, and presenting the
results in workshops in both the U.S. and Egypt. There is the potential to
conduct needed research with an appropriate emphasis on sustainability issues
including considering the production of methane from organic wastes. Because of
the large and growing population in the major cities, water quantity and water
reuse may be of importance as well. Preliminary analysis of water samples
collected at various several strategic points in Egypt will be performed and
results will be used to identify pollution prevention remedies and low-cost
treatment technologies. The plan of the research is well constructed, the
statement of work is clear and expected progression of tasks are planned well to
match objectives. The key personnel demonstrate training, experience and
knowledge in the field, awareness of the dimension of the problem. The
analytical methods and approaches have been adequately identified.

Broader impacts: The objective of the proposal is to improve water quality in
Egypt through collaborative research between UAB in the U.S. and Alexandria
University and MUST in Egypt. The project has the potential for a significant
impact on developing countries, and could improve quality of life in Egypt. It
will likely result in significant advancement in the water purification field in
Egypt, and if successful, will greatly improve the environmental water quality
in Egypt. Results will be presented in at least two workshops, one in
Birmingham, Alabama, and the other in Egypt for Egyptian researchers, industrial
managers and regulatory personnel. Proceedings will be prepared and submitted to
the U.S.-Egypt Joint Board. The project will result in increased collaboration
and interactions between UAB and Egyptian researchers, and enhance their
educational outreach activities, especially undergraduate/ graduate student
programs. The research may also result in significant improvement of industrial
processes from the emphasis on pollution prevention and environmental management
systems. The proposal addresses a real environmental issue of serious concern in
a practical and achievable way.