* 1104831
* Collaborative Research: Multiple Approaches to Gain Increased Capture of Carbon Dioxide
* BIO,EF
* 03/01/2011,02/28/2015
* John Golbeck, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Gregory W. Warr
* 02/28/2015
* USD 510,000.00

Plants capture the energy of sunlight to turn carbon dioxide and water initially
into carbohydrates, and then eventually into food and fiber that feeds and
clothes the world's population. A major problem with this process is that the
protein that carries out the incorporation (or fixation) of carbon dioxide into
carbohydrate, ribulose bisphosphate carboxylase/oxygenase (Rubisco), is
inefficient. This is because this enzyme also fixes atmospheric oxygen into
products that the plant must break down and recycle. These processes of fixation
by Rubisco of carbon dioxide and oxygen are in competition, and the fixation of
oxygen is so large that over 30% of the light energy captured by a plant is
wasted in this process. This project seeks to maximize the amount of carbon
dioxide (and minimize the amount of oxygen) fixed by Rubisco by increasing the
concentration of carbon dioxide inside the cell, where Rubisco is located. This
will be accomplished by introducing a light-driven carbon-dioxide pump into the
plant cell membrane, to move carbon dioxide from the atmosphere into the cell.
This pump will use infrared light, which is not required for photosynthesis, as
its source of energy. In this project halorhodopsin will first move chloride
ions into the cell, using the energy of light. The chloride ions will then move
out of the cell and (through the action of a membrane protein called an
antiporter) be exchanged for bicarbonate ions that move into the cell. The
bicarbonate will then be decomposed (by an enzyme called anhydrase) into carbon
dioxide and water, with the net result that carbon dioxide has been pumped into
the cell by a light-driven process. In a second approach it is planned to re-
engineer halorhodopsin to pump bicarbonate directly into the cell without using
chloride ions as an intermediate. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: Large
increases in crop yields can be expected from the more productive fixation of
carbon dioxide that is the goal of this project. The new technologies derived
from this project will provide tools and knowledge to boost photosynthetic
capacity that should lead rapidly to applications in agricultural and industrial
systems. The project will also include intensive research training for
undergraduate and graduate students and for postdoctoral fellows.