* 1104439
* US - Chile Planning Visit: Development of a Research Framework for International Supply Chains of Perishable Commodities
* O/D,OISE
* 03/01/2011,02/28/2014
* Jesus Villalobos, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Sonia Ortega
* 02/28/2014
* USD 18,436.00

This U.S.- Chile visit proposal will support one senior researcher, one graduate
student, and one undergraduate from Arizona State University, under the
direction of Dr. Jesus R. Villalobos, on two visits to Chile during 2011. The
primary goal of these visits is to refine collaborations on the development of a
research framework for international supply chains of perishable commodities
between investigators from Arizona State University and the Pontificia
Universidad Católica de Valparaíso in Chile (PUCV). The PI and the visiting
students will participate in work sessions with Drs. Rosa Guadalupe Gonzalez
Ramirez, Pablo Miranda Gonzalez, and José Ceroni Díaz, from The Pontificia
Universidad Católica de Valparaíso, all with strong expertise in Port Operations
and Management. The students will extend or compare their current research
approaches to include considerations of Chilean ports and supply chains. The
impact of port service variability is especially important in the supply chains
for perishable commodities, which are of great importance in the commerce
between Chile and the United States. One of the main objectives of these visits
is to set the analytical framework to incorporate perishability into supply
chain decision. In particular, the research team plan to develop a methodology
for the design of port operations that will best serve the shippers of these
types of commodities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This collaboration will be a catalyst
for regional commercial development and will form an initial core of US and
Chilean researchers that will expand to researchers from other Latin American
countries over time. Additionally, the proposed activities will strengthen the
material of undergraduate and graduate courses that address theoretical and
practical issues in port logistics, and supply chain planning and management. It
is believed that the resulting collaboration will also increase the number of
students obtaining advanced degrees in logistics. This award is supported by the
Americas Program of the Office of International Science and Engineering and the
Division of Industrial Innovation and Partnerships of the Directorate of
Engineering.