* 1104075
* Strengthening Continuity of Rural Education in Biotechnology
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2011,06/30/2016
* Ruth Wrightsman, Flathead Valley Community College
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Teles
* 06/30/2016
* USD 198,305.00

The biology department at the college is developing a program in biotechnology
that prepares students from a rural community college for transfer to four-year
biotechnology programs. The primary goals of this project are to: &lt;br/&gt; 1.
Develop a biotechnology transfer program that incorporates biotechnology cross-
disciplinary laboratory exercises in cell and molecular biology and microbiology
courses, and develop a new course entitled Introduction to Biotechnology. The
new biotechnology course introduces students to fundamental biotechnology
principles and methods, using inquiry-based, interdisciplinary laboratory
instruction. &lt;br/&gt; 2. Serve as a pipeline linking the biotechnology
curriculum between rural high schools, the community college, and four-year
universities. &lt;br/&gt; 3. Target recruitment of underserved rural science
students for biotechnology careers. &lt;br/&gt; 4. Establish ties to
biotechnology industry in Montana by developing partnerships and business
connections between industry and education. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
merit: The program is integrating laboratory methods in cellular, molecular, and
biotechnology within an established biology and chemistry curriculum. In
addition to emphasizing cross-disciplinary laboratory experiences, the new
laboratory exercises utilize well-characterized proteins and their genes to
introduce students to the basic concepts of biotechnology, while allowing them
to develop fundamental laboratory skills. Basic laboratory procedures, such as
spectroscopy, isolation of macromolecules, recombinant DNA techniques,
immunochemistry, and mammalian and microbial cell culture are being introduced
in inquiry-based laboratory exercises. Students are experiencing the excitement
of scientific discovery while simultaneously learning the essential tools of
biotechnology in a collaborative learning
environment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts: This project primarily
impacts students living in a rural community experiencing continued economic
downturn and job losses. The students served by this institution include many
first-generation college students. The curriculum provides a path to careers in
biotechnology, an industry that is expected to grow in Montana and other
northwestern states. Further, the program provides a model for promoting
biotechnology education and establishing ties to industry in a rural
environment.