* 1104364
* Spatiotemporal Development and Forecasting of Space Storms
* GEO,AGS
* 03/15/2012,02/28/2017
* James Wanliss, Presbyterian College
* Continuing Grant
* Michael Wiltberger
* 02/28/2017
* USD 217,194.00

This project will apply and extend two new approaches to the problem of
recasting magnetic storms. In particular it will develop tools for forecasting
of extreme events in ground-based magnetic indices. It will also develop tools
for accurately predicting local magnetic fluctuations on the ground that are
generated by magnetic storms. Local forecasts during and prior to storms are
particularly important since coupling of the magnetosphere-ionosphere system
produces geospace and ground magnetic variations whose statistical properties
vary with both local time and latitude. The project will develop risk estimation
methods based on (1) the statistics of the waiting times between storms above
(below) a certain threshold, and (2) a symbolic dynamics method which quantifies
temporal variations in the magnetic fluctuations and incorporates the solar wind
driving fluctuations. Recent years have witnessed the development of tools that
allow for the analysis of data that feature sudden transitions and extreme
events, like space storms. These advances have been made possible by a
combination of approaches based on dynamical systems theory and statistical
physics. A growing catalogue of research provides evidence that the
magnetosphere behaves like a complex system with sudden transitions and extreme
events that have a distinct statistical structure, including heavy-tailed Levy-
type behavior. Because of this complex nature it is possible to leverage the
data statistics to make probabilistic hazard assessments for storm risk. These
are primarily based on the association of small disturbances with future large
storms. The project will examine the way in which the nonlinear behavior in the
driver and the magnetosphere interact to produce space storms, especially those
for which there is no obvious gross trigger.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;American
society relies upon technologies such as power distribution systems and
constellations of communications satellites for its daily functioning. These
technologies are all susceptible to the effects of magnetic storms (also called
space storms). Increased societal dependence on these technologies implies the
need to understand and predict spatiotemporal fluctuations in the magnetosphere.
In addition to the improved ability to predict important space weather phenomena
the project will include meaningful research performed by undergraduate
students.