* 1104707
* Topics in the Theory of Elastic Networks and Soft-Matter Physics
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2015
* Tom Lubensky, University of Pennsylvania
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 08/31/2015
* USD 336,000.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports theoretical research
and associated educational activities in the broad field of theoretical
condensed matter physics with a particular focus on the nature and origin of
mechanical rigidity. The PI will study elastic response and phonon structure in
a range of floppy or nearly floppy model networks. Such networks occur in a
variety of physical systems from network glasses, to packings of rigid soft
spheres, to networks of semi-flexible polymers that control the rigidity of
living cells, to auxetic systems that have the unusual property that when
stretched, they expand in the direction perpendicular to the direction of
stretch. Improved understanding of the fundamental science controlling the
mechanics and elastic response of these systems has the potential to lead to new
materials and possible new treatments for disease.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Almost
150 years ago James Clerk Maxwell, who put the final touches on the equations
that govern electric, magnetic, and optical phenomena, developed the framework,
still very much in use today in fields as disparate as architecture and micro-
biology, to determine whether a frame composed of linked struts, such as might
be found in a bridge, is mechanically stable. He identified in particular the
conditions under which a frame is isostatic, that is, under which there are just
enough struts for the frame to support external loads. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project is focused on controlled model periodic networks of springs near the
Maxwell central-force rigidity threshold. The PI will study, and attempt to
expand the members of, a new class of two-dimensional maximally auxetic
lattices, whose bulk modulus vanishes and whose Poisson ratio equals minus one,
with a particular emphasis on the nature and origin of zero modes in finite
lattices that reside in the surface Rayleigh waves rather than in bulk phonons.
He will investigate how the properties of these systems change upon addition of
next-nearest-neighbor and bending forces and upon dilution. Quasiperiodic and
random rather than periodic isostatic lattices will also be studied, including
random rhombus tilings and pentagonally symmetric Penrose tilings in two-
dimensions and their icosahedral generalizations to three dimensions. These
lattices can be manipulated in various ways that should allow for controlled
studies of the nature of phonon wavefunctions, particularly low-energy ones,
near the isostatic limit, including how they are localized in space and to what
extent they are surface waves or bulk waves. The PI will study a range of models
for networks of semi-flexible polymers both in two and three dimensions,
including diluted and twisted versions of the kagome lattice in two-dimensions
with bending force added for stabilization and a newly constructed three-
dimensional lattice consisting of infinitely long straight lines with crosslinks
that are connected to no more than four other crosslinks as is the case in real
systems. The last topic to be investigated is how bending forces affect the
rigidity percolation at which a rigid frame becomes floppy upon the removal of
struts. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award will contribute to the training of
young scientists in a highly interdisciplinary environment with broad contacts
between theorists and experimentalists and among scientist of different
disciplines. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NONTECHNICAL
SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports theoretical research and
associated educational activities in the broad field of condensed matter
physics, a field whose purview is the vast varieties of matter - from liquids to
crystalline solids, from foams to steel girders, from rubber to living cells,
from insulators to superconductors. This research project is focused on the
nature and origin of rigidity in classes of materials ranging from granular
packing of glass beads or sand grains to the cytoskeleton that gives form to
living cells and is an essential part of their locomotion apparatus.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Imagine a frame constructed by joining popsicle sticks
with frictionless cotter pins through holes at their ends. If two sticks are
joined at with a single pin, they will be free to rotate about that pin: They
form a floppy structure that can be distorted without energy cost or mechanical
force. But three sticks joined together in an equilateral triangle are rigid:
They can be rigidly translated and rotated, but the triangular shape cannot be
altered without bending or stretching the sticks. This simple observation
generalizes to more complicated structures like bridges and buildings: a frame
of beams is floppy and is not mechanically stable unless it has a sufficient
number of links joining the beams. In 1864, James Clerk Maxwell, who gave us the
equations governing electromagnetism and light, developed a simple set of
mathematical rules for determining the stability of general
frames.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Remarkably, the structural motifs that occur in
architectural structures at visible length scales also occur in condensed matter
systems at microscopic length scales, and the ideas of Maxwell can be applied
directly to them. Research in this award will explore how elastic rigidity, and
thus stability against shear and compressional forces, develops in microscopic
networks. It will explore in particular the nature of floppy distortions - for
example whether they extend throughout the sample, are localized near particular
points, or are restricted to the surface - in models that describe random
crystalline solids and network glasses, quasicrystals which assume the same
pattern when rotated one-fifth of a turn - a symmetry not allowed in ordinary
crystals, biopolymer networks which are networks of long chainlike molecules
that crisscross each other, and other materials. A particularly interesting set
of materials that will be studied have the unusual property that when stretched
along one direction they expand rather than contract along the perpendicular
direction. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award will contribute to the training of
young scientist in a highly interdisciplinary environment with broad contacts
between theorists and experimentalists and among scientist of different
disciplines. The PI is serves as an organizer of and on advisory board of summer
schools, conferences and workshops.