* 1104869
* GOALI: Structure-Property Systematics in Novel Chalcogenide glasses with Modified Networks
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2016
* Sabyasachi Sen, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Lynnette Madsen
* 08/31/2016
* USD 686,394.00

NON-TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION: Glassy materials such as sulfides, selenides and
tellurides (i.e. chalcogenides) of Ge, As, Sb and P have found wide-ranging
applications in the areas of photonics, telecommunication, memory storage,
alternative energy resources and environmental remote sensing. The atomic
structures of these materials are typically characterized by a network of
covalently bonded atoms and structure-property relationships in these network
chalcogenide glasses have been studied in detail. The physical and chemical
characteristics of these networks can be substantially modified upon
incorporation of elements such as Ba and Ga. Little, if any, is known about the
unique properties of these new materials - they could result in transformative
and wide-ranging technological applications. This research project brings
together investigators with complementary expertise and common interests from UC
Davis and Corning Incorporated (the world's foremost innovator and commercial
developer of cutting-edge glass technology) to investigate the fundamental
structure-property relationships in these novel chalcogenide materials. This
project will finally enable the formulation of predictive models necessary for
the optimization of these materials towards improved functionalities for
potential commercialization. Students in this research project are learning to
investigate problems in the realm of "basic science" that underlies industrial
applications. The project is preparing students with powerful experimental
skills and research experience in both academic and industrial settings that
will open many opportunities for their careers. This project coordinates with
the underrepresented minority-serving and other outreach programs at UC Davis to
attract and recruit underrepresented graduate students and to increase the
awareness of students in the science and technology of glassy materials.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL DETAILS: This project entails studying the
structure-property relationships and developing an atomic scale understanding of
the structural mechanisms of transport and relaxation near the glass transition
in novel modified and compensated network ternary and quaternary chalcogenide
bulk glasses, fibers and supercooled liquids in the Ba-Ga-Ge-Se system.
Accomplishing this goal involves application of a powerful combination of state-
of-the-art techniques of physical property measurement and structural and
dynamical characterization including nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR), Raman,
optical absorption and fluorescence spectroscopy, high-energy X-ray diffraction
and reverse Monte Carlo simulation. The results are being combined to develop
predictive models, linking the atomic structure and dynamics with macroscopic
physical properties that are crucial for compositional optimization of these
materials for a wide range of technological applications. One example is
exploring potential applications in photonics where these materials serve as
efficient rare earth hosts with low phonon energy and high quantum efficiency.
The interdisciplinary nature of this project impacts materials science and
engineering, solid-state chemistry and physics and incorporates significant
training of graduate students in state-of-the-art spectroscopic, diffraction and
simulation techniques. The equipment and expertise at UC Davis, Corning Inc.,
National High Magnetic Field laboratory and Argonne National Laboratory provide
students with a variety of modern research tools and a supportive structure for
learning to use them. It continues to foster our longstanding collaborations
with scientists in industry, academia and national laboratories and enriches the
graduate education and training experience through numerous scientific dialogue
and interactions between the collaborating scientists and participating
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;FUNDING: This National Science Foundation project
is co-funded by the Engineering Directorate and the Mathematical and Physical
Sciences Directorate.