* 1104933
* Workshop:  Developing New Paradigms for Biofuel Separations to Enable an Alternative Fuels Future
* ENG,CBET
* 03/01/2011,02/28/2013
* Daniel Shantz, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Rosemarie D. Wesson
* 02/28/2013
* USD 43,000.00

1104933&lt;br/&gt;Shantz&lt;br/&gt;There are many significant drivers for the
United States to shift to alternative fuels. These range from reducing our
dependency on foreign imports of oils, to the deleterious effects of climate
change that are driven by fossil fuels utilization, to creating a new industrial
sector (green energy) that will provide high quality jobs for the future work
force. There are many routes being explored and touted as alternatives to fossil
fuel, including wind, solar, hydrogen, and nuclear energy. One of the more
promising possibilities is the development of biofuels from non-edible crops. It
would appear that one of the key advantages of biofuels is that conversion of
biomass is possible using known technologies such as pyrolysis, hydrolysis,
fermentation etc. However, one of the key challenges in this area is that these
processes on whole are nonselective. Thus, while the reactor technology for
processing raw biomass into a base product feedstock is available, there will be
considerable needs for the development of methods for upgrading the base product
feedstock. The ability to selectively remove desirable components (e.g. sugars,
furfurals) from streams produced by pyrolysis / hydrolysis would represent a
simple route to either blending renewable feedstocks into existing fuel
production schemes or lead to whole new routes for fuel production. The former
represents a logical intermediate target that would be beneficial to the fuels
industry meeting government-mandated targets for integration of renewable
compounds into the fuel pool. The latter represents the ultimate goal of moving
the country away from fossil fuels. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Based on these points,
it is believed that new separation schemes will be needed for biofuel
utilization to reach its full potential. This workshop will have three major
themes: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1. A discussion of the state of the art in
feedstock processing, with an emphasis on the nature of the resulting bio-
mixtures, particularly focused on properties of relevance for potential
separations. &lt;br/&gt;2. A discussion of the current state of liquid
separations applied to biofuels processing. &lt;br/&gt;3. A summary session
outlining the key and unique challenges facing this area that will lay out a
roadmap for future work and goals in the field.