* 1104484
* Functional Transport Properties of Multiferroics
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2011,06/30/2014
* Sang-Wook Cheong, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Continuing Grant
* Paul Sokol
* 06/30/2014
* USD 390,000.00

****Technical Abstract****&lt;br/&gt;Charge conduction in ferroelectrics, more
often called leakage, has been considered a serious problem that depreciates
their functionality. However, remarkable electronic transport properties have
been recently reported in ferroelectric domains and walls in multiferroics with
non-zero d electrons. These novel properties include significant conduction in
ferroelectric domain walls, polarization-modulated rectification, and switchable
photovoltaic effects. The objective envisioned in the proposal is to
characterize the underlying mechanisms of charge conduction and photovoltaic
effects of individual domains and walls in high-quality single crystals of
semiconducting multiferroics, including polar magnets, using standard transport
measurements and Scanning Probe Microscopy (SPM) in controlled environments.
Crystallographic and magnetic structural correlation with charge transport
properties will be investigated using transmission electron microscopy (TEM),
and synchrotron x-ray and neutron scattering. The results will be important in
order to exploit potential technologies based on nanoscale functional transport
properties, such as resistive ferroelectric memories, sensors, and novel energy-
harvest devices. Integration of fundamental research and education of graduate,
undergraduate and high-school students will be a critical part. High school
students will be involved through the Partners in Science Program, organized by
the liberty Science Center, New Jersey. New research results from the proposed
projects will be a valuable part of a graduate course on up-to-date materials
physics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;****Non-Technical Abstract****&lt;br/&gt;Magnetism
and ferroelectricity are imperative bases for current technology and
multiferroic materials, where magnetism and ferroelectricity coexist, have been
extensively investigated for great technological and fundamental scientific
importance. However, the unprecedented functional charge transport properties in
multiferroics have been only recently revealed. The objectives envisioned in the
proposal include to characterize the mechanism of the functional charge
transport properties in multiferroics, and to exploit potential technologies
based on nanoscale functional transport properties, such as resistive
ferroelectric memories, sensors, and novel energy-harvest devices. The
centerpiece of the proposal is a wide spectrum of collaboration, so a
multiplicity of techniques and skills will be utilized. The proposed study will
further strengthen the role of research in all levels of education. For example,
high school students will be involved in the proposed research through the
Partners in Science program, organized by the Liberty Science Center, Jersey
City, New Jersey, which the PI has been continuously involved in for the last 11
years, and new research results from the proposed projects will be a valuable
part of a graduate course on up-to-date materials physics.