* 1104330
* Tennessee Explorers: Partnering With Public Television to Tell the Stories of the STEM Explorers Who Live Among Us
* EDU,DRL
* 09/15/2011,08/31/2014
* Charles Chappell, Vanderbilt University
* Standard Grant
* Paul Jennings
* 08/31/2014
* USD 150,000.00

This CRPA project seeks to inform Tennessee residents about STEM research that
is occurring at Vanderbilt University and the scientists that are undertaking
this exciting work. Tennessee Explorers is a two-part television series which
uses an interview format to present scientists, both as real people and as
research professionals. Questions for the scientists include where they grew up,
what they did as children, and how they progressed to the stage of being an
accomplished scientist. Moreover, each scientist or engineer will discuss their
research and associated processes, conveying the exploratory nature of
science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Two 30-minute programs will air on Nashville
Public Television (NPT) featuring 3 NSF-funded scientists on each show. The
programs will be broadcast 10 times throughout the state and will be available
online for subsequent use by teachers and the general public. This is a unique
collaboration between the Emmy-award winning staff at NPT and university
research faculty. It is a true partnership with each contributing their
expertise to inform the public about cutting-edge scientific research. Obvious
in all of the ideas, there is the undercurrent that youth encouragement will be
generated in terms of models and careers to become future
scientists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;While the intended audience is the Nashville
area, affiliated PBS stations will broadcast the interviews across the state
reaching an estimated 100,000 individuals in the first year. The television
series and subsequent explorer interviews will be made available through the new
Tennessee Digital Learning Library, while DVDs will be distributed to schools
and science museums upon request. If successful as judged by the extensive
evaluation studies, this program will likely be expanded as a national model.