* 1104701
* RUI: Collaborative Research: Carbon-based long-coherence quantum bit
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2017
* Susan Watson, Middlebury College
* Continuing Grant
* Alexander Cronin
* 08/31/2017
* USD 352,924.00

Underlying the global economy is the ability to process information quickly and
cheaply. The field of quantum information processing, which harnesses the
unusual features of quantum physics, offers a novel approach to rapid encoding
and manipulation of information. In this project, researchers from Middlebury
College, Harvard, and University of Copenhagen create and investigate quantum
bits (qubits) "the fundamental building blocks of quantum computation" formed
from carbon nanotubes. The team of researchers exploits the unique properties of
carbon nanotubes to manipulate and interrogate the qubits, with the goal of
demonstrating coherent control of the fragile quantum states. The key properties
of nanotubes that make them well suited for quantum information processing are
themselves newly understood, and are a forefront area of fundamental physics.
Those properties include spin-orbit coupling associated with circumferential
motion around the nanotube, electron-nuclear coupling and the ability to control
dephasing of electron spin. The project is a good balance between future
potential applications in the exciting area of quantum information, and
condensed matter physics in nanoscale electronics, as fundamental physics.
Students involved in the project particularly appreciate the connection between
fundamental and applied components of the activity.

The subject of the project "quantum information processing" is inherently
revolutionary. In addition, the project is designed to build on the exceptional
strengths of liberal arts colleges and research universities in educating
students and conducting research. Undergraduates perform a significant portion
of the research, providing invaluable training for careers in physics. Research
conducted at Harvard during the summer feeds directly into the curriculum at the
PI's institution, Middlebury College, as students work in parallel on credit-
bearing projects and senior theses and interact with their peers at Harvard. The
aim is to foster a critical mass of students who are deeply engaged in all
aspects of research, from collecting and analyzing data to presenting results,
and who have the training and expertise necessary to excel in physics.