* 1104305
* RapidTech - National Center for Rapid Technologies
* EHR,DUE
* 09/15/2011,02/28/2013
* Marc Madou, Saddleback College
* Continuing Grant
* Gerhard L. Salinger
* 02/28/2013
* USD 1,580,119.00

The goals of the RapidTech National Center are to be a leader in technician
education in additive manufacturing by providing professional development to
faculty, teachers and incumbent workers; by creating, pilot testing and
disseminating project-based modules and career pathways; and by developing
successful approaches to obtaining and maintaining equipment for other colleges.
Rapid prototyping is emerging as a core enabling technology to support the
design, development, and manufacturing of numerous products. A growing number of
industries use rapid prototyping and rapid tooling. Faculty members from a wide
variety of STEM fields recognize this situation and are in need of curriculum
materials and professional development that can support the swift introduction
of rapid prototyping into their courses and programs. Rapid prototyping models
provide quick feedback for critical decision making that fully engage students
and increase their interest and pedagogical focus. The Center is working with
regional and local workforce agencies and school districts to interest student
in careers in additive manufacturing. Using RapidTech's close relations with
industry, a national survey of career opportunities in additive manufacturing is
planned. The Saddleback College Center is located at the University of
California at Irvine. The connection with UC Irvine ensures career pathways for
students and provides intellectual underpinnings for the products of the Center.
The evaluation is providing metrics for determining the effectiveness of the
Center's activities.