* 1104874
* Further Investigations into Aleut Subsistence: Analysis of Bone Apatite for Carbon and Oxygen, Bone Collagen for Sulfur and Individual Amino Acid Isotope Chemistry
* GEO,OPP
* 09/15/2011,08/31/2015
* Joan Coltrain, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Anna M. Kerttula
* 08/31/2015
* USD 155,700.00

The proposed project is a follow-up and expansion of preious research using
stable isotope analysis and paleo-DNA to discuss the population history from
four locations, the Chaluka midden site, Shiprock, and Kagamil caves, in the
Eastern Aleutians, using samples from human and non-human faunal remains. The
original project addressed hypotheses concerning the biological difference
between ?Paleo? and ?Neo-Aleuts,? originally defined using craniometrics and
cranial morphology and concluded that the differences did not reflect wholesale
population replacement as had previously been hypothesized. The results from
Coltrain?s previous analysis suggested that the historic populations in
different localities differentially used terrestrial and marine subsistence
resources. This project would expand the suite of stable isotopes, specifically
sulfur to separate food taxa, carbon isotopes from bone apatite, oxygen isotopes
as a proxy for temperature levels, and compound-specific nitrogen to separate
specific amino acids. Analysis of these various isotopes would allow the
researcher to more closely identify the diets of the individuals represented in
the historic populations and provide more specific evidence for a separation of
diet between the same population, rather than the skeletal sample representing
two separate populations as previously thought.