* 1104147
* Air quality and climate conference, March 14-19, 2011 Kona, Big Island, Hawaii
* ENG,CBET
* 02/01/2011,01/31/2012
* David Shaw, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 01/31/2012
* USD 75,000.00

This grant is to help support costs for a conference on air quality and climate
for the Asian-Pacific region. The conference is scheduled to be held March
14-19, 2011 in Kona, Big Island, Hawaii. The objectives of this conference are
to (1) discuss the research issues at the nexus of air quality and climate with
particular concern for the Asian-Pacific region, and (2) assess practical
research needs and opportunities in areas of, but not necessarily restricted to,
air quality trends of megacities, air pollution and weather modification,
accelerated regional pollution exposure with climate change, and multi-pollutant
air quality/climate management. The current science and technology outlook for
East Asia and the Pacific Rim, as related to climate and air quality, will be
explored at the conference. Discussion will also identify the depth and coverage
of current knowledge, as well as its limitations, and the probable need for
sustained investigations in the future to fill knowledge gaps and improve
capability for applications to environmental management. The conference will be
arranged so that the sessions will occur in series with discussion of each major
topical area. Each session will be co-chaired by leading scientists in the
field, and will include a 30-minute presentation followed by 10 to 15 minutes of
summary views presented by a panel of several discussants. An open discussion
will follow for each topic. Papers in poster form are encouraged to complement
the invited speakers and invited discussants, so that participants can develop a
broad view of ongoing topical research. The invited lead-in presenters are
encouraged to provide a broad but brief summary of research carried out in East
Asia and the Pacific Rim since the 1990s, and present a hypothetical discussion
guide to ?important? future research in the topical areas. The conference will
explore long-term theoretical, field, and laboratory research opportunities in
the conference topical areas: How does research and development inform policy
makers in, for example, the energy and transportation sectors? What are the
questions in the next twenty-five years that can be addressed by long-term
science and technology in the Asian-Pacific region? Can energy transportation
and other actions be moderated or modified by long-term research and development
results? Research initiatives may emerge that can serve as the basis for future
collaborations in the Asian-Pacific region.

This award is co-funded by the ENG Environmental Sustainability program, the GEO
Atmospheric Chemistry program, and OISE-China.