* 1104835
* Multi-scale Study of Coupled Reaction and Wetting in Droplet Spreading
* MPS,DMR
* 09/15/2011,08/31/2016
* Ying Sun, Drexel University
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 08/31/2016
* USD 240,000.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;This award supports theoretical and computational
research and educational activities related to coupled reaction and wetting
dynamics in droplet spreading. Special attention is paid to examine the effect
of intermetallic compound formation on drop wetting kinetics, contact line
advancement, and the evolution of the solid-liquid interface. Using a multi-
scale model that integrates the hybrid phase-field and arbitrary Lagrangian-
Eulerian approach at the macroscopic scale and molecular dynamics simulations at
the atomistic level, this project seeks to address several fundamental issues in
the understanding and prediction of reactive wetting: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;(i)
What are the dominating driving forces and dissipation mechanisms in reactive
wetting? The PI aims to understand whether the relevant driving forces and
dissipation mechanisms can be separated into distinct regimes or whether they
are strongly coupled in one or multiple regimes. Using inputs from molecular
dynamics simulations, the PI will integrate the intermetallic compound formation
and growth into the macroscopic moving boundary problem to examine the coupling
mechanisms among flow, species transport, and chemical
reaction.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;(ii) How is material delivered to the contact
line during new interface formation? The PI will examine the effect of reaction
and surface alloying on mechanisms that deliver new materials to the contact
line region. The effects of intermetallic compound formation and growth in the
contact line region on drop wetting kinetics will be
quantified.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;(iii) How does the solid-liquid interface
evolve during coupled reaction and wetting? The flow, temperature, and
concentration fields will be computed to explain how they interact to result in
a certain shape of the solid-liquid interface and types of intermetallic
compounds. The PI will also quantify the intermetallic compound growth rate and
relate it with the rate of substrate dissolution. The possibility of solid to
liquid to solid phase transition will be explored and results will be compared
with experimental observations from the
literature.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Fundamental understanding of coupled reaction
and wetting dynamics during reactive wetting is crucial in creating stronger
bonds in materials joining, better adhesion for thin film coating, novel
composites for bio-implants, and new routes for surface modification with
tunable functionalities. This work will have impact on areas ranging from
materials processing, MEMS fabrication, electronics packaging, to energy
conversion and storage and surface chemistry. This project will also advance a
largely uncharted area of research that is concerned with multi-component,
multi-phase systems with flow, heat/mass transfer, phase change, and chemical
reactions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Graduate and undergraduate students will be
trained working in an interdisciplinary research area at the intersection of
physics, materials science, engineering, and chemistry. Collaborations with
McMaster University and Sandia National Laboratories will enable the PI and her
students to interact with leading research groups on performing atomistic
modeling of phase transformation. The proposed research will also enable new
course materials for two graduate-level courses and support undergraduate
researchers via Drexel's Hess Honors program and the six-month intensive
research co-op program. Outreach will extend to pre-college students and those
from underrepresented groups through PI's mentoring of RET teachers and Girl
Scouts of Eastern Pennsylvania from School District of
Philadelphia.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;This award
supports theoretical and computational research and educational activities
related to how a droplet makes contact with a surface and spreads. The PI will
also include the reaction of the liquid with the solid substrate on which it is
spreading. This plays an important role in many technological applications
including materials processing and joining, thin film coating, printable
electronics fabrication, heterogeneous catalysis, droplet actuation and
manipulation, and surface modification. Recent advances in materials that are
structured down to a scale some ten thousand times smaller than a human hair
require greater precision in the control of this reactive wetting processes.
Despite its importance, reactive wetting remains a poorly understood process.
The PI will perform computer simulations aimed to address fundamental issues in
understanding reactive wetting and the ability to use computers to simulate the
process. Model predictions will be validated against experimental observations.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is important in materials processing and
joining, thin film coating, and droplet manipulation processes. The process
involves at least three interfaces that are typically away from the balanced
state of equilibrium and plays a significant role in synthesis and processing of
advanced materials for energy conversion and storage, bio-implants, micro-
electro-mechanical devices, and electronics packaging. The complex multi-phase
systems studied by the PI occur in numerous process industries, as well as in
nature and in living organisms. Thus, this work will help to establish research
methodology that can be used in a broad array of
applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The interdisciplinary nature of the project,
at the intersection of physics, materials science, engineering, and chemistry,
makes it a great educational opportunity for students. Graduate students and
undergraduate students will be trained to utilize interdisciplinary tools in
fluid dynamics, heat/mass transfer, and materials science to study transport
phenomena in materials processing across length scales. The proposed research
will also enable new course materials for two graduate-level courses. Research
products will be disseminated in part through open-source computer code
packages. The community outreach programs will extend to inner-city K-12
teachers and students in Philadelphia with approximately 80% minority students.