* 1104342
* RAPID: REAL Security and Safety
* GEO,AGS
* 12/15/2010,11/30/2012
* Shane Mayor, Chico State Enterprises
* Standard Grant
* Bradley F. Smull
* 11/30/2012
* USD 25,292.00

The Raman-shifted Eye-safe Aerosol Lidar (REAL) observing platform, now based at
the California State University at Chico, was originally designed and assembled
with support from NSF and NCAR (the National Center for Atmospheric Research).
It supports a combination of lower-atmospheric research and university-based
instruction led by the Principal Investigator. REAL operates at a wavelength
1.54 microns, and is capable of mapping distributions of urban pollutants and
naturally occurring dusts/aerosols. By tracking the movement of aerosol
features, REAL provides high-resolution depictions of air motions adjacent to
the earth's surface, while backscatter depolarization of returned signals
provides information on the shape of encountered particles. This RAPID-type
award will promptly support required refurbishment of high-precision mirrors
used to accurately and efficiently direct lidar energy, and restore full
functionality to REAL's beam steering unit. Associated upgrades to site security
will ensure reliable operation of the system at an off-campus CSU-Chico research
farm location. In-house design and fabrication of a small and portable crane
will allow safe and reliable removal and replacement of the elevated beam
steering unit from atop the shipping container in which REAL's transceiver and
associated instrumentation reside.

The Intellectual Merit of this work rests in restoring and maintaining the
ability of the REAL to collect high-quality observations, and adequate
protection of the platform for future use.

Broader Impacts of this effort will include increased safety for students and
staff involved in REAL's operation, and its continued availability for support
of on-site educational activities scheduled for early 2011.