* 1104870
* Bandgap-Tunable Graphene Nanoribbons for High Speed, Ultra-Wide-Band Photodetectors
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/2011,05/31/2015
* Eui-Hyeok Yang, Stevens Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Mahmoud Fallahi
* 05/31/2015
* USD 375,000.00

This project is jointly funded by the Electronics, Photonics, and Magnetic
Devices (EPMD) Program in the Division of Electrical, Communications and Cyber
Systems (ECCS) and the Electronic and Photonic Materials (EPM) Program in the
Division of Materials Research (DMR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this
program is to investigate the electro-optical properties of actively controlled
graphene nanoribbon arrays with the goal to enable in-situ strain tunability of
the bandgap for applications in infrared detectors covering an ultra-wide
spectral range.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit is that the planned
experiments provide new insights into the interplay between thermoelectric
effects and built-in electric fields due to the Schottky barriers to the overall
photocurrent generation. Furthermore, the controlled actuation of graphene
nanoribbons with well defined edge chirality provides important insights into
the relation between applied stress, band gap opening, and infrared absorption,
for zigzag and armchair edges. The proposed device can detect terahertz
radiation over a wavelength range with efficiencies similar to bolometers, but
at much higher speed and with wavelength agility.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
broader impacts are that demonstration of the proposed device concept can enable
a wide range of applications including high-speed communication in foggy
environments, optical interconnects, terahertz detection, imaging, remote
sensing, and spectroscopy. The planned educational initiatives provide training
for students in science and engineering with a special focus on recruiting and
mentoring students from under-represented minorities in partnership with the
Women in Engineering Program and Advocates Network and the National Action
Council for Minorities in Engineering. The program will also work with the
Center for Innovation in Science and Engineering Education at Stevens to extend
this effort to K-12 outreach endeavors.