* 1104115
* Heat kernel methods applied to zeta functions of Ihara, Rankin-Selberg, and Selberg
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2014
* Jay Jorgenson, CUNY City College
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Pollington
* 08/31/2014
* USD 162,400.00

The Principal Investigator proposes to use techniques from analysis, in
particular from the study of heat and wave kernels and distribution theory, to
study zeta functions of number theory. In the field of regular graphs, both
finite and infinite, the project will systematically develop a heat kernel
approach to number theory on graphs, including the Ihara zeta function. In
previous work, the PI has developed a succinct relation between Fourier
coefficients of weight zero Maass forms and weight two holomorphic forms, both
associated to any finite volume hyperbolic Riemann surface. The proposal
involves a continuation of this work, striving toward bounds of the Fourier
coefficients.

Both the heat kernel and the wave kernel are mathematical objects which admit
interpretations from many mathematical fields. The heat kernel, in particular,
can be viewed as a solution of a partial differential equation, as a one-
parameter family of positive integrable functions, and as a function associated
to probability theory and random walks. As a result, the heat kernel provides a
means by which one can employ ideas and results from one mathematical discipline
in order to approach problems in another field. The PI plans to continue this
approach to study problems in number theory, analysis, and graph theory. In
addition to research interests, the PI has undertaken a number of educational
endeavors striving to enhance opportunities for students. As a faculty member at
The City College of New York, the PI has developed courses in statistics and in
financial mathematics for the Mathematics Department, and he works closely with
the School of Education in their course offerings in teacher training programs.
In October 2010, the PI, together with J. Kramer, taught a graduate level course
at the University of Sarajevo. The proposed research includes a component of
effort by the PI to enhance and further develop these teaching aspects of his
mathematical interests.