* 1104768
* Diachronic Generative Syntax Conference XIII: Support for meeting and associated workshop
* SBE,BCS
* 05/01/2011,10/31/2013
* Anthony Kroch, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* William Badecker
* 10/31/2013
* USD 23,547.00

This grant supports a workshop and conference in the annual international series
"Conference on Diachronic Generative Syntax" (DIGS). Researchers in the field of
diachronic syntax study language change from three perspectives: Firstly, they
attempt to specify the grammatical properties of languages spoken in the past,
combining knowledge of grammatical theory gleaned from work on modern languages
with the study of historical materials. Secondly, they aim to develop an
understanding of the conditions under which languages change rather than
remaining stable. Both language contact and instabilities in language
transmission are investigated in this regard. Finally, researchers study the
time course of language change, using statistical techniques to track changes
over time in the usage frequencies of grammatical elements. The time course of
change can then be modeled mathematically, using techniques from epidemiology
and population biology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This is the thirteenth meeting of
DIGS Conference, whose venue alternates between the eastern and western
hemispheres. This year's meeting is distinguished from others by the addition of
a pre-conference workshop on the use of syntactically annotated corpora for
historical research. The growing use of highly annotated corpora in diachronic
syntax is a part of an ongoing revolution in the sciences of language made
possible by modern computational technology and techniques of language
engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;DIGS meetings feature plenary addresses by the
most distinguished scholars in the field of language history and presentations
by established researchers and students. In addition, there is a poster session
for the best papers that cannot be accommodated in main conference sessions.
Funds are included in the grant budget to subsidize travel to the conference by
student presenters.