* 1104104
* Collaborative Research:  TORERO - Tropical Ocean tRoposphere Exchange of Reactive Halogen Species and Oxygenated VOC
* GEO,AGS
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2014
* K. Sebastian Schmidt, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* Sylvia Edgerton
* 08/31/2014
* USD 764,695.00

The Tropical Ocean tRoposphere Exchange of Reactive halogen species and
Oxygenated VOCs (TORERO) field campaign will deploy the NSF/NCAR Gulfstream V
research aircraft over the tropical and subtropical Eastern Pacific Ocean in
early 2012 to investigate the release of reactive halogen species (RHS) from
biologically active coastal waters and open ocean upwelling regions (termed
oxygen minimum zones, OMZs). Observations and modeling studies corroborate the
global presence of RHS and oxygenated volatile organic compounds (OVOC) in the
free troposphere (FT), yet important gaps remain in our understanding of remote
ocean sources, and the effects on atmospheric chemistry, and potentially
climate. TORERO will investigate three hypotheses: (1) OVOC and RHS released
from the remote ocean impact atmospheric composition in the FT as a result of
deep convective transport; (2) the ocean sources of VOC precursors, and the
abundance of OVOC and halogen oxide radicals varies between open ocean areas
with biologic activity, coastal upwelling and the ocean deserts, and (3)
reactive gases released from the ocean are relevant to chemistry and potentially
climate through ozone destruction, methane oxidation, and aerosol
formation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TORERO research will support two graduate
students and a postdoctoral scholar in an environment where interaction with
Hispanic culture is part of the daily routine during the field phase in Ecuador
and Chile. University researchers will be provided with access to a unique
aircraft facility, several unique instruments, and a network of scientists from
federal laboratories (NCAR, NOAA). TORERO results will be made available for use
by the scientific community. The project will benefit society by advancing
understanding of ocean-atmosphere interactions to improve predictive
capabilities and better prepare for climate change.