* 1104518
* Melt-Dispersion Mechanism for Energetic Reactions of Aluminum Nanoparticles
* ENG,CBET
* 09/15/2010,04/30/2012
* Valery Levitas, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Ruey-Hung Chen
* 04/30/2012
* USD 247,389.00

CBET-0755236&lt;br/&gt;Levitas&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Aluminum particles are
becoming integrated into energetic formulations and considered for overlapping
technologies such as materials synthesis and thermites for ordnance
applications. Recently, a new mechanochemical mechanism has been introduced that
shows potential for understanding extremely fast Al nanoparticle reactions. This
theory applies during fast heating of Al nanoparticles, where the volume change
due to melting of the Al core encased in an alumina shell induces extreme
pressures of 1-2 GPa, resulting in a spallation of the oxide shell. The
unbalanced pressure between the Al core and exposed surface creates an unloading
wave with high tensile pressures, resulting in dispersion of small liquid Al
clusters that fly at high velocity. Thus, nanoparticle reactions are not limited
by diffusion. The proposed melt-dispersion mechanism is the only existing
explanation that resolves a number of basic puzzles in nano-Al combustion.
&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to define the main conditions and
controlling physical parameters for operation of the melt-dispersion mechanism
for reactions of Al nanoparticles; to extend this mechanism for micron-scale
particles; and to utilize obtained fundamental knowledge for the improvement of
Al-based formulations. &lt;br/&gt;The following tasks will be considered: (a)
develop comprehensive theories for physical processes participating in the melt-
dispersion mechanism, (b) synthesize Al particles based on theoretical
predictions and new particle design concepts, (c) study implications of the
melt-dispersion mechanism experimentally, (d) expand the melt-dispersion
mechanism to micron-scale particles, and (e) predict and experimentally confirm
methods that will improve the reactivity of Al particles in various
formulations. &lt;br/&gt;Beyond the potential for technological impact, a
mentoring program will be developed where undergrads work with grad students in
a research environment. In addition, nanoparticle combustion will be integrated
into the combustion curriculum and a continuing-education program in energetic
materials. The investigators also plan to organize special symposia devoted to
"mechanochemical" processes at various international conferences.