* 1104798
* The Geometrical Basis of Crystal Chemistry
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2016
* Michael O'Keeffe, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Birgit Schwenzer
* 08/31/2016
* USD 200,000.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;With support from the Solid-State and Materials
Chemistry Program in the Division of Materials Research, the proposed research
focuses on the development of new methods in theoretical crystal chemistry. The
main components are:&lt;br/&gt;(i) A systematic attack on the "zeolite problem"
which is that, although there are millions of proposed zeolite structures, less
than 200 topologies are actually known. What structural aspects really determine
zeolite formation? We will critically assess the relevance of local geometric
structure to feasibility of frameworks. This work will also be extended to
germanates.&lt;br/&gt;(ii) Extension of work on enumeration and identification
of 3-periodic nets to include further nets with vertices of different
coordination. We plan to enumerate all nets with up to two kinds of link. We
will carry out full topological analysis of these structures and determine their
natural tilings and their dual structures.&lt;br/&gt;(iii) Development of the
tiling approach to description and generation of intermetallic and clathrate
structures. This will be an entirely new approach to the description of
intermetallic structures.&lt;br/&gt;(iv) Development and elaboration of the RCSR
crystal chemistry structure resource which contains a searchable database of
information relative to design and analysis of crystalline
materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;The most rapidly
developing area of inorganic materials chemistry is the design and synthesis of
porous materials such as metal-organic frameworks (MOFs). These materials have
unparalleled promise for storage and separation of permanent gases such as
hydrogen, carbon dioxide, and methane (natural gas) with direct application to
developing clean energy applications. Essential to the description of the
topology of these materials, and to the design and synthesis of new materials
with desired characteristics, is a knowledge of the mathematical structures that
describe their underlying topologies. One component of the proposed work is the
systematic enumeration of such structures. Zeolites are more traditional porous
materials that are essential to petrochemical industry in such processes as
conversion of crude oil to gasoline and to components of materials such as
plastics. One would like to design and synthesize zeolites by rational methods
in the same way as MOFs, but a full understanding what theoretical structures
are suitable for zeolite synthesis is so far lacking, and attention will be
devoted to analysis of such structures (of which many thousands are known) to
determine just what features of theoretical structures inhibit zeolite
synthesis. The mathematical methods used promise to provide a new approach to
the description of complex inorganic solids. Among the most complex and least
understood are the structures of intermetallic compounds (alloys) and work will
devoted to developing a systematic description of these. The project is
supported by the Solid-State and Materials Chemistry Program in the Division of
Materials Research.