* 1104503
* Quantal Heating of 2D Electrons  in Crossed Electric and Quantizing Magnetic Fields
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2016
* Sergey Vitkalov, CUNY City College
* Continuing Grant
* Tomasz Durakiewicz
* 08/31/2016
* USD 270,000.00

**** TECHNICAL ABSTRACT**** Recent experiments on 2D electrons, placed in
quantizing magnetic fields, have identified a new kind of Joule's heating, which
occurs exclusively in conducting quantum systems. The effect is absent in
classical systems. The quantal heating produces peculiar spectral distribution
of electrons, which deviates significantly from the Fermi-Dirac form.
Experiments show that even a weak quantal heating induces exceptionally strong
violation of Ohm's Law, changing radically the electron transport. Overheated
electrons undergo a transition into a state in which voltage does not depend on
current (ZDR state), demonstrating simultaneously an apparent metal-insulator
(M-I) transition. These intriguing phenomena as well as some fundamental
properties of the quantal heating are not understood and contradictive. This
project pursues experiments probing the fundamental properties and limits of the
quantal heating, ZDR state and the apparent M-I transition in systems with
different quantum electron lifetime - the most essential parameter regulating
the heating. The experiments will be done on a set of 2D electron systems,
formed in high quality GaAs quantum wells with different density of carbon
impurities, which control the quantum lifetime. The research will be
accomplished by employing the most advanced tools of experimental science:
growth of conducting materials of exceptionally high quality, micro and nano-
fabrication, low temperature experiments and sophisticated computer simulations.
This project will support education and training of a PhD student in advanced
areas of quantum physics and materials research. ****NON-TECHNICAL ABSTRACT****
Heating by electric current is a broadly known effect, which has a vast impact
on our everyday lives. Besides its positive practical applications, heating
often is an undesirable effect in electric circuits. For example, heating causes
enormous energy losses in power lines, which translate to significant capital
losses for our economy. Despite the general understanding, in some novel
conducting materials many features of the electric heating are very surprising.
Recent experiments indicate that the electric current may not increase electron
temperature in quantum conductors, which are materials with an atomic-like
energy spectrum. In the quantum conductors the current generates exceptionally
strong electron overheating in certain parts of the spectrum and induces
enormous variation of conducting properties of these materials, which is
valuable for applications. This project will pursue experiments to probe
fundamental properties of the extraordinary quantal heating, which are poorly
understood and contradictive. This will be accomplished by employing the most
advanced tools of experimental science: growth of conducting materials of
exceptionally high quality, micro and nano-fabrication, low temperature
experiments on quantum conductors and comprehensive computer simulations of the
heating. This project will support education and training of a PhD student in
these advanced technologies.