* 1104892
* Silica-Derived Nitric Oxide Delivery Vehicles as Anti-Plaque Agents
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2011,07/31/2015
* Mark Schoenfisch, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Continuing Grant
* Joseph A. Akkara
* 07/31/2015
* USD 450,000.00

This award by the Biomaterials program in the Division of Materials Research to
University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill is to carryout studies in nitric
oxide (NO)-releasing silica nanomaterial-scaffolds that reduce dental biofilm
formation via localized NO delivery. The rationale for pursuing this work is
based on nitric oxide's central role in our body's immune response to pathogens,
broad-spectrum antimicrobial activity, and rapid diffusion through biofilms.
Silica nanomaterials allow for tunable properties such as NO storage, size and
surface charge, and will enable the study of such properties on bactericidal
activity and cytotoxicity. After determining the optimum particle properties for
killing planktonic bacteria, the project will study the eradication of
established biofilms. The research will establish new knowledge regarding the
effects of nanomaterial properties on antibacterial activity. This project is
expected in providing graduate and undergraduate students with experiences that
interface materials science with microbiology through fundamental,
transformative, and discovery research. In addition, this project will take
advantage of the clear need for understanding nanoparticle-bacteria dynamics to
engage underrepresented populations in science and engineering through the
research activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Tooth decay due to bacteria plaque
biofilms is a prevalent and costly health problem worldwide. Although
substantial progress has been made through fluoride treatment of public water
supplies and routine dental cleaning, tooth decay remains a significant problem
requiring intense treatment. In 2006, dental care costs amounted to 7.4% of the
total healthcare spending in the U.S. alone. In this proposal, the investigators
seek to develop new bactericidal nanomaterials against plaque producing
bacteria. This work aims to elucidate how the properties of the nanomaterial
(e.g., size, charge, and nitric oxide release kinetics) influence its biocidal
activity against plaque producing bacteria. The research is thus critical to the
implementation of drug-releasing nanoparticles with maximum therapeutic
efficacy. The proposed work will also have significant impact on students. In
addition to providing students with research projects that enables training at
the interface of material science, chemistry and microbiology, the research will
be used to capture the attention of underrepresented populations in science and
engineering through specialized research experiences.