* 1104740
* Collaborative Research: Continuation of the XENON100 Dark Matter Search at the Gran Sasso Underground Laboratory
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2015
* Elena Aprile, Columbia University
* Continuing Grant
* Jonathan Whitmore
* 08/31/2015
* USD 2,913,000.00

This award addresses the question of the nature of Dark Matter (DM) in the
Universe with an experimental direct detection search for Weakly Interactive
Massive Particles (WIMPs) using two-phase xenon detectors within the XENON
program. This Collaboration is currently at the 100 kg mass scale with the
XENON100 experiment at the Gran Sasso Underground Laboratory (LNGS), Italy. The
next phase will be a detector at the ton scale (XENON1T) with a sensitivity goal
of more than two orders of magnitude better than the current best limits from
XENON100, currently the lowest background and largest mass direct detection
experiment operating underground.

These funds will enable these groups to continue the XENON100 experiment to
reach the design sensitivity for the spin-independent cross-section and to study
other WIMP interaction scenarios. They plan to take data for at least one
continuous year throughout 2011 to search for both spin-independent and spin-
dependent DM, for inelastic DM and low mass DM and for an annual modulation
signal in the XENON100 data.

Broader Impacts: The XENON science, addressing questions about fundamental
properties of the Universe, has all the ingredients to captivate the interest
and imagination of students and the general public alike. Technical-related work
can impact society in a number of ways: liquid xenon imaging detectors and
related technologies find applications in several fields outside particle
astrophysics, including national security and medical imaging research.