* 1104989
* International Dissertation Enhancement: Interactive Effects of Harvest, Grazing and Fire on Plant Populations and Communities in the Western Ghats, India.
* O/D,OISE
* 05/01/2011,04/30/2014
* Lisa Mandle, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* Marjorie Lueck
* 04/30/2014
* USD 5,100.00

01104989&lt;br/&gt;Ticktin/Lisa Mandle&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Doctoral
Dissertation Enhancement award provides funding for a final trip to India for
coPI Mandle to carry out a suite of additional field measurements for her
dissertation research. The focus of the study is the interactive effects of
harvest, grazing, and fire on the population dynamics of a harvested palm in a
prime biodiversity site in India?s Western Ghats, where human activities
strongly impact native plant communities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Although a
number of studies of demographic effects of palm leaf-harvest have been done
previously, this study breaks new intellectual ground through the application of
new statistical population modeling techniques. The combination of multi-site
comparative studies with explicit experimental studies will strengthen the
coPI?s thesis. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Research focused at the nexus between
native plant populations and human activities is especially valuable in tropical
sites such as the Western Ghats. What is learned in this project could
potentially be both practically-applicable locally and a model approach for such
research at many types of sites, particularly in the tropics.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of this project are strong with
respect to the level of cross-interaction between countries, the incorporation
of Indian colleagues and local people in the field, as well as its potential to
develop new modeling and experimental approaches for plant conservation efforts
in the face of significant on-going human activities. This enhancement provides
additional funding for international research to a current NSF Graduate Research
Fellowship awardee.