* 1104368
* Order and Disorder in Strongly Segregated Block Copolymers
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2011,07/31/2018
* Frank Bates, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 07/31/2018
* USD 1,074,000.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Block copolymers constitute one of the
fastest growing segments of the polymer industry, which accounts for more than
$300B annually of commerce in North America. These materials are prepared by
coupling together two or more chemically distinct linear polymer chains,
resulting in macromolecules endowed with multiple functionality and multifaceted
physical properties that derive from segregation of the polymer blocks on a
nanometer scale. Modern technical applications of block copolymers, for example
in the microelectronics industry, require constantly diminishing and more
complex nanoscale structures, below the limits set by current theoretical
knowledge and practical understanding. This project aims to establish the
fundamental principles that govern block copolymer phase behavior and mechanical
properties in this new structural limit. Model materials, containing various
combinations of two, three or more polymer blocks will be synthesized by
controlled polymerization and characterized using small-angle x-ray and neutron
scattering, electron microscopy, dynamic mechanical spectroscopy, and a host of
other sophisticated techniques. These materials will be prepared near the order-
disorder transition (ODT) by tightly controlling molecular weight and
composition. The ODT represents a key processing parameter for designing
multiblock copolymers for subsequent applications. The findings of this work are
intended to spur new theoretical developments along with exciting practical
applications. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NON-TECHNICAL
SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Polymeric materials, including plastics and
elastomers, medical devices and pharmaceutical aids, and key elements of the
microelectronics industry constitute one of the most important commercial
drivers in the nation's economy. This research program will guide the
development of new and more versatile polymeric materials while educating the
next generation of scientists and engineers working in this critical area of
technology. New and more demanding applications of synthetic polymers mandates
the development of microscopic structural features at nanometer length scales,
thousands of times smaller than the diameter of a human hair. The scientific and
engineering goals will be achieved through state of the art synthetic chemistry
coupled with sophisticated structural analysis and physical property evaluation.
This technical program will provide industry with competitive tools for the
design and implementation of new and innovative products. Interest in science
and engineering will be fostered in students in grades 3-12 through an
interactive program called Energy and U. This activity brings thousands of
students and numerous families to the University annually for an experience that
stimulates awe and excitement while teaching important lessons about energy and
society.