* 1104467
* CONFERENCE: 2011 CSHL Conference on Eularyotic mRNA Processing to be held August 23-27, 2011 in Cold Springs Harbor, NY
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2011,07/31/2012
* David Stewart, Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory
* Standard Grant
* Karen Cone
* 07/31/2012
* USD 7,000.00

Intellectual Merit &lt;br/&gt;The 2011 CSHL Conference on Eukaryotic mRNA
Processing will be held in New York, August 23-27, 2011. As in the previous
meetings, a major focus will be on nuclear events in mRNA maturation,
particularly mRNA splicing and polyadenylation, but the scope will now be
expanded to encompass both the impact of the history of an mRNA on its ultimate
biological fate, the emerging fields of RNA interference and microRNA function
as well as the application of informatics and genome-wide approaches to the
analysis of RNA processing. It will span a broad range of areas of investigation
including genetics, genomics, biochemistry, molecular biology and biophysical
approaches to understand the mechanisms and physiologic consequences of the many
processing steps that can impinge on a nascent pre-mRNA transcript to control
gene expression. The meeting format will consist of eight plenary sessions and
two poster sessions. For the 2011 meeting, each plenary session will be
subdivided into two parts that focus on related but separate topics. The most
recent meeting was held in August 2009 and attracted 335 scientists
internationally, who are actively investigating various aspects of messenger RNA
maturation in eukaryotic cells, using genetic, biochemical, molecular, and cell
biological approaches. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts &lt;br/&gt;The 2011
CSHL Conference on Eukaryotic mRNA Processing will bring together a highly
diverse group of scientists seeking to share and promote knowledge in the field
and provide an outlet for collaboration and exchange of ideas. The 2011 CSHL
conference committee has made every effort to include the participation of
groups underrepresented in science.