* 1104742
* Studies of Alkali Metal, Noble Metal and Hydrogen-Rich Superconductors under Extreme Pressure
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2011,07/31/2016
* James Schilling, Washington University
* Continuing Grant
* Tomasz Durakiewicz
* 07/31/2016
* USD 540,000.00

****Technical Abstract****

The primary focus of the research in this single investigator award is the
transformation under extreme compression of canonical simple free-electron
metals, such as the alkali metals, into materials with highly anomalous
electronic properties. These properties include superconductivity at relatively
high temperatures, metal-semiconductor or metal-insulator transitions or even
Pauli paramagnetic to itinerant ferromagnetic transitions. This project will
study in depth to ultrahigh pressures the superconducting phase diagram and
critical magnetic field behavior of selected alkali metals as well as their
alloys and compounds. The systematics derived from this study will shed light on
the properties of hydrogen under pressure which has been predicted to become a
metal at multi-Mbar pressures with possible superconductivity near room
temperature. Further phenomena of interest are possible insulator-metal
transitions and superconductivity in highly polarizable insulators such as solid
xenon and beryllium hydride BeH2, as well as the extension of our previous
hydrostatic and uniaxial pressure work on the optimally doped Hg-1201 cuprate
into both the underdoped and overdoped regimes. The proposed experiments give
undergraduate and graduate students an excellent opportunity to learn and
develop important laboratory techniques and collaborate with groups both in the
US and abroad.

****Non-Technical Abstract****

Simple materials are easier to understand but complex materials are more
interesting and more likely to lead to innovative applications. In this single
investigator award extremely high pressures, as high as 2-3 million atmospheres,
are applied to very soft and simple materials, like the alkali metals. Such
extreme compression is able to continuously transform these metals into
surprisingly complex materials which may be superconducting, ferromagnetic or
even insulating. The fact that a single sample can be brought through extreme
compression to exhibit such anomalous behavior allows one to gain a deeper
understanding of the underlying processes involved. This enhanced understanding,
on the other hand, facilitates the design of materials with interesting
properties at ambient pressure. Such studies provide insight into a possible
superconducting state near room temperature in metallic hydrogen under millions
of atmospheres of pressure. The proposed experiments give undergraduate and
graduate students the opportunity to learn and develop a multitude of essential
experimental techniques; these students will also benefit from scientific
collaborations with groups both in the US and abroad.