* 1104238
* Regional Center For Nuclear Energy Education and Training (RC-NET)
* EDU,DUE
* 08/01/2011,02/28/2017
* John Barlow, Indian River State College
* Continuing Grant
* David B. Campbell
* 02/28/2017
* USD 3,067,524.00

Indian River State College establishes a Regional Center for Nuclear Education
and Training (RC-NET). The Center ensures the demand for skilled nuclear
technicians is met in a unified, systematic way in the Southeastern United
States. Some of the goals of RC-NET are to create a comprehensive curriculum for
technician tracks, develop or enhance training programs at the regional
colleges, provide career paths to higher education and undergraduate research,
and provide remote access to expensive and unique training components. This
Regional Center serves the nuclear industry as a training resource, curriculum
repository, and source of expertise, while improving communications and
collaboration across the industry. RC-NET is supported by partnerships with
colleges across the region. The partnerships include fifteen colleges, three
universities and twenty seven industry partners. Collectively, this group
represents a critical mass of training and industry
experts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;By coordinating and supporting a network of
dynamic training facilities capable of scaling up to meet the energy industry's
needs, the Center reduces the risk associated with serious shortages in trained
technicians. Traditionally, minority and female populations in the nuclear
industry have been low; however, enrollment in IRSC's programs are above the
national average. Highly qualified minority and female students are targeted to
continue their education through scholarships, summer bridge programs, 2/3
articulation, and undergraduate research opportunities.