* 1104951
* Spin Transport Far From Equilibrium
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2011,07/31/2015
* Paul Crowell, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Paul Sokol
* 07/31/2015
* USD 370,000.00

Technical abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will advance the
understanding of charge and spin transport in semiconductors under conditions
that are very far from equilibrium. The research addresses new devices in which
spin currents in semiconductors are generated and detected using ferromagnetic
metals. The experiments will address how fundamental phenomena such as the spin-
orbit interaction, hyperfine interactions, hot electron populations, and
dimensionality impact spin-polarized transport. First, a set of experiments will
be carried out to elucidate the connection between the spin Hall effect in
semiconductors, which has only recently been observed in transport measurements,
and its inverse effect, in which a spin-polarized current generates a charge
current. A second set of experiments will probe spin-polarized carriers far from
equilibrium, where departures from ordinary linear response have recently been
observed. The potential for using these non-linear effects to control spin
currents will be demonstrated. Third, the manifestation of spin-orbit coupling
in traditional transport effects, including weak-anti-localization, will be
correlated with direct measurements of the spin transport and dynamics using
techniques developed in the PI's group. Finally, the proposed research will
address some of the critical steps required to undertake similar experiments in
reduced dimensions. These experiments address some of the critical steps
required to implement devices, such as a spin transistor, which will require a
deeper understanding of ferromagnet-semiconductor
heterostructures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Non-technical abstract
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Magnetism is ubiquitous in modern technology. Mass data
storage, as in computer hard drives, depends on the magnetism of metals, such as
iron, cobalt or nickel. Semiconductors, while also a critical component of
modern technologies, are not magnetic. This project focuses on a materials
system that is made out of thin layers of a ferromagnetic material (iron) and a
semiconductor. The ultimate goal of this line of research is the achievement of
new classes of devices that carry out both the processing and storage of
information on a single chip. This project focuses on fundamental properties
that determine how electron spins (the carriers of magnetic information) can be
injected, controlled, and detected inside a semiconductor. The research will
include experiments probing the new and unusual conditions present when spins in
semiconductors are generated near surfaces, in very large numbers, or in very
thin layers. These physical phenomena lie at the heart of new proposals for
magneto-electronic devices that could be enabled by this research.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;