* 1104544
* RUI:  Investigation of Strongly Correlated Electron Behavior in Rare Earth Related Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 06/15/2011,05/31/2015
* Pei-Chun Ho, California State University-Fresno Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Tomasz Durakiewicz
* 05/31/2015
* USD 255,000.00

********Technical Abstract********&lt;br/&gt;This project will support
experimental research in the strongly correlated electron phenomena in rare
earth related materials. These phenomena arise from a subtle interplay between
competing interactions, either electronic or magnetic, which can be controlled
through tuning the experimental parameters such as temperature, magnetic field,
chemical composition, and reduced dimensionality. The primary focus of this
research is on the effect of magnetism on unconventional superconductivity in
the filled skutterudite substitution system Pr1-xNdxOs4Sb12, the investigation
of the electronic structures of near-by compounds NdOs4Sb12 and CeOs4Sb12 for
understanding the quantum critical behavior and superconducting pairing
mechanism in PrOs4Sb12, and the effect of reduced dimensionality on magnetism in
gadolinium and neodymium nanoparticles. Through the synthesis of high quality
specimens and the establishment of transport and thermodynamical properties of
these rare earth materials, they can be used as model systems to probe the
localized and itinerant nature of the electron states and test the existing
theories for strongly correlated electron phenomena. The research experience and
practical placement provided by this project will help undergraduate and MS
program students pursue Ph. D degrees and start their careers in
industry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;*******Non-Technical
Abstract*******&lt;br/&gt;This project will support material science research of
rare-earth related materials at an undergraduate institution. The primary focus
of this research is on the synthesis and characterization of superconducting
materials and magnetic nanoparticles, with the goal of understanding their
underlying mechanisms. These materials promise useful technical applications in
diverse fields such as energy conservation, energy storage, digital information
storage, and medical imaging. This project will allow direct participation by
undergraduate and MS-program students in the experiments, giving them hands-on
experience at the early stage of their academic life. The opportunities provided
through this work will encourage students to pursue higher education and careers
in the STEM fields.