* 1104489
* RUI: Determining Magnetic Structures in Oxide-Based Nanoparticle Systems
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2015
* Yumi Ijiri, Oberlin College
* Standard Grant
* Tomasz Durakiewicz
* 08/31/2015
* USD 200,000.00

Technical:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Nanoparticle magnetism is a subject of much
fundamental and technological interest, with many unresolved questions about the
nature of intraparticle and interparticle interactions. This project will probe
these issues through novel polarized small-angle neutron scattering (SANS)
experiments of magnetic oxide nanoparticles. The nanoparticles will be
synthesized using solution chemistry methods that have sensitive control of
particle size, separation, and composition. The PI and her undergraduate
students will use polarized SANS and related methods to determine core and shell
spin arrangements, interparticle magnetic correlation lengths, and connections
between these and the more macroscopic behavior evident in applications. The
work will yield quantitative data on nanoparticle structures, information
difficult to obtain through other approaches. A broader impact of this research
centers on its emphasis on helping develop advanced techniques, particularly
significant given recent improvements in US neutron scattering facilities. This
award will support research at an undergraduate institution and as such, will
lead to the training of undergraduate students in these important
methods.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Non-technical:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Magnetic
nanoparticles are tiny magnets which can be used for computer data storage,
targeted drug delivery, and a host of other applications. For these different
uses, it is important to characterize the way in which the individual magnetic
components align and interact. This award will support the study of magnetic
oxide nanoparticles using advanced neutron scattering techniques that the PI and
her undergraduate students are helping to develop in collaboration with
researchers at the NIST Center for Neutron Research. The nanoparticles will be
synthesized using solution chemistry methods that allow for sensitive control of
particle size, separation, and composition. The samples will be investigated
with polarized small-angle neutron scattering to yield quantitative data on
nanoparticle structures that are difficult to obtain through other methods. A
broader impact of this research involves its emphasis on helping develop
advanced techniques, particularly significant given recent improvements in US
neutron scattering facilities. In addition, this award will support research at
an undergraduate institution and as such, will lead to the training of
undergraduate students in these important methods.