* 1104023
* US-Egypt Cooperative Research: Managing Grid Integration of Large-Scale Wind Power Parks using Energy Storage Technology and Demand Response
* O/D,OISE
* 08/01/2011,07/31/2015
* Saifur Rahman, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Anne Emig
* 07/31/2015
* USD 169,899.00

1104023 &lt;br/&gt;This project supports a cooperative research project by Dr.
Saifur Rahman at Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University (VA Tech)
and Dr. Mohamed El-Sobki, Cairo University, Cairo, Egypt. They plan to study the
management of grid integration of large scale wind power parks. As large wind
power parks, or wind farms, rapidly expand around the world, electric power
systems operators face new challenges. While it is desirable to use the zero-
emission wind energy, managing large wind parks integration is difficult due to
the intermittency and fluctuation of their power production. Therefore, it is of
the interest of the United States, Egypt, and other countries with wind
generation to seek solutions for integration of large wind farms without
compromising their power grid stability and reliability. This research involves
using an energy storage technology and demand response techniques for managing
the grid integration of large wind parks. Specifically, it aims to develop novel
sizing, scheduling and control methods to enable an application based on
compressed-air energy storage (CAES) technology for partial smoothing of the
high-rate fluctuations of multiple wind parks output. Furthermore, it develops a
new operation scheme for combining the load regulation capability of demand
response techniques with the energy storage to increase wind power utilization
and thereby reduce wind curtailment. The application is also designed with added
functions to provide real and reactive power support for stabilizing the power
grid and coping with grid emergency
situations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit:&lt;br/&gt;The PIs will
develop novel sizing, scheduling and control methods for compressed-air energy
storage technology (CAES), which are applied to wind power integration
applications at utility scale. It will also develop a new operation scheme for
combining the load regulation capability of demand response techniques with
CAES. The research outcome will contribute a set of analytical tools, which are
needed for managing the integration of large-scale wind power parks into power
systems while ensuring the safe operation of the power
grids.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The research outcome will fill in
the need for high-efficiency solutions to manage wind power on a large scale.
The resulted application based on CAES technology and demand response will
improve the integration and conservation of wind energy, which benefit both
electric utilities and wind developers. Increased wind energy integration helps
utilities meet their renewable mandates and enhances revenues for wind
investors. This international collaborative project creates a valuable
opportunity for U.S.&lt;br/&gt;researchers and students to work with Egyptian
researchers on the technical problems for mutual benefit.&lt;br/&gt;Overall, the
joint research contributes innovative tools to ensure safe operation of power
grids, increase wind energy usage thereby reducing carbon emissions and helping
protect the environment. These factors foster the sustainable economic
development of Egypt and the United States. The US team includes two women
scientists at Virginia Tech, Dr. Ha Thu Le, a postdoctoral researcher and Dr.
Manisa Pipattanasomporn, a junior scientist.