* 1104122
* Rare Earth Geometrically Frustrated Magnets
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2011,06/30/2013
* Peter Schiffer, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Daniele Finotello
* 06/30/2013
* USD 310,000.00

****Technical**** &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this research program is to
investigate rare earth geometrically frustrated magnets. These are materials in
which the interactions between the moments associated with rare earth ions
compete with each other due to the particular geometry of the magnetic
sublattice. The frustration in these materials leads to unusual low temperature
states in which the interaction energies cannot all be simultaneously minimized,
such as spin liquids and spin ices. The research will explore new geometrically
frustrated magnetic materials and will have a special focus on the spin ice
states in which exotic monopole-like excitations have been observed. The
experiments will focus on magnetic susceptibility studies but will also include
a number of other techniques. The research will be conducted in close
collaboration with material scientists and chemists who can provide unique and
important samples of new materials. Students involved in the research will
participate in traditional and cutting edge training in a wide range of
experimental techniques that will prepare them for careers in academe, industry
or government.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;****Non-technical****&lt;br/&gt;This is a
research program into the physics of a group of materials known as rare earth
geometrically frustrated magnets. The magnetic atoms in these materials are
unable to direct their magnetic axes (known as the magnetic moments) in a unique
way to minimize the combined energy of their collective state. The underlying
cause of this inability to minimize the energy is the geometrical arrangement of
the magnetic atoms within the materials, and this geometrical arrangement makes
these materials excellent models for a wide range of other complex systems which
are similarly 'frustrated'. In particular, this research program will probe the
nature of special materials known as spin ices, in which the disorder of the
magnetic moments mimics the behavior of frozen water and acts as an ideal model
system for testing basic understanding of collective behavior of many other
systems. The research will also probe other new materials in this class obtained
through substituting different elements in the chemical formulae, and looking
for various novel behavior that they often exhibit. Understanding these magnetic
materials has implications for other systems as diverse as superconducting
junction arrays and glasses, and may also provide insight into computational
algorithms. The principal investigator has an extensive record of working with a
diverse students and involving graduate students and undergraduates in every
stage of the research process. Students involved in this research program will
participate in traditional and cutting edge training in a wide range of
experimental techniques that will prepare them for careers in academe, industry
or government.