* 1104610
* Mechanisms of Stress and Structure Evolution During Processing of Polycrystalline Thin Films
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2011,06/30/2015
* Carl Thompson, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Diana Farkas
* 06/30/2015
* USD 508,020.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY Polycrystalline films are used in a wide range of micro- and
nano-scale devices and systems in which their stress state and grain structure
profoundly affect their performance, properties and reliability. Stress and
structure evolution during film formation and subsequent processing are known to
be strongly coupled. In-situ measurements of stress evolution have revealed a
complex range of phenomenology, including evolution between tensile and
compressive stress states, and apparently reversible stress changes during
growth interruptions. Both ex-situ and in-situ characterization of grain
structures and surface topography have also revealed complex processes that
include grain growth and texture evolution during and after island coalescence,
network formation during island coalescence, retention of deep trenches at grain
boundaries, and changes of surface topography during and after film island
coalescence. This phenomenology is not accounted for in current understandings
of the linkage between stress and structure evolution. In this program, stress
evolution will be studied during deposition of a range of materials under a
range of conditions. Use of different materials and deposition temperatures will
allow observations of behavior that are intermediate to those that have been the
focus of prior studies. Use of materials with higher melting temperatures will
also allow quenching of surface and grain structures for ex-situ
characterization. Surface topography will be monitored during deposition, and
during interruptions of depositions, using light scattering techniques. The
angle of incidence of the atomic deposition flux will also be varied in order to
controllably promote different levels of surface roughness. The size and spacing
of the initial islands from which films are formed will also be varied using
templated dewetting techniques. Through these studies, understandings will be
developed that will allow application-specific engineering of structures and
properties of polycrystalline thin films and the micro/nanostructures patterned
from them. NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY The electrical devices and integrated circuits
that power our cell phones, computers, and the Internet are created using very
thin layers of metals and semiconductors that are formed on flat surfaces of
materials like silicon. Extremely small patterns are then made in these films to
create millions of devices that are connected to make circuits of devices.
Sometimes the devices have parts that physically move as they work. Layers, or
films, of different materials are usually made by essentially spraying atoms
onto a flat surface. Once the atoms arrive on the surface, they move around to
form small crystals and these crystals grow until they run into each other to
form a continuous film. The way these crystals form and grow can vary
tremendously, depending on how the atoms are sprayed and on which atoms are
used. These variations strongly affect the properties of a film, including how
easily electrons can move through them or how easily the moving parts can be
moved. This makes it very difficult to make complex integrated circuits and
limits what can be made. This research program focuses on understanding why
these variations occur and on how they can be controlled, so that new devices
and circuits can be made. To do this, the researchers will change the way the
atoms are sprayed and measure how the properties and structure of films change,
while they are being formed.