* 1104850
* Electrophoresis in Liquid Crystals
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2015
* Oleg Lavrentovich, Kent State University
* Continuing Grant
* Michael J. Scott
* 08/31/2015
* USD 435,000.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY &lt;br/&gt;The proposed research focuses on electrophoresis in
liquid crystals. Electrophoresis is a motion of charged dispersed particles
relative to a fluid in a uniform electric field. The effect is widely used to
separate macromolecules such as DNA and proteins, to assemble colloidal
structures, to transport particles in nano- and microfluidic devices and ePaper
type of displays. Typically, the fluid is isotropic (for example, water) and the
electrophoretic velocity is linearly proportional to the electric field. It has
been recently demonstrated that when the electrophoresis is performed in a
liquid-crystalline nematic fluid, the effect becomes strongly nonlinear, with a
velocity component that is quadratic in the applied voltage [O. D. Lavrentovich,
I. Lazo, O. P. Pishnyak, Nonlinear electrophoresis of dielectric and metal
spheres in a nematic liquid crystal, Nature 467, 947-950 (2010)]. The goal of
this project is to explore the fundamental physical mechanisms controlling the
LC electrophoresis, establish the role of LC orientational order, anisotropy of
dielectric and electroconductive properties, determine the flow patterns around
an electrophoretic particle, explore the phenomenon as the function of amplitude
and frequency of the driving voltage, type of the liquid crystal carriers and
the particles. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY
&lt;br/&gt;Electrically-induced transport of particles in fluids is an important
phenomenon with applications ranging from e-readers such as Kindle to health
sciences, where it is used in separation of DNA molecules and proteins,
antibiotic and vaccine analysis. In regular fluids (such as water) a particle
can move parallel to the field direction when it is electrically charged. This
project explores a new type of electrophoresis that occurs when the particle
moves in a liquid crystal rather than in a regular fluid. The ordered structure
of the liquid crystal brings an entirely new dimension to the effect. For
example, particles that cannot move in a regular fluid (say, because their
electric charge is zero) acquire the ability to move once the medium has a
liquid crystalline order. The project will explore the basic mechanisms and
feature of the electrically induced motion of microparticles in liquid crystals.
The phenomenon offers new perspectives for practical applications where highly
flexible, precise and simple control of particle (or cargo) placement, delivery,
mixing or sorting is needed. The research will offer new insights for the
display technology, colloidal assembly, sorting, microfluidic and micromotor
applications.