* 1104495
* FRG: Spin Response in Organic Semiconductors with Tuned Hyperfine Interaction
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2011,06/30/2014
* Zeev Valy Vardeny, University of Utah
* Continuing Grant
* Paul Sokol
* 06/30/2014
* USD 510,000.00

Technical Abstract&lt;br/&gt;The goals of the proposed research are the study of
electron spin injection, manipulation, transport and detection in organic two-
terminal devices such as spin-valves, diodes, and light emitting diodes; as well
as the inter-relation between the injected electron spins and nuclear spins in
these devices. In particular the injected spin aligned carrier dynamics, the
dynamic of the resulting nuclear polarization and its influence on the
electronic spin response, as well as the electroluminescence response in spin-
organic light emitting diodes will be thoroughly investigated. The novel
experiments will be conducted in spintronics devices based on organic
semiconductors such as polymers, small molecules, and fullerenes, in which some
of the building block atoms would be replaced by less abundant isotopes having
different hyperfine strength. This includes replacing protonated hydrogen (1H)
by deuterated hydrogen (2H); and/or 12C by the 13C isotope. The studies will
contribute to the understanding of the physical processes that govern the spin
response in organic spin devices, and have the potential to revolutionize their
performance. This project will support the education of two PhD students in
these advanced technologies, which is excellent training for many scientific
careers from academia to our most advanced technology industries. These
experiments are expected to be of general interest to the scientific community
and provide new spintronics techniques especially for pursing new information
bearing media.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Non-Technical Abstract&lt;br/&gt;Recently
the spin degree of freedom of the electron that is associated with its internal
magnetic moment has been investigated as an information carrying medium, in
addition to the electron charge. It has been predicted that the electrical
current would be augmented by spin current in future devices. The organic
semiconductor has started to play an important role in the electronics and
displays industries, as well as in solar energy harvesting. Organic spintronics
is a new concept, where the spin is manipulated in organic semiconductor
devices. This proposal deals with spin manipulation in organic electronic
devices. Spins will be injected, controlled and detected in various organic
materials of which molecular building blocks contain different isotopes such as
deuterium that replaces hydrogen, and 13C that replaces the more abundant 12C in
the organics. It is postulated that the electron spin coherence is lost because
of the nuclei in the organic that also carry spins; this occurs due to the
electron-spin/nuclear-spin interaction also known as hyperfine interaction.
Although very tiny, this interaction plays a destructive role in spintronics
because there are so many nuclei in the material. In this proposal the role of
isotope exchange will be investigated in a number of organic spin devices, with
the goal to improve the spin coherence time. A cadre of undergraduate students
as well as 2 graduate students will participate in the projects, gaining
training and hands-on experience in frontier scientific research. Through the
research experience, the students will be well equipped to pursue a graduate
education or start a career in the semiconductor/nanotechnology
industries.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;