* 1104118
* Effect of Self-Control on Antisocial and Prosocial Behavior
* SBE,BCS
* 10/01/2010,09/30/2014
* Brad Bushman, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* kerry marsh
* 09/30/2014
* USD 331,000.00

Blending theoretical perspectives from the aggression and self-control
literatures, the proposed research sheds light on who is at risk for behaving
antisocially, when antisocial behaviors are most likely to occur, and how
metabolic, psychological, and hemodynamic processes help explain why people
engage in antisocial behaviors. It also focuses on how to increase prosocial
behavior. The proposed program of research to be conducted over the course of 5
laboratory studies is novel in several ways. First, it blends perspectives from
two influential social psychological theoretical perspectives, namely the
General Aggression Model and the limited resource model of self-control. The
proposed research will provide the first integration of these perspectives in a
single program of research. Second, it uses an extremely diverse methodological
approach, including daily diary, experimental, quasi-experimental, and fMRI.
Therefore, the proposed research will be able to provide converging empirical
evidence that can impact researchers who use each of these diverse methods.
Third, it provides the first examination of whether the capacity to override
aggressive impulses relies on the same metabolic processes in humans and non-
human animals.

Findings from this work should be of interest to scholars from a broad range of
disciplines who wish to understand how physical and mental self-control
processes can decrease antisocial behavior and increase prosocial behavior. The
project will also provide a unique, interdisciplinary training opportunity for
two graduate students and many different undergraduate research assistants. The
graduate student researchers will work closely with members of the senior
research team, which will constitute a unique training experience in the use of
multiple perspectives and methods. Finally, the proposed work will help lay
people who have difficulty controlling their aggressive and selfish impulses.
The investigators will give lectures that are open to members of the community
and to people who are interested in applying the theoretical principles of
effective self-control to reducing aggression and increasing prosocial behavior.
Additional outreach will be provided to law enforcement agencies regarding how
to prevent aggression and shooting of unarmed suspect.