* 1104394
* Tunneling and Bulk Resistance Measurements in the Fractional Quantum Hall States
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2011,06/30/2014
* Marc Kastner, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Paul Sokol
* 06/30/2014
* USD 375,000.00

Technical Abstract The properties of the quasiparticles in the fractional
quantum Hall states are different from those of non-interacting particles, which
are either Fermions or Bosons. It is predicted that in most fractional quantum
Hall states the interchange of quasiparticles results in a change of the wave
function by a phase factor that is a complex number, with magnitude one, but
different from +/-1, as for Fermions and Bosons. Even more surprising is the
possibility, for a special state at filling fraction i= 5/2, that interchange of
the particles does not simply change the wave function's phase, but results in a
completely different wave function. For this case, the statistics are called
non-Abelian. To determine the statistics of quasiparticles requires building an
interferometer, in which the quasiparticles can travel on two distinct paths to
the detector. Experiments are proposed to study the tunneling process by which
the particles access the two paths, and, once it is understood, to create an
interferometer to test the ideas about non-Abelian statistics. This research
could contribute to the development of strategies for quantum computing. The
education of graduate students and postdoctoral scientists in the kind of
research proposed here is very valuable. By learning nano-fabrication
techniques, ultra-low temperature physics techniques, as well as thinking deeply
about fundamental physics issues, young people become extremely valuable to
small and large businesses, as well as to academia.

Non-Technical Abstract Research is proposed to study a novel system, which might
be the basis of a quantum computer. It has been shown that such a computer could
solve problems that conventional computers cannot. For example, a classical
computer cannot factor very large numbers into its prime factors. This fact is
used to protect our bank accounts and many of the Nation's defense secrets.
However, a quantum computer could do this. No one has built such a quantum
computer yet, but if it can be done, it is important for us to do it in the US
first, so that new approaches to security can be found. The work proposed here
is to study a system, which might be useful for quantum computing. When
electrons are forced to move in only two dimensions inside semiconductors and
are placed in a strong magnetic field, they form a kind of liquid, with special
properties. The liquid acts as though it is made of new particles, instead of
electrons, and these new particles may be used for quantum computing. Graduate
students and postdoctoral researchers working on this project will learn
semiconductor technology as well as learning the deep physics of quantum
mechanics. This will prepare them to work in small and large corporations on
forefront technologies that will make the Nation more competitive.