* 1104074
* Mother Lode Region Multimedia Technician (MLMT) Project
* EHR,DUE
* 07/01/2011,06/30/2014
* Gary Mendenhall, Yosemite Community College District
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Teles
* 06/30/2014
* USD 200,000.00

This college is developing a multimedia career pathway to prepare students with
the skills and education necessary to advance in careers as multimedia
technicians. The college has the long-term vision of providing a comprehensive
set of multifaceted career pathways that connect students beginning at the K-12
level to higher education programs and ultimately to jobs in the Information
Communications and Technologies (ICT) industry. The project consists of 3
components: (1) Collaboration with local K-12 school districts throughout the
Mother Lode region (with a focus on grades 6-12), including shared training
opportunities and video broadcasting laboratory space that is designed to build
a pipeline of students to enroll in multimedia courses at the college and to
place college students in service-learning projects at various school sites. (2)
Development of a Multimedia Technician Certificate Program at the college that
can be modeled by other community colleges, particularly those located in rural
areas. (3) Expanded business/industry relationships to create student
externships and job placements.

The primary populations to be served are two-year community college students,
however, training for college faculty and staff, as well as K-12 teachers and
staff, is being conducted. A Multimedia Advisory Committee that includes college
faculty and staff, students, K-12 teachers and counselors, and representatives
from private industry/businesses that employ multimedia technicians is being
formed to provide project oversight.

Intellectual Merit: The project is improving student learning in the multimedia
field by developing a model multimedia career pathway that incorporates K-12 and
business/industry partnerships, as well as best practices and pedagogical
research findings throughout the broader ICT field. Project staff are
collaborating with the regional ATE-funded ICT Center (Mid Pacific ICT), and
hosting trainings on campus for faculty and K-12 teachers in the Mother Lode
Region, thus utilizing the resources and expertise from other NSF-funded
programs.

Broader Impacts: The project is impacting students, staff, and the surrounding
community by raising awareness and interest in multimedia technician careers;
providing multimedia services through student internships, externships, and
service-learning projects; and ultimately providing a greater number of rural
technicians to meet workforce demands. To disseminate the model developed to
other community colleges, the college is participating in various state and
national conferences and forums, developing a student-driven webpage to house
resources and model materials, and participating in other NSF-funded projects
and ATE Center activities.