* 1104254
* Fuse Lab: Collaborative Education for Tomorrow's Technology in Architecture, Engineering, and Construction
* EHR,DUE
* 09/01/2011,12/31/2015
* Huseyin Yuce, CUNY New York City College of Technology
* Standard Grant
* John Krupczak
* 12/31/2015
* USD 877,322.00

New York City College of Technology (City Tech) in collaboration with
Polytechnic High School of Engineering, Architecture and Technology (City Poly)
and industry partners are implementing an initiative titled Fuse Lab in an
effort to transform the AEC (architecture, engineering and construction)
curriculum and develop faculty expertise. This initiative provides a model for
other undergraduate AEC programs around the country. In order to produce
students who can take advantage of and continuously adapt to the fields' rapidly
evolving computational, construction and sustainable technologies, Fuse lab is
1) developing and implementing an articulated career pathway (3+2+2) that serves
a diverse population of students and leads to the associate and baccalaureate
degree while offering students multiple exit points that were integrated with
industry certification; 2) creating curriculum units and faculty development
opportunities that reflect the technology integration and interdisciplinary team
work that have transformed industry practice; and 3) situating these activities
in a larger advanced technology loop by creating sustainable mechanisms for
industry participation across the career pathway and by joining existing
feedback loops with ATE centers and related projects. The broader impact of the
project includes addressing future needs of AEC technicians, increasing
participation of underrepresented populations and producing a new AEC curriculum
that can serve as a national model.