* 1104108
* Biotechnology Alliance for Suncoast Biology Educators
* EHR,DUE
* 05/01/2011,04/30/2014
* Matthew Keirle, STATE COLLEGE OF FLORIDA, MANATEE-SARASOTA
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Teles
* 04/30/2014
* USD 187,084.00

The Biotechnology Alliance for Suncoast Biology Educators (BASBE) project is
facilitating professional development for secondary school teachers leading to
the design and implementation of new biotechnology laboratory activities in
regional high school biology classrooms. The college, in collaboration with the
State College of Florida and the two school districts in the service area of the
college, are committed to increasing the number of students entering Science,
Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics (STEM) fields by (1) encouraging high
school students to consider careers in science or in teaching science and (2)
improving the overall quality of science education in local secondary schools to
increase the preparedness of high school graduates to succeed in college science
courses.

Intellectual Merit: The BASBE project is based upon several science teacher
training programs that have successfully integrated the use of biotechnology
tools into high school biology laboratory activities. College faculty are
working collaboratively with curriculum specialists from the two school
districts, faculty and technicians from a Florida university, and
representatives from regional biotechnology companies to develop educational
modules that focus on DNA science and the use of biotechnology tools. BASBE is
encouraging and supporting high school biology teachers with hands-on training
programs that cover basic and advanced molecular techniques, elements that are
essential for all biologists as well as science technicians and science
educators. Instruments and supplies are being made available to participating
teachers via an inter-district loan program to provide students first-hand
experiences with the tools and techniques of molecular biology. BASBE is also
providing teachers with classroom support, including presentations by area
science professionals on careers in the industry and the materials needed for a
two-week unit on biotechnology.

Broader Impacts: The project makes a significant contribution to the science-
learning infrastructure of two school districts and the only open-access college
in the region. Recent revisions to the Florida science standards (Sunshine State
Standards) reflect the trend to align college science curricula with more
comprehensive real-world applications tied to an industrial or research
laboratory setting. BASBE is developing an inquiry-driven approach to help make
the molecular world relevant to students, including those whose interests and
career goals may lie outside of the sciences. This partnership is enabling the
college and its regional K12 districts to better align their curricula, creating
continuity without duplication for students as they transition from high school
to college science courses. This approach is novel in the way it forms
partnerships between secondary and postsecondary science educators. Teachers are
collaborating with scientists and college professors, forming lasting
partnerships and sharing the physical and human resources needed to empower K12
teachers to incorporate a unit of technologically current investigative science
into their curricula.