* 1104595
* Native Point Defects and Doping of Heterovalent Ternary Wide Band Gap Semiconductors
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2015
* Walter Lambrecht, Case Western Reserve University
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 08/31/2015
* USD 330,000.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports computational
research on point defects and doping in a new class of wide band gap
semiconductors which may have optoelectronic applications. It focuses on II-
IV-N2 semiconductors in which the group III element, e.g. Ga in GaN, is replaced
by group II and group IV elements, hence the name heterovalent ternary. In
preliminary work, the PI found that these materials have promising
optoelectronic properties similar to those of the group-III nitrides. The PI
will explore whether the point defect physics of these II-IV-N2 semiconductors
is more conducive to doping than the III-nitrides. The flexibility arising from
having two cation sublattices with different valences enriches the point defect
and doping physics. The PI will participate in a close collaboration with an
experimentalist who works on the same family of heterovalent ternary
compounds.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;An integral part of the proposal is to improve
current methodologies for point defect calculations in two areas. First, in the
context of defect physics, the PI will focus on the problem of underestimating
the band gaps, as is the tendency of density functional theory in the local
density approximation. Using the framework of the recently developed
quasiparticle self-consistent GW approach as implemented in the full-potential
linearized muffin-tin orbital method, the PI will exploit the possibility of
representing the self-energy in a real-space basis set, hence reducing the large
computational demand. Second, the PI will focus on a challenging problem in
point defect physics related to the accuracy of the calculations for shallow
donors and acceptors. The PI will revive the effective mass approximation method
with central cell corrections extracted from first-principles calculations and
generalize the approach to the lower symmetry Hamiltonian required for the
particular class of semiconductors under study. To further address the supercell
finite size effects, the PI will redevelop the Green's function approach as a
more accurate means to obtain one-electron defect levels with respect to the
band edges and explore how long-range Coulomb tail effects can be included in
this method.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The award also supports the training of two
graduate students in electronic structure methods and defect physics. The PI
will also mentor and involve undergraduate students in research through senior
projects in an existing Research Experience for Undergraduates program. The PI's
planned collaboration with a colleague from Mexico on parts of this project will
allow student exchanges between the two groups and be useful in attracting
underrepresented minorities to science and
technology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award supports computational research on method development related to modeling
of isolated imperfections and impurities that are intentionally introduced into
crystalline materials as well as the application of the developed methods and
techniques to a new class of semiconductors that can be potentially useful for
manipulating optical properties of electronic
devices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Isolated imperfections or impurities, generally
called "point defects", are ubiquitous in crystalline solids. Intentionally
introduced impurities, called dopants, and native defects, such as missing atoms
or atoms in the wrong place in the crystal, play very crucial roles in
determining various properties of semiconducting materials. Some defects are
essential for, while some are detrimental for the useful operation of a
semiconductor device. Accordingly, obtaining a fundamental understanding of
which defects give rise to what properties in semiconductor materials is a
problem of both fundamental and technological relevance. While theoretical and
computational studies, aided by the vast increase in computational power and
improved algorithmic developments, have played a major role toward achieving
this goal during the last three decades, even the most widely used parameter-
free computational methods still suffer from certain deficiencies when it comes
to making accurate and reliable predictions about various properties of native
defects and impurities in solids. The PI will address such problems that arise
in the modeling of structural, electronic, and optical properties of defects by
revisiting existing methodologies, combining them with state-of-the-art
capabilities, and extending them to produce more sophisticated tools and methods
that can increase the accuracy and reliability of parameter-free defect
computations. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI will then apply these new methods to
a new class of nitride semiconductors, composed of three elements, that can
potentially help to overcome certain technological difficulties associated with
existing group-III nitrides, which are composed of two elements, such as gallium
nitride, for optical applications. This new class of semiconductors is important
for photovoltaic energy conversion in solar cells as well as the development of
solid-state lighting by light emitting diodes. If successful, the project will
provide a rationale for further experimental development of these materials.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The award also supports the training of two graduate
students in electronic structure methods and defect physics. The PI will also
mentor and involve undergraduate students in research through senior projects in
an existing Research Experience for Undergraduates program. The PI's planned
collaboration with a colleague from Mexico on parts of this project will allow
student exchanges between the two groups and be useful in attracting
underrepresented minorities to science and technology.