* 1104974
* First Principles Investigations of Boron Nanostructures
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2011,07/31/2016
* Sohrab Ismail-Beigi, Yale University
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 07/31/2016
* USD 300,000.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports theoretical and
computational research that is focused on applying first principles theory and
calculations to study, understand, and predict the properties of boron
nanostructures. In recent years, boron nanomaterials have been the subject of
increasing scientific interest and investigation due to their novel and unusual
structural, mechanical, and electronic properties. These properties differ from
those of better-known nanomaterials based on carbon such as graphene,
nanoribbons, nanotubes or buckyballs, and may prove robust and useful in device
applications. Elucidating the underlying reasons for the unusual behavior of
boron nanosystems furthers understanding of the atomic geometries, unusual
bonding schemes, and electronic behaviors that emerge in reduced dimensional
systems. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI will investigate a range of problems
related to the following main topics: (i) the tendency (or lack thereof) of
boron atoms deposited on transition metal surfaces to form sheet-like
structures; (ii) the stable structures and compositions of boron sheets when
metal atoms are incorporated onto them to form metal-borides; (iii) the
ramifications of curvature on metal-boride nanotubes in terms of structure and
properties to help design materials that naturally form small nanostructures;
and (iv) the potential of metal-boride nanosystems for hydrogen storage.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The educational component of this award concentrates on
efforts that will disseminate knowledge and interest in computational condensed
matter theory and materials physics through mentorship of graduate and
undergraduate students. Undergraduate students will continue to be trained and
will perform research on nanostructures while learning solid-state and
computational physics. The PI will also continue and expand his outreach
activities in minority-dominated New Haven local public schools by developing
teaching modules in collaboration with high school science teachers. The
modules, teaching curricula, and associated kits help in teaching materials
science, physics, chemistry, and engineering at a high school level by using
electronic devices and media as the delivery vehicles. These modules will be
showcased via workshops organized for high school teachers to help incorporate
this material in the classroom and thereby captivate the interest of students
who may consider degrees and careers in science or engineering.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This award supports
theoretical and computational research that is focused on studying,
understanding, and predicting the properties of very small structures made up of
boron atoms that are some one-millionth the size of the human hair. In recent
years, such materials have been the subject of increasing scientific interest
and investigation due to their novel and unusual structural, mechanical, and
electronic properties. These properties differ from those of better-known
materials based on carbon, and may prove robust and useful in various device
applications. Elucidating the underlying reasons for the unusual behavior of
boron materials furthers understanding of the atomic geometries, unusual bonding
schemes, and electronic behaviors that emerge in systems that are confined along
various spatial dimensions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Using theoretical and
parameter-free computational tools, the PI will investigate a range of problems
such as whether boron atoms deposited on transition metal surfaces will form
sheet-like structures; the stable structures and compositions of boron sheets
when metal atoms are incorporated onto them; and the potential use of metal-
boride materials for hydrogen storage. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The educational
component of this award concentrates on efforts that will disseminate knowledge
and interest in computational condensed matter theory and materials physics
through mentorship of graduate and undergraduate students. Undergraduate
students will continue to be trained and will perform research on nanostructures
while learning solid-state and computational physics. The PI will also continue
and expand his outreach activities in minority-dominated New Haven local public
schools by developing teaching modules in collaboration with high school science
teachers. The modules, teaching curricula, and associated kits help in teaching
materials science, physics, chemistry, and engineering at a high school level by
using electronic devices and media as the delivery vehicles. These modules will
be showcased via workshops organized for high school teachers to help
incorporate this material in the classroom and thereby captivate the interest of
students who may consider degrees and careers in science or engineering.