* 1104813
* 2011 International Conference on Micromanufacturing; Tokyo, Japan; March 7-10, 2011
* ENG,CMMI
* 03/01/2011,02/29/2012
* Kornel Ehmann, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Zhijian Pei
* 02/29/2012
* USD 20,000.00

This grant provides funding to partially cover the travel expenses of selected
U.S. participants of the 2011 International Conference on Micromanufacturing,
which will be held in Tokyo, Japan on March 7-10, 2011 at Tokyo Denki
University. The funds will support a total of 15 researchers from the U.S. to
attend the symposium. The conference will consist of three days of technical
presentations, panel discussions, and keynote speeches, and a technical tour to
RIKEN - The Institute of Physical and Chemical Research, Ohmori Materials
Fabrication Laboratory. The focus of panel discussions will be on energy and
sustainability in micromanufacturing, which requires global collaboration to
address this challenging issue.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This grant will stimulate
technical discussions among researchers in micromanufacturing and foster future
collaborations. The benefits to the U.S. researchers attending the Conference
will include knowledge gained from the technical presentations and discussions
on various micro processes, systems and applications. Japan is one of the world
leaders in micro-manipulation, micro-machining, and micro-forming, hence, the
requested support will enable many researchers (faculty, postdoctoral fellows
and graduate students), scientists and engineers from the U.S. to gain firsthand
knowledge of research, development, and implementation of micromanufacturing
technologies in Japan.