* 1104545
* Statistical Inference for Temporally Dependent Functional Data
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2011,05/31/2015
* Xiaofeng Shao, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 05/31/2015
* USD 316,245.00

The PI develops a systematic body of methods and related theory on inference of
temporally dependent functional data. The basic tool is the self-normalization
(SN), a new studentizing technique developed recently in the univariate time
series setting. The PI proposes to advance new SN-based methods in functional
setup and develop (i) a class of SN-based test statistics to test for a change
point in the mean function and dependent structure of weakly dependent
functional data; (ii) a class of SN-based test statistics to test for white
noise in Hilbert space and effective diagnostic checking tools for the AR(1)
model in functional space; (iii) new SN-based tests in the two sample setup. The
tests can be used to check if the two possibly dependent functional time series
have the same mean and/or autocovariance structure. In this proposal, the SN is
the foundation on which the body of connected and systematic inference methods
for temporally dependent functional data is built.

The proposal is motivated by ongoing collaboration with atmospheric scientists
on statistical assessment of properties of numerical model outputs as compared
to real observations. To study climate change, which is one of the most urgent
problems facing the world this century, scientists have relied primarily on
climate projections from numerical climate models.  There is currently a major
interest to study how different the numerical model outputs are from real
observations and the characterization of their difference. Analyzing these data
are quite challenging because they are massive and highly complex with intricate
spatial-temporal dependence. The SN-based inference methods that the PI develops
in this proposal address these issues. With the assistance of functional
principal component analysis, the SN-based methods are able to handle massive
data sets with dependence, because the methods automatically take the unknown
weak dependence into account, do not involve the choice of any tuning parameters
(so are quite efficient computationally),   and are very straightforward to
implement with asymptotically pivotal limiting distributions. A direct
application of the SN-based methods to climate data is expected to help
atmospheric scientists gain a better understanding of the ability of numerical
model outputs in mimicking real observations.  In addition, the proposed methods
will have broad direct applications to data that are obtained from very precise
measurements at fine temporal scales which frequently  arise in engineering,
physical science and finance. On the educational front, the PI will develop new
advanced topic courses, mentor undergraduate and graduate students and expose
them to the state-of-the-art research in this project.