* 1104383
* Trapped Polariton Condensates: Fundamental Optical Studies and Novel Fabrication Methods
* MPS,DMR
* 09/15/2011,08/31/2015
* David Snoke, University of Pittsburgh
* Continuing Grant
* Paul Sokol
* 08/31/2015
* USD 589,835.00

****Technical abstract****&lt;br/&gt;This project focuses on the new and growing
field of exciton-polariton condensates in semiconductor microcavities. Several
experimental groups around the world have now shown behavior of exciton-
polaritons which is exactly analogous to Bose-Einstein condensation (BEC),
including quantized vortices, a bimodal momentum distribution, superfluid flow,
Josephson junction oscillations, and linear Bogoliubov excitation spectra. Our
group in Pittsburgh has also shown BEC behavior, using a harmonic potential trap
created using our unique method using applied stress. Our proposed work will use
several new experimental methods, including stabilized lasers to reduce
fluctuations, simultaneous real-space and momentum-space imaging of the
polaritons, and streak camera temporal imaging, and will use new ultra-high-Q
cavities with world record polariton lifetimes (including our present structures
which have Q-factor of over a million and diffusion lengths of hundreds of
microns). This work is in collaboration with the fabrication group of L.
Pfeiffer at Princeton; we will develop new types of structures including etched
features acting as barriers for the polaritons. The project will support two
Ph.D. students to learn cutting-edge methods of modern optics, including
ultrafast and nonlinear optics, design, and fabrication methods. Research on the
basic physics of systems generating optical coherence without lasing, may lead
to new types of coherent light sources, new methods of light guiding, and new
optical switching methods.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;****Non-technical
abstract****&lt;br/&gt;Coherent light is light that has no random "noise": you
can think of a coherent light source as like the sound from a bell with a pure
tone, while incoherent light has random noise, like the sound of a radio tuned
to no radio station. Most people are familiar with lasers, which generate
coherent light via a special process predicted by quantum mechanics. In the past
few years, researchers at several labs around the world, including ours, have
developed a new type of solid-state system which generates coherent light by an
entirely different process. This method involves getting the electrons inside a
solid to act coherently; the quantum mechanical wave nature of the electrons is
used to make the electrons oscillate in phase together, and the radiation from
these electrons leads to coherent light emission. This new method of generating
coherent light has already been shown to be more efficient than regular lasing,
and several other novel effects have been seen such as vortices of light. This
project will study the basic physics of this fascinating new type of optical
system, known as Bose-Einstein condensation of polaritons. Graduate students
will be trained to use cutting-edge methods of optics with time resolution of
less than a trillionth of a second, and they will work on new designs of these
solid-state structures, which require structures with dimensions of a few
nanometers, i.e., billionths of meters. This type of device may eventually be
used in optical communications to switch light on and off in trillionths of
seconds, to direct light into different communications channels on the same time
scales, and to make efficient coherent light emitters.