* 1104930
* Defect Structure and Mechanical Behavior of High Entropy Alloys
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2011,07/31/2015
* Carl Koch, North Carolina State University
* Continuing Grant
* Diana Farkas
* 07/31/2015
* USD 435,000.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY: Convention has dictated that multi-component alloy systems
either form intermetallic phases, brittle microstructures, or metallic glasses
during alloying. Recently it has been found that some alloys with five
components or more, all with approximately equiatomic compositions, form simple
structures with unique physical properties. These materials may exhibit high
mechanical hardness and strength. A fundamental understanding of the mechanical
properties and the degree of the stability of these desirable structures has not
been reached. The proposed work investigates the nature of defects as well as
the mechanical properties of a series of fcc solid solution alloys that contain
two to seven components of equiatomic composition. Alloy samples will be created
experimentally by either casting or ball milling methods. EDS and SEM will be
used to perform chemical analysis, TEM and XRD will be used to measure stable
stacking fault energies, and DSC will be used to study structural stability.
Mechanical properties will be measured through both tensile tests and
nanoindentation. First-principles density functional theory based methods will
be used to investigate the physical properties of the alloy system. Elastic
constants will be calculated and used to help interpret the stacking fault
energies measured experimentally with XRD. Additionally, the elastic constants
will also be used to directly evaluate the mechanical stability of the alloy.
Stable and unstable stacking fault energies will be directly calculated through
calculation of generalized stacking fault energy curves. These quantities will
be used to predict and interpret the plastic mechanical response. Finally, low-
angle grain boundary energies and any preferential atomic segregation to grain
boundaries will be directly studied from first
principles.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY: A fundamental
understanding of the nature of defects and the mechanical characteristics of
high entropy alloys is expected to provide a transformative assessment of the
potential capabilities of these novel alloys. The properties of these materials
will be systematically explored as a function of number of components (i.e. atom
types) for alloys with the same underlying atomic structure. This study will
provide critical insight into how defects in the same lattice change as a
function of number of components. This derived understanding could then provide
a foundation for how to better design multi-component alloys with simple
metallic crystal structures. The resulting fundamental understanding of the
mechanical properties and the nature and degree of the stability of these
desirable structures could provide transformative capabilities in the design of
future novel alloys and enable their use in a variety of applications. An
equally important goal of this project is the development of intellectual
resources in the form of M.S. and Ph.D. research students. The PIs are committed
to this education effort, especially for groups underrepresented in science.