* 1104446
* Optically Driven Quantum Dot Spins for Quantum Computing: Coherence Between Spins in Entangled States
* MPS,PHY
* 09/15/2011,08/31/2015
* Lu Sham, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Alexander Cronin
* 08/31/2015
* USD 675,000.00

Moore's limit in electronic devices and information processing represents the
point in time where the number of devices per unit area is so high that the size
of each device is on the order of few atoms and will no longer function
according to design and the chip will fail. Our experiments are designed to go
beyond this limit, working at the size level where quantum mechanics rather the
classical behavior determines performance. We will develop coherent coupling
between devices, without the need for wires, as well as implement quantum phase,
say between particles carrying information, that will be used to carry
additional information and serve to expand the horizon for invention and
discovery. Our studies include understanding decoherence in entangled systems, a
unique quantum phenomena, and provide insight that is quite general and outside
our paradigm of semiconductor quantum dots. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
increasingly sophisticated understanding of the interaction between a
microscopic system (the electron spins) and a macroscopic system (the dot
environment and control or measurement) within quantum theory will provide a
basis for understanding and development of future technology as current
approaches reach their operational limits. The interdisciplinary nature of the
research at the frontier of applications of quantum physics is evident by the
team of collaborators in the physics of semiconductor nano-structures, in high-
precision coherent optical control and spectroscopy of quantum dots, and in
many-body theory and light-matter interaction. The education in this new
frontier for both graduate and undergraduate students contributes to the
development of highly trained people critical to the infrastructure.