* 1104083
* Planning Grant Full Proposal for a Midwest Photonics Regional Center
* EDU,DUE
* 08/15/2011,08/31/2013
* Steven Dulmes, Indian Hills Community College
* Standard Grant
* Duncan E. McBride
* 08/31/2013
* USD 69,748.00

This project supports a planning process for an ATE midwest regional center in
photonics education at 2-year colleges in order to address the growing industry
demand for skilled photonics workers. Photonics, the technology that
incorporates optics and electronics (lasers, fiber-optics, electro-optics,
etc.), is a rapidly expanding field that provides highly-rewarding jobs for
technicians and excellent opportunities for economic growth within the United
States. Photonics is also an enabling technology, with wide-scale applications
in manufacturing and materials processing, defense and homeland security,
renewable energy, telecommunications, diagnostic and therapeutic medicine,
environmental monitoring, nanotechnology, and solid state lighting.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The planning project is: &lt;br/&gt;1. Organizing a
Midwest Photonics Cluster of industry employers and community colleges.
&lt;br/&gt;2. Conducting an employer needs assessment to determine the demand
for photonics technicians in the midwest. &lt;br/&gt;3. Identifying other
Photonics Specialty Education Centers needed by midwest colleges.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: &lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of
this project resides in its focus on photonics, photonics-enabled technologies
and the emerging and changing photonics applications that impact our country's
security, development of alternate energy, and the economic recovery of
manufacturing companies in the midwest. An adequate supply of well-prepared
photonics technicians is vital. Success in building the capacity for educating
sufficient photonics technicians in the midwest ensures rewarding and high-
paying employment for new technicians and enables employed technicians to obtain
the additional education and training to keep their jobs as the requirements
change and the economy expands. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts:
&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of the proposed Regional Center lie in the:
&lt;br/&gt;1. Potential for photonics enrollment growth by coordinating efforts
and providing assistance to midwest colleges as they update existing programs or
initiate new educational offerings for photonics technicians; &lt;br/&gt;2.
Expansion of photonics applications in manufacturing; &lt;br/&gt;3. Mobilization
of midwest colleges to educate employed technicians; &lt;br/&gt;4. Building the
high school pipeline to college in photonics fields;&lt;br/&gt;5. Analysis of
student performance and employer satisfaction with program graduates;
&lt;br/&gt;6. Analysis of the effectiveness of a variety of methods and
practices in technician education.