* 1104986
* Conference:  Sixth International Conference on Ethical Issues in Biomedical Engineering, Brooklyn, New York, March 3-5, 2011
* ENG,CBET
* 04/01/2011,03/31/2012
* Subrata Saha, SUNY Health Science Center at Brooklyn
* Standard Grant
* Kaiming Ye
* 03/31/2012
* USD 15,000.00

This project will support the 6th International Conference on Ethical Issues in
Biomedical Engineering that will be hosted by The SUNY Downstate Medical Center
in collaboration with the Polytechnic Institute of New York and New York Academy
of Sciences during April 1-3, 2011. The conference will bring together faculty,
researchers and students in the rapidly growing interdisciplinary field of
biomedical engineering to discuss the challenging ethical issues faced by
biomedical engineers in their research and practice. Biomedical engineering is
responsible for many of the dramatic advances in modern medicine. However,
biomedical technology has also contributed to dilemmas and has challenged some
of our moral values. These include ethical issues in stem cell research &amp;
cloning, conflicts of interest, allocation of scarce resources, research
misconduct, animal experimentation, clinical trials and marketing of new medical
devices and many other new emerging issues. Research and development executives
from biomedical companies will also be invited. International participants will
also be welcomed to present papers at this conference. The goal of this
conference will be to present an overview and an in-depth discussion of the
ethical issues encountered in bioengineering research and practice that are
presently being conducted at various institutions and biomedical
industry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The conference is expected to have a broad
spectrum of attendees (faculty, scientists, philosophers, students, physicians,
lawyers and industry representatives).