* 1104271
* Preparing a 21st Century Workforce for the Water Industry
* EHR,DUE
* 09/15/2011,08/31/2015
* Colleen Jorgensen, Red Rocks Community College
* Standard Grant
* David B. Campbell
* 08/31/2015
* USD 569,952.00

This project is expanding workforce preparation for water quality operators in
the environmental technology industry through a partnership of Red Rocks
Community College with the Colorado Department of Public Health and Environment,
Regis University, Western State College, and the Colorado State University-
Global Campus. It is producing a statewide training network that expands access
to workforce preparation for water quality management technicians by: 1)
developing and adapting curricula for online delivery that is supported by a
mobile hands-on learning lab; 2) providing outreach and mentorship for the
inclusion of women in the industry; and 3) establishing seamless career pathways
through articulation agreements with 4-year institutions that lead to
accelerated, dual and concurrent enrollment bachelors and masters degree
programs. The project is engaging industry experts to define sustainability
competencies for the twenty-first century water workforce, to develop and
enhance curricula, and to refine instructional strategies. More specifically,
the project is adapting water quality management foundational courses to include
the industry-identified competencies; developing continuing education coursework
to facilitate incumbent worker skills upgrades; adapting a water quality
management degree program for online delivery that is being enhanced by the
mobile training lab; and establishing a regional hands-on training network
through partnerships with business and industry. As a result, the project is
producing 1) updated course materials that prepare students to understand the
importance of sustainability for the water industry; 2) enhanced entrance and
persistence of women in the water quality management program; 3) increased
enrollment in the water quality management degree program; 4) increased
attainment of Class A and B water and wastewater licenses by incumbent workers;
5) the establishment of transfer agreements with colleges and universities; and
6) the establishment of a cadre of trained instructors to deliver online and
regional hands-on training. Collectively, these efforts are developing pathways
into advanced education required by an increasingly complex industry, and
producing a more diverse pool of highly qualified water quality technicians.