* 1104313
* Micro-Submersible Lake Exploration Device (MSLED) - Development of first-generation propelled slim-hole device for subglacial lake (&amp; aquatic environments) exploration
* GEO,OPP
* 05/15/2011,10/31/2012
* Alberto Behar, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Lisa Clough
* 10/31/2012
* USD 299,886.00

This award provides support for "Micro-Submersible Lake Exploration Device
(MSLED)- Development of first-generation propelled slim-hole device for
subglacial lake (&amp; aquatic environments) exploration" from the Antarctic
Integrated System Science within the Office of Polar Programs. Subglacial
environments represent one of the last unexplored habitats on Earth. To get to
subglacial environments one must first drill through the ice. Drill holes are
typically limited in diameter to approximately 30 cm (~ten inches), and all
subglacial explorations are currently limited to slim equipment that will remain
directly beneath the drill hole. The proposed MSLED will be the only piece of
equipment to "swim" away from the hole in a subglacial environment, thus greatly
increasing the range of exploration.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit:
The award provides funding for development of a swimming camera and sensor
platform that is small enough to be deployed down a slim borehole. The MSLED
will have a camera, and also be equipped with a limited suite of chemical
sensors to include temperature, salinity, pH, and pressure. While the current
award is only for development and initial field testing of the MSLED through the
sea ice, it is envisioned that the MSLED will be very useful for recent projects
that NSF has funded within the Pine Island Glacier and Whillans Ice Stream
areas. Understanding subglacial dynamics in the Antarctic is critical for
improving predictive models of land-ice loss that in turn is critical for
understanding how fast sea level may rise in the next
century.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: Exploring new environments has
great inherent interest. Cameras are a great tool to provide a quick look at
totally unexplored locations, and imagery from such explorations is a great way
to engage the public. The development of the MSLED draws heavily on design
contributions from students (both graduate and undergraduate), and will bring a
student to Antarctica.