* 1104629
* Electrical Resistance of a Point Defect
* MPS,DMR
* 09/15/2011,08/31/2014
* Philip Collins, University of California-Irvine
* Continuing Grant
* Tomasz Durakiewicz
* 08/31/2014
* USD 335,000.00

****Technical Abstract****&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The electronic scattering,
localization, and fluctuation associated with a point defect ultimately limit
what is practically achievable in electronics. This NSF project uses new
advances in materials and techniques to systematically measure the transport
phenomena associated with single point defects in one-dimensional, carbon
nanotube conductors. The one-dimensional limit dramatically amplifies the
importance of single defects, to the extent that a single bond or atom
modification can substantially affect two- or three-terminal device
characteristics. This project will perform a comparative study of different
types of defects, produced through deterministic chemical modification, in order
to identify reproducible electronic features that can be associated with
specific chemical terminations. Variable temperature conductance spectroscopy,
scanning probe techniques, and noise spectroscopy will all be used to
characterize devices before and after the incorporation of single point defects.
The project will support the education of a Ph.D. student and also provide
summer research opportunities for undergraduates and talented high school
students. Because the field of research lies at the crossroads between
traditional physics, chemistry, and electrical engineering, these research
opportunities provide outstanding starting points for careers in science and
technology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;****Non-Technical
Abstract****&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The copper wires that conduct most electricity
are not very sensitive to a missing or misplaced atom. But imagine what happens
when these wires shrink to nanometer scales. As the wire diameter approaches a
few atoms, one missing atom could have enormous effects. New advances in
materials and scientific tools allow us to actually make and study wires at this
scale, along with more complicated electronic devices like transistors. For
practical reasons, future electronics are more likely to use carbon wires than
copper ones, so this project uses hollow carbon "nanotubes," wires having a
cross section of only ten to twenty atoms. By fashioning these wires into
transistors and then modifying carbon bonds one by one, the project will map out
and understand the electronic consequences of disorder in atomic scale devices.
This work is a "bottom-up" approach to understanding practical electronics at
the smallest scales, and it will inform and enable the success of future
electronics as traditional, "top-down" manufacturing shrinks to ever smaller
scales. The project will support the education of a Ph.D. student and also
provide summer research opportunities for undergraduates and talented high
school students. Because the field of research lies at the crossroads between
traditional physics, chemistry, and electrical engineering, these research
opportunities provide outstanding starting points for careers in science and
technology.