* 1104819
* Development of Cello/Enzo-P: An Extremely Scalable Adaptive Mesh Refinement Framework and Code for Astrophysics and Cosmology
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2011,01/31/2015
* Michael Norman, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Bogdan Mihaila
* 01/31/2015
* USD 400,000.00

This award supports the development of Cello, a new parallel adaptive mesh
refinement (AMR) software framework. The purpose of Cello is to enable
researchers to write multi-physics AMR applications that can harness the
enormous computing power of current and future world-class high- performance
computing (HPC) platforms. The distinguishing characteristic relative to
existing AMR frameworks is the aggressive pursuit at the onset of extreme
scalability, both in terms of software data structures and hardware parallelism.
Integral to developing Cello will be developing Enzo-P, a petascale astrophysics
and cosmology application built on top of the Cello framework. Enzo-P will not
only help drive development of the underlying Cello framework, but it will serve
as a highly scalable variant of the Enzo terascale astrophysics and cosmology
community code. Both the Enzo-P science application, and the underlying
independent Cello parallel AMR software framework, will be released and
supported as community software.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Software sustainability
will be realized under the dual support of the Laboratory for Computational
Astrophysics (LCA) at the University of California San Diego, and the San Diego
Supercomputer Center, organizations devoted to the long-term maintenance of---
and user support for---community scientific codes and HPC cyberinfrastructure.
Software self-management will be an integral component of the Cello software
design, with software resilience a high priority. The Cello framework will be
designed to detect hardware and software faults, identify performance and
numerical issues, and dynamically reconfigure to always perform with the highest
possible efficiency on currently available hardware components. Energy
efficiency can be considered implicit in the underlying adaptive mesh refinement
approach, which dynamically targets computational resources where they are
required, and avoids expending resources where they are not. The adaptivity of
AMR translates directly to energy savings. This project synthesizes the best
practices of existing parallel AMR frameworks and adds several innovations that
improve the quality of the mesh for various types of simulations. A hierarchical
approach to parallelism and load balancing is taken while enforcing locality to
the maximum while relaxing global synchronization to a minimum. This will enable
the construction of AMR applications of unprecedented spatial and temporal
dynamic range on tomorrow's hierarchical HPC architectures. Adaptive mesh
refinement has proven to be a powerful numerical technique in a wide variety of
disciplines in the pure and applied sciences and engineering. Existing
frameworks will probably not be scalable to tens and hundreds of millions of
cores, meaning that existing applications built on them will need to move to
more scalable and fault tolerant frameworks. Cello is being built with these
applications in mind. The broader impacts of this software development will come
through the science and engineering applications that Cello supports, as well as
novel design principles it embodies.