* 1104373
* DNA Origami Nanostructures with Complex Curvatures in 3D Space
* MPS,DMR
* 09/15/2011,08/31/2014
* Hao Yan, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Aleksandr Simonian
* 08/31/2014
* USD 400,000.00

ID: MPS/DMR/BMAT(7623) 1104373 PI: Yan, Hao ORG: Arizona State
University&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Title: DNA Origami Nanostructures with Complex
Curvatures in 3D Space&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;INTELLECTUAL MERIT: A grand
challenge in the fields of nanotechnology and biomaterials is to assemble
arbitrary, three-dimensional (3D) nanostructures with complete control of the
material shape. To address this challenge, the PI will develop various novel
strategies to construct self-assembling DNA nanostructures that possess complex
curvatures in 3D space. More specifically, he proposes to develop a self-
assembling system to: (1) Produce 3D DNA nanostructures that contain intricate,
complex curvatures using the DNA origami folding technique. (2) Create a set of
geometric, wedge-like DNA nanostructures to direct the curvature of preformed,
planar DNA nanostructures using targeted insertion and deletion. (3) Utilize
curved, 3D DNA origami nanostructures as scaffolds to mimic the role of histone
proteins in gene packaging and create artificial nucleosomes for subsequent
study. This new technology will exploit the exceptional addressability and
spatial control associated with structural DNA nanotechnology to produce an
artificial structural platform that resembles the conformational complexity that
exists in biological structures, thus creating unprecedented opportunities for
engineering novel bioinspired, biomimetic, and biokleptic materials. The design
strategies included in this proposal present fundamental steps toward meeting
this challenge. The proposal aims to achieve self-assembly of 3D nanostructures
with high programmability and complexity, and subsequently use them as scaffolds
to mimic the functionality of nucleosomes. Furthermore, the proposed research
will provide various new and significant approaches to DNA-based
nanofabrication. This project ultimately seeks to go beyond the evident limits
of current top-down techniques for the fabrication of arbitrary shaped 3D
nanostructures. This will lead to smaller, faster, and more diverse nanoscale
structures for a wide range of applications from energy to bio-diagnostic
devices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;BROADER IMPACTS: There are broad societal
implications for this research. As the PIs advance nanoscale techniques for the
development of novel technologies, their research leads to opportunities for
undergraduate and graduate student to receive advanced scientific training, and
for educational outreach to the community by ASU. Yan and Liu's teams at ASU are
located in the Biodesign Institute, which places special emphasis on
interdisciplinary research. The Biodesign Institute provides an opportunity to
recruit students with various backgrounds including chemistry and biochemistry,
engineering, physics, and life science. Also actively recruited are minority and
female students. In addition, every summer the Biodesign Institute and ASU also
provide research opportunities to local high school students and to middle and
high school teachers [Summer Research Experience for Teachers (RET) and High
School Student Summer Internship Program (SIP), and Arizona Science Teacher
Advancement and Research Training (AZ-START)]. The PI and co-PI have actively
participated in these programs, hosting several minority high school teachers
and students in their labs. They anticipate the recruitment of additional high
school students to participate in the proposed research during each summer and
plan to collaborate with local high school chemistry and science teachers to
design an interactive online course called DNA Nano Laboratory, aiming to
introduce DNA nanotechnology to high school students, undergraduate students and
the public. Course materials will include text introductions and laboratory
photographs, video demonstrations, and animations of experimental procedures.
This will benefit a multitude of students who are not able to participate in the
highly competitive internship programs. Projects from this proposed research
will also be used in laboratory modules for the development of a web-based
training protocol for a larger community interested in nanotechnology.