* 1104191
* Single-Electron Mediated Charge, Spin and Lattice Interactions in Oxide Nanostructures
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2011,07/31/2016
* Jeremy Levy, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Lynnette Madsen
* 07/31/2016
* USD 711,145.00

NON-TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION&lt;br/&gt;This research project will help provide
physical understanding of a new oxide-based system capable of information
storage and sensing at scales approaching the distance between atoms. Using a
technique analogous to the perennial toy "etch-a-sketch", devices that operate
with single electrons are being created. These devices store information at very
high densities, and they are also predicted to be ultrasensitive sensors of both
force and charge. The combined sensitivity, once understood properly, can be
used to develop new types of devices and technologies. Aligned with the research
goals are mentoring strategies for helping undergraduates learn advanced (but
essential) subjects such as quantum mechanics. Mentoring strategies for
underrepresented groups are also being pursued for both undergraduate and
graduate students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL DETAILS&lt;br/&gt;This
research project will identify and develop novel couplings between electron
charge, spin, and nanomechanical degrees of freedom in oxide nanostructures. The
research centers on a recently developed ferroelectric sketch-based single-
electron transistor ("SketchSET"). Resonant tunneling into the SketchSET is
modified by the ferroelectric polarization in SrTiO3, enabling an ultrasensitive
electronic readout of the ferroelectric polarization (or strain) state. Initial
experiments are further characterizing the SketchSET devices, and helping to
define the relationship between writing parameters, charging energies, and
tunnel barriers. The two-dimensional confining potential V(x,y) that forms the
SketchSET are being mapped using a cryogenic atomic force microscope (AFM).
Nanomechanical coupling is also being investigated using the piezoelectric and
inverse-piezoelectric effects. Subsequent experiments couple a nanoscale
mechanical object (e.g., C60 molecule or nanocrystalline quantum dot) placed
atop the SketchSET and investigate coupling to phonon modes through inelastic
tunneling experiments. Spintronic effects are being investigated at low
temperature and high magnetic fields (50 mK/9T), with the purpose of
investigating spin relaxation times and gauging the applicability of these
systems for spin-based quantum information platforms. The Kondo regime for
SketchSETs are being investigated, with a longer-term goal of creating
artificial networks of localized and delocalized spin systems. Graduate students
are receiving broad-based training in advanced techniques including sample
processing, scanning probe microscopy and low-temperature magneto-transport.