* 1104821
* Quantum and Classical Phenomena in Electrical and Mechanical Resonators
* MPS,DMR
* 09/15/2011,08/31/2015
* Alexander Rimberg, Dartmouth College
* Continuing Grant
* Paul Sokol
* 08/31/2015
* USD 370,000.00

****Technical abstract****

The research supported by this grant will investigate the nature of the boundary
between classical and quantum physics by study of systems consisting of a
macroscopic oscillator strongly coupled to a microscopic electrical device. The
microscopic device will be driven by application of an electrical signal, and
its effects (or backaction) on the macroscopic oscillator will then be observed.
Two systems are envisioned: in one the microscopic part is a quantum point
contact (a microscopic electrical constriction in a semiconductor) and the
oscillator is the macroscopic crystal in which the point contact is embedded. In
the other, the microscopic part is a single Cooper pair transistor (a
superconducting device that transfers Cooper pairs one by one) coupled to a
superconducting microwave resonator. In each case, applying an electrical drive
to the microscopic device is expected to lead to oscillations in the macroscopic
oscillator. A detailed study of this interaction could lead to a better
understanding of the interface between quantum and classical behavior. Two
graduate students will be supported by this project, and will be trained in such
experimental techniques as microwave measurement, nanoscale fabrication and low-
temperature physics that are widely used both in academia and in high-technology
industry.

****Non-technical abstract****

It is well understood that the physical behavior of macroscopic objects like
baseballs or planets is described very accurately by the laws of classical
physics developed by Newton and familiar to many from a course in freshman
physics. It is equally well understood that the behavior of microscopic objects
like atoms and molecules is described by the much more mysterious and
counterintuitive laws of quantum physics. What is not clear is exactly where the
boundary between classical behavior and quantum behavior lies. In order to
investigate this question, this research will examine the behavior of systems
made up of two pieces, one that by itself would behave classically, and another
that on its own would behave quantum mechanically. By design, the two pieces
will interact strongly with each other, so that the behavior of the combined
system will be different from that of either piece in isolation. Investigations
of this sort will better delineate the border between classical and quantum
physics, and help us understand the influence of quantum phenomena on the
everyday world around us. Two graduate students will be supported by this
project, and will be trained in such experimental techniques as microwave
measurement, nanoscale fabrication and low-temperature physics that are widely
used both in academia and in high-technology industry.