* 1104705
* RUI: Particle Dynamics: Swimming Cells and Sheared Particulate Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2011,06/30/2016
* Paulo Arratia, Haverford College
* Standard Grant
* Paul Sokol
* 06/30/2016
* USD 360,000.00

*****TECHNICAL ABSTRACT*****&lt;br/&gt;This project utilizes the tracking of
particles and cells for novel investigations of complex nonlinear systems. One
project is a study of the fluid dynamics of swimming single celled swimming
organisms that utilize molecular motors contained within twin flagella to propel
themselves through a fluid. Investigations are planned of the induced velocity
fields and mixing produced by swimming cells, their interactions with each
other, collective behavior, the mechanics of the deforming flagella, and the
confinement of cells by light. This work will extend our understanding of the
fluid dynamics and statistical physics of microorganisms. A second investigation
explores the deformation and failure of sheared layers of cohesive particles,
which provides a promising model system for understanding the mechanical failure
of disordered solids. This work includes the training of undergraduate
investigators learning how to conduct independent research and postdoctoral
scholars learning how to mentor students successfully. The work on swimmers is
connected to certain diseases involving abnormalities of flagellar function, and
the work on failure modes of packings can contribute to the improvement of
particulate-based materials. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;*********NON-TECHNICAL
ABSTRACT*********&lt;br/&gt;This project utilizes the video tracking of
particles and biological cells for novel investigations of complex systems. One
project explores the behavior of swimming single-celled organisms that utilize
molecular motors contained within protrusions called flagella to propel
themselves through the surrounding fluid. This work may eventually lead to
insight into diseases involving abnormalities of flagellar function.
Investigations are planned of the fluid mixing produced by swimming cells, their
interactions with each other, the deformations of their flagella, and their
confinement by light. A second investigation studies the deformation and
breaking of layers of cohesive particles, which could contribute to the design
of solids that are especially strong. All of this work includes undergraduate
investigators learning how to conduct independent research and postdoctoral
scholars learning how to mentor students successfully. The Principal
Investigator is also deeply involved in projects designed to improve
undergraduate physics education.