* 1104795
* RUI-Anisotropic Phases of Correlated Electronic Systems
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2015
* Orion Ciftja, Prairie View A & M University
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 08/31/2015
* USD 144,000.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports theoretical and
computational research and education to advance understanding of anisotropic
phases of strongly correlated electron systems in low dimensions and under
extreme quantum conditions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI aims to understand the
origin of and the stabilization mechanism for anisotropic phases of correlated
electronic systems that possess liquid crystalline order. Interacting quantum
systems are often intractable either analytically or numerically without making
uncontrolled approximations. The PI's focus will be on microscopic models of
correlated electronic systems that originally manifest Fermi liquid or quantum
Hall liquid behavior but may undergo phase transitions to inhomogeneous
anisotropic phases. Analytical theoretical methods of quantum many-body physics
will be used in combination with unbiased numerical simulations of microscopic
models to provide a basis for a theoretical understanding of the nature of novel
liquid crystalline or hybrid phases that arise in correlated electronic systems
in low dimensions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Key foci of the research
include:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1) Determining the role of interaction potentials
in the stabilization of anisotropic Fermi liquid phases,&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;2)
Understanding the anisotropic piezoelectric interaction in gallium arsenide
semiconductors,&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;3) Investigating the nature of anisotropic
phases in high Landau levels in terms of novel liquid crystalline states with
broken rotational symmetry,&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;4) Novel electronic quantum
phases driven by strong interactions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports
educational opportunities for undergraduate students. Undergraduate students
will be able to participate in valuable research experiences. This award will
help to develop research opportunities for undergraduate students and will
enhance research and education infrastructure for underrepresented students at a
minority HBCU institution. The outreach activities devised by the PI are aimed
to develop interest in science related areas at the K-12 level in local
communities and local high schools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NONTECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports theoretical research and
education aimed at understanding and exploring new states of matter that arise
from electrons that interact strongly with each other in materials confined to
two dimensions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Quantum physics of many interacting
particles forms the basis of our understanding of the properties of complex
materials synthesized in laboratories all over the world. The ability to predict
the properties of new materials and new materials-related phenomena can play a
crucial role in the search for the building blocks of future technologies. The
interaction between electrons leads to intriguing quantum mechanical states.
Some of these states are believed to be quantum mechanical analogs of phases
observed in systems of long molecules in which the orientation of the molecules
become correlated with each other, as occurs in, for example, a liquid crystal
display. The understanding of these liquid-crystal-like states of electrons and
how they appear under specific circumstances is of great interest not only from
the perspective of fundamental science, but also because they serve as potential
building blocks of future technologies for electronic devices, sensors,
computation, and more. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The ability to predict the
properties of new materials and new materials-related phenomena can play a
crucial role in the search for the building blocks of future technologies. Using
theoretical methods for quantum many-body systems, the PI will address both the
nature of the anisotropy that develops in a variety of electronic systems at
temperatures close to the absolute zero of temperature. This project includes a
focus on applying computational methods to enable computers to provide
fundamental insight into quantum mechanical systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;
Undergraduate students will be able to participate in valuable research
experiences and will be involved in important aspects of this research. Because
the research requires exploring a variety of models and methods, there are many
opportunities for undergraduate students to gain important research experience.
This award will help to enhance research and education infrastructure for
underrepresented minority students. Through an outreach activity, the PI aims to
develop interest in science related areas at the K-12 level in local communities
and high schools.