* 1104186
* H2Options
* EDU,DUE
* 09/15/2011,09/30/2016
* Sammis White, Milwaukee Area Technical College
* Standard Grant
* David B. Campbell
* 09/30/2016
* USD 498,216.00

A regional partnership of technical colleges and universities, workforce
investment boards, K-12 systems, and water-driven industries and businesses have
identified gaps to be filled to meet the specific personnel and skill needs of
southeastern Wisconsin's water technology businesses and emerging occupations.
This ATE project - H2Options - is filling these gaps by modifying and developing
new associate degree and technical certificate water technology programs, and
establishing high school and university articulations as a part of pathways to
water technology careers. This project is promoting the training of new water
industry technicians to meet the growing workforce demands of the water industry
in southeastern Wisconsin. These degrees and certificates are serving students
at the partner institutions, as well as incumbent and dislocated workers.
Through articulation, regional high school students are being introduced to
opportunities in water technology and gain basic competencies to transition into
two- and four-year programs. Students also benefit from internships, service
learning, and mentoring opportunities. The H2Options program identifies new
articulation areas; expands knowledge of specific skills, tasks and technology
needed in water technology sectors; develops networks and partnerships; and
makes the expanded curriculum for the career pathways available nationally. The
broader impacts of the project include the modification of at least one
associate degree program and creation of four new certificate programs that will
reach a wide range of persons in southeastern Wisconsin. In addition, the
project promotes new AAS to BS transfer articulations, incumbent worker
promotional opportunities, and adult and youth career pathways leading to water
industry employment through internship and service learning programs.