* 1104090
* Priming The Pipeline For The St. Louis Region - Creating A Future High Technology Workforce
* EHR,DUE
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2015
* Donald Pohl, Ranken Technical College
* Standard Grant
* Keith Sverdrup
* 08/31/2015
* USD 881,984.00

Ranken Technical College is partnering with the Saint Louis Public Schools, the
Saint Louis Regional Business Council, and St. Louis for Kids to implement this
"Priming the Pipeline" project. The project is providing a continuum of
educational opportunities for students, beginning in middle school and
continuing through the attainment of at least a 2-year Associate Degree and
successful job placement in a high technology field, or transfer to a 4-year
Bachelor Degree program. The project activities include coordination of science,
math and technology-based experiences for middle school students through summer
academies and other extra-curricular activities, a dual high school-college
enrollment educational program, summer internship experiences in business and
industry for secondary school students, a program to allow disconnected youth to
revive their educational opportunities, integrated work-based learning
components that include an apprenticeship program to create pathways to
employment, and professional development for secondary school educators. Through
the offering of this coordinated set of activities and opportunities for
students and teachers, the project is working towards accomplishment of the
following objectives: 1) motivating a significant number of disadvantaged
students (middle school and high school grades) to pursue an education in high
technology-related occupations; 2) providing an effective peer and professional
mentoring program for participating students that promotes academic and personal
achievement; 3) establishing a high school-to-college academic bridge program in
STEM-related technical disciplines that effectively encourages educational
advancement and achievement leading to AAS and BS degrees, and to industry-
recognized certifications; 4) developing a registered internship and
apprenticeship program that provides opportunities with St. Louis area
industries, and that is centered on job-related competencies that lead to
enhanced placement opportunities; 5) developing a cadre of secondary school
teachers who demonstrate improved STEM teaching skills; and 6) increasing the
number of individuals who will ultimately be prepared to join a highly qualified
workforce serving St. Louis area high tech companies.

By focusing on economically disadvantaged students from underrepresented groups
in STEM, this project is expanding the pool of participants who are qualified
for the many excellent careers available to trained technicians, particularly in
the fields of biotechnology and advanced manufacturing, which are key growth
industries in the St. Louis area. The project is replicating, extending, and
enhancing various projects successfully conducted by other educational
institutions, including Central Virginia Community College, Arizona State
University, and Idaho State University, and in doing so is bringing together
individuals and organizations in St. Louis with proven commitment and expertise
to collaborate to ensure student success. This project is situated in a low-
income, high minority urban setting, and has the potential to serve as a model
for how to achieve long range effects that eliminate or mitigate some of the
cyclical realities of generational poverty and low educational achievement.