* 1104062
* US Egypt Cooperative Research: New Approach for Measuring Crop Evapotranspiration and Updating Crop Coefficients in Egypt
* O/D,OISE
* 08/01/2011,07/31/2015
* Richard Snyder, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Anne Emig
* 07/31/2015
* USD 146,300.00

1104062 &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project supports a cooperative research
project by Dr. Richard Snyder, University of California at Davis and Dr. Hassan
E-Banna Osman, Agricultural Research Institute (ARC) in Cairo, Egypt and Dr.
Atef Swelam, ICARDA, Cairo, Egypt. They plan to work on developing new
methodologies to measure actual evapotranspiration (ETc) in Egypt. This will
help the Egyptian water policy planners. The goals of this project are to (1)
refine and use the SIMETAW model for water demand planning in Egypt and (2) use
the calibrated Surface Renewal method (SR) to develop and update crop
coefficient (Kc) values for various crops by region in Egypt. Also, this project
aims to develop training materials to extend the methodology to the water
resources engineers, agronomists, extension agents, and growers. The SIMETAW
application program and surface renewal are being used by the State of
California to estimate the demand for irrigation water to improve agriculture
water resources management. It has the potential to greatly improve our
knowledge about the demand for water in crops in Egypt and it will help farmers
with on-farm irrigation efficiency. Information on water demand is also needed
to efficiently manage water supply and delivery in the Nile Delta and other
regions in Egypt. The proposal is to develop and collect the information needed
to apply the SIMETAW model for all agro-ecological zones in Egypt and to run the
model, test its accuracy, and modify the program as needed to provide the
Egyptian irrigation engineers with better statistics on water use under
different conditions. In addition, this project will identify where more
reference evapotranspiration (ETo) stations are needed to improve the spatial
estimation of ETo over Egypt. The PIs will work jointly to install and operate
surface renewal stations to measure crop evapotranspiration and to determine
crop coefficients. This will help growers to improve their on-farm irrigation
efficiency, and it will help Egyptian water management specialists and
hydrologists to better manage water flows through the irrigation networks in
Egypt. The effort will be beneficial to both the economy and the environment.
The first year of the project will mainly be devoted to training, installation
of SR stations, and basic data collection. In the second and third years,
cooperators will collect data from SR stations to determine ETc and Kc values
for various important crops. The third year will focus on educational materials,
publishing and dissemination of the project
findings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual merits: The proposed activity
involves application of a water demand model in Egypt and development of crop
coefficients for various crop types in Egypt. The research uses surface renewal
method to estimate evapotranspiration over Egypt. Software for water budget
determination and management over varied croplands has been developed over a
number of years, mainly using California locations for testing and calibration.
Application to other climates and cropland situations is required to test and
calibrate the software. This will be provided by the work in Egypt. Technology
transfer will be conducted with workshops and materials.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts: Overall water is a critical resource
whose management affects all aspects of human life. Agriculture is the biggest
water consumer and so better management pays off substantially. This work will
contribute to this goal, and is highly important in a region (Middle East) where
water is likely to be a contentious issue among nations as well. The research
will help scientists in Egypt to devise better methods to estimate
evapotranspiration and get better estimates of surface energy budget, and thus
help manage water resources better. The research can provide information on
exchange coefficients over an arid region. &lt;br/&gt;This proposal is supported
under the US-Egypt Joint Fund Program where NSF supports the US side and the
Government of Egypt funds the Egyptian side.