* 1104598
* Collaborative Research: The Estuarine Chlorophyll a Maximum as an Ecosystem Integrator and Indicator of Contemporaneous Nutrient and Climatic Perturbations
* BIO,DEB
* 09/27/2010,08/31/2013
* Michael Wetz, Texas A&M University Corpus Christi
* Standard Grant
* Linda Deegan
* 08/31/2013
* USD 115,135.00

Phytoplankton primary production in estuarine ecosystems is often concentrated
in distinct zones where high nutrient loads coincide with optimal conditions for
phytoplankton growth. These zones are called chlorophyll maxima and produce a
disproportionate amount of carbon for estuarine food webs. These areas are zones
of high ecological importance because they can be used as indicators of
estuarine condition and function. The focus of our study, the Neuse River
Estuary (NRE), has a well defined chlorophyll maxima during the spring-fall. The
NRE is highly affected by human activities, in particular excess nutrient input
from agricultural and urban areas. The results of this research will provide
baseline information about how these areas behave under future nutrient
management, hydrologic (e.g., droughts, storms) and altered food web
scenarios.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Estuaries are among the most productive, yet
highly impacted ecosystems on Earth. The chlorophyll maxima is an important
location in many temperate estuaries worldwide, thus our result will be
applicable beyond our study system, the Neuse River estuary. Further knowledge
of the behavior of this important feature will enhance our ability to better
manage highly impacted estuarine ecosystems. This project will provide diverse
educational opportunities for graduate students who will develop independent
research projects. The NSF-supported Summer Pre-graduate Research Experience
Program (SPGRE) at UNC-CH and regional universities educating under-represented
groups will provide students for summer internships. Finally, high school
students and teachers will be employed as interns during the summer field
season, giving them a range of newfound experiences and knowledge to bring back
to the classroom.