* 1104163
* EDUCATORS' EQUITY in STEM ACADEMY:
* EDU,DUE
* 08/01/2011,01/31/2016
* Mimi Lufkin, National Alliance for Partnerships in Equity Education Foundatio
* Standard Grant
* Keith Sverdrup
* 01/31/2016
* USD 1,059,944.00

The Educators' Equity (EE) STEM Academy aims to enhance recruitment and academic
success of women and underrepresented students in technician education STEM
courses and programs by providing professional growth opportunities for
community college faculty and secondary teachers. The National Alliance for
Partnership in Equity Education Foundation (NAPEEF), together with the Community
College of Baltimore County, Baltimore County Public Schools and two regionally-
based ATE Centers, created the EE-STEM Academy project to deliver 5 days of
rigorous instruction, plus a year of facilitated coaching and high quality
resources to improve classroom pedagogy. The 20-50 educators who participate
each year customize and implement the strategies and tools in their classrooms,
ones that they have designed to have a direct positive impact on student
outcomes in STEM technician programs in engineering and IT. The materials and
methods featured in the project include the following effective, research-based
practices: 1) delivery of face-to-face and on-line rigorous training content,
resources, tools, and strategies focused on micro-messaging, gender, and
diversity in STEM; 2) incorporation of NAPEEF's Five Step Program Improvement
Process for continuous educator feedback, peer support, and program revision; 3)
building of professional learning communities to engage and support
participants; 4) provision of peer-coaching training to build the network of
educator learning and support; and 5) collection of quantitative and qualitative
data that describe the impact on student performance for dissemination through
technical education channels and journal publication.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: EE-STEM adapts research-based
instructional materials and strategies originally developed and delivered to
physics teachers in the Dallas Independent School District, which resulted in
significant increases in the physics pass rate for girls and in the number of
girls taking the AP Physics exam. With input from leading content experts in
STEM technician education, NAPEEF adapts and enhances this curriculum to improve
faculty pedagogy and assure improvements in student outcomes among a diversity
of young women and underrepresented groups in targeted technician programs, and
in the common core classes that serve the programs' educational pipeline.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The EE-STEM Academy engages educators to
create customized strategies unique to their diverse population's needs by
making them aware of the implicit biases that we all have and which cause
inequities in the classroom. Educators collectively and individually select,
develop, and evaluate currently available pedagogical tools, resources, and
strategies as applied to their specific programs in order to improve student
outcomes. NAPEEF distributes the resulting products and services through its
national distribution network of 40 state education agencies and community
colleges. It is anticipated that results of the initial offerings of this
adapted effective practice program will be the understanding of its impact for
implementation in all STEM technician programs of study in the U.S.