* 1104501
* Studies in Statistical Mechanics
* MPS,DMR
* 10/01/2011,09/30/2016
* Joel Lebowitz, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 09/30/2016
* USD 423,000.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;The Division of Materials Research, the Division of
Mathematical Sciences, and the Physics Division contribute funds to this award.
This award supports theoretical research and education aimed at advancing
understanding of the properties of macroscopic systems originating in the
collective behavior of their microscopic constituents. The methods used range
from exact mathematical analysis to computer simulation. They provide a bridge
between rigorous results and applications, for both equilibrium and
nonequilibrium phenomena.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research is highly
interdisciplinary, bringing together physicists, mathematicians, chemists and
those working in theoretical areas of the biological and social sciences. Topics
of study include:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1) The effects of randomness in quantum
systems will be elucidated. This will extend the recent proof that the addition
of randomness to a quantum system rounds a first-order phase transition in the
conjugate order parameter in 2 dimensions or less, or for cases involving the
breaking of a continuous symmetry in 4 dimensions or less. New inequalities for
random systems will be explored.&lt;br/&gt;2) The phase diagram of general
systems with spatially asymmetric long range interactions will be investigated,
extending the exact solution of the three species ABC model in 1D.&lt;br/&gt;3)
Results on the phase diagram of lattice systems with multispin interactions will
be extended.&lt;br/&gt;4) Pattern formation such as stripes, in equilibrium and
nonequilibrium systems, due to short range attractions and long range repulsions
will be elucidated.&lt;br/&gt;5) The evolution of the macrostate of an open
system given by an autonomous equation will&lt;br/&gt;be investigated. In
analogy to the Boltzmann entropy in an isolated system, the large deviation
function, with respect to the stationary measure of the nonequilibrium
stationary state, is a Lyapunov function for this evolution. This yields new
Lyapunov functions for nonlinear diffusion equations. The deviation function,
considered as a relative free energy of an open system, will be explored from
both a microscopic and macroscopic point of view.&lt;br/&gt;6) A rigorous
determination of transport coefficients is an important objective of this
research project. Domains of validity of Fourier's law in various systems, for
example weakly anharmonic crystals with random masses, will be elucidated. When
noise is added to the dynamics Fourier's law holds rigorously, but will a small
amount of anharmonicity destroy phonon localization? Violations of Fourier's law
for momentum conserving models in 1D and 2D will be investigated.&lt;br/&gt;7)
Criteria for "typicality" in realistic systems will be investigated: for a
"typical" large isolated quantum system every initial wave function from an
energy shell evolves in such a way that, for most time it is macroscopically
equivalent to the micro-canonical density matrix.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award supports the PI's efforts to organize two conferences every year in which
both core subjects and new developments in statistical mechanics are discussed
in a collegial atmosphere. Graduate students, postdocs and minority scientists
are encouraged to present talks on their work and interact with leaders in the
field. They also serve as a clearing house for positions and often lead to new
collaborations. In addition to many invited lectures at scientific conferences
the PI has given public lectures and has written an article for Scholarpedia on
Time's Arrow.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NONTECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;This award supports theoretical research and education in a
variety of subfields of statistical mechanics. This work is jointly supported by
the Division of Materials Research and the Division of Mathematical Sciences.
The central theme of the effort is a better understanding of the properties of
material systems originating in the collective behavior of their elementary
atomic constituents. The methods used range from exact mathematical analysis to
computer simulations. These approaches bridge the gap between rigorous results
and applications. Topics of study range from classical physics to quantum
physics, from highly formal to applications of technological relevance and even
to dynamics of disease propagation. The project aims to advance the theory of
systems that are far from the balance of equilibrium with an impact on
biological systems, biomaterials, and materials more generally.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research activities are highly interdisciplinary,
bringing together physicists, mathematicians, chemists and those working in
theoretical areas of the biological and social sciences. The expected
applications are in material science, complex fluids and in biological systems.
The project also includes the organization of two conferences every year in
which both core subjects and new developments in statistical mechanics are
discussed in a collegial atmosphere. Graduate students, postdocs and minority
scientists are involved and present talks on their work and interact with
established researchers in the field. The conferences also serve as an
opportunity for professional networking and can lead to new collaborations.