* 1104195
* Pathways to Cybersecurity and Information Assurance Careers
* EHR,DUE
* 10/01/2011,09/30/2014
* William Keely, Hagerstown Community College
* Continuing Grant
* R. Corby Hovis
* 09/30/2014
* USD 650,000.00

This project is developing a cybersecurity career pathway with school systems,
baccalaureate institutions, and employers, including the Defense Information
Systems Agency (DISA). Activities include the establishment of a new A.A.S.
degree (designed specifically for those who wish to enter the workforce
immediately), a new A.S. degree (a more computer science-based associate degree
for transfer students), and a new certificate program (designed for those who
just need basic certifications to enter the cybersecurity field), as well as
outreach to local high schools. These features enable students, including high
school students taking college courses before graduation, to follow a smooth
educational pathway into jobs, certification examinations, or baccalaureate
programs for additional education. The project is also developing a penetration
testing lab to enable extensive hands-on training, providing professional
development for teachers, making connections with cybersecurity start-up firms,
and offering curricula for students who have completed degrees in fields other
than cybersecurity but want to start new careers as cybersecurity technicians.

The career pathway for the cybersecurity/information assurance program is based
on the model developed by the College and Career Transitions Initiative (CCTI).
As defined by CCTI, a "career pathway" is an articulated sequence of rigorous
academic and career courses, beginning in the ninth grade and leading to an
associate degree, and/or an industry-recognized certificate or licensure, and/or
a baccalaureate degree and beyond. Following this model, specific long-term
outcomes for the project include (1) increased enrollment and persistence in
postsecondary education; (2) increased academic and skill achievement at
postsecondary levels; (3) increased attainment of postsecondary degrees,
certificates, or other recognized credentials (including professional
credentials needed by incumbent cybersecurity employees that go beyond
traditional associate degree-related curricula); and (4) increased entry into
stable employment or further education.

The project's new curricula are being offered in hybrid/online formats with
flexible scheduling. This flexibility, along with the variety of program
possibilities, enables the college to attract more prepared students into the
cybersecurity/information assurance pathway and gives students who have
completed postsecondary studies new opportunities to obtain additional
professional credentials and move into the cybersecurity field.