* 1104658
* Polymer Glass, Melt, and Mixture Thermodynamics in the Bulk and in Thin Films
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2011,07/31/2015
* Jane Lipson, Dartmouth College
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 07/31/2015
* USD 355,000.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Division of Materials Research and
the Division of Chemistry contribute funds to this award. It supports
theoretical reearch and education that involves the application of statistical
thermodynamic methods to problems of both fundamental and applied
interest.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Polymeric thin films have potential applications
in areas such as electronics, optics, and protective membranes; in addition,
they are a ubiquitous component in nanocomposites. Maintenance of structural
integrity is key, thus it is essential to ensure that operating conditions do
not approach the glass transition temperature. Evidence from a variety of
experimental techniques indicates that a supporting substrate and a free surface
can each have a profound impact on the glass transition temperature of a
polymeric thin film, relative to the bulk value. However, the interpretation of
these results is controversial. Theory can play an essential role in resovlving
the controversy through the development of clearly elucidated models with well-
defined assumptions, and the application of them to determine what physical
behaviour would ensue. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A focus of this project builds on
the PI's previous work that yielded a model of thermodynamic properties that
appears able to predict shifts in the glass transitions of freestanding
polymeric films that match with experimental data. The PI aims to exploit this
and related models in order to predict both glass transitions and phase
separation in polymer films.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;An important question is
whether it is possible to capture the thermodynamic behavior well enough - not
just the free energy, but also the entropic and enthalpic contributions to it -
so that predictions regarding any mixture may be made using only pure component
experimental data as input. The PI's lattice-based theory of polymer fluids and
mixtures in analyzing dozens of polymers and blends has yielded intriguing
connections between pure component properties and thermodynamic behaviour. The
PI plans to explore whether strategic choices of components will result in
control of both the enthalpy and entropy of mixing in polymeric blends and
solutions, allowing for true predictions regarding miscibility based on pure
component properties, alone.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; Theoretical models developed
in the course of the research have potential for widespread use. The ability to
correlate characteristic pure component behaviour with the enthalpic and
entropic contributions to mixture thermodynamics will yield routes to the
development of new materials. Another outcome of this research will be a
thermodynamic model for how both the local and averaged behaviour of polymers
and their blends changes in going from bulk to film. The impact of this research
will be magnified through the involvement of graduate students and postdoctoral
fellows, both via publications and also through their presentations at national
meetings. The PI's efforts in research and teaching mentorship have resulted in
an increase in the number of women in the ranks of graduate and postgraduate
students and in faculty; it is expected that such effects will continue.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
Division of Materials Research and the Division of Chemistry contribute funds to
this award. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;An enduring ambition for a theorist is to
solve complex problems with conceptually transparent tools. The PI will focus on
research areas from studies on glassy polymer thin films to thermodynamic
properties of novel, untested, polymer-containing mixtures. Preliminary evidence
indicates that tools from the same basic set may be effective across this span
of interests. When a simple tool is shown to be convincing in tackling a series
of complicated questions, it not only reveals something about the essential
elements of the problems, but also illuminates the extent to which seemingly
very different problems may be related.&lt;br/&gt;A typical small molecule
liquid, when cooled, can turn into an amorphous glass or a crystal. What is
usually thought of as 'glass,' as found in windows and drinking vessels, has as
its majority component silicon dioxide, with other small molecules mixed in.
However, large chain-like molecules such as polymers also form glassy materials.
Among the many common examples are polycarbonate eyeglasses and windshields. The
temperature below which a polymer system turns into a glass is called the 'glass
transition temperature'. Recent experimental studies have revealed that when
polymers are formed into very thin films, ten to one hundred nanometers thick,
where a nanometer is a billionth of a meter, the presence of either a free
surface or a supporting underlayer may result in a shift in the glass transition
that can be quite dramatic - up to thirty degrees Celsius.&lt;br/&gt;There is
some evidence that more than one physical driving force may be at play in the
evident shifts of glass temperature with film thickness. The PI's investigation
begins a thought experiment: imagine that a 'slice' of material is extracted
from a bulk sample to form an ultrathin slab. The formation of two free surfaces
creates layers of polymeric segments for whom neighbouring interactions with
other segments have been greatly diminished. By describing the implications in
mathematical terms the PI finds that missing interactions result in a film glass
transition temperature lower than that for the bulk sample. Test calculations
are in reasonable agreement with experiments.&lt;br/&gt;This focus on how
neighbouring interactions affect the physical behaviour of a polymeric sample
also motivates the PI's studies on what happens when polymers of two types are
mixed. In that case a polymer segment will not face missing interactions, but
altered ones, due to the presence of another kind of segment. The ability to
predict the extent to which polymers of different types may mix is crucial in
the design of new materials, and will also lead to better manipulation of
poorly-understood systems already being used. Combining results for the two
kinds of problems described above will allow the PI to 'create' mixtures in both
thin film and bulk form, with the potential for controlling the extent to which
different materials may mix as a function of sample thickness. &lt;br/&gt;The
scientific discoveries arising from this research will be magnified through the
involvement of graduate students and postdoctoral fellows, both via publications
and also through their presentations at national meetings. In addition, the PI's
efforts in research and teaching mentorship have resulted in an increase in the
number of women in the ranks of graduate and postgraduate students and in
faculty; it is expected that such effects will continue.