* 1104205
* VESTA National Center of Excellence
* EDU,DUE
* 07/15/2011,06/30/2016
* Michael Gau, Missouri State University
* Continuing Grant
* David B. Campbell
* 06/30/2016
* USD 4,999,812.00

The Viticulture and Enology Science and Technology Alliance (VESTA) became an
ATE Regional Center of Excellence in 2007 and now includes 2-year colleges in
Arkansas, Oklahoma, Kansas, Michigan, Minnesota, Texas, Ohio, Indiana, and
Wisconsin, thus completing the goal of expanding the Regional Center to include
institutions in 12 Midwest states. With a focus on providing students
scientific, mathematics, and technology foundations in viticulture and enology,
VESTA provides students access to a cadre of nationally recognized expert
instructors who provide online courses and participate in designing and
implementing local field practicums. Through its expanding partnership and
utilizing its ground-breaking distance education model, VESTA provides 2-year
colleges and the grape and wine production industry access to knowledge and
skill development programs that would not be available if each institution had
to develop and sustain separate programs. With this award, VESTA becomes an ATE
National Center of Excellence and further broadens its partnership to include
four 2-year colleges that represent grape and wine production regions on the
east and west coasts. As a National Center of Excellence, VESTA continues to
expand the partnership through an Affiliates program that adds twenty 2-year
colleges throughout the nation, thus providing the broadest national access to
its programs and professional development activities. The VESTA Center also is
expanding its scope to include the development of entrepreneurial and business
skills. VESTA is developing a pilot project to link its education to employment
outcomes with the rapidly emerging statewide, linked education and workforce
longitudinal database systems. This activity significantly improves the capacity
of ATE centers and projects to accurately track performance measures. VESTA has
developed and deployed a ground-breaking distance education model which enables
faculty and students, especially in rural areas, to participate in VESTA
programs regardless of state boundaries. This exemplary model, which is being
widely disseminated, has broad ramifications for implementation to support the
education of a workforce at the national level. Finally, VESTA focuses on
increasing awareness and interest of veterans and other underrepresented
populations in the career opportunities available in this industry, as well as
expanding its program to accommodate those with English as a second language.