* 1104934
* GOALI: Spectroscopic Ellipsometry of Transition Metal Silicides
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2011,07/31/2015
* Stefan Zollner, New Mexico State University
* Standard Grant
* Z.  Ying
* 07/31/2015
* USD 359,376.00

Technical: This GOALI project is to study optical properties of transition
metals and related intermetallic compounds, especially silicides. Metal and
intermetallic compound films are grown on silicon and silicon oxide using
physical vapor deposition at IBM. Samples are annealed to encourage grain
growth, intermetallic reactions, and agglomeration (Ostwald ripening). The
complex dielectric functions of the thin film materials are investigated using
spectroscopic ellipsometry over a wide spectral range from the far infrared to
the vacuum ultraviolet. Optical measurements are combined with semiconductor
metrology techniques, particularly x-ray measurements and atomic force
microscopy, to understand the film properties, intermetallic formation, and
evolution of the films during materials and device processing.&lt;br/&gt;Non-
technical: The project addresses basic research issues in a topical area of
materials science with high technological relevance. Low-resistance contacts to
nanoelectronic devices require ultrathin Ohmic metal-semiconductor junctions
with superior chemical, physical, and thermal stabilities. Ellipsometry allows
non-contact investigations of the properties of thin metal films, intermetallic
formation, and materials evolution during processing. Graduate and undergraduate
students, including those in under-represented groups, will be trained for
ellipsometry, metrology, semiconductor processing, and device fabrication, and
learn about materials physics in industry. Well-designed capstone design
projects for senior undergraduate students are an important component of the
project.