* 1104788
* Many-body theory of spin-orbit coupled materials and novel spin drag effects
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2014
* Giovanni Vignale, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 08/31/2014
* USD 345,000.00

Technical Summary&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports theoretical research
and education on materials with strong spin-orbit interaction. These materials
are potentially important in a new generation of electronic devices, based on
the electron spin. Spin-orbit interactions are traditionally studied within a
one-electron context, but there are instances in which electron-electron
interactions latch-on to spin-orbit interactions to produce intriguing
collective effects. Examples of this are the spin Hall drag and the
inhomogeneous Gilbert damping of spin waves. The PI aims: (i) to identify and
study novel many-body effects in spin-orbit coupled systems, and (ii) to study
Coulomb drag effects under novel conditions, e.g. in dilute magnetic
semiconductors close to the magnetic ordering transition, in semiconductor bi-
layers close to an electron-hole pairing transition, and in semiconductors with
strong spin-orbit interactions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;(i) Many-body effects in
spin-orbit-coupled systems - Spin-orbit coupling in solid-state systems modifies
the electron-electron interaction, producing an effective interaction similar to
the Breit interaction of quantum electrodynamics, but considerably stronger. The
PI will investigate the effects of this interaction in Coulomb-coupled bilayer
systems and in single-layer two-dimensional electron liquids. The PI will
further develop the many-body theory of coupled current-spin excitations and the
optical conductivity in the single-layer systems, both in the normal and in the
superconducting state and in the presence of a magnetic field. In particular, he
will study these effects in systems with Bychkov-Rashba and Dresselhaus spin-
orbit coupling, in the vicinity of the 'neutrality point' where the two
interactions balance each other. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;(ii) Coulomb-drag effects
- The PI will extend his investigations of spin Coulomb drag to electronic
systems on the verge of phase transitions, such as magnetic ordering in dilute
magnetic semiconductors and electron-hole pairing in semiconductor bilayers. In
both cases, a strong enhancement of the drag effect is expected due to the
contribution of spin fluctuations or pairing fluctuations to the effective
electron-electron or electron-hole interaction. In this context the PI will
study the behavior of the Dyakonov-Perel spin relaxation time near the magnetic
ordering transition. In collaboration with experimentalists, the PI will
calculate spin Coulomb drag parameters of optically excited electrons in hole-
doped magnetic semiconductors near the ferromagnetic transition. The PI also
plans to investigate the transport and spin relaxation dynamics of optically
induced spin gratings in quantum wells with Bychkov-Rashba and Dresselhaus spin-
orbit coupling, near the neutrality point. A recently introduced spin-to-density
dynamics mapping will be used to connect the spin relaxation time in the
presence of spin-orbit coupling to the spin Coulomb drag time without spin-orbit
coupling.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Research on interacting spin-orbit coupled
systems can have a large impact on the field of spintronics and contributes to
the intellectual foundations upon which possible new electronic device
technologies rest. This award and the supported research contribute to the
education of graduate students and postdoctoral
researchers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Non-Technical
Summary&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports theoretical research and
education to study materials in which electrons experience strong spin-orbit
interactions. Electrons have an intrinsic property called spin where it appears
as if the electron spins like a tiny top. The spin of the electron is also
connected to its intrinsic magnetic properties; it behaves as though it was a
tiny bar magnet. As an electron moves through a solid the theory of relativity
says that it will experience a magnetic field from the atomic cores in the
lattice. The interaction of the electron with this magnetic field gives rise to
the spin-orbit interaction. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Materials where spin-orbit
interactions are particularly strong have recently gained the spotlight as key
actors in a possible new generation of electronic devices, spintronic devices,
which use the electron spin just as ordinary electronic devices use the electron
charge. This interest has largely been fueled by the hope to realize the
spintronic analog to a transistor, the 'spin transistor,' in which the on/off
state would be achieved through control of the electron's spin in a way that
does not use a magnetic field but exploits our ability to control the electron's
motion and the spin-orbit interaction. Basically, the spin-orbit interaction
allows us to manipulate the electron spin using an electric
field.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Spin-orbit interactions are traditionally studied
ignoring the interaction of electrons with each other. But, there are instances
in which interactions between electrons latch-on to spin-orbit interactions to
produce interesting effects. For example, in a system of two closely spaced but
clearly separated electron layers, a current flowing in one of the two layers
can induce a spin accumulation in the other layer. This effect, known as spin
Hall drag, is caused by the Coulomb interaction between electrons in different
layers, coupled with spin-orbit interaction of electrons in each layer. This
effect is one instance of a broader class of 'Coulomb drag effects' in which the
motion of one group of electrons is used to drag along a second group of
electrons and, in so doing, induces a desired property. This award supports
research with the aim to discover new effects in materials with strong spin-
orbit interactions, with an emphasis on Coulomb drag effects. The PI will also
study Coulomb drag effects under novel conditions, for example in novel
materials close that are close to becoming
magnetic.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Research on interacting spin-orbit coupled
systems can have a large impact on the field of spintronics and contributes to
the intellectual foundations upon which possible new electronic device
technologies rest. This award and the supported research contribute to the
education of graduate students and postdoctoral researchers.