* 1104192
* Cybersecurity Camps
* EHR,DUE
* 07/15/2011,06/30/2014
* Corrinne Sande, Whatcom Community College
* Standard Grant
* R. Corby Hovis
* 06/30/2014
* USD 200,000.00

This project is increasing the awareness and interest of high school students in
the exciting and emerging field of information security and promoting their
involvement in the next steps towards an educational career pathway. Activities
focus primarily on program development and improvement, and curriculum and
educational materials development. The project builds on activities of Cyber
Watch. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: The project is developing and
implementing the following strategies: (a) providing outreach and resources to
local high schools, (b) offering high school students Cybersecurity Camps at the
college, (c) providing and supporting College CIS Program mentors for students,
and (d) sponsoring culminating Cyberdefense Competitions. High school students
are being exposed to information security scenarios through hands-on activities
and cybersecurity camps and competitions at the college. Bringing high school
students and educators into the information security arena is broadening
participation and promoting understanding of this critical field. It is
strengthening relationships between local county high schools and the college.
Student participation is an integral component to this project, and peer
mentoring is foundational to activities in the Cybersecurity Camps and
Cyberdefense Competitions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: This project
is increasing the depth of understanding and skill level among students
preparing for information security jobs or other jobs in information technology
that need knowledge of information security. This project is advocating for
females and underrepresented populations to be involved in the camps and
competitions and to consider information security as a possible career.
Materials and developed for the high school cybersecurity camps and competitions
are being made available to other institutions. Information is being
disseminated both state-wide and nationally. This project is helping to support
national security by cultivating an interest in high-school students who can
further their education in information security and become part of the pipeline
to a well-equipped workforce.