* 1104801
* Resistance switching in electrodeposited metal oxide thin films and superlattices
* MPS,DMR
* 06/15/2011,05/31/2016
* Jay Switzer, Missouri University of Science and Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Lynnette Madsen
* 05/31/2016
* USD 591,431.00

NON-TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION: Solid-state memory is ubiquitous in digital cameras,
smart cell phones, tablet computers, and the latest laptop computers. As device
size continues to shrink, the non-volatile memory becomes a limiting factor;
consequently there is increasing demand for highly-scalable memory devices. This
research focuses on an emerging and compact technology known as resistance
random access memory (RRAM) that is based on resistance switching in metal oxide
materials such as magnetite and bismuth oxide. The materials are deposited by
electrodeposition, a simple and inexpensive processing method. In addition to
opening up new possibilities for data-storage and retrieval, this research
project has strong educational broader impacts. Students at the Materials Camp
find producing materials for RRAM to be exciting because they have hand-held
devices that depend on solid-state memory. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
DETAILS: The research focuses on the electrodeposition of metal oxide films and
superlattices that exhibit resistance switching. A possible application of these
materials is RRAM for solid-state memory. The materials in the study have
multiple resistance states that can be accessed by simply varying the applied
voltage, opening up new possibilities for multi-bit data storage and retrieval.
Specific tasks are i) electrodeposition of superlattices in the magnetite/cobalt
ferrite system, ii) using a focused ion beam to fabricate nanoscale contacts and
cross-point architectures, iii) resistance switching in nanostructured
polycrystalline films, iv) study of the mechanism of resistance switching in
electrodeposited magnetite superlattices and films, and v) resistance switching
in electrodeposited films of delta-Bi2O3. The project emphasizes correlating the
nanostructure of the electrodeposited films with their resistance switching
behavior.