* 1104260
* Chemical and Nanoengineering Regulation of Inter-molecular Electron Transport in Organic Semiconductor Thin Films
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2011,06/30/2014
* Gang-Yu Liu, University of California-Davis
* Continuing Grant
* Michael J. Scott
* 06/30/2014
* USD 480,000.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research program, supported by the
Solid State and Materials Chemistry Program, aims at a molecular level
understanding of chemical modulation of intermolecular electron transport using
a specially designed model device containing pi-conjugated molecules such as
oligothiophene based organic thin films. To circumvent contribution from surface
roughness, Ultraflat NanoElectrodes (UNEs) with sub-nanometer roughness will be
fabricated, onto which designed molecules will be placed using atomic force
microscopy (AFM) based nanografting method. The multifunctional AFM enables in
situ nanolithography, high-resolution structural characterization, and
measurements of electron transport. The chemical and electronic properties of
organic films will be controlled by varying their head group, intermolecular
interactions and terminal group. The response of the electronic properties
during and after exposure to chemical species will be studied, in correlation to
structure in situ. The project combines the technical strength of
nanolithography and imaging (PI), UNE fabrication and electron transport (co-
PI), and organic synthesis (collaborator). With molecular level structure and
packing engineered precisely on UNEs, the systematic investigation of
intermolecular electron transport becomes feasible and reliable. This systematic
investigation will review the correlation of intermolecular transport with the
film morphology, reveal the role of structure, especially domain boundaries and
molecular level packing, and examine the influence of analytes binding to the
film termini. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NON-TECHNICAL
SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research aims at accurate measurements of
electron transport along and in between molecules within model junctions of
electronic devices. These measurements are technically very challenging, yet
critical in order to realize the great potential of modern molecular electronic
devices, which are smaller than state-of-the-art transistors, with properties
tunable by varying the structure and packing of the molecules. The research team
plans to take best advantage of today's technology, fabrication of ultraflat
microelectrodes with sub-nanometer roughness, the ability to position molecules
with high precision, and measurements of electron transport over these well-
engineered junctions. This investigation should yield reliable and fundamental
information in understanding organic semiconductor based devices, and guiding
design of a next generation of molecular devices. The investigation is highly
interdisciplinary, and requires close collaboration among Liu (AFM
nanofabrication and high resolution imaging), Salmeron (UNE fabrication and
device characterization), and Schore (synthesis of organic semiconductor
materials), whose team members will attain advanced training in
micro/nanofabrication, molecular resolution imaging, electron movement in
confined space, and device making. The team has been working closely with local
community college faculty (Miller, SacCity College) and students to expose them
to the concept and experiments of these model devices. Being extremely
proficient in both Spanish and English languages, Salmeron has participated and
will continue to participate in Hispanic Radio Shows to attract Hispanic
students to the forefront of modern devices and materials science.