* 1104035
* Establishing NOVA as a Regional Leader in Biotechnology Education and Training
* EDU,DUE
* 08/01/2011,07/31/2014
* Ia Gomez, Northern Virginia Community College
* Standard Grant
* Terry S. Woodin
* 07/31/2014
* USD 190,949.00

The goal of this project is to strengthen and enhance the current NOVA Biotech
Program, which includes an Associates of Applied Science (AAS) Degree program in
Biotechnology and a Career Studies Certificate program for Biotechnology Lab
Technicians. Four specific goals have been identified including: internal
recruitment of current NOVA students into the Biotech Program, improved
retention and graduation efforts, successful placement of students in workforce
and/or at transfer institutions, and more extensive assessment and evaluation of
student learning outcomes and success. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To promote
awareness of biotechnology and the Biotech Program within NOVA, biotechnology
laboratory exercises are being introduced into General Biology courses at
several campuses (Manassas, Alexandria, Annandale) to make students more aware
of the field and their potential within it; this is being accompanied by faculty
training for General Biology faculty new to the techniques and culture of
biotechnology. An internal advisory board is also being established to help
promote the biotechnology program and enhance retention of students who are
recruited into the program. Retention is also being strengthened by increased
student advising, tutoring resources, and interactions with the local industry.
An external industry advisory board is helping ensure the curriculum is
responsive to industry needs. To enhance job placement, a formal internship
program is being created, and new courses quality control, bioinformatics, and
microbiology/biomanufacturing are being introduced. Furthermore, a survey of
potential employers is beinge conducted to assess employment needs in terms of
educational and skill set requirements for entry-level positions. In addition,
work is in progress with transfer institutions (i.e. George Mason University,
George Washington University, etc) to establish articulation agreements. To
facilitate assessing students in each course and tracking their progress on a
semester basis, faculty are establishing desired student learning outcomes for
each course and the entire curriculum. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Data gathered for
formative and summative assessment of the project will include quantitative data
such as enrollment, course completion, graduation, and job placement data as
well as more qualitative data concerning student and employer satisfaction. The
intellectual merit of the program lies in the rigor of the new courses being
introduced and the new material being introduced into existing courses. In terms
of broader impacts, the presence of an expanded career pathway, a better
assessment process, enhanced retention and graduation rates, the establishment
of more rigorous curricula, and strengthened relationships with the local
industry is expected to increase the number of skilled lab technicians and
expand educational access to biotech curricula.