* 1104158
* Mechatronics and Innovation for Rural Technicians
* EHR,DUE
* 07/15/2011,06/30/2015
* Anthony Clarke, Kentucky Community & Technical College System
* Continuing Grant
* Abby Ilumoka
* 06/30/2015
* USD 672,350.00

This project is developing a partnership with the local community college,
community leaders and industry to enhance existing training programs.
Specifically Mechatronics and Innovation training is being provided to rural
students and technicians. The project fulfills a local industrial need and could
serve as a national model for delivering advanced technology education in rural
areas. Because of its rural setting and focus on secondary and industry
programs, the project serves students from underrepresented groups better than
many other programs. In addition to increasing the number of graduates ready for
employment and trained in Mechatronics, the project is developing graduates with
entrepreneurial skills. Entrepreneurial skills are helping build the local
economy and providing graduates more opportunities
nationally.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project uses proven delivery methods and
emphasizes technician education relevancy so students are fully engaged.
Engagement will increase student recruitment, retention and graduation numbers.
Through the project partnership, articulation between secondary schools and the
community college is being enhanced which will also lead to improved student
success. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project also provides professional
development opportunities for secondary and post-secondary faculty. Faculty
development is expected to make it easier to integrate new curriculum materials
into existing courses thereby creating a sustainable program.