* 1104912
* Ferromagnetic Magnetooptical Oxides for Nonreciprocal Photonic Devices
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2011,07/31/2015
* Caroline Ross, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Lynnette Madsen
* 07/31/2015
* USD 651,875.00

NON-TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION&lt;br/&gt;Optical computer chips, which are based on
the flow of light, could work faster and use less power than conventional
computer chips, which rely on the flow of electrical currents. Optical computer
chips require various components including on-chip lasers, waveguides,
modulators, and isolators. Isolators act as diodes for light, letting it flow in
one direction but blocking its flow in the other direction, and are essential
components of an optical circuit. Isolators are made from transparent magnetic
materials, but the traditional materials, which consist of magnetic garnets,
have proven to be very difficult to grow on common semiconductor substrates from
which computer chips are made. There is therefore a great need to develop new
magnetic materials which can be conveniently grown on substrates such as silicon
because this will enable fully functional optical devices to be made, with the
ultimate goal of transforming the field of optical computing and enabling
faster, lower-power computers. This project studies new magnetic oxide
materials, understanding the relation between the composition, structure, strain
state of the materials and their magnetic and optical properties, and
prototyping new isolator designs based on these materials. The broader impacts
of the work include the training of students, and outreach to the public through
the MIT OpenCourseWare initiative, mentoring of high school teachers, and
interactions with schools. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
DETAILS&lt;br/&gt;Magnetic oxides which are magnetooptically active are an
essential component of photonic devices such as optical isolators. Isolators act
as optical diodes, protecting lasers from back-reflected light, and are
therefore of critical importance in photonic devices. Integrating all the
components of an optical circuit onto an optoelectronic chip would enable
optical computation to be carried out, with its advantages of high speed and low
power consumption. However, the traditional magnetooptical material, garnet, has
proved difficult to integrate onto a Si or III-V platform. Therefore, there is
considerable interest in developing alternative materials which have good
optical transparency and high Faraday rotation, and can also be integrated onto
photonic substrates. This project develops thin film magnetooptical materials
based primarily on perovskites, and controls the magnetic and optical properties
by the substitution of ions onto the A and B sites and the presence of vacancies
on the oxygen sites, and by controlling the strain and the magnetoelastic
anisotropy. In addition, magnetooptical isolators are designed and modeled based
on the nonreciprocal phase shift experienced by light passing through the films.
The broader impacts of the work include the development of an optical isolator
that, if successful, could transform the field of integrated optics; the
training of students; and outreach to the public through the MIT OpenCourseWare
initiative, mentoring of high school teachers, and interactions with schools.