* 1104829
* Computational studies of nonequilibrium processes in electrochemical materials science and catalysis
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2015
* Per Arne Rikvold, Florida State University
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 08/31/2015
* USD 300,000.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports research and
education in computational and theoretical studies of nonequilibrium phenomena
in electrochemical materials science and heterogeneous catalysis. These studies
are concerned with modeling of specific experimental systems, with investigation
of fundamental nonequilibrium phenomena of importance to such systems, and with
further development of computational and theoretical methods.&lt;br/&gt;The
particular experimental phenomena that will be investigated in collaboration
with experimental groups are (i) validation of a new method to accelerate the
charging of Li-ion batteries suggested by the PI's computer simulations, and
(ii) island growth and dissolution in electrochemical pulsed-potential studies
of single-crystal gold surfaces. The particular nonequilibrium phenomena under
investigation include the effects of lateral diffusion during electrochemical
surface modification and in heterogeneous catalytic reactions. The PI will use
large scale computer simulation to model various systems of interest. Both
continuous and discrete models will be employed. Computational methods include
kinetic Monte Carlo and Molecular Dynamics simulations with model parameters
obtained from quantum mechanical calculations based on density functional
theory. The simulation data will be analyzed by several theoretical methods
including finite-size scaling theory, theory of stochastic processes, and
statistics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In a broader sense, the supported research
contributes to understanding issues related to nonequilibrium processes in
general. More specifically, it is expected to lead to achieving an improved
understanding of nonequilibrium processes at electrode-electrolyte interfaces.
As such, it could have broad implications in supporting the future development
of new, electrochemistry-based processes for environmental cleanup,
manufacturing of nanomaterials, chemicals, and pharmaceuticals, and corrosion
protection, as well as renewable-energy technologies including rechargeable
batteries and fuel cells. The fundamental knowledge and simulation algorithms
developed through this award are applicable in many scientific and technological
fields, including materials science, chemistry, biology, and even to the design
and analysis of communications networks and power grids. From an educational
perspective, this computationally intensive research is ideal for involving both
beginning and advanced apprentices in the discovery process. The activities will
contribute to education at all levels while including women and minorities by
involving undergraduate and graduate students and postdoctoral fellows, who will
mentor K-12 students. The results of the research will be communicated through
articles in a wide spectrum of professional journals, through talks at
scientific meetings, and through presentations for the general public, as well
as through the World Wide Web.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NONTECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports theoretical and computational
research and education on the growth of materials and structures of atoms at the
length scale of a nanometer, that is approximately one ten-millionth of an inch.
The "electrochemical" phenomena and processes that form the focus of this
research are chemical reactions that occur at the interface of a metal or a
semiconductor, called the "electrode", with an ionic conductor, called the
"electrolyte", such as those that take place inside a battery. During the last
three decades, experimental techniques have become available that enable
electrochemical methods to manufacture high-tech materials and designer
catalysts that derive their functionality from the particular structures on the
nanometer length scale. Such methods are rapidly becoming cost-effective
alternatives to traditional methods. These impressive experimental developments
are matched by spectacular progress in computer technology and computational
methods. The PI will use large scale computer simulation methods to study how
structures at the nanometer length scale grow on the surface of electrode
materials immersed in a chemical solution with an electric current flowing
through the electrodes. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In a broader sense, the supported
research contributes to understanding issues related to processes that are far
from the state of balance understood as equilibrium. More specifically, it is
expected to lead to achieving an improved understanding of out-of-equilibrium
processes at electrode-electrolyte interfaces. As such, it could have broad
implications in supporting the future development of new, electrochemistry-based
processes for environmental cleanup, manufacturing of nanomaterials, chemicals,
and pharmaceuticals, and corrosion protection, as well as renewable-energy
technologies including rechargeable batteries and fuel cells. The fundamental
knowledge and simulation algorithms developed through this award are applicable
in many scientific and technological fields, including materials science,
chemistry, biology, and even to the design and analysis of communications
networks and power grids. From an educational perspective, this computationally
intensive research is ideal for involving both beginning and advanced
apprentices in the discovery process. The activities will contribute to
education at all levels while including women and minorities by involving
undergraduate and graduate students and postdoctoral fellows, who will mentor
K-12 students. The results of the research will be communicated through articles
in a wide spectrum of professional journals, through talks at scientific
meetings, and through presentations for the general public, as well as through
the World Wide Web.