* 1104600
* RUI: Role of the Ambient in the Electrical Properties at the Interface for ZnO Systems
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2011,09/30/2014
* James Moore, Coastal Carolina University
* Standard Grant
* Z.  Ying
* 09/30/2014
* USD 99,570.00

Technical: This project is an in-depth investigation of the electrical behavior
at the interface of ZnO bulk, thin film and nanowire systems at various
temperatures and in different ambient environments, under illumination, and with
varying wire length, film thickness and bulk orientation. Although the optical
properties of ZnO nanowires are beginning to receive attention, there is very
little discussion concerning their electrical properties, specifically in single
wire configurations. Recent studies of films and bulk material suggest that the
ZnO/ambient interface may significantly contribute to conductive properties,
which may be related to the irreproducible and unstable p-type conductivity of
ZnO. Both the lack of reliable p-type doping and the relative lack of
information on these interface contributions significantly challenges progress
in ZnO device applications and the understanding of the electrical behavior on
the nano-scale. Non-technical: The project addresses basic research issues in a
topical area of materials science with high technological relevance. This study
will further the understanding of processes at the interface of bulk and nano-
scale ZnO, which could lead to the future growth of more reliable material,
resulting in higher reliability, longer lifetime, and higher efficiency bright
light sources, UV detectors, and gas sensors. Coastal Carolina University is a
primarily undergraduate institution with a history of recruiting
underrepresented minorities and women in physics. Undergraduate students,
including those in under-represented groups, will be trained for surface
electrical properties by atomic force microscopy (AFM) based techniques.