* 1104628
* Controlling Conductivity in the UV-Transparent Conducting Oxide Ga2O3
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2016
* Marjorie Olmstead, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Tania M. Paskova
* 08/31/2016
* USD 639,975.00

Technical: This Focused Research Group project, funded jointly by the Electronic
and Photonic Materials (EPM) and Ceramics (CER) Programs, encompasses a
systematic interdisciplinary effort combining physics, materials science and
electrical engineering to elucidate interconnections among the structural,
electronic and optical properties of the transparent conductor gallium oxide,
Ga2O3, with emphasis on intrinsic and extrinsic defects, interface chemistry,
and dimensionality. Ga2O3 is transparent throughout the solar spectrum and into
the near ultraviolet (UV), with a band gap of 4.9 eV (wavelength ~ 250 nm), but
can be made conductive through doping (e.g., Si or Sn), by processing to create
intrinsic defects (e.g. oxygen vacancies or interstitials), or through deep-UV
photoabsorption. The anisotropic crystal structure of beta- Ga2O3 contains
intrinsic, one-dimensional, open channels, and can be fabricated in structures
with arbitrary dimensionality - 3D bulk crystals, 2D films, quasi-1D nanobelts,
1D nanowires and 0D nanospheres - as well as maintain that structure when
alloyed with Al2O3 over a wide concentration range. Ga2O3 can undergo resistive
switching (RS) with appropriate processing, but unlike more commonly considered
transition metal oxides, gallium remains Ga3+ during creation of oxygen
vacancies and/or interstitials, placing it in a different class of RS materials.
This project will address key issues related to Ga2O3 that are not currently
well understood: the interplay between ionic and electronic conductivity in
Ga2O3, the nanoscale processes by which surface and interface reactions induce
conductivity changes, and the role of the intrinsic channel structure in
governing these properties. Ga2O3 has been proposed for several applications,
including a "solar-blind" transparent conductor, a resistive switching memory
element, an UV only photodetector, a chemical sensor, and a catalysis substrate.
This research will contribute to mechanistic understanding of the conductivity
and interface reduction-oxidation reactions that govern the operation of these
prototype device structures, enabling refinement and enhancement of their
function.&lt;br/&gt;Non-Technical: This project addresses workforce development
at several levels. Graduate students will be actively involved in
multidisciplinary research that spans science and engineering, and involves
collaboration among academic, industrial and government laboratories in the US
and Japan. They will develop key skills across several arenas that will enhance
their career opportunities: materials synthesis, table-top sample
characterization, synchrotron and other user-facility-based measurements,
theoretical modeling, and proposal writing (for user facility access), as well
as analytical and both oral and written communication skills as they process,
interpret and present their research findings. The project also includes well-
defined activities to increase interactions with populations that are frequently
unaware of research activities at the University of Washington. Established
connections with a local high school at which the majority of students don't
typically aim for college will be expanded through active mentoring of high
school students to perform photocurrent measurements of oxide samples grown
under this proposal, summer research collaboration with the high school teacher
who directs the science and robotics clubs there, as well as visits to
classrooms to discuss both our science and students career and educational
options.