* 1104612
* Probing the Influence of Magnetism and Superconductivity on Topological Insulators &amp; their Surface States
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2011,06/30/2016
* Ali Yazdani, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Tomasz Durakiewicz
* 06/30/2016
* USD 540,000.00

Technical Abstract: &lt;br/&gt;Topological insulators are a new class of
insulators in which spin-orbit interactions are so strong that the insulating
energy gap is inverted, the states that should appear at high energy above the
gap actually appear below the gap. A key consequence of this band inversion is
the appearance of topological surface states that are robust to the effects of
disorder and changes in the chemical potential, making them of strong interest
for future electronics applications. While rapid developments on both
theoretical and experimental fronts have made topological insulators the subject
of intense study, previous work has focused on their electronic properties. This
project addresses the next frontiers of understanding topological insulators and
their surface states, elucidating the influence of magnetism and
superconductivity on their physical characteristics and electronic behavior. The
application of magnetic fields is expected to be a powerful method by which the
properties of topological surface states could be modulated, and magnetism-
induced gapped topological surface states are predicted to give rise to a number
of exotic magneto-optical and electron transport effects. Local spectroscopic
techniques and the PI's state-of-the-art scanning tunneling microscope (STM)
facilities will allow nanometer-scale examination of these effects.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Non-technical Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;Soon after the discovery
of quantum mechanics it was realized why some solids are insulating (like
diamond) and others are highly conducting (like graphite), even though they
could be comprised of the same element. Now, 80 years later, the concept of
insulators and metals is again being fundamentally revised. During the last few
years, it has become apparent that there can be a distinct type of insulator,
which can occur because of the topology of electronic wavefunctions in materials
comprised of heavier elements. Strong interaction between the spin and the
orbital angular momentum of electrons in these compounds alters the sequence in
energy of their electronic states. The key consequence of this topological
characteristic (and the way to distinguish a topological insulator from an
ordinary one) is the presence of metallic electrons with helical spin texture at
their surfaces. The proposed program will directly visualize these novel quantum
states of matter and demonstrate their unusual properties through spectroscopic
mapping with the scanning tunneling microscope (STM). The potential of these
novel quantum states for electronic application will be examined as part of the
proposed program. Undergraduate, graduate, and postdoctoral researchers will be
trained as part of the program.