* 1104536
* Non-linear partial differential equations in geometry
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2011,06/30/2016
* Paul Yang, Princeton University
* Continuing Grant
* Bruce P. Palka
* 06/30/2016
* USD 790,000.00

In this project, the principal investigators will study several higher-order
nonlinear partial differential equations that arise in conformal geometry and
Cauchy-Riemann (CR) geometry. These equations describe the effect on the
curvatures of the new structures of making conformal changes of metrics (as in
conformal geometry) or of contact forms (as in CR-geometry). Of particular
interest are equations that prescribe higher-order curvature invariants that
control the global geometry of higher dimensional manifolds. The project seeks
to develop new tools to solve these equations and to describe the behavior of
the solutions. A key difficulty in handling such equations is the absence of a
maximum principle, and the principal investigators propose to compensate for its
absence by using integral inequalities as the main working tool. It is expected
that the study will yield extensions of the well-known mixed volume inequalities
to more general domains in Euclidean space, as well as sharp Sobolev
inequalities in CR-geometry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to
provide new insights into and to create new tools for the study of the theory of
geometric partial differential equations, a subject that has evolved into a
basic toolbox in many areas in mathematics, applied mathematics, and
engineering, to say nothing of mathematical physics. One of the main topics of
study in the project (namely, the existence of so-called Einstein space) is
motivated by a conjecture that physicists call the "holography principle." It
asserts that the results of any measurements of the physical universe in the
Einstein space can be predicted by taking another set of measurements near the
"far end" of the universe (which is referred to as its "boundary"). A case of
particular interest is the situation when the boundary space is three-
dimensional, a case in which geometric understanding is already well developed.
The project will engage graduate students and postdocs in its research
activities.