* 1104472
* Engineering Quantum Dissipation in Cold Atom Systems
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2015
* Steven Rolston, University of Maryland, College Park
* Continuing Grant
* Alexander Cronin
* 08/31/2015
* USD 420,000.00

This research will explore ways to engineer quantum dissipation to be useful
rather than problematic. Much of the focus in quantum research has concentrated
on purely conservative systems, isolated as well as possible from environmental
influences. But coupling to a dissipative channel can be important and useful,
to remove entropy, a critical component of both classical and quantum
information processing. Any realistic quantum information processor is an open
quantum system, and will require control and understanding of dissipation. This
research will develop techniques to use dissipation to remove entropy from one
degree of freedom while preserving the quantum state of another, vital for
quantum computation. In particular, the work will concentrate on developing the
ability to laser cool atoms without destroying quantum information stored in the
nuclear spin.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The researchers will explore a matter wave
analogy to quantum optics, studying an open quantum system where the dissipation
comes from the phonon vibrations of a degenerate gas rather than the photon
vacuum. Atoms trapped in an optical lattice will interact with a Bose condensate
of another species, and will dissipate energy into excitations in the
condensate, in analogy to atoms dissipating energy through spontaneous emission
into excitations of the electromagnetic vacuum. The wider range of control of
the reservoir formed by the condensate will allow for a greater understanding
and possible control of dissipation in the quantum
world.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This work resides at the intersection of atomic
physics, quantum information science, and condensed matter physics. Developing
ways to engineer dissipation and understand and control open quantum systems
will be relevant to virtually any new technological applications built on
quantum mechanics, from a fully realized quantum computer to much more modest
applications such as sensors based on coherent quantum mechanical processes. One
of the biggest impediments to implementing quantum information processing is the
interaction with the environment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Graduate and
undergraduate students will be trained in state-of-the-art optical techniques,
along with gaining experience with high vacuum, analog, RF, and digital
electronics, and computer-based data acquisition. They will be in an environment
that exposes them to a wide variety of physics including quantum information,
condensed matter and atomic physics. They will be exposed to research in an
academic and national lab setting. The results of this research will be
disseminated through the significant outreach efforts of the Joint Quantum
Institute that are focused on explaining to the public the importance of quantum
phenomena in the world around them and for future technology.