* 1104753
* Magnetism on the nanoscale
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2014
* Oleg Tchernyshyov, Johns Hopkins University
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 08/31/2014
* USD 285,000.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY

This award supports theoretical and computational research and education on the
dynamics of magnetization in nanoscale magnets.

The PI will investigate the influence of topological defects on static and
dynamic properties of nanoscale magnets by using analytical methods of field
theory in combination with numerical simulations. Topological defects such as
domain walls, vortices, and skyrmions, are highly stable textures interpolating
between distinct ground states of a condensed-matter system. Because any memory
unit relies on the existence of two or more ground states, the switching of a
memory bit often involves the creation, propagation, and annihilation of
topological defects. Understanding how topological defects behave in
nanostructures is thus important for future technological applications.

Topological defects can be characterized most concisely using the language of
field theory. Rather than trying to capture the evolution of a system in
complete detail, the field-theoretic approach provides a coarse-grained
description. This approach has been enormously helpful in understanding flux
vortices in type-II superconductors and superfluids, domain walls in
polyacetylene, dislocations in hexatics, and hedgehogs in nematics. The main
advantage of the field-theoretic approach in the current context is its ability
to reduce the complex problem of many spins to a more tractable one: determining
the evolution of a few elementary excitations directly involved in the switching
process.

The PI will focus on several magnetic systems with topological defects
exemplified by the following: artificial spin ice, where the dynamics of
magnetization is mediated by the propagation of defects carrying magnetic
charge; composite domain walls in ferromagnetic nanowires; Bloch domain walls in
thin ferromagnetic films with negative surface tension and unusual dynamics of
transverse fluctuations; skyrmion crystals recently discovered in non-
centrosymmetric ferromagnets.

The PI will create interactive programs simulating various physical phenomena
for educational tools. The programs will be implemented as Java applets. The
attractive feature of Java-based simulations is their portability: such programs
can be run on any computer equipped with a browser. The simulations will be
paired with assignments to provide a genuine learning experience.

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY

This award supports theoretical and computational research and education on the
dynamics of magnetization in nanoscale magnets, magnets about a ten-millionth of
an inch in size.

The development of new electronic technologies for ever-shrinking electric
circuits and memory elements requires a solid grasp of physical laws governing
the collective behavior of electrons on the nanoscale. Atomic-scale magnets in
computer hard drives interact with one another via several distinct forces with
different ranges. As a result, magnets of different sizes work in different
ways. Switching the state of a magnetic bit from 0 to 1 involves simultaneous
flipping of the direction of all the atomic-scale magnets, or dipoles, in a
magnet with a few thousand atoms. The process is much more involved in magnets
containing billions of dipoles and more. It usually involves the creation and
propagation of topological defects, solitary stable spatial patterns in the
directions of atomic-scale magnets that propagate throughout the magnet and in
the process switch its direction. These defects can be of different types and
shapes including domain walls, separating two regions with dipoles pointing in
different directions, and vortices, where the directions of the dipoles form a
swirling pattern.

The PI will study the dynamics of switching in several diverse physical systems
where the way the directions of the dipoles change in time is governed by the
propagation of topological defects. These include ferromagnetic nanowires
proposed for the 'racetrack' magnetic memory, artificial arrays of ferromagnetic
islands known as spin ice, thin ferromagnetic films, and periodic lattices of
topological defects in ferromagnets with twisting magnetization.

The PI will create interactive programs simulating various physical phenomena
for educational tools. The programs will be implemented as Java applets. The
attractive feature of Java-based simulations is their portability: such programs
can be run on any computer equipped with a browser. The simulations will be
paired with assignments to provide a genuine learning experience.