* 1104107
* The National Center for Welding Education and Training - NSF ATE Center - Request for Continuation
* EHR,DUE
* 08/01/2011,07/31/2015
* Monica Pfarr, Lorain County Community College
* Continuing Grant
* David B. Campbell
* 07/31/2015
* USD 2,997,899.00

The National Center for Welding Education and Training (Weld-Ed) is a national
partnership between the welding and materials joining industry and the nation's
community and technical colleges and universities that is dedicated to expanding
the role and pipeline of welding technicians in the industry. Weld-Ed brings
together the American Welding Society (AWS), industry partners Lockheed Martin
and Lincoln Electric, 140 business/industry affiliates, 66 educational
affiliates, and ten Regional Center Partners. This project has the following
goals: 1) Develop a national welding educators' certificate program; 2) Expand
professional development for welding faculty in new technologies including
blended learning, virtual simulation, and new and emerging welding processes; 3)
Expand and increase the effectiveness of the Center and its Regional Partners
Network to address market-driven needs, including regional welding technician
specialization, and the use of distance learning applications in sharing
curricula between institutions and in delivering coursework; and, 4) Develop and
implement a strategy to deliver technical assistance and consulting services to
community and technical colleges, universities, K-12 school districts and the
welding industry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Center activities enable other
community and technical colleges in the U.S. to partner with their local K-12
school districts, adult education and institutions of higher education to expand
welding technician education in their area. Many of those same institutions as
well as two-year colleges that are currently offering welding technician
education are able to add welding specializations that better meet the needs of
their regional welding employers. The project enhances and expands professional
development opportunities for welding educators by developing a national welding
education certificate program and a master welding educator certificate that can
be offered by current and future Weld-Ed partners throughout the U.S.