* 1104937
* Paraequilibrium Carbides in Stainless Steels
* MPS,DMR
* 09/15/2011,08/31/2014
* Gary Michal, Case Western Reserve University
* Continuing Grant
* Gary Shiflet
* 08/31/2014
* USD 456,000.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY: Ferritic, martensitic, and duplex stainless steels, optimally
carburized at temperatures below 500 Â°C, possess a hardened case containing a
remarkable class of carbide phases that do not degrade, and in certain cases
actually improve the corrosion resistance of these important steels. Analyses of
these carbides have determined that they have the same metal compositions as
those of the bulk stainless steels in which they formed, and thus are termed
paraequilibrium carbides. Inasmuch as the formation of these paraequilibrium
carbides do not deplete the surrounding matrix of Cr, "sensitization" and loss
of corrosion resistance does not occur. The proposed research will fully
characterize the structure, microstructure, and stoichiometry of these
paraequilibrium carbides, and their effect on electro-chemical, tribological,
and mechanical properties of the interstitially hardened steel surfaces. A range
of processing parameters, e.g., time/temperature and carbon activity in the
process gas atmosphere, will be applied to these stainless steels to generate a
broad spectrum of paraequilibrium carbide phases. Thermodynamic and kinetic
modeling will be performed in parallel with the processing and characterization
activities to provide in-depth understanding of this exciting technology.

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY: Low-temperature carburization of austenitic (high nickel
content) stainless steels is now employed on an industrial scale in a number of
important applications. Similar technology is not now generally available for
ferritic, martensitic, and duplex stainless steels. Successful low-temperature
carburization of this important group of magnetic stainless steels---which
furthermore are less costly due to their greatly reduced nickel content---will
have broad impact. A properly hardened carburized surface will enable these
stainless steels to establish new applications and new markets, based upon
improved wear and corrosion resistance, in addition to their other useful
properties. Finally, the student researchers doing their thesis research on this
topic will experience a rich array of activities involving processing,
characterization and modeling, all against the backdrop of a constrained
optimization project.