* 1104683
* Multi-Physics Modeling of Intense, Short-Pulse Laser-Plasma Interactions
* MPS,PHY
* 09/15/2011,08/31/2015
* Bradley Shadwick, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Continuing Grant
* Bogdan Mihaila
* 08/31/2015
* USD 342,000.00

This award supports a project focusing on the development of novel multi-physics
simulation tools suitable for detailed studies of phase-space dynamics of
plasmas. These tools will be used to optimize the generation of high-quality
multi-GeV electron beams by laser-plasma devices. Clear and complete
understanding of phase-space processes opens the door to the manipulation of
phase space and to greater control over high-energy-density-physics phenomena.
Many of the technological applications of intense-laser plasma interactions,
such as compact, next-generation light sources, have stringent limits on beam
quality that exceed what is currently available. The results of this study are
expected to advance the development of these technologies, having ultimate
applications in a wide range of fields. The main problem to be addressed is that
the existing theoretical understanding of the processes leading to trapped
particles in large amplitude plasma waves driven by intense lasers, as seen in
various experiments, is incomplete. To improve this, a phase-space level
understanding of the mechanisms at work is essential. Current experiments
typically rely on the free evolution of the laser-plasma system, i.e., a laser
pulse is brought to a target and the system is allowed to evolve without
subsequent intervention. Recent experimental results provide a tantalizing
glimpse of the great promise of tailoring phase space to produce exploitable
features. Realizing these advances requires a first principles understanding of
the phase-space dynamics of these systems. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;High energy
density physics is coming to prominence as a new physics frontier; fully ionized
matter (plasma) under extreme conditions is a source of exciting new physics.
The advent of sub-picosecond, petawatt-class lasers opens a new chapter in
ultrafast physics of relativistic laser plasma interactions. Centimeter-long
relativistic plasmas are now being produced, and new, poorly understood
phenomena are being observed. This makes the development of new theoretical
frameworks and computational approaches essential. A combination of experimental
and theoretical research is leading to new understanding of the complex plasma
processes that can occur and will no doubt have significant practical
applications to medicine, structural stability/safety, and homeland security.
The results of the proposed research will be disseminated widely. The entire
computational data set produced during this project will be archived and made
publicly available through a web-based interface. Visitors to the archive can
search the database, examine any of the data sets, create visualizations of the
data, perform various diagnostics on the data sets as well as download raw data.
The computer codes developed during this project will generally be made publicly
available. Additionally all of the algorithms and their implementations,
including full source code documentation, will be made publicly available on the
PI's research group's web site. Integration of this research with education will
be accomplished through motivation and improved teaching of undergraduate and
graduate students. High school students from underrepresented groups also will
be recruited to participate in summer research projects.