* 1104077
* Planning Grant for the Southeast Regional Center for Optics and Photonics Education & Training
* EHR,DUE
* 08/15/2011,08/31/2013
* Nasser Hedayat, Indian River State College
* Standard Grant
* Duncan E. McBride
* 08/31/2013
* USD 69,988.00

Electro-optics, lasers, and fiber optics are the technologies encompassed by the
broad field of Photonics. This planning project has assembled a coalition of
four colleges from Florida and North and South Carolina with existing photonics
programs and strong industrial advisory councils, and the Florida Photonics
Cluster (representing 150 companies) to develop the infrastructure for the
Southeast Regional Center for Optics and Photonics Education. A full regional
center would serve the states of FL, GA, AL, MS, SC, NC, and customize the
photonics education to each individual state's industrial needs. The main goals
of the planning project are: 1) Survey the photonics technician needs of the
industry in the six states of the region; 2) Identify and enlist colleges local
to employers to provide the needed education; 3) Assist identified colleges in
establishing photonics education programs; 4) Identify the specific specialty
area of focus for each principal partner college; 5) Create a plan for
strengthening and increasing the photonics technician output of the principal
partners and; 6) Complete and submit a comprehensive proposal for a Regional
Center.

Intellectual Merit: The management team of the coalition colleges has experience
developing successful photonics programs. The lead college has been a partner of
OP-TEC, the NSF/ATE National Center for Optics and Photonics Education, and the
PI chairs the OPTEC Photonics College Network (OPCN), which consists of 35
colleges from across the country. OP-TEC collaborates with many other colleges
across the nation. The Florida Photonics Cluster, with its large membership and
its affiliation with the Center for Research in Electro-optics and Lasers
(CREOL) of the University of Central Florida, is a catalyst for the successful
engagement and collaboration of the photonics industry. The Regional Center's
broad participation of colleges from the southeast can transform photonics
education at the college and high school levels.

Broader Impact: An eventual regional center will help maintain the world lead in
the field of photonics for the US, which is vital to our security and defense
industries. Photonics technicians receive starting salaries above the national
average, thereby elevating the graduates' socioeconomic status. A broad
photonics education infrastructure will become available to the southeast US
that will enhance and promote the fields of science, technology, engineering and
mathematics. The partnerships that will be created by the educator network and
the employer council will have a beneficial and lasting effect not only on the
local region but the entire nation. The regional center will intensify its
recruiting efforts to increase diversity in enrollment. The PI, as member of the
advisory board of the Gender Equity Cooperative, will organize events aimed at
attracting more women and minorities into this program. Member colleges are also
involved with Hispanic and African American organizations to increase the number
of students from these ethnic groups. Through the center's outreach to local
high schools a center will expand student awareness of STEM, and increase the
number of students who choose STEM-related disciplines and careers.