* 1104909
* Strong Coupling Physics in Mott and Related Systems
* MPS,DMR
* 09/15/2011,08/31/2015
* Philip Phillips, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 08/31/2015
* USD 330,000.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports theoretical research
and education that is aimed to advance understanding of strongly correlated
electron materials. A recent advance from string theory, the gauge-gravity
duality, has opened up a possible non-perturbative approach to the physics of
quantum many-body systems. The PI will explore whether through this theory it
may be possible to understand the physics of strongly correlated materials at
low energies in a controlled way. The PI aims to tailor this technique for Mott
insulators. A goal is to extend this technique so that basic problems of
superconductivity in a non-fermi liquid system can be addressed. The PI will
engage a new line of research to explore the possibility of superconductivity in
the multi-orbital Mott systems, the oxychalcogenides. The PI also aims to
disentangle how orbital ordering and magnetic order mediate transport
anisotropies seen in recent experiments on the iron-based pnictide
superconductors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award also supports
graduate student training at the frontiers of condensed matter theory. The PI
will continue his work to increase the participation of minorities in science
through recruiting and mentoring minority students and through outreach
activities to public schools. The PI will also revise his recent textbook for
the second edition. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NON-TECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports theoretical research and
education on materials which contain electrons that interact strongly with each
other. Strong interaction between electrons leads to their correlated motion,
rather like a complicated dance, and in the quantum world to new states of
electronic matter. Of particular interest is the appearance of superconductivity
in these strongly correlated materials. Superconductivity is one of the possible
complicated dances of electrons with unusual properties, among them the ability
to conduct electricity without losses. The problem of how to precisely describe
these new states of matter in the language of theory is a challenging one. The
PI will attempt to exploit advances in the theory of gravity to understand
systems of many strongly interacting electrons and how they organize themselves
into new states of matter. The PI will also use advanced but more conventional
methods to study the emergence of unusual superconductivity in recently
discovered materials. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Through these studies, the PI aims
to elucidate the nature of superconductivity in strongly correlated materials
and the physical mechanism that leads electrons to organize into this state of
matter. Understanding the latter could lead to the discovery of materials in
which superconductivity appears at higher temperatures. So far superconductivity
is relegated to the deep freeze where the atmospheric gas nitrogen is nearly a
liquid or even colder still. The discovery of materials which exhibit
superconductivity at temperatures higher than room temperature would lead to
possible new electronic device technologies and methods for virtually lossless
transmission of electric power.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award also supports
graduate student training at the frontiers of condensed matter theory. The PI
will continue his work to increase the participation of minorities in science
through recruiting and mentoring minority students and through outreach
activities to public schools. The PI will also revise his recent textbook for
the second edition.