* 1104236
* Genomic Approaches in Biotechnology
* EHR,DUE
* 04/01/2011,03/31/2016
* David Micklos, Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory
* Standard Grant
* Virginia Carter
* 03/31/2016
* USD 1,010,111.00

With this project, the Dolan DNA Learning Center (DNALC) of Cold Spring Harbor
Laboratory (CSHL), in collaboration with community college faculty and the
National Advanced Technological Education Center for Biotechnology (Bio-Link) is
establishing a professional development program to disseminate instructional
modules that provide a strong foundation for biotechnology careers in the genome
age. The program focuses on four key technologies: polymerase chain reaction
(PCR), DNA sequencing, RNA interference (RNAi), and bioinformatics. It
encompasses three eukaryotic systems: humans, plants, and nematode worms. Each
module can be integrated into existing courses, provide the basis for new
courses, or serve as the foundation for student research projects.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: The post-genome era demands
biotechnicians equipped with the tools and intellect needed to tap the enormous
potential hidden within complex and dynamic eukaryotic genomes. The intellectual
merit of this proposal lies in the fact it brings a new perspective to the
field, a cost effective eukaryote based approach to high school and
undergraduate laboratories in genomics. The evaluation plan, involving faculty
and doctoral students at the State University of New York at Stony Brook, has
merits both for the project itself and for the model it establishes for teasing
out the outcomes of faculty development efforts as regards subsequent faculty
activity and the resultant student outcomes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts: A strong community college perspective, including best practices for
program development and industry collaborations, complements the experimental
program. Over its three-year term, the program will reach 288 biotechnology
faculty at week-long workshops conducted at 12 community colleges nationwide. A
leadership cadre of 12 community college advisors is involved in all aspects of
the program: determining workshop curriculum, hosting and co-teaching workshops,
providing participant follow-up support, evaluating the program impact in the
classroom, and disseminating the project. Additional expert advisors are drawn
from the biotechnology industry, high schools, and 4-year colleges. Broad
classroom implementation is supported by the Internet sites built for each
teaching module, the custom bioinformatics tools developed, the teaching kits
available from various suppliers, and a laboratory text, Genome Science, to be
published by CSHL Press.