* 1104965
* Solid State Chemistry of Chalcogenides for Materials Discovery
* MPS,DMR
* 06/15/2011,05/31/2015
* Mercouri Kanatzidis, Northwestern University
* Continuing Grant
* Michael J. Scott
* 05/31/2015
* USD 450,000.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary goals of this research
supported by the Solid State and Materials Chemistry program are to discover and
characterize new types of metal chalcogenide compounds and to develop and
understand their structures, chemical bonding and physical properties. An
important question of this synthesis program is whether we can guide the
fundamental reaction chemistry occuring in salt fluxes at intermediate
temperatures in order to suppress the formation of undesirable compounds and
favor the crystallization of new ones. The project employs alkali metal
polychalcogenide flux syntheses to afford materials containing condensed
chalcogenide units. Well-defined building blocks are present in the flux
reactions and their formation is guided by tuning the flux composition and
temperature, which controls Lewis basicity and redox potential. In addition, the
salt fluxes can sustain tunable dynamic equilibria that are important for the
synthesis to be directed towards new metal chalcogenide materials. It is
hypothesized that manipulation of these flux properties will allow the control
of the synthetic routes toward a variety of new structures. The metals employed
in this chemistry are primarily main group and rare earth metals and in select
cases, transition metals. New materials of the chalcogenide class are expected
with attractive chemical and physical properties such as ion-exchange,
semiconductor (with a wide range of energy band gaps from 0.5-3.0 eV depending
on structure and composition), metallic, phase-change and nonlinear optical
properties (particularly very strong second harmonic generation in the infrared
region). It is anticipated that many of the physical properties of the new
materials will have significant potential for technological impact and further
development in applications. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NON-TECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Synthesis and crystal growth of new materials is
increasingly recognized as an important underpinning of research that strongly
impacts the physical sciences and thus programs such as the proposed one are
both relevant and timely. Under this Solid State and Materials Chemistry funded
program new chalcogenide materials are anticipated with useful chemical and
physical properties such as ion-exchange, semiconductor (with a wide range of
energy band gaps from 0.5-3.0 eV depending on structure and composition),
metallic, phase-change and nonlinear optical properties (particularly very
strong second harmonic generation in the infrared region). A wide variety of
experimental characterization tools are employed in this project including
single crystal and powder X-ray crystallography using in-house and synchrotron
radiation, solid state optical, infrared and Raman spectroscopy, scanning and
transmission electron microscopy, differential thermal analysis and scanning
calorimetry, and measurements of electrical conductivity as well as optical
second harmonic generation. It is anticipated that many of the physical
properties of the new materials will have significant potential for
technological impact and further development in applications.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;At a grassroots level, the solid state and materials
chemistry community recognizes the grand challenge of developing rational
materials discovery strategies. This project helps address this challenge by
developing new synthesis methodologies. For the class of chalcogenides, a
rational, science-driven foundation is set to extract maximum scientific and
technological benefit. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The specific focus is on training
and teaching graduate students in solid state and materials chemistry who
understand the importance of developing new materials as drivers for new
technologies. The project provides important opportunities for graduate and
undergraduate students to learn research investigative skills that are needed
for contemporary materials chemistry research. The students are also exposed to
a broad battery of physical property characterization tools. Student training in
the synthesis and crystal growth of novel materials has a positive impact on our
national competitiveness in key materials and addresses a growing national need.
Students also benefit from high impact interdisciplinary collaborations.
Finally, the broad dissemination of scientific results and knowledge through
publication will enhance scientific understanding and hopefully stimulate
further research activity elsewhere.