* 1104899
* Planning Conferences on Longitudinal Study analysis of High School Algebra and College Mathematics
* EDU,DRL
* 12/15/2010,08/31/2014
* Margret Hjalmarson, George Mason University
* Standard Grant
* Edith Gummer
* 08/31/2014
* USD 163,187.00

This RAPID project supports a series of three workshops with mathematicians,
mathematics educators, and research methodologists to design an analysis, and
conduct analysis, of a new national longitudinal study of high school Algebra
learning. This project will provide a new plan for analysis of mathematics
learning using a new longitudinal data base. The analysis plan is intended to
stimulate future research studies in algebra learning. The investigator has
invited about 20 mathematics education researchers, mathematicians, research
methodologists, and graduate students to meet three times to create a research
analysis plan for the new longitudinal survey data on high school Algebra
learning and to inform the upcoming rounds of data
collection.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The complex longitudinal study is supported by
both the National Center for Educational Statistics (NCES) and the National
Science Foundation (NSF). The NCES has not previously considered the essential
elements of mathematics learning in their planned analysis. This project will
create a new set of analysis plans as seen from the view of researchers and
educators who study mathematics learning. The outcome of this project will
enhance the use and policy value of the statistical analysis of this new large
survey. The participants will also include state representatives because the
study will contribute data about 10 states for the first time.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The new plan for analysis will provide needed frameworks
for the understanding of high school algebra learning. Importantly, this project
will provide an opportunity for insights about Algebra learning by involving
well known mathematics educators as well as aspiring graduate students.