* 1105945
* Study of ultra-cold orbital, large spin, and dipolar systems in optical lattices
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2011,12/31/2014
* Congjun Wu, University of California-San Diego
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 12/31/2014
* USD 300,000.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports the theoretical study
of novel states of matter with cold atoms and dipolar molecules, which are not
easily accessible in typical materials. It also provides theoretical guidance
for current experimental efforts. The PI will use both analytical and numerical
methods including self-consistent mean-field theory, classical and quantum field
theoretical methods, and quantum Monte-Carlo simulations.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research has three foci: &lt;br/&gt;1.) The study of
exotic states of ultra-cold bosons and fermions in the high orbital bands of
optical lattices. For orbital bosons, based on his previous study on
unconventional Bose-Einstein condensations beyond the 'no-node' theorem, the PI
will further investigate their collective excitations and quantum phase
transitions. The research on fermions will focus on the quantum anomalous Hall
insulators with interesting band topology and exotic Mott insulators with
frustrated orbital exchanges. &lt;br/&gt;2.) The study of the competing phases
of ultra-cold large-spin alkali and alkaline earth atoms with a particular focus
on the exotic quantum magnetism characterized by strong quantum fluctuations.
&lt;br/&gt;3.) The study of unconventional Cooper pairing that arises from
ultra-cold electric and magnetic dipolar interactions leading to new mechanisms
for p-wave triplet Cooper pairing. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project seeks to
predict new states of matter that have not yet been found in materials but are
currently the subject of cold atom experiments. This research lies at the
interface between condensed matter and cold atom physics and will benefit both
fields. Students will receive train-ing in analytical and numerical methods for
strongly correlated systems, and will develop broad research interests. Research
results will be incorporated into advanced graduate courses.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award supports theoretical research and education that seek to study new states
of matter that arise in a kind of 'crystal of light,' which is made from atoms
that are very close to the absolute zero of temperature and are trapped in laser
beams forming a regular array of atoms. These ultra-cold atoms can behave in
ways that are analogous to electrons moving in materials and provide another way
to discover and study electronic states of matter that arise as a consequence of
strong interactions among electrons. These novel electronic states may live in a
class of mate-rials known as strongly correlated materials. An advantage of
studying ultra-cold atom analogs is that the interactions between atoms trapped
in laser light can be more easily tuned than the elec-trons in a
material.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Ultra-cold atoms trapped by lasers are
interesting in their right as they can form novel quantum mechanical states that
cannot occur or are not easily observed in the electrons of a material. The
interactions among atoms can be more complex than those among electrons leading
to interesting novel states of matter. &lt;br/&gt;The PI aims to develop
theories to explain the novel quantum mechanical properties of these cold atoms
in crystals of light. The theories provide guidance for new experiments,
deepening our understanding of quantum physics and states of matter of ultra-
cold atoms and electrons alike, and leading to new
discoveries.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This is fundamental research that lies at the
interface of atomic and condensed matter physics. Systems of cold atoms are
intriguing and may hold possibilities for future technologies. Conspicuous among
these is the potential to realize powerful new methods of computation based on
the principles of quantum mechanics. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Students will receive
training in advanced theoretical condensed matter physics which will stimulate
students to develop broad interests and skills in the scientific frontiers.
Aspects of the research, particularly the underlying theoretical techniques,
form part of the subject matter of the advanced physics courses that the PI will
develop.