* 1105512
* Spin-dependent transport and thermoelectric phenomena in multi-band systems
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2011,07/31/2015
* Jairo Sinova, Texas A&M Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 07/31/2015
* USD 300,000.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The field of spintronics, for both metals
and semiconductors, has been a continuous source of intellectual challenges over
the past two decades. Within this field one can broadly distinguish two regimes:
one where the spin-orbit coupling is weak and acts as a perturbation, and
another where the spin-orbit coupling is strong. The latter regime remains one
of the most theoretically difficult at a fundamental level. This award supports
theoretical and computational research and education to study spin dependent
transport and thermoelectric properties in complex multiband systems with strong
spin-orbit coupling. The PI will focus on four research thrusts centered on
fundamental physics questions that are mostly motivated by unexplained
experimental phenomenology:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1) Anomalous Hall effects in
multiple transport regimes. The PI will study analytically and numerically the
origin of the phenomenological scaling of the anomalous Hall effect observed in
the insulating regime and how the topological properties of the metallic regime
transform as disorder increases.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;2) Spin dynamics and spin
relaxation in the strong spin-orbit coupled regime. The PI will study recent
optical experiments demonstrating unique spin dynamics in this regime, explore
these dynamics through non-equilibrium transport techniques, and connect them to
spin accumulation in this regime and new electrical measurements of the spin
Hall effect where spin-orbit coupling can be tuned
systematically.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;3) Topological thermoelectric materials and
spin-dependent thermoelectric effects. The PI will explore the thermodynamic
properties of topological insulators connected to the one-dimensional protected
states in dislocations, as well as other spin thermoelectric transport phenomena
in these materials. The primary focus will be to find schemes and arrangements
in which thermoelectric efficiency can be tuned above bulk material values that
are currently achieved.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;4) Localization effects in diluted
magnetic semiconductors. The PI will study recent experiments that seem to
indicate a mixed character of the Fermi surface in these systems, and explore
the effects of strong disorder and spin-orbit coupling on optical and transport
phenomena near this regime.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;On the educational and outreach
front several graduate students and postdoctoral researchers will be trained in
diverse analytical and computational techniques for the modeling of transport,
optical and thermoelectric properties. They will work closely with experimental
collaborators and have ample opportunities to visit them and experience an
international collaboration effort. The training will help the students in any
career path they may choose to take, whether it is in academia or industry. In
addition, the PI will establish a website which incorporates tutorials on
scientific visualization focused on spintronics and based on the open-source
code Blender. An open repository of notes and base codes on spin-charge
transport will be also developed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NON-TECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The field of spintronics is an emerging technology
that exploits not only the electronic charge but also the intrinsic spin of the
electron in solid-state devices. For both metals and semiconductors, this field
has been a continuous source of intellectual challenges over the past two
decades. This award supports theoretical and computational research and
education to study how electrons are driven through certain materials by
external fields, for example the electric field of a battery. The resulting
transport property of the material reflects the way electrons move through it
which may depend on how their spin, an intrinsic property of the electron,
interacts with the material. The PI will study spin dependent transport
properties, and electronic properties induced by thermal effects, in complex
materials with the interesting property that the interaction of the spin with
the material is strong. This is an exciting and intriguing frontier in the field
of spintronics. The PI will focus on several research thrusts centered on
fundamental physics questions that are motivated by either unexplained
experimental phenomenology or new potentially transformative approaches such as
the possibility of efficiently obtaining electrical currents from thermal
effects (thermoelectricity) that originate from intriguing properties of the so-
called "topological insulators", which conduct electricity only on their
surfaces or boundaries, rather than their interior. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
proposed activities could potentially contribute to the development of new
paradigms in thermoelectric efficiency and heat management in devices that are
some one millionth size of the human hair. Such materials are of fundamental
importance for energy usage efficiency as they could provide heat recovery
energy systems that are more efficient than present day coolers and
refrigerators. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;On the educational and outreach front
several graduate students and postdoctoral researchers will be trained in
diverse analytical and computational techniques for the modeling of transport,
optical and thermoelectric properties. They will work closely with experimental
collaborators and have ample opportunities to visit them and experience an
international collaboration effort. The training will help the students in any
career path they may choose to take, whether it is in academia or industry. In
addition, the PI will establish a website which incorporates tutorials on
scientific visualization focused on spintronics and based on an open-source
code. An open repository of notes and base codes on spin-charge transport will
be also developed.