* 1105143
* COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH:  Impact of the 2010 Caribbean Coral Bleaching Event:  Assessing Changes in Coral Immune Function
* GEO,OCE
* 12/15/2010,11/30/2012
* Ernesto Weil, University of Puerto Rico Mayaguez
* Standard Grant
* David Garrison
* 11/30/2012
* USD 38,745.00

The investigators requested RAPID funding to assess the impact of the 2010
Caribbean bleaching event on coral gene expression, immune function and coral
reef communities. 2010 is currently tracking as the warmest year ever on record,
potentially creating one of the largest thermal anomalies in the Caribbean basin
and in the southeastern Caribbean, exceeding the previous record-breaking
temperatures of 2005. These investigators will perform coral surveys at selected
sites in the southeastern Caribbean and sample collections in Puerto Rico during
and after this transient event to compare coral health measures with previously
collected pre-event data. The study will integrate several levels of data, from
remote temperature sensing satellite records, to coral health, cover and
diversity surveys, to studies of individual coral immune function and microbial
assemblages. The scale of this thermal event is significant enough that the
investigators hypothesize levels of disease will increase following this event,
as was observed after the 2005 Caribbean bleaching event and the 2002 Australian
bleaching event. The RAPID study will also test the hypothesis that this large
scale thermal anomaly will stress corals in Puerto Rico and down-regulate immune
gene expression in thermally sensitive species (Montastrea spp), but potentially
up-regulate expression in a thermally resilient species (Gorgonia ventalina).
The investigators also hypothesize that this expected level of coral bleaching
will change the surface microbial communities of both species toward more
Vibrio-based communities, and this is the first step in increased disease
susceptibility to opportunistic pathogens.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
merit: This project is relevant to an understanding of the resilience of marine
ecosystems and the impact of ocean warming events on coral physiology and
biodiversity. Current understanding of the impacts of warm thermal anomalies is
largely restricted to the bleaching response of the corals themselves, with much
less known about how warm temperatures change the functioning of the coral
holobiont via the microbial constituents and/or the immune responses of corals.
There is tremendous value in following the physiology and gene expression of
corals in the field through an extreme and transient event like this. Laboratory
studies could never truly duplicate these field conditions, particularly with
respect to disruptions to the natural resident microbial community that is so
critical to the coral holobiont. &lt;br/&gt;This RAPID project will focus on
objectives for which pre-event data/samples exist:&lt;br/&gt;1) Monitoring
levels of coral disease, coral species diversity and coral cover in Puerto Rico,
Grenada, Trinidad, the Mexican Yucatan, and Panama.&lt;br/&gt;2) Assessment of
coral immune responses and immune gene expression in a resilient gorgonian
(Gorgonia ventalina) and a susceptible scleractinian (Montastraea spp). Sampling
will occur pre-bleaching, during the heating event and after
recovery.&lt;br/&gt;3) Assessment of changes in total microbial community
before, during and after the heating event in the two above mentioned
species.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The dramatic visual impacts of
coral bleaching will be captured in photos and videos that, when used in
website, media and lecture outlets will help to garner public interest in coral
health (e.g. www.cnn.com/2010/OPINION/09/27/harvell.coral.reefs/index.html).
This interest will then be leveraged to raise public understanding of more
subtle climate impacts in the ocean. Through this RAPID project the
investigators will build upon ongoing local public outreach programs with the
Ithaca Science center, Paleontological Research Institution, Science Cabaret,
Arlington Independent School District as well as national outreach such as the
"Expanding your Horizons" program and the "Sally Ride Science Festival for
Girls". This work also embodies many of the objectives of the Cornell Center for
Sustainable Futures, and for this reason, the center will contribute matching
funds to this project.