* 1105663
* Geometry and Topology of Manifolds with Special Holonomy
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/2011,07/31/2016
* Sema Salur, University of Rochester
* Standard Grant
* Joanna Kania-Bartoszynska
* 07/31/2016
* USD 126,745.00

Manifolds with special holonomy and calibrated geometry have important relations
with symplectic geometry, complex geometry, algebraic geometry, Cartan-Kahler
Theory and Seiberg-Witten Theory. In this project, the P.I. plans to continue
her work on calibrated submanifolds of Calabi-Yau, G_2 and Spin(7) manifolds. In
joint work with S. Akbulut, the P.I. studied complex associative and complex
Cayley submanifolds and using the SW theory she showed that the moduli space of
these submanifolds is smooth without any obstructions to such deformations. She
also introduced the mathematical definitions of mirror Calabi-Yau and G_2
manifolds. The P.I. plans to continue her work on compactification problems of
these moduli spaces and to study the mirror dualities in other Calabi-Yau and
G_2 manifolds. These will lead to the construction of new counting invariants
and provide a better understanding of the mirror symmetry phenomenon.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research topics of this project are motivated by
questions in geometry and topology of low dimensional manifolds and mathematical
physics. The P.I. believes that this makes calibrated geometry an excellent
subject for students who might decide to study math and science, and as a female
researcher in this exciting area she feels a particular responsibility to
encourage young women to begin and to continue their studies of mathematics. She
will continue to encourage both undergraduate and graduate students and to
collaborate with them in this research field which is expected to have a long-
lasting impact on both mathematics and physics.