* 1105355
* Resolution of Important Remaining Puzzles in Conjugated Polymer Photophysics
* MPS,DMR
* 09/15/2011,08/31/2015
* Lewis Rothberg, University of Rochester
* Standard Grant
* Z.  Ying
* 08/31/2015
* USD 430,000.00

Technical: This project is designed to provide a detailed understanding of
photophysics in conjugated polymers used for optoelectronic applications.
Transient absorption and delayed luminescence experiments are performed on
solutions and films of electroluminescent polymers to address the root cause of
the decrease in fluorescence quantum yield in films, the branching ratio for
recombination of charge carriers to form singlet states and the origin of
magnetic field effects in organic light-emitting diodes. In donor-acceptor
blends relevant to fabrication of solar cells from conjugated polymers, time-
delayed field collection experiments to quantify charge photogeneration
efficiency and transient absorption to ascertain whether energy transfer plays
an important role in organic photovoltaics.&lt;br/&gt;Nontechnical: The research
has implications for the design of materials and device structures for solar
cells, optically pumped film lasers, lighting, display devices and spintronic
technologies based on processable conjugated polymer materials. Graduate and
undergraduate students participating in the research acquire interdisciplinary
training in areas as diverse as condensed matter physics, optics, materials
science, analytical chemistry and device engineering. Hands-on educational
modules demonstrating how conjugated polymers can change color and enable light
detection as in solar cells are developed for middle and secondary school
students in collaboration with a local high school science teacher and
disseminated on the Internet