* 1105839
* Epitaxial Growth and Doping of Topological Insulator Heterostructures
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2011,06/30/2015
* Michael Weinert, University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee
* Continuing Grant
* Z.  Ying
* 06/30/2015
* USD 579,140.00

Technical: This project aims to advance the understanding of the epitaxial
growth and doping of the Bi2X3 (X=Se, Te) topological insulators and their
modulation-doped superlattices. The critical issue is to control impurity
incorporation vs. intercalation during growth, with the goal to selectively
designate the sites for desired properties. In-situ scanning tunneling
microscopy/spectroscopy is carried out to study the surface morphology, atomic
structure, and carrier scattering by steps and magnetic impurities, and to
determine how the defining properties of topological insulators are affected by
magnetic impurity doping, gap opening, and warping of the Dirac cone. Scanning
tunneling microscopy is also used to investigate the transport properties of
topological insulator films and heterostructures in situ. Element-specific
electronic and magnetic properties of dopants are determined by x-ray absorption
spectroscopy and magnetic circular dichroism, while structural characterization
is carried out using x-ray diffraction, Raman spectroscopy, and transmission
electron microscopy, and magnetic and transport properties by temperature- and
field-dependent magnetization measurements and Hall effects. The experimental
efforts are complemented by density functional theory calculations of the
energetics of impurity adsorption and doping, the changes in the electronic band
structure, the x-ray absorption spectroscopy and magnetic circular dichroism
spectra, and scanning tunneling microscopy images, which helps to identify the
most promising heterostructures to be synthesized and their experimental
signatures.&lt;br/&gt;Nontechnical: The project addresses basic research issues
in a topical area of materials science with high technological relevance. With
precise control of composition and doping, molecular beam epitaxy facilitates
the synthesis of topological insulator heterostructures congruent with existing
semiconductor device fabrication infrastructure, which can potentially bring a
new paradigm for the next generation electronics. Graduate students are trained
in an interdisciplinary environment for materials growth, characterization, and
modeling. The PIs' active involvement in an on-going Research Experience for
Teachers outreach program continues to bring cutting-edge research on materials
sciences to high school students to impact their perception of science and
technology, and to inspire them to seek college degrees and careers in science
and engineering.