* 1105458
* Biophysics of protein nucleic-acids interactions
* MPS,DMR
* 09/15/2011,08/31/2015
* Ralf Bundschuh, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 08/31/2015
* USD 259,000.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Division of Materials Research and
the Division of Molecular and Cellular Biosciences contribute funds to make this
award. This award supports theoretical research and education in the field of
molecular mechanisms of protein nucleic-acid interactions. Nucleic acids (DNA
and RNA) and proteins are some of the fundamental molecules of living systems.
In a living organism they perform their biological function based on their
interactions with each other. The overarching goal of the research under this
award is to develop theoretical models of the complex phenomena resulting from
these interactions. The research will be in close collaborations with
experimentalists resulting in immediate feedback between model building and
experiments and thus leading to a deep understanding of the biological phenomena
of interest based on molecular mechanisms. There are three specific phenomena
that will be studied:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1. As cells repair damage to their
DNA they have to clear the stretch of DNA to be repaired from associated
proteins such as transcription factors and histones. For DNA mismatch repair
this is the function of the protein complex MSH2/MSH6 which forms a sliding
clamp on the DNA in the vicinity of a mismatch. Quantitative models developed
under this award will reveal the detailed molecular mechanism underlying this
clearing of DNA through binding of MSH2/MSH6.&lt;br/&gt;2. When retroviruses,
such as HIV, infect a cell, they use a special protein to 'soften' the secondary
structures of their RNA genome and enable several molecular processes that are
necessary for successful host infection. Under this award a quantitative model
will be developed to explain how nucleocapsid and similar RNA binding proteins
change the secondary structure of RNA molecules and its dynamics and how these
structural changes affect the processes necessary for retroviral
infection.&lt;br/&gt;3. RNA molecules can be threaded through protein and
artificial nanopores that are so small that only a single strand of the molecule
can pass through them. Thus, the secondary structure of these molecules has to
unravel in order for the molecule to pass through the pore. This makes nanopore
translocation experiments a unique vehicle to study RNA secondary structure
kinetics. However, this requires molecular scale models of RNA structure
kinetics and interactions with the nanopore which will be developed under this
award.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research and educational activities will provide
a highly interdisciplinary training to graduate and undergraduate students
through various avenues such as direct involvement in the research and
participation in biophysics courses and seminars. The scientific impact of the
models developed under this award will be maximized by incorporating these
models into existing or newly developed web servers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NON-
TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Division of Materials Research and
the Division of Molecular and Cellular Biosciences contribute funds to make this
award. This award supports theoretical research and education in the physics of
biological molecules. There are three major classes of molecules that life is
based upon, namely proteins, nucleic acids (DNA and RNA), and lipids. These
different types of molecules have their distinct roles, but in order for a
living cell to function they all have to work together. The research under this
award specifically focuses on the interplay between proteins and nucleic acid
molecules. The overarching goal is to develop theoretical models of the complex
phenomena that arise as proteins and nucleic acids interact. These models in
turn will allow the interpretation of experiments and enable a deep
understanding of diverse biological phenomena. The specific phenomena of
interest here are how cells correct errors in their DNA in order to avoid
cancer, how retroviruses (such as HIV) infect a host cell, and how RNA molecules
pass through minuscule holes and reveal their dynamical
properties.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research and educational activities will
involve training graduate and undergraduate students at the frontiers of
research at the interdisciplinary interface between the life and the physical
sciences. All projects will be performed in close collaborations with
experimentalists thereby providing a unique training environment to the students
involved in the research. In addition, the models developed in the course of
this research will be disseminated through interactive web pages in order to
enable their utility to as broad a group of users as possible.