* 1105757
* Electron Microscopy of Pulsed Laser Induced Rapid Solidification and Transient Solid State Phenomena in Nano-Scale Metal and Alloy Thin Films
* MPS,DMR
* 09/15/2011,08/31/2015
* Jorg Wiezorek, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Diana Farkas
* 08/31/2015
* USD 310,664.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY: This project is an investigation of rapid solidification
processes in pure metal and Al-rich Al(Cu) thin films. The main technique is in-
situ transmission electron microscopy (TEM) using the dynamic TEM (DTEM) at
Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory (LLNL) for ultrafast electron diffraction
(UED) and imaging. There are no other measurement techniques currently capable
of observing rapid solidification processes with interfacial velocities ranging
from about 0.1 to 100 m/s in metal thin films with the required nano-scale
spatial and temporal resolution offered by the DTEM. The research will reveal
quantitative dynamic details of the extremely rapid liquid-solid transformation
and other transient phenomena (e.g. solid-solid transitions) associated with Al
and Al-rich Al(Cu) thin films and other FCC, BCC and HCP metals after single-
shot pulsed laser melting. Robust modeling software codes, validated by direct
comparison with quantitative measurements from in-situ DTEM experiments on pure
metals, will be developed for the pulsed-laser melting. Post-mortem and in-situ
microstructural characterization will be used to investigate microstructural
evolution and defect formation in the solid state following solidification of
pure metals with different crystal structures. The study of Al-rich Al(Cu) thin
films is expected to help identify the conditions of morphological
destabilization of the growth interface as function of pulsed laser power, alloy
composition and heat-extraction parameters for hypo-eutectic, eutectic and
hypereutectic compositions between Al and Al2Cu. The data obtained on parameters
that determine the stability or instability of the transformation front will
enable validation of theoretical solidification models. Apart from delivering
basic scientific knowledge on metals under the extreme conditions of laser-
induced rapid solidification, state-of-the-art experimental techniques for in-
situ TEM will be developed for the purpose of probing the behavior of material
volumes at time scales close to those accessible by computational
modeling.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY: Solidification is a
ubiquitous and fundamental process in materials fabrication, especially for
metals, which are critical to energy generation and transmission, transportation
and information technologies. Under extreme conditions of laser processing the
growth dynamics determine the final microstructure and consequently performance-
related properties in engineered components and devices. Understanding such
phenomena is scientifically interesting and technologically important. The
results of this research will be disseminated by peer-reviewed publications and
presentations. The project involves outreach to high school students, via the
Pennsylvania Junior Academy of Science and the development of semester-long
research experiences for students enrolled in the new Pittsburgh Science &amp;
Technology Academy (grades 6-12). Students will receive training in vacuum and
laser science, physical metallurgy, thin film science, micro-fabrication
methods, scattering and diffraction physics, transmission and scanning electron
microscopy, crystallography, thermodynamics, transport phenomena and numerical
methods for materials modeling. Visits to, and continuous interaction with, LLNL
will provide professional preparation outside the academic environment and
access to state-of-the-art instrumentation.