* 1105975
* Nanocomposite Magnetoelectric Films
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2011,05/31/2014
* Menka Jain, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* Lynnette Madsen
* 05/31/2014
* USD 169,731.00

NON-TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION: This project is focussed on improving the
understanding of composite materials critical for making multifunctional
devices. Specifically, the materials being studied are multiferroics
magnetoelectrics (ME) that simultaneously have both magnetic and ferroelectric
properties. By intimately connecting the piezoelectric and magnetostrictive
phases that exhibit ME-coupling via strain, it is possible to artificially
create composite films with better strain-transfer capabilities between the two-
phases. At the conclusion of this project, insight will be gained into the
scientific parameters affecting leakage current (that adversely reduces the ME
coupling). Furthermore, this understanding may be used to combine other ferroics
order parameters, such as, ferroelectric-ferroelastic or ferroelastic-magnetic.
During the course of this project diverse undergraduate and graduate students
are being trained and mentored, results are being incorporated into a new
physics and nanomaterials course, and awareness and understanding of
multifunctional device materials is being enhanced through presentations at
public libraries.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL DETAILS: The professor and her
team are synthesizing novel magnetoelectric composite films with well-dispersed
magnetic phase in the form of nanoparticles, nano-islands, etc. of different
sizes, aspect ratio, and distribution, into a matrix of a piezoelectric phase
with a reduced substrate-clamping effect. The approach focuses on controlling
and characterizing interfacial diffusion and reactions (through careful
selection of materials, processing parameters and other phenomena). Insight into
how strain states can be modulated is being gained. Team member recruitment
includes utilizing connections to a historically black college and university,
Alabama A&amp;M University. Professor Jain is incorporating results into the
development of new graduate-level course entitled 'Physics of Advanced
Functional Nano Materials' and she is presenting scientific principles and
directions at the nearby Tolland Public Library. For the latter, assessment is
underway to evaluate the effectiveness of the outreach in this environment.