* 1105895
* Polycation Beacons for Multiscale and Multimodal Imaging of Nucleic Acid Delivery
* MPS,DMR
* 09/15/2011,08/31/2014
* Theresa Reineke, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Aleksandr Simonian
* 08/31/2014
* USD 420,000.00

ID: MPS/DMR/BMAT(7623) 1105895 PI: Reinecke, Theresa ORG: University of
Minnesota&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Title: Polycation Beacons for Multiscale and
Multimodal Imaging of Nucleic Acid Delivery&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;INTELLECTUAL
MERIT: The PI proposes to develop a novel family of twelve polycations that form
nanoparticle complexes with nucleic acids that are nontoxic and effective at
cellular entry, and to develop methods to track these nanoparticles via
luminescence imaging (for intracellular trafficking on the nm/ìm scale) and
magnetic resonance imaging (MRI, for bulk cell and tissue tracking/imaging on
the ìm/mm scale). The specific objectives are: (1) To synthesize and
characterize a novel family of twelve polymer structures that contain lanthanide
chelates. The PI will systematically vary the following chemical properties of
these polymer beacons: number of ethyleneamine groups, absence, presence, and
size of the carbohydrates within the repeat unit, and polymer molecular weight.
(2) To characterize water proton relaxivity, toxicity, and delivery efficiency
for twelve polymer structures (chelated with Gd3+) and statistically compare the
results to select three highly effective vehicles for delivery and imaging of
pDNA and siRNA. (3) To examine the selected delivery beacons for pDNA and siRNA
cellular trafficking via confocal microscopy (with the Eu3+ chelates) and MRI
(with the Gd3+ chelates) in cultured cells to optimize the balance between
imaging capability and delivery efficiency. (4) To establish an interactive
mentoring and learning environment that successfully attracts undergraduate
chemistry students to the McNair Scholars Program in an effort to unite teaching
and scholarship with the excitement of performing interdisciplinary research and
thus increase retention of disadvantaged students in the
sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;BROADER IMPACTS: This research is critical to
advance many areas in need of delivery beacons, such as studies involving gene
and epigenetic function, cellular signaling, therapeutic development, and
regenerative medicine. The work will pave the way for higher information content
imaging for therapeutic tracking in the lab and in the clinic, as well as aid
development of specific medical therapies involving cellular-based genetic
delivery. Students involved in this interdisciplinary program will gain uniquely
broad and deep experience in fields ranging from synthetic chemistry and polymer
science to molecular biology and imaging. Training students at this interface of
different fields is essential to foster creative and innovative developments in
research, increase the skills of our future workforce, and keep our country at
the forefront of technological advancement. Involvement of the co-PI in the
McNair Scholars Program targets current undergraduate students from
disadvantaged backgrounds at Virginia Tech and prepares them to earn an advanced
degree via formal graduate school preparation courses and mentoring. This
program is designed to encourage and prepare financially disadvantaged and first
generation college students and those from groups currently underrepresented to
enter graduate education programs, primarily at the PhD level. The results from
this project will be disseminated widely to the general public by the PIs,
graduate and undergraduate and students involved in this work through
publications, conference presentations, the web, to promote the research,
mentoring, and educational programs are presented here.