* 1105135
* Nonlinear Dynamics of Entangled Polymers with Well-controlled Long-chain Branching
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2011,07/31/2016
* Shi-Qing Wang, University of Akron
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 07/31/2016
* USD 359,776.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research aims to probe how molecular
design of chain architecture can be employed to affect nonlinear dynamics of
entangled polymers. The proposed research will attempt to control the structure
of long-chain branching (LCB) in various polyisoprene and polybutadiene-based
melts, and determine the differences between melts with LCB and corresponding
linear melts under different conditions of large deformation. The specific
objectives of the proposed work are as follows: 1) Determine interfacial
yielding characteristics of the various LCB polymers to contrast with
corresponding linear counterparts; 2) Explore how melt strength depends on the
specific chain architecture, e.g., the number of branching points per chain; 3)
Examine whether the entanglement network with LCB may suffer strain localization
upon large deformation; 4) Identify key molecular structural parameters that
define/determine the cohesion and dictates nonlinear responses to large
deformations; 5) Study the effect of mixing different components of LCBs or LCB
and linear chains on the nonlinear dynamics. To achieve these goals, both simple
and uniaxial extension will be carried out involving either startup or step
strain. In all cases, effective particle-tracking velocimetric (PTV)
observations will be indispensable and systematically carried out. In the case
of shear, a circular Couette shear cell will be employed with PTV capability.
Uniaxial extension will be realized either with the counter-rotating double-
cylinder device or Instron where in situ PTV measurements will also be
performed. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
research aims to explore and identify guiding fundamental principles that may
find application in more efficient and energy-saving manufacturing of polymeric
materials. These principles will ultimately emerge from the present proposed
work, aimed to determine how different molecular designs of polymeric materials
would affect the processing ability of plastics and rubbers. The outcome of the
proposed work should lead to explicit information valuable to the plastic and
rubber industries. At the same time, the experimental activities are expected to
stimulate theoretical development in the field of polymer physics. More broadly,
the PI plans to consolidate the findings from this research into a textbook,
which would include all the key results emerging from his contributions to this
field. Since the nature of the proposed research is visualization-intensive,
complex physical phenomena can receive intuitive interpretations, thus providing
attractive educational materials for students in middle and high schools to
perceive how science is done. As part of the research activities, an
international collaboration has also been initiated with the Changchun Institute
of Applied Chemistry of the Chinese Academy of Sciences, aiming to carry out
computer simulations complementary to the various proposed experiments.