* 1105183
* Electron-Electron Interaction Driven Phase Transition in Low Dimensional Systems
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2015
* Jian Huang, Wayne State University
* Continuing Grant
* Tomasz Durakiewicz
* 08/31/2015
* USD 340,000.00

****Technical Abstract****&lt;br/&gt;The study of the many-body electron systems
encompasses two of the most fundamental subjects: electron-electron interaction
and electron-disorder interaction. It is well known that sufficient disorder
causes electron states to undergo Anderson Transition. On the other hand,
whether strong electron-electron interaction also brings radical changes, such
as the predicted Wigner Crystallization (electron solid), is still unknown. For
a long time, experimental effort was hindered because most devices contain a
high level of unwanted disorder which overwhelms the interaction effect at low
electron densities. Recent breakthroughs have been made in providing ultra-high
quality two-dimensional electron systems in GaAs semiconductor field-effect-
transistors. This project will utilize this type of devices with record low
electron densities to perform transport experiments at low temperatures. The
goal is to verify whether strong electron-electron interaction drives a first-
order phase transition (Wigner crystallization) or some intermediate phases.
Either observation will provide insights in understanding the quantum mechanical
nature of strongly interacting electrons in the form of a solid or a strongly
correlated liquid. This project will support the education of one Ph.D. student
in pursuing discovery and in learning most advanced technologies, which has
historically shown to be excellent training for scientific
careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;****Non-Technical Abstract****&lt;br/&gt;Electrons
are quantum mechanical objects that exist in all physical systems and most
systems contain a large number of them. Understanding the states of electrons,
how they interact with the environment and each other, is a vital scientific
subject and has played a critical role in advancing modern science and
technologies. Analogous to water, electrons manifest both gaseous states at high
temperatures and liquid states at low temperatures. Another form of the states
is solid which was predicted but never observed. To obtain evidence of this
solid state of electrons is not only important to understand how the most basic
force among the electrons can radically affect the quantum states, but also
allow scientists to utilize remarkable properties in developing quantum
electronics and spintronics. As nanotechnology marks the opening of the 21st
century, semiconductor technologies have greatly improved. A novel type of
semiconductors of ultra-high purity has become available as a result of a recent
breakthrough. This project will utilize such devices to perform experiments with
the most advanced scientific tools: nanofabrication and ultra-low temperature
physics. The goal is to capture direct evidences that either indicate an
electron solid, or some other complex states. This project will support the
education of one Ph.D. student in pursuing discovery and in learning most
advanced technologies, and allow the group to conduct outreach activities with
local high schools.