* 1105842
* Growth of Low Defect Density III-Nitride Compounds on Nanowires
* MPS,DMR
* 09/15/2011,12/31/2015
* S. Bedair, North Carolina State University
* Continuing Grant
* Z.  Ying
* 12/31/2015
* USD 554,720.00

NON-TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION: Gallium nitride optoelectronic devices are amongst
the fastest expanding fields and are being extensively used in solid-state
lighting, optical imaging, scanners, power amplifiers and switches for
interfacing renewable energy with the electric grid. Therefore, their importance
is of the utmost concern. Efforts to successfully improve the material's quality
will enhance device performance and impact several industrial and consumer
products.

TECHNICAL DETAILS: III-Nitride compounds are the material of choice in several
optical and electronic devices. High defect densities (approximately 10exp9 to
10exp10 /cm2) are currently present in III-Nitride compounds due to the lack of
both lattice matched substrates and lattice matched multilayers made from binary
and ternary compounds. These defects act as non-radiative recombination and
scattering centers that, for example, impact minority carrier lifetime and
reduce thermal conductivity. These high defect densities limit the performance
and reliability of several optoelectronic devices such as ultraviolet (UV)
light-emitting diodes (LEDs), laser diodes as well as power devices and
switches. Previous efforts to reduce these defects have had limited success. The
objective of this project is to achieve films in III-nitride compounds with
defect densities lower than 10exp7/cm2 over the entire wafer. The overall
approach is involves overgrow from nanostructured GaN templates by using an
innovative approach. It begins with a mask-less fabrication of nanowires with
conical tips to facilitate the growth and coalescence of the overgrown GaN film.
GaN three-dimensional growth on different crystallographic facets in early
overgrowth stages on nanowire structures plays a key role in the remaining
dislocation interactions (since the likelihood for dislocation annihilation and
formation of dislocation loops are greatly increased). Subsequently a network of
embedded voids in the epitaxial films are generated that act as dislocation
sinks. Studies are underway to determine the dominant mechanism in the defects
reduction. During the course of this project, both undergraduate and graduate
students are engaged in the research. As well, the outreach program includes
undergraduates, minority students, and high school teachers.