* 1105370
* Understanding Acid-Base Interactions using Interface-Sensitive Spectroscopy
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2011,05/31/2016
* Ali Dhinojwala, University of Akron
* Continuing Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 05/31/2016
* USD 500,000.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this NSF project is to
exploit the interface sensitivity of infrared-visible sum frequency generation
spectroscopy (SFG) to measure acid-base interactions at solid-solid interfaces.
An understanding of polar interactions is important in the areas of adhesion,
friction, and wetting. In-situ characterization of acid-base interactions and
their role in adhesion of these coatings at the molecular level and under
kinetic conditions (for example: during sliding and mechanical contact) pose a
formidable challenge to scientists. The principal investigator (PI), Professor
Dhinojwala, proposes to directly probe the acid-base interactions for polymers
in contact with inorganic sapphire substrate or sapphire modified with self-
assembled monolayers with acidic or basic end groups to understand these
interactions at the molecular level. SFG instrumentation is used to directly
monitor the shifts in the vibrational peaks of the acidic and basic groups and
correlate them with interaction energies to study exchange kinetics at polymer-
solid interface as a function of time, temperature, and composition. This
proposal explores the kinetics and thermodynamics of surface segregation driven
by acid-base interactions. In addition, this proposal focuses on blends and
copolymers to study the role of these interaction energies on the segregation of
near solid-solid interfaces and dynamics during sliding and peel-off. The study
of interaction energies and its experimental results have important implications
in understanding friction and adhesion hysteresis. These interaction energies
will be compared with adhesion measurements using the Johnson-Kendall- Roberts
(JKR) geometry. In addition to these experiments, the PI will also conduct
atomistic molecular dynamics simulations (MD) and quantum calculations to
understand the magnitude of the frequency shift and its effect on segregation.
The SFG, MD, and quantum calculations of these experiments will be used in
conjunction to understand the influence of surface concentration, steric
constraints, and surface roughness on acid-base interactions and the
consequences on adhesion energies. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NON-TECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The fundamental understanding of acid-base
interactions helps in predicting the adhesion of polymers to substrates and in
developing the next generation of enhanced coatings and adhesives for
applications in multiple areas, including, but not limited to, electronics, bio-
mineralization, peptide-based surface recognition, nano-composites and solar
cells. This project will support two graduate students who will work together as
a group with experts in the areas of surface science, MD simulations, and
industrial research. The students working with this broad multidisciplinary
group will be provided training to work as a team. Additionally, the graduate
students will also have the opportunity to supervise NSF-REU students during the
summer. As a volunteer Director of District 5 Science Day, the PI will continue
his outreach to host District Science Day at The University of Akron (UA). The
PI has also initiated a mentorship program where he brings together scientists
from industries and academia to mentor the science projects. This mentorship
program was started in the city of Hudson, Ohio, and the PI plans to make this
program available to all schools in District 5. In collaboration with UA's
business school and Austen Bio-innovation Institute in Akron, the PI is helpping
in developing a multidisciplinary Bio-design class offered to UA students in
physical sciences, business, and medicine with a goal of observation or
experimental based approach to solve problems. This class will be taught in
collaboration with professors from UA's business and medicine schools.