* 1105361
* Gas Phase Combustion Synthesis of Nanopowders, Modeling and Processing Duplex Microstructures
* MPS,DMR
* 09/15/2011,08/31/2015
* Angela Violi, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Lynnette Madsen
* 08/31/2015
* USD 780,000.00

NON-TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION: Metal oxide nanopowders play major roles in
applications including recording media, catalysts, as fillers for plastics, or
for forming ceramic prosthetics (hip replacements). Most commercial nanopowders
are made by flame processing volatile, toxic and polluting metal chlorides.
Researchers at the University of Michigan (UM) have developed a process that
escapes metal chlorides furnishing the same products while greatly expanding the
number and types of oxides accessible. This approach has generated metal oxide
nanopowders that offer novel lasing behavior; act as new catalysts for auto and
diesel exhaust cleanup as well as providing facile routes to prosthetic ceramics
with exceptional control of final properties. The UM process uses turbulent
flames to combust metal-organic complexes (not chlorides) dissolved in alcohols.
Despite the unique materials made, the exact process(es) whereby combustion
generates metal ions that condense to form nuclei, which coalesce to form
particles primarily of kinetic products are unknown. Given the considerable
potential of this process for creating novel nanomaterials, researchers at UM
are conducting basic studies including computer modeling to delineate the steps
involved in particle formation to identify the scientific principles whereby
nanopowders form. These principles will then be used to design the synthesis of
new nanopowders for applications including catalysts, ceramic materials with
controlled/novel properties including for example transparent ceramics or
lithium battery electrolytes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL DETAILS: Liquid
feed flame spray pyrolysis (LF-FSP), as developed at UM, provides a wide variety
of single and mixed-metal oxide nanopowders that are often kinetic rather than
the thermodynamic phases observed in most other nanoparticle syntheses. They
have been shown to exhibit unique catalytic, photonic, electronic and ion
conducting properties. LF-FSP uses a turbulent rather than a laminar flow flame.
While laminar flow flames are easily modeled, turbulent flames are much less so.
Consequently, most of the UM discoveries arise from empirical efforts.
Researchers at UM believe that establishing a detailed understanding of the
scientific underpinnings to LF-FSP processing will provide the basis for greatly
expanding its utility in providing new nanopowders with novel properties
especially for catalysts, photonic materials and in low temperature processing
of dense, ceramic materials. The Laine and Violi groups have teamed together to
develop a predictive model that identifies how specific processing parameters
(e.g., temperature) contribute to the size and chemical composition of
nanopowders. The model development is being guided and validated by the
experimental techniques. In particular, they will explore the formation of
spinel phase materials MOAl2O3 (M = Mg, Co, Ni, etc.) at compositions outside
thermodynamic phase fields. The process variables that control the formation of
these nanopowders are being assessed incisively to establish processing-property
relationships of use in the modeling studies. The expected outcome entails
controlled approaches to novel nanopowders for multiple practical applications.
Research done in both groups is being used to train graduate and undergraduate
students in the design, synthesis, characterization and processing (and
handling) of nanopowders. At the undergraduate level, students from the
undergraduate research opportunity program (UROP) are working with graduate
students to learn how to characterize nanopowders using multiple spectroscopic
tools, to map properties and to use the characterization data to develop
theoretical models of the formation processes and methods of controlling what
materials/nanopowders form.