* 1105584
* Collaborative Research:   Exploiting Prokaryotic Proteins to Improve Plant Photosynthetic Efficiency
* BIO,EF
* 03/15/2011,07/31/2015
* Maureen Hanson, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* elsbeth walker
* 07/31/2015
* USD 675,287.00

Photorespiration can account for yield losses of 25-50% in C3 plants, which
include rice, wheat and soybean, three of the top four crops in terms of global
grain production. Photorespiration occurs because oxygen and carbon dioxide
(CO2) compete for the same acceptor molecule in photosynthesis. The process can
be very simply inhibited by increasing the concentration of CO2. When CO2 is
increased artificially in greenhouses or in open fields, very significant yield
increases are obtained. However, artificially elevating CO2 over millions of
acres of fields is not feasible. Some cyanobacteria solve this problem by
confining the fixation of carbon to a structure termed a carboxysome, where
localization of specific enzymes cause a concentration of CO2. Although
chloroplasts, which contain the photosynthetic machinery of crops, lack
carboxysomes, they evolved from cyanobacteria, which were symbiotically
recruited into the ancestors of todays plants and crops. This research project
will provide the foundation for a synthetic biology approach in which
carboxysomes will be engineered into the chloroplasts of crop plants to enhance
photosynthesis. Optimization will involve manipulating a model plant that is
readily transformable and the development of an in silico model of the system to
evaluate the use of different proteins and the minimal system that is needed. A
multidisciplinary approach will be implemented through collaboration of four
research groups, each contributing complementary expertise: carboxysome genetics
and assembly (Berkeley), chloroplast and nuclear transformation (Cornell),
photosynthetic systems modelling (Illinois) and physiological and biochemical
characterization of the whole plant (Rothamsted, Cornell and Illinois). The
project will allow postdoctoral and undergraduate trainees to gain experience in
an international collaborative project (All). Research resources for comparing
plant and bacterial genes will be developed for use in undergraduate education
(Berkeley).