* 1105772
* Statistical, algebraic and combinatorial structures related to curves on surfaces and three manifolds
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2015
* Moira Chas, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Joanna Kania-Bartoszynska
* 08/31/2015
* USD 131,442.00

Oriented closed curves on an orientable surface with boundary are described up
to continuous deformation by reduced cyclic words in the generators of the
fundamental group and their inverses. By self-intersection number one means the
minimum number of transversal self-intersection points of representatives of the
class. The PI aims at studying statistics relating self-intersection, geometric
length and combinatorial length (number of letters of the word) of deformation
classes of curves. The second goal is to deepen the understanding of a
relatively new algebraic structure defined on curves on surfaces (the Goldman-
Turaev Lie bialgebra) and its relation to existing structures. The third is
studying a generalization of the Goldman-Turaev Lie bialgebra, to three
manifolds and its relation with intersection structure of
submanifolds.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A surface is the mathematical representation
of the "outer layer of a solid". A curve on a surface, can be thought of as a
"rubber band" on the surface. We consider all curves on a given surface, where
the rubber band is taut, and associate certain quantities to each curve, related
to the length and the number of crossings. One of the mathematical goals of this
project consists in studying statistical relations between this quantities. The
other mathematical goal of this project will be studying an algebraic structure
defined on curves on surface, and a generalization of this structure to three
dimensional spaces which are the mathematical representation of solids, like,
for instance, a donut or a ball, and also, the space we live in. Surfaces and
three manifolds play a crucial role in many branches of mathematics and have
applications beyond them - potentially protein folding and cellular arrangements
in organisms. The third goal is educational: Since some aspects of this project
do not require an extensive knowledge of mathematics, and possible statements
can be tested by computer experiments, we will involve undergraduate students in
the executions. This will allow them to learn mathematics "from the inside ".