* 1105539
* Mechanosensitive Tumor Cell Migration: Deconstructing the Roles of Matrix Stiffness and Confinement
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2016
* Sanjay Kumar, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Alexis Lewis
* 08/31/2016
* USD 350,000.00

The goals of this NSF-NCI joint research grant are to establish the influence of
extracellular matrix (ECM) stiffness and microarchitecture on tumor cell
invasion and to elucidate the molecular mechanisms that underlie this
regulation. While the strong influence of ECM stiffness in governing tumor cell
migration has been well established in traditional two-dimensional culture
paradigms, understanding this phenomenon in three-dimensional (3D) ECMs that
more closely mimic tissue has proven considerably more challenging. In part,
this is because perturbations that change 3D ECM stiffness often concurrently
change microscale matrix parameters that also critically regulate cell
migration, such as pore size, fiber architecture, and local material
deformability. By combining a new microscale culture platform that enables
orthogonal separation of ECM stiffness and pore geometry with gene targeting
approaches and computational modeling, this project will explore the
contributions of these two parameters to the invasion of tumor cells.

The studies will initially focus on glioblastoma multiforme (GBM), a highly
malignant brain tumor that routinely kills patients within two years of
diagnosis. Successful completion of the work will provide new biophysical,
mechanistic insight into the progression of GBM, and the resulting experimental
and computational platforms may be readily applied to probe the invasion and
metastasis of other tumor types. The project will also feature an educational
plan in which undergraduates will be mentored and actively included in research
efforts. Finally, a learning module for elementary school students on cell
motility and the ECM will be created and taught through a local program that
places practicing scientists and engineers in area public schools to enhance
science education.