* 1105310
* RUI:  The Molecular Mechanisms and Mechanical Behavior of Spider Glue Silks
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2011,06/30/2015
* Craig Vierra, University of the Pacific
* Continuing Grant
* Aleksandr Simonian
* 06/30/2015
* USD 320,000.00

ID: MPS/DMR/BMAT(7623) 1105310 PI: Vierra, Craig ORG: University of the Pacific

Title: RUI: The molecular mechanisms and mechanical behavior of spider glue
silks

INTELLECTUAL MERIT: Spiders manufacture a variety of high performance structural
fibers that have outstanding mechanical properties. This project investigates
the relationship between the molecular structure and mechanical behavior of
spider glue silks, a class of fibers spun from newly discovered glue silk
proteins. These spider glue silks differ substantially from the widely studied
dragline silks and have unique biochemical properties that make them excellent
candidates for large-scale synthetic fiber production. The primary goal of the
proposed research is to characterize the molecular and mechanical properties of
native and artificially spun glue silk fibers. The central hypothesis is that
the molecular sequences of glue silk proteins have evolved specialized features
that are well suited for viable biomaterials for design, structural, and other
engineering applications. The molecular mechanisms and mechanical behavior of
natural and artificially spun glue silk fibers will be studied to help
accelerate development of next generation engineering materials. The research
should develop new insights into the relationship between the molecular
structure of glue silks and its implications on the mechanical behavior of the
fibers. Studying the molecular and mechanical properties of glue silks will help
delineate how glue silk protein sequences relate to its unique biological
function, which will provide insight into how these silk types are capable of
being spun into a gelatinous matrix that facilitates spider locomotion and web
construction. The nanostructure and mechanical behavior of natural and
artificial spider glue silk fibers will be characterized using atomic force and
scanning electron microscopy. Emphasis will also be placed on elucidating the
secondary and tertiary structure of the glue silk fibroin, PySp1, using circular
dichroism, NMR, and mass spectrometry. Spider silk glue proteins will be
expressed using a heterologous expression system in yeast, purified and spun
into artificial silk fibers. Both natural and synthetic spider glue silk fibers
will be characterized at the nanoscale level to reveal the molecular
relationship between the protein modules within the PySp1 amino acid sequence
and their contributions to the mechanical behavior of glue silks from black
widow spiders.

BROADER IMPACTS: The broader impacts of the proposed research include
comprehensive mentoring programs and promotion of careers in science,
technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM) fields to underrepresented
student groups. Because this work is highly interdisciplinary, integrating
engineering, biology, chemistry, and physics, the principal investigators will
be able to train students broadly across a wide-range of disciplines. The
principal investigators will mentor students at a variety of different
educational levels, including at the high school, undergraduate, and graduate
student levels. They will also promote engagement from underrepresented groups
by encouraging participation by economically disadvantaged and minority
students. Additionally, the proposed research will enhance the infrastructure
for research and education by fostering collaborations and interdisciplinary
research between the Departments of Biology, Chemistry, Physics, and the School
of Engineering and Computer Science through the acquisition of an atomic force
microscope supported by this proposal. The results of the proposed research will
be disseminated broadly to enhance scientific understanding of the
bioengineering potentials for spider glue silks. The findings of the proposed
studies will be made visible to the community via local news stations, radio
stations, community outreach programs, the Science Blast STEM program,
scientific research articles, and regional and national scientific meetings.
Collectively, these studies have transformative potential and will provide new
directions for the utilization of artificial spider glue silks as
environmentally friendly, next generation materials.