* 1105577
* RAPID: Field Reconnaissance of the 25 October 2010 Mentawai Islands Tsunami Earthquake Offshore Sumatra
* ENG,CMMI
* 12/01/2010,11/30/2011
* Costas Synolakis, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Joy Pauschke
* 11/30/2011
* USD 49,783.00

This Grant for Rapid Response Research (RAPID) award provides travel and field
support for a team of eight investigators and three to four graduate students to
conduct a reconnaissance survey of the 25 October 2010 Mentawai Islands offshore
Sumatra earthquake and tsunami. On 25 October 2010, a magnitude 7.7 earthquake
triggered a tsunami which impacted the Mentawai Islands and parts of the coast
of western Sumatra in the Indonesian archipelago. The most recent estimate of
the human toll from the tsunami exceeds 450. This is the highest tsunami death
toll worldwide during the past five years. The tsunami hazard along the
coastline of western Sumatra and its offshore islands has been identified
repeatedly after the 2004 Sumatra-Andaman, 2005 Nias, and 2007 Bengkulu
earthquakes. Educational programs have been initiated and outreach lectures
given on the Mentawai Islands themselves as recent as May 2010. With the October
2010 occurrence, a warning was issued within minutes by the Pacific Tsunami
Warning Center (PTWC). Initial media reports and some estimates from local
scientists relate run-up heights in excess of 7 meters and inundation distances
up to 1 kilometer. Post disaster reconnaissance following major natural and
anthropogenic events has yielded significant new insights into both the
characteristics of the events as well as the performance of natural and built
infrastructure subjected to these catastrophic events.

The field survey be conducted over ten days and includes rental of off-road
vehicles, boats, and aircraft as needed. The field activities will include
collection of perishable data that will be assembled into a comprehensive multi-
scale, geo-referenced data base of tsunami damage and flood zone characteristics
combined with numerical model results. The field investigation will gather data
to address the following research topics. First, the Mentawai earthquake falls
into the category of tsunami earthquakes, which represent only about 1/10 to
1/100 of tsunamigenic earthquakes. The tsunami community lacks proper scaling
functions for the tsunami run-up associated with tsunami earthquakes. Second,
landslide scarps have been reported on the Mentawai Islands. The impact zone
appears to be highly localized, and the offshore earthquake may have triggered
superimposed tsunamis generated by landslides. The arrival times need to be
determined and validated against numerical model predictions to exclude local
early arrivals due to separate submarine landslide tsunamis. The distribution of
inundation heights needs to be quantified to determine whether tsunamigenic
submarine landsliding occurred. Third, and finally, several animations with run-
up projections have been posted on the International Tsunami Information Center
list-servers. Collecting high quality inundation measurements will allow the
community to infer the predictive capability of different numerical models and
evaluate their potential uses for inundation mapping and operational forecasts.
As part of the field study, the research team will investigate why the death
toll was so high from this event, given the recently installed German-Indonesian
Tsunami Early Warning System (TEWS) and the role of PTWC. The field team will
give education and outreach lectures and briefings at villages surveyed.