* 1105304
* Complex Functional Materials Accessed Uniquely through Selective Covalent and Non-covalent Macromolecular Interactions
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2011,07/31/2015
* Karen Wooley, Texas A&M Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 07/31/2015
* USD 518,741.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed work is of a fundamental
nature, and includes the synthesis of intricate nanostructures and investigation
of their supramolecular assembly behaviors and the properties of the resulting
complex morphologies. Combinations of controlled radical polymerizations and
ring opening polymerizations will be used to prepare linear triblock terpolymers
and molecular brush triblock terpolymers. Each polymer topology will include at
least one semi-crystalline polymer component and the overall nanostructures will
be amphiphilic. The differences that occur during their supramolecular assembly
in water will be explored. A significant effort will be directed toward
determination of the effects of molecular topology on molecular chain packing
and overall properties, with the assemblies being stabilized by crosslinking
within selective domains, and with portions of the nanostructures being
excavated. By this process, roles of nanoconfinement and covalent attachment
between polymer chains and crosslinked network surfaces will be probed by the
crystallization and melting transition characteristics. Host-guest behaviors
will also be investigated, with one target being organic-inorganic hybrid
materials that utilize the complex organic polymer morphology as a shell layer
for packaging small molecule guests and magnetic inorganic cores to facilitate
magnetic recovery. Characterization studies will include standard spectroscopic
techniques to determine the compositions (nuclear magnetic resonance, infrared,
ultraviolet-visible), measurement of dimensions and internal morphologies
(dynamic light scattering, atomic force microscopy, transmission electron
microscopy, small angle neutron scattering, small angle x-ray scattering),
analysis of the thermal properties (differential scanning calorimetry and
thermogravimetric analysis), evaluation of the nanoparticle mechanical
properties (quartz crystal microbalance with dissipation monitoring (QCM-D)),
and host-guest behaviors (UV-vis, high performance liquid chromatography,
QCM-D).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
supramolecular assembly of linear block copolymers is leading to high
performance materials, for instance tough plastics, or nanoscopic devices for
medical imaging and therapy. The new frontier will involve the construction of
complex materials from polymers of higher structure. The proposed investigation,
of the effects of the compositions, sizes, shapes and architectures of synthetic
polymers on their controlled aggregation in water, extends the fundamental
knowledge of molecular assembly processes and is expected to lead to nanoscopic
materials for advanced performance in applications that will solve real-world
problems. An initial target will be optimized organic polymer coatings
surrounding magnetic nanoparticles, to serve as high capacity materials for
sequestration-based capture and magnetic-based recovery of pollutants in the
environment. Many other applications can be anticipated. The primary technical
outcomes and broader impacts of the proposed work will be (1) diverse and
extensive education, training and recruiting of the next generation of chemists,
who gain expertise in synthetic organic/polymer chemistry, with specialty in
materials science and engineering, (2) advances in synthetic polymer chemistry
techniques, and (3) creation of novel materials that have the potential to
positively impact society. The breadth and depth of knowledge and expertise will
be extensive and cross disciplinary. Broad-based educational activities, at all
levels, including the development of polymer science courses for chemists and
engineers at Texas A&amp;M University, and web-based distance-taught courses on
polymer chemistry and applications of nanostructured materials, will be
continued throughout the four years of this grant support.