* 1105253
* Patterned Polymer Brushes as the Basis of Shape Selected Molecular Objects
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2011,05/31/2015
* Christopher Ober, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 05/31/2015
* USD 580,000.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research program will examine the
synthesis, characterization and lithographic processing of "grown from" di- and
triblock copolymer brushes. By combining brush growth and self-assembly with
precision patterning a variety of new polymer micro- and nanostructures will be
created that are not easily produced by other means. A key aspect of the
proposed research is a focus on immiscible block segment combinations that react
in opposite ways to the radiation used during lithographic patterning. By using
one phase that crosslinks and one that is scissioned (and easily removed), new
periodic structures, porous materials, brush membranes, nanosheets and
nanoribbons will be formed. Through brush growth the composition and height will
be set and through patterning lateral size and shape will be determined.
Advanced patterning methods will initially include electron beam techniques and
will subsequently involve deep UV processes. In order to speed evaluation of
brush architecture and its effect on pattern formation, the use of initiator
density gradients and brush segment size gradients will be employed. Mixed
brushes, binary brushes and block copolymer brushes consisting of crosslinkable
and scissionable segments will be investigated. Characterization of the brushes
before and after patterning will be made using a variety of analytical tools
including X-ray reflectometry, grazing incidence (GI) SAXS and WAXS, neutron
reflectivity and near edge X-ray absorption fine structure (NEXAFS)
measurements. Each technique will provide information about the internal or
surface organization of the material and will aid our understanding of the
structures produced. Neutron reflectivity in particular will provide information
about the brush chain conformation as the brush undergoes the patterning
process. Several model systems will be investigated to better understand the
process limitations and the possible architectures that can be produced from
these brushes. Mixed gradient brushes, supported membranes and untethered
nanosheets and nanoribbons will be explored. It is anticipated that applications
for these brushes will include new membranes for water purification,
nanochannels for small-scale fluidic devices and new nanopatterned strucures
from brush gradients.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;NON-TECHNICAL
SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Polymer brushes are ideal structures to interface
the surface of a material with its environment. Like many natural surfaces,
polymer chains extend from a surface and provide an organic coating with
functional groups that can be modified or used in a number of applications.
Along with systematic synthesis and characterization of these materials, there
are prospects for making brush surfaces with gradient controlled properties,
nanosheets with the ability to wrap drugs and other useful materials for later
release, new membranes for water purification to help better improve drinking
water in arid regions and nanochannels that will enable transport of fluids in
small devices such as sensors. The research program will act as a mechanism to
engage undergraduates in polymer science and materials research. Graduate
students will serve as mentors and role models to these young students, while at
the same time gaining supervisory skills. Graduate students will have an
opportunity to work with the research groups of our collaborators and to take
part in exchange visits. Undergraduates from Cornell will take part during the
academic year while REU students from other schools with an emphasis on
underrepresented students will participate in research during the summer months.
Cornell undergraduates taking part in this program will be encouraged to take
internships at the companies and university labs we will interact with. Lessons
learned from these research programs will be factored into programs in which the
PI and graduate student volunteers interact with high school teachers. Patterned
brushes make interesting visual aids because hydrophobic brushes can repel
water. Sample brushes on substrates will be made available to interested
teachers the PI will meet at teacher workshops offered by Cornell.