* 1105737
* Collaborative Research:   Strengthening Pathways to Diversity through Professional Development for Minority-Serving K-12 Science Educators-Expanding GeoFORCE Texas
* GEO,GEO
* 12/01/2010,06/30/2012
* Eleanour Snow, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* Jill L. Karsten
* 06/30/2012
* USD 149,994.00

The project will expand The Jackson School of Geosciences at The University of
Texas at Austin (JSG) efforts in educational outreach to the K-12 community by
providing high quality geoscience professional development to 8th to 12th grade
minority and minority-serving science teachers and teacher mentors throughout
Texas. The overarching project goals are to (1) develop a rigorous geoscience
professional development program for minority and minority-serving teachers for
a new Texas high-school level capstone Earth and Space Science course that can
serve as model for other states; (2) ensure that all teacher participants attain
the basic foundation for the new capstone course, helping this course to remain
a viable option for core credit to satisfy the fourth science; and (3) support
teachers from the JSG GeoFORCE program's network of educators in southwest Texas
who receive this professional development to implement improved Earth science
instruction in their own classrooms. Professional development will be provided
through several activities, including:&lt;br/&gt;1) Professional Development
Academies (PDA's), with The Texas Regional Collaboratives for Excellence in
Science Teaching (TRC), to train 70 teacher mentors each semester, who will in
turn bring the training to 25 teachers at each of the 35 Regional
Collaboratives. Eight different PDA's of 70 teachers each.&lt;br/&gt;2) Summer
Institutes for 25 highly motivated TRC teacher mentors. These institutes will
comprise two 2-week sessions. They will train the teacher mentors to train other
teachers to implement the new Earth and Space Science course in Texas high
schools. Two 2-year institutes of 25 students each.&lt;br/&gt;3) GeoFORCE
Education Academies. Similar to the summer institute, these academies are
designed to help teachers from SW Texas who are part of the GeoFORCE network to
implement the new Texas Earth and Space Science course. Rather than bring these
teachers to Austin, training will be brought to them in the form of 8
professional development workshops. Two 8-unit academies will serve 25
participants each.&lt;br/&gt;4) On-Line Learning Communities, designed to keep
the teachers in contact with facilitators and fellow teachers between and after
training, and to share best practices, and new information.&lt;br/&gt;The
project will directly impact 140 TRC teacher mentors (2 cohorts of 35 TRC
teacher teams representing each of the 35 Regional Collaboratives, or 70 teacher
mentors, over 4 years = 140 teacher mentors) and 50 GeoFORCE southwest Texas
teachers (2 cohorts of 25 teachers over 4 years = 50 teachers). Each two-person
TRC teacher-mentor team is expected to reach 25 additional teachers each year,
for a total of 3,500 additional TRC teachers directly impacted by the project.
&lt;br/&gt;