* 1105167
* Structure of Mollusk Shells at Different Length-Scales
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2011,07/31/2014
* Pupa Gilbert, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Aleksandr Simonian
* 07/31/2014
* USD 450,000.00

ID: MPS/DMR/BMAT(7623) 1105167 PI: Gilbert, Pupa ORG: University of
Wisconsin&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Title: Structure of mollusk shells at different
length-scales&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;INTELLECTUAL MERIT: The complex structures of
mollusk shells will be analyzed with unprecedented resolution, and on a large
scale, using new spectromicroscopy methods developed with the previous NSF grant
and which are now available to many other synchrotron users around the world.
The mollusks produce a variety of mineralized shells that are presumably adapted
to specific functions. The PI will study the processes leading to the formation
of complex shell structures, and correlate these observations with the physical
parameters (e.g. depth, pressure, temperature) of the environments in which the
mollusks live. This will provide insights into the evolution of mollusk shells,
how they adapted to different environments, and possibly provide new tools to
for measurement of environmental parameters. Beyond this, a full understanding
of how mollusk shells are constructed can serve as a guide for biomimetic
manufacture of strong, tough composites.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;BROADER IMPACTS:
The methods developed with the previous NSF grant have now been established, and
are available to hundreds of other spectromicroscopy users around the world. The
PI has also developed software to process the spectromicroscopy data, which is
distributed free-of charge to the community on
http://home.physics.wisc.edu/gilbert/. The experiments proposed here will yield
detailed microcrystal and nanocrystal architectures and the formation mechanisms
of tough biominerals, and may therefore inspire the engineering of new synthetic
materials with improved performances for medical implants or micro-mechanical
machines. One graduate and one undergraduate student per year will be involved
in the proposed experiments. Women and underrepresented minority students will
be actively recruited. Four major outreach activities will be performed,
including: (1) Development of instructional modules on biomineralization within
the framework of the Wisconsin Center for the Integration of Research, Teaching,
and Learning (CIRTL). These will be actively disseminated through CIRTL for use
by high school teachers and college educators for their own classes. (2)
Presentations to about 3000 people/year from the general public at the UW-
Madison Physics Fair. (3) The PI and her students will continue to provide
lectures and lab experiments to African American students within the PEOPLE
program every summer. (4) The PI has given and will continue to give invited
talks at the American Association of Physics Teachers (AAPT) annual meeting,
during which she has and will disseminate teaching tools, modules, and slides to
the teachers, to teach the fascination of biominerals to high school and college
students.