* 1105248
* Engineering Effector Protein Nanoclusters for Breast Cancer Therapy
* MPS,DMR
* 09/15/2011,08/31/2015
* Julie Champion, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Joseph A. Akkara
* 08/31/2015
* USD 300,000.00

ID: MPS/DMR/BMAT(7623) 1105248 PI: Champion, Julie ORG: Georgia Tech

Title: Engineering Effector Protein Nanoclusters for Breast Cancer Therapy

INTELLECTUAL MERIT: A select group of bacterial pathogens secrete proteins
called effectors during infection, which enable them to survive and grow in a
hostile host. Some of these effectors have the capability to interfere with the
same pathways that are altered in breast cancer. The goal of this proposal is to
use these effector proteins as novel breast cancer therapies. In order for these
proteins to be used as anticancer drugs, the normal bacterial delivery
mechanisms must be replaced by a drug delivery system able to deliver
biologically active protein to breast cancer cells. To achieve this, the
effector proteins will be linked together into nano-sized clusters that can
enter breast cancer cells and then fall apart to allow the individual proteins
to act inside the cells. The proposed work will fabricate effector nanoclusters
and assess their ability to restore normal behaviors in breast cancer cells,
such as increased apoptotic cell death, decreased proliferation, decreased
metastasis, or increased sensitivity to chemotherapeutics. Four technical
objectives have been established to achieve this goal: (1) Identify candidate
effector proteins with therapeutic potential. (2) Fabricate effector
nanoclusters with controlled disassembly and effector protein release. (3)
Assess nanocluster delivery efficiency and therapeutic effects on breast cancer
cell lines. (4) Assess immunologic potential by measurement of nanocluster
uptake and cytokine activation by macrophages. The results of these objectives
will establish the feasibility of using bacterial proteins as breast cancer
drugs and the capability to deliver these molecules to breast cancer cells with
positive therapeutic outcomes. The nanoclusters described here are unique
assemblies that protect proteins and increase delivery load over traditional
polymer-drug nanoparticles. The result is a new type of protein therapeutic,
mimicked from nature, which serves as both the bioactive agent and delivery
vehicle, all in one, for the treatment of breast cancer.

BROADER IMPACTS: Given that breast cancer is the most common cancer in U.S.
women and the 2nd leading cause of cancer death, many people could benefit from
the development of effector nanoclusters. This work validates the idea of using
bacterial proteins for therapeutic applications and the concept can be expanded
for a variety of drug development and delivery needs for other diseases. Beyond
the anticipated scientific results, the PI has planned a variety of activities
to educate non-engineers as well as to recruit and retain women in chemical
engineering. This proposal will support one female under-represented minority
graduate student. The PI will actively mentor this student to encourage her to
continue her career in engineering and serve as a role model for the next
generation of potential female engineers. The PI is also active in the Women in
Engineering program at Georgia Tech (GT), and she will participate in outreach
programs such as "Introduce a Girl to Engineering Day." These programs are aimed
at Atlanta-area middle and high school girls. The objective is to get them
excited and interested in the important projects that chemical engineers work on
through interactions with women engineers such as the PI. In addition to
scientific publications and presentations, results from this proposal will be
shared with GT alumni through a homecoming cancer research panel and with all
Atlantans on the GT science-comedy radio show "Inside the Black Box."