* 1105061
* EAGER: Production of Nanoscale Solar Energy Materials using a Solar Microreactor
* ENG,CBET
* 02/01/2011,01/31/2013
* Chih-hung Chang, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Maria Burka
* 01/31/2013
* USD 100,000.00

1105061&lt;br/&gt;Chang&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
Merits&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The main purpose of chemical manufacturing processes
is to transform raw materials into useful products. In the course of these
operations, energy resources are consumed and the usefulness of materials
resources is altered. As the world-wide demand for energy continues to rise and
the economic and environmental impact of fossil fuel combustion continues to be
felt, the search for suitable alternative energy sources has become more urgent
than ever. Among the various renewable energy sources, the conversion of
sunlight directly into electricity using the photovoltaic (PV) properties of
certain materials is attractive. Current PV manufacturing practices suffer from
poor energy efficiency and large carbon footprints due to poor material
utilization, high processing temperatures and/or high solvent usage --
offsetting the hope and promise of PV technologies. The objective of this
project is to explore the possibility of a zero energy impact chemical
manufacturing process for the production of nanoscale solar energy
materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Recent advances in nanocrystals are having a
dramatic impact on the development of next generation low-cost and/or high
efficiency solar cells. For example, semiconductor nanocrystal inks are used to
lower the fabrication cost of the absorber layers of the solar cells. In
addition, some quantum confined nanocrystals display an electron-hole pair
generation phenomena with greater than 100% quantum yield, called multiple
exciton generation. These quantum dots could potentially be used to fabricate
solar cells that exceed the Schockley-Queisser limit. This project aims to
investigate the microreactor systems powered by renewable energy for the
production of nanoscale solar energy materials. The needed thermal energy for
driving the chemical reaction will be supplied via a parabolic trough solar
concentrator. Two different reactor schemes will be investigated in this EAGER
project. One is the direct use of solar radiation onto solar microchannel
reactors and the other approach is to use an energy transfer medium to absorb
the solar energy then use the medium as an energy input for the synthesis. The
idea of using a solar microreactor for the production of nanoscale solar energy
materials will be explored for the first time through this EAGER project to
assess its feasibility and to identify the key
challenges.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PV
manufacturing industry and green building construction industry are expected to
grow significantly due to the increasing awareness of renewable energy and
government incentives. The current low adoption of solar based energy generation
can be attributed to inefficiency and high cost. An inherent cost to the current
technology is the high consumption of energy in the solar energy materials
production processes. The possibility of achieving zero-energy impact
manufacturing processes in a cost-effective manner can make solar energy
technologies greener and more affordable. The demonstrations of this solar
micro-reaction technology will increase effectiveness and efficiency, reduce
cost of nanoscale solar energy materials and in turn lead to wider adoption.
Graduate and undergraduate students will be involved in this project and mini
projects for the existing K-12 outreach programs on the OSU campus will be
developed for recruiting and retaining underrepresented groups (young women and
ethnic minorities) into science and engineering.