* 1105321
* Partial Differential Equations in Geometry
* MPS,DMS
* 09/15/2011,08/31/2015
* Qing Han, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* Joanna Kania-Bartoszynska
* 08/31/2015
* USD 153,270.00

Under this award, the principal investigator plans to continue his work in
geometric partial differential equations. In particular he will investigate the
role of level sets of solutions of differential equations. Special cases of
level sets are given by the nodal sets, the singular sets and the branch sets.
An important part of the study is the investigation of the asymptotic behavior
of solutions near these sets or the asymptotic behavior of these sets
themselves. The differential equations may be elliptic, hyperbolic or of mixed
type. Some problems have close connections with other fields in mathematics,
including several complex variables and algebraic geometry. Another class of
problems that the PI will continue to work on involves the effect of level sets
of known functions in the equations on the existence and properties of
solutions. A particular problem is the isometric embedding of 2-dim Riemannian
manifolds in 3-space when the zero set of Gauss curvature is well behaved. This
problem is in the form of degenerate Monge-Ampere equations.

The problems involving nodal sets or the singular sets originate from materials
science and control theory. Singular sets, as the name suggests, are those sets
where singularities occur. Precise definitions vary depending on the problems
where they arise. It often is impossible to eliminate the singular sets, the so-
called "bad sets". One of the central tasks is to identify the conditions under
which the singular sets can be controlled and the conditions under which the
singular sets are small. The proposed problems concerning singular sets in the
project are in their simplest forms. They are related to the Erickson's model
for liquid crystals and the Ginzburg-Landau equation in the superconductivity.
The PI believes that the discussion of these mathematical problems will help
scientists work with singular sets in various applications.