* 1105549
* Geometric flows on Riemannian and Kaehler manifolds
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/2011,07/31/2014
* Lei Ni, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Joanna Kania-Bartoszynska
* 07/31/2014
* USD 148,538.00

The first part of the project is about the geometric and analytic properties of
the Ricci flow equation and their applications to the study of geometry. Namely
to study the classifications of self-similar solutions, e.g gradient solitons
and ancient solutions, as well as the convexity type estimates in general. Such
results have far-reaching consequences in the singularity analysis, and
applications of Ricci flow in the study of geometric-topological structure of
the manifolds. The second theme of the project is on the sharp gradient
estimates of Li-Yau-Hamilton type, related monotonicity formulae and
applications in geometric nonlinear PDEs. Their relations to physics,
statistical mechanics will be studied too. The aim is to discover a fundamental
physical/geometric principle to unify various sharp estimates and monotonicity
formulae. It will also provide the guideline for further discovery of the new
monotonicity formulae in other geometric PDEs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Since all
physical event takes place in a space, the subject of differential geometry
which studies the geometric properties of the space has important consequence in
every physical event. This project mainly involves the study of partial
differential equations of parabolic type which arise from differential geometry,
and their applications to the understanding of various geometric/topological
properties of manifolds. This area lies in the center of the current
mathematics. It naturally connects various area of mathematics, such as
topology, Riemannian geometry, partial differential geometry, Lie groups, as
well as mathematical physics. The techniques developed can be useful in
understanding problems in economics, material sciences and bio-sciences.