* 1105202
* Hybrid Graphene-Ferroelectric Devices
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2011,02/28/2015
* Matthew Dawber, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Z.  Ying
* 02/28/2015
* USD 419,999.00

This project is jointly funded by the Electronic and Photonic Materials (EPM)
Program in the Division of Materials Research (DMR) and the Electronics,
Photonics, and Magnetic Devices (EPMD) Program in the Division of Electrical,
Communications and Cyber Systems (ECCS).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical: This
research project studies hybrid graphene-ferroelectric materials and devices.
The hybrid materials offer promise for combining the strength of the unique two-
dimensional Dirac Fermionic electronic structure and high carrier mobility in
graphene plus the high functionality in ferroelectric materials. The research is
designed to overcome undesirable polarization screening by absorbates on the
surface of ferroelectric materials by the use of artificially layered
superlattice materials in the form of epitaxial thin films, in which the phase
transition temperature and dielectric response of the material can be precisely
tailored. The research focuses mainly on two aspects: (1). A ferroelectric
material is used to charge dope a graphene sheet in contact with it to a much
higher extent than the conventional dielectrics can. Based on the principle of
ferroelectric charge doping, atomic force microscopy are used for "on-demand"
fabrication of nano-junctions and circuits, allowing definition of sharp
potential profiles with arbitrary designs, enabling exploration of the physics
of Dirac electron scattering through both scanning probe imaging and electrical
transport measurements. (2). A ferroelectric material is used to exert precisely
controlled strain on a graphene sheet in particular directions to modify the
electronic properties and to study the theoretically predicted gauge field
effects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Non-technical: The project addresses basic and
applied research issues in an interdisciplinary area that combines physics,
materials science and device engineering, with high technological relevance. The
unique properties of graphene are exploited in new device structures that
utilize both the ferroelectric field effect and piezoelectric strain. Prototype
devices studied in the project could form the seed for next-generation
electronics such as novel transistors with low-power consumption and high
mobility, non-volatile memory devices, and devices based on strained graphene.
Graduate students, as well as undergraduate and high-school students, are
trained in an interdisciplinary environment and learn thin-film deposition,
lithography, atomic force microscopy, and electrical characterization.