* 1105444
* RUI: Nonlinear and Neural Dynamics in Josephson Networks
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2011,07/31/2014
* Kenneth Segall, Colgate University
* Continuing Grant
* Paul Sokol
* 07/31/2014
* USD 262,459.00

****Technical abstract****&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This individual investigator
award supports an experimental and computational study of nonlinear dynamics in
networks of superconducting Josephson junctions. Josephson junctions are
examples of nonlinear systems which can be fabricated with adjustable
parameters, measured in a straightforward fashion, and easily scaled to large
network sizes. In addition, a large Josephson junction circuit measured over a
long time contains dynamics which would essentially be impossible to calculate
on a computer, but which can be observed with electrical measurements. This
project will take a multi-faceted approach to studying the collective, emergent
behavior of Josephson junction networks. First, it will follow previous work in
the field on soliton-like modes called fluxons and localized modes called
discrete breathers. Next, studies will be performed on the synchronization of a
system of disordered oscillators. Finally, a circuit of Josephson junctions
designed to accurately model the time-dependent voltage of a biological neuron
will be fabricated and tested. This has a longer-term goal of studying the
emergent behavior of a large, coupled neural network. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;****Non-technical abstract****&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;An important
aspect of physics today is the effort to understand how the fundamental laws of
nature result in complex behavior. For example, consider a system of gas
molecules. Simple laws of force and momentum govern their collisions. With only
a few molecules, the system is simple and uninteresting. With a large number of
molecules, however, the system can organize itself into something complex, like
a tornado. This new behavior comes about not because of a change in the
fundamental laws, but rather a change in the number of constituents, in this
case gas molecules, of the system. In this research, a simple electrical circuit
element known as a Josephson junction is studied. Josephson junctions are made
from superconducting metals and work at very low temperatures. Past experiments
have looked at the behavior of a single Josephson junction and found it capable
of interesting electrical behavior. However, circuits composed of large numbers
of Josephson junctions have yet to be fully studied. Just like the case of gas
molecules, new collective behaviors result when the number of constituents is
increased. This project will look at several of these new behaviors. One of
these, like a tornado, is a swirl of electrical current. Another is a collective
voltage oscillation, a back and forth motion like pendulums swinging together. A
final behavior is voltage spiking, similar to the on-off firing of a biological
neuron. With this last behavior, a longer term goal is to build circuits which
would emulate collective behaviors in the human brain, where large numbers of
neurons are connected together. This project incorporates undergraduate students
as the primary researchers, preparing them for technical careers in the
sciences.