* 1105586
* Complex Analysis and Geometry
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2011,05/31/2016
* Daniel Burns, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 05/31/2016
* USD 308,291.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Award: DMS-1105586&lt;br/&gt;Principal
Investigator: Daniel M. Burns&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Some of the themes emphasized
in these research projects are&lt;br/&gt;modern aspects of the Bohr-Sommerfeld
theory from the early days&lt;br/&gt;of quantum mechanics in the 1920s, value
distribution theory and&lt;br/&gt;Ahlfors currents, and Grauert tubes. In
physics the&lt;br/&gt;Bohr-Sommerfeld theory was created as a method for
quantizing an&lt;br/&gt;integrable classical mechanical system. The
principal&lt;br/&gt;investigator interprets the Bohr-Sommerfeld conditions
for&lt;br/&gt;quantization as a geometric property, name a triviality
condition&lt;br/&gt;on the holonomy of a certain flat bundle. Ongoing work seeks
to&lt;br/&gt;understand the connections between singularities of
Hamiltonians&lt;br/&gt;and singularities of underlying complex spaces, and the
geometry&lt;br/&gt;of the Bohr-Sommerfeld construction seems to be a central
focus&lt;br/&gt;of the story.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Value distribution theory is
a framework for attempting to count&lt;br/&gt;solutions to an equation in
complex variables. The Fundamental&lt;br/&gt;Theorem of Algebra tells us that a
polynomial equation of degree&lt;br/&gt;n in one variable has exactly n
solutions over the complex&lt;br/&gt;numbers, if you count repeated roots with
care. More complicated&lt;br/&gt;equations in a single complex variable can have
infinitely many&lt;br/&gt;solutions, but these are spread around the complex
plane and the&lt;br/&gt;number of solutions contained in a ball of radius R
about the&lt;br/&gt;origin can only grow at a limited rate as R becomes large --
a&lt;br/&gt;situation greatly clarified by ideas introduced by the
Finnish&lt;br/&gt;mathematician Rolf Nevanlinna in the 1920s, at about the
same&lt;br/&gt;time that the Bohr-Sommerfeld theory was developed in
physics.&lt;br/&gt;One of the projects supported by this award is a project
that&lt;br/&gt;applies modern geometric tools to study the distribution
of&lt;br/&gt;solutions to equations in several variables.