* 1105197
* Coupling a Single Vortex in a Superconductor to a Single Microwave Photon
* MPS,DMR
* 09/15/2011,08/31/2015
* Britton Plourde, Syracuse University
* Continuing Grant
* Tomasz Durakiewicz
* 08/31/2015
* USD 345,000.00

****Technical Abstract****&lt;br/&gt;Vortices in superconductors have been
studied from a variety of vantage points, including for the many key
technological applications of superconductors in the modern world. Nonetheless,
some fundamental questions remain, such as the possibility for a vortex to
tunnel through a classically forbidden barrier. In the field of quantum coherent
superconducting devices, recent dramatic advances have made it possible to
produce resonant circuits that can store a single quantized excitation of the
microwave field, or photon. In this project, experiments will be performed to
study the dynamics of a single vortex coupled to a single microwave photon, thus
applying state-of-the-art quantum coherent circuit technology to address key
fundamental problems in condensed matter physics. Following the fabrication of
nanoscale vortex confining structures, measurements of the resonators at
millikelvin temperatures will provide a unique probe of the dynamics of a single
vortex. In addition, such structures will allow for studies of the coupling of a
single microwave photon to quantized amounts of dissipation as vortices are
added one at a time. The proposed work will engage a diverse team of students in
cutting-edge scientific endeavors and will provide them with training in key
technological areas such as nanofabrication and microwave engineering. Public
lectures will also be given describing the nature of single vortices in
superconductors and their coupling to microwave quanta.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;****Non-Technical Abstract****&lt;br/&gt;Over a range of magnetic
fields, many different superconductors are threaded by vortices, which are
quantized bundles of magnetic flux. These vortices have been studied from a
variety of vantage points, including for the many technological applications of
superconductors in the modern world. Nonetheless, some fundamental questions
remain, such as the possibility for a vortex to tunnel quantum mechanically
through a barrier. In the field of quantum coherent superconducting devices,
recent dramatic advances have made it possible to produce circuits that can
store a single quantized microwave excitation, or photon. In this project,
experiments will be performed to study the dynamics of a single vortex coupled
to a single microwave photon, thus applying state-of-the-art quantum coherent
circuit technology to address key fundamental problems in condensed matter
physics. Following the fabrication of vortex confining structures at the nearby,
NSF-funded Cornell NanoScale Facility, measurements at temperatures near
absolute zero will provide a unique probe of the dynamics of a single vortex.
Such structures will also allow for coupling a single microwave photon to
quantized amounts of dissipation as vortices are added one at a time. The
proposed work will engage a diverse team of students in cutting-edge scientific
endeavors and will provide them with training in key areas such as
nanofabrication and microwave engineering. Public lectures will also be given
describing the nature of single vortices in superconductors and their coupling
to microwave quanta.