* 1105341
* Imaging Electron States in Nanostructures
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2011,07/31/2015
* Robert Westervelt, Harvard University
* Continuing Grant
* Tomasz Durakiewicz
* 07/31/2015
* USD 405,000.00

****Technical Abstract****&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As the size of electronic
structures continues to decrease, the classical view of electron motion
transforms into a fully quantum picture based on interacting electron states and
wavefunctions. To understand this quantum picture, we need to visualize where
electrons are and understand how they move. A liquid-He cooled scanning probe
microscope (SPM) is used to extract both the energy and the wavefuction of
individual electron states inside a semiconductor nanostructure, using Coulomb
blockade spectroscopy. The sample is a long, thin InAs quantum dot in an
InAs/InP nanowire, which contains a row of electrons that form a one-dimensional
electron gas. The wavefunction can be imaged by locally denting the wavefunction
with the SPM tip, which acts as a moveable gate, and recording the resulting
change in energy of the quantum state as the tip is moved along the dot. The
group plans to investigate the predicted transition from a Wigner crystal to a
Luttinger liquid as the number of electrons is increased. Research and education
will be integrated through the training of graduate students, and through summer
research experiences for undergraduate students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;****Non-
Technical Abstract****&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As the size of electronic devices
decreases, quantum mechanics becomes increasingly important. Our classical view
of electron motion transforms into a quantum picture based on interacting
electron states and wavefunctions. A technique is being developed to measure the
energy of individual electron states and map their wavefunctions using a cooled
scanning probe microscope (SPM). A row of electrons is held inside a long
quantum dot formed in an InAs/InP nanowire - the nanowire is so narrow that the
electrons must line up, one after the other. The energy of a single electron
state is measured using Coulomb blockade spectroscopy - current can flow through
the dot only when the energy required to add or remove an electron drops to
zero. The wavefunction is mapped by denting the wavefunction with the charged
SPM tip, and measuring the change in energy of the quantum state as the tip is
moved along the dot. In this way, the SPM can visualize the quantum picture in
order to develop new types of quantum devices from nanostructures. Research and
education will be integrated through the training of graduate students, and
through summer research experiences for undergraduate students.