* 1105409
* FRG: Development and Validation of Novel Computational Tools for Modeling the Growth and Self-Assembly of Crystalline Nanostructures
* MPS,DMR
* 09/15/2011,08/31/2015
* John Lowengrub, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 08/31/2015
* USD 900,000.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports theoretical research
and educational activities in computational materials science, with a focus on
the controlled growth of nanostructured
materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Nanostructured materials, including
semiconductor quantum dots and nanowires, hold the promise to yield
revolutionary new technologies. The realization of this promise has been
hindered to date by the challenges inherent in reproducibly synthesizing and
assembling arrays of such nanostructures with controlled morphologies and
compositions. Computational modeling is essential for understanding the complex
fundamental processes underlying nanostructure growth and self-assembly.
However, current state-of-the-art computational methods are not well suited to
such studies because of the difficulty in accounting for the atomistic processes
that control growth, while simulating over the larger length and time scales
associated with self-assembly. The PIs, three materials scientists and a
mathematician, propose to develop a new computational methodology that addresses
these issues, in order to investigate quantum-dot formation in thin-film
heteroepitaxy and nanowire growth mediated by liquid catalysts.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This multidisciplinary project addresses the challenge of
understanding multiscale phenomena associated with the formation of
nanostructures by exploiting recent developments in phase field crystal (PFC)
models, which resolve atomic spatial scales on diffusive time scales. The PFC
method naturally incorporates elastic/plastic deformations and crystalline
defects, and has already been used to simulate interfacial evolution during
solid-liquid phase transitions. The team will develop a new PFC-based
computational methodology for modeling solid-vapor, liquid-vapor and faceted
solid-liquid interfaces, which are commonly present during the growth of
crystalline nanostructures. The models will be parameterized and validated with
the aid of atomistic simulations and experimental results. Amplitude/phase
equations similar to traditional phase field models will be derived to allow
larger domains to be simulated. This will reveal how atomistic features and
processes affect morphological evolution at larger scales. We will develop new
efficient numerical algorithms that will enable simulations of large 3D systems,
as well as novel tools for data extraction and visualization. These tools will
advance the field of computational materials science by providing a framework
for the computational discovery of the fundamental mechanisms underlying
synthesis and assembly of nanostructures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Courses on
crystal growth for high school students are planned as part of the California
State Summer School for Mathematics and Science at UC Irvine, along with
additional outreach activities at the Ann Arbor Hands-On Museum. These
activities will help develop the future generation of mathematicians, scientists
and engineers. Graduate students will receive interdisciplinary training and
will present their findings at conferences, enhancing their educational
experiences. Furthermore, a symposium on the PFC approach will be organized. In
collaboration with the National Institute of Standards and Technology, a FiPy
version of the PFC codes will be developed and will be disseminated through
their website for use in education and
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NON-TECHNICAL
SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports theoretical research and
educational activities in computational materials science, with a focus on the
controlled growth of nanostructured materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Artificial
materials composed of building blocks on the scale of some ten thousand times
smaller than the width of a human hair but still larger than an atom can have
unique properties and capabilities that differ dramatically from bulk
crystalline materials. The properties of these nanostructured materials and
their lean tiny cousins, nanostructures, can be controlled through the way the
building blocks are arranged; they may even arrange themselves through a process
of self-assembly. Nanostructured materials including semiconductor quantum dots
and nanowires, hold the promise to yield revolutionary new technologies.
Realizing this promise has been hindered by difficulties in controlling their
structures and compositions. The use of computers to model nanostructures and
nanostructured materials is essential for understanding the complex fundamental
processes underlying nanostructure growth and self-assembly. However, current
state-of-the-art computational methods are not well suited to such studies
because of the difficulty in accounting for the atomic scale processes that
control growth, while simulating over the larger length and time scales
associated with self-assembly, involving the organization of the building
blocks. This grant will support the development of a new computational
methodology that addresses these issues, in order to investigate quantum-dot
formation and nanowire growth. The team will also develop new efficient
numerical algorithms that will enable simulations of large three-dimensional
systems, as well as novel tools for data extraction and visualization. These
tools will advance the field of computational materials science by providing a
framework for computational discovery of the fundamental mechanisms underlying
synthesis and assembly of nanostructures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Courses on
crystal growth for high school students are proposed as part of the California
State Summer School for Mathematics and Science at UC Irvine, and additional
outreach activities are planned at the Ann Arbor Hands-On Museum. These
activities will help develop the future generation of mathematicians, scientists
and engineers. Graduate students will receive interdisciplinary training and
will present their findings at conferences, enhancing their educational
experiences. Furthermore, a symposium on aforementioned computational techniques
will be organized. In collaboration with the National Institute of Standards and
Technology, a Python-script version of the simulation software will be developed
and will be disseminated through their website for use in education and
research.