* 1105129
* Kinetic Control of Crystalline Order in Olefin-Based Polymers
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2011,05/31/2016
* Rufina Alamo, Florida State University
* Continuing Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 05/31/2016
* USD 472,635.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Research is proposed to advance knowledge
of the interplay between chain microstructure, phase structure, crystallization
kinetics and morphology of non-oriented bulk crystallized polyolefins. The aim
is to understand this interplay using well-characterized systems that serve as
models to predict the behavior of more complex commercial systems. Molecules
could then be tailored with unique crystalline morphologies and properties. We
seek to understand from first principles the role of crystallization kinetics on
the development of the ultimate crystalline state. Of interest is the effect of
undercooling on nucleus size, nature of folding when enabled, and impact in
packing of sequence-specific macromolecules. Using polyethylene-based molecules
with exquisite control in halogen substitution as model systems to predict
kinetically controlled polymorphic transitions, further insights into primary
chain deposition and subsequent arrangements are sought as they relate to
classical and novel views of the path to polymer crystallization. In blends of
metallocene-made poly(propylene) and higher alpha-olefin random copolymers, the
role of sequence length distribution in polymorphic behavior and the crystalline
phase structure that evolves will be addressed for a wide range of
compositions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NON- TECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The main proposed work involves the two leading
commercial polyolefins, polyethylenes and polypropylenes. As they comprise over
half of the annual production of all synthetic polymers, any improvement in the
product, either by branching architecture, rate of processing, or judicious
component blending will lead to a significant impact in the US and world
economy. Most properties of these polyolefins are directed by the fraction and
type of crystalline order that they assemble, which is a function of branching
content and distribution. Commercial polyolefins are too complex in chain length
and branching distributions to generate fundamental relations between chain-
structure and properties. In the work proposed, polyethylenes and polypropylenes
synthesized with exquisite control of branching distribution, either at a
precise regular spacing or randomly placed will be studied as models to
establish fundamental behaviors. Special emphasis is given to the role of
crystallization kinetics, as it relates to processing rate, in the type of
crystals assembled. Crystals with different degrees of symmetry are predicted
with the model systems, thus bringing the opportunity to develop new polyolefins
in which polymer primary structure can be manipulated to control physical
properties. This fundamental research is also aimed to provide learning
opportunities for both graduate and undergraduate students, many of them
minority.