* 1105147
* High-Conductivity Binary Organic Single Crystals for Electronic Applications
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2011,07/31/2015
* Laurie McNeil, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Continuing Grant
* Z.  Ying
* 07/31/2015
* USD 723,935.00

Technical: The overarching goal of this research project is to grow single
crystals of binary compounds formed from organic or inorganic donors and
acceptors, to explore their physical properties, and to identify the most
promising candidate materials for potential applications for electronics and
optoelectronics. The project brings together a unified group of scientists, from
several campuses, with extensive knowledge and experience in the materials
growth, materials characterization, device behavior, and theory of organic
semiconductors. The team will concentrate its efforts on organic binary charge-
transfer compounds composed of two different organic molecules in which one
molecule acts as a donor and the other as an acceptor. A transition from
research on single-component materials to that of binary- and multi-component
materials offers the prospect of the discovery of unexpected material properties
and new phenomena, as the intermolecular interactions between donor and acceptor
molecules (with electron transfer playing the critical role) allow for novel
functionalities.&lt;br/&gt;Nontechnical: The project addresses basic research
issues in a topical area of materials science. The study of new binary organic
compounds has the potential to move the field of organic semiconductors forward
in a significant way, by opening up a large range of functionalities not
manifest in monomolecular solids and creating new applications for electronics
and optoelectronics. The graduate students who participate in this project will
gain broad experience in a range of physical characterization techniques, device
fabrication and characterization, quantum-chemical computational methods, and
crystal growth. Undergraduates will experience exciting collaborative and
interdisciplinary topics of research and a stimulating environment for training.
The research results will be integrated into courses taught by the co-PIs at the
undergraduate and graduate level, including special-topics courses on organic
electronic materials and devices. They will also be used in public outreach
activities sponsored by local science museums.