* 1105371
* Special Langrangian submanifolds in C^n and minimal surfaces in 3-manifolds
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2011,06/30/2015
* Nicolaos Kapouleas, Brown University
* Continuing Grant
* Joanna Kania-Bartoszynska
* 06/30/2015
* USD 220,496.00

The first main objective of this project is to expand the use of gluing
methodology to the greatest possible extent in understanding important existence
questions in the theory of minimal surfaces. Another objective (in the opposite
direction) is to understand related non-existence, characterization, and
uniqueness questions. Achieving these objectives requires the refinement of the
known methodology and also the development of entirely new methods. In the first
project of this proposal, the PI aims to study in collaboration with Mark
Haskins important special Lagrangian and other calibrated submanifolds. In
particular they intend to continue to study special Lagrangian cones in
$\mathbb{C}^n$ controlled by ODE systems and related in various ways to the
Lawlor necks, some of them invariant under the action of $SO(p)\times SO(n-p)$;
their use as building blocks for gluing constructions for new special Lagrangian
cones; and uniqueness questions for these objects (for which the known theory
seems inadequate because of the high codimension). In other projects, the PI,
alone or in collaboration, intends to continue his work on generalizing his
earlier desingularization and doubling constructions for minimal surfaces in
three-manifolds to the greatest possible extent, and apply these constructions
to fundamental questions in the theory of minimal surfaces, for example to a
question of Yau about the existence of infinitely many minimal surfaces in any
Riemannian three-manifold. The PI also intends to study existence and
classification questions for minimal surfaces in the round three-sphere,
including characterizations of a topological nature for the Lawson surfaces. In
a collaboration with F. Martin and W. Meeks, the PI intends to work on
desingularization constructions where there are triple points of intersection so
that they can be used to understand the Calabi-Yau problem for minimal surfaces
in the embedded case. In collaboration with Stephen Kleene and Niels Moller, the
PI intends to work on existence questions for self-shrinkers of the mean
curvature flow. In collaboration with Christine Breiner, the PI intends to
expand his earlier work on gluing constructions for constant mean curvature
surfaces.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Minimal and constant mean curvature surfaces have
historically been an important field where many important ideas were first
developed, and later applied to nonlinear Partial Differential Equations,
General Relativity, Einstein manifolds, and other fields. This is not surprising
because in some sense the theory combines important features of all these fields
while it is at the same time the simplest and most intuitive. Although enormous
progress has been made, there are many fundamental questions which are
completely open, mostly because the known methodologies are inadequate.
Successful completion of these pending projects would answer many important such
questions and would be the basis for progress in the related fields as well.