* 1105300
* Catch and Release: Biomolecular Ligation and Cleavage Strategies for Generating Instructive and Dynamically Responsive 3D Biomaterials
* MPS,DMR
* 09/15/2011,08/31/2014
* Brendan Harley, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Joseph A. Akkara
* 08/31/2014
* USD 450,000.00

This award by the Biomaterials program in the Division of Materials Research to
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign is to create a robust system based on
collagen-glycosaminoglycan biomaterials, benzophenone photoimmobilization, and
stimuli-responsive release chemistries that enables both spatial and temporal
control over the presentation of a wide range of adhesive and proliferative cues
(growth factors, ligands, proteins, carbohydrates, genetic sequences, etc.). The
systematic approach used here to integrate collagen biomaterials with
photochemically controlled immobilization techniques will enable design of new
classes of biomaterials for complex tissue engineering applications that
recapitulate much of the biomolecular complexity found in native tissues and
tissue interfaces. Simple, yet generic tethering chemistries that allow spatial
localization of a wide range of biomolecules as well as exogenously or
endogenously cued release of the same biomolecules will be invaluable for
generating novel classes of instructive biomaterials. Such materials would offer
the ability to mimic the dynamic and spatial heterogeneities of the natural
extracellular matrix. Apart from basic insights into developing molecularly
general methods for creating spatially and temporally patterned instructive cues
within 3D biomaterials, this work will enable fabrication of new classes of
biomaterials for both translational regenerative medicine as well as mechanistic
investigations of cell behavior. Broader impacts of this work are both to re-
imagine how biomaterials can be used to control cell behaviors as well as to
provide a valuable multidisciplinary training experience that affords
significant research projects for undergraduates from multiple departments and
colleges across campus. In doing this, this project will create a highly
interdisciplinary environment that exposes, educates, and empowers the next
generation of undergraduate and graduate engineers and chemists to address
critical challenges at the intersection of biological, physical, and engineering
sciences.

Tissues are complex, three-dimensional environments that present multiple types
of cues which regulate cell fate. The ability to spatially control the display
of biomolecules within three-dimensional biomaterials does not currently exist,
but this is a fundamental technological gap that must be bridged to develop next
generation biomaterials for use both in the body, to regenerate tissues, and
outside of the body, to study how cells sense and respond to their
microenvironment. Materials created using the patterning tools developed here
will be both instructive and responsive to surrounding cells and tissues, and
will provide mechanistic insights into cell-matrix interactions as well advanced
bioactive materials for more complex regenerative medicine applications. Through
a coordinated research and educational plan, the project will directly support a
number of critical outreach programs on campus. The tools developed during this
project will serve as the foundation for ongoing and future novel research
projects at the confluence of chemistry-biology-engineering disciplines for
under-represented undergraduate students in science and engineering, and will
form the basis for a new teaching module in an ongoing Tissue Engineering course
on campus.