* 1105362
* Collaborative Research:  Dynamical Processes in Semiconductor Nanowires in the Quantum Regime
* MPS,DMR
* 09/15/2011,08/31/2015
* Howard Jackson, University of Cincinnati Main Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Paul Sokol
* 08/31/2015
* USD 352,178.00

****Technical Abstract****

Semiconductor nanowires have recently emerged as a new class of materials with
significant potential for the advancement of understanding of fundamental
physics and for new applications in device physics. This research project will
bring together expertise in state-of-the-art semiconductor nanowire growth, in
modeling of these structures, and in unique excitation spectroscopies in order
to advance the understanding of dynamical properties of semiconductor nanowires
whose diameters are in the quantum regime. This project will: support the design
and growth of unique radial and axial nanowire heterostructures; develop new
optical tools for measurement of quantum states and their interactions;
investigate nanowire heterostructures in the quantum regime utilizing these new
tools; employ highly localized electric fields to manipulate and probe the
electronic states in the nanowire heterostructures; carry out both optical and
transport measurements; and explore spin dynamics in these nanowire
heterostructures. By designing, growing, and probing nanowire radial and axial
heterostructures with length scales from 5 nm - 50 nm, we will have access to
the truly quantum regime in these materials. Both graduate and undergraduate
students will be trained in these state-of-the-art techniques, which are an
excellent preparation for careers ranging from research and education in
academia, to applied development research in the most technologically advanced
industries. The overall goal of this research is to advance the understanding of
dynamical processes in semiconductor nanowires in the quantum regime.

****Non-Technical Abstract****

Semiconductor nanowires have recently emerged as a new class of materials with
significant potential for the advancement of understanding of fundamental
physics and for new applications in device physics. The research in this project
will bring together expertise in state-of-the-art semiconductor nanowire growth,
in modeling of these structures, and in experimental efforts that will advance
the understanding of semiconductor nanowires whose diameters are less than 50 nm
(1/1000 of the diameter of a human hair), a range where the materials themselves
are comparable to the size of the wavelength of electrons. Remarkable phenomena
and new technological opportunities are expected when synthetic materials can be
designed so as to control the electron wavefunctions. These states can be probed
using both optical and transport measurements by using highly localized electric
fields, magnetic fields, and utilizing unique nanowire heterostructures. This
research will be particularly directed towards the effect of spins in these
materials where both new physics and new technologies may be enabled. Graduate
and undergraduate students will be trained in state-of-the-art optical and
electronic techniques for looking at single nanowires. Such training is
excellent preparation for careers from research and teaching in academia to
applied development in the most technologically advanced industries. The overall
goal of this research is to advance the understanding of dynamical processes in
semiconductor nanowires in the quantum regime