* 1105837
* The algebraic structures behind higher homotopies in symplectic topology.
* MPS,DMS
* 10/01/2011,09/30/2014
* Sikimeti Mau, American Institute of Mathematics
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 09/30/2014
* USD 91,433.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;Award: DMS-1105837&lt;br/&gt;Principal Investigator: Sikimeti
Mau &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A-infinity algebra structures have recently emerged in
symplectic topology and will be investigated and extended by these projects. The
principal investigator intends to study these algebraic structures in concrete
examples based on Hilbert schemes of points on complex curves or complex
surfaces. Part of the goal will be to extend the structures to higher
categorical structures, using symplectic constructions closely related to the
string diagrams of physicists. The extended algebraic structures are motivated
by constructions in algebraic geometry for the same Hilbert schemes, which
should have symplectic analogues by mirror symmetry. Two examples in particular
that have been well studied on the symplectic side, and can function as guides,
are the Heegaard Floer theory developed by low-dimensional topologists, and
Seidel-Smith's symplectic Khovanov homology, a symplectically constructed
invariant of knots and links. The short-term objective is to find concrete
illustrations, and potential applications, of a new theory that is largely
abstract, but has the potential to explain algebraic phenomena in these fields.
The broader goal is to describe as much of the algebraic structure of Lagrangian
Floer theory as possible in a single algebraic language coming from "quilts", a
recent technique in symplectic topology due to Wehrheim and
Woodward.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A symplectic structure is the geometric face of
Hamiltonian mechanics, in which the position and momentum coordinates of a
system of moving particles are tracked and used to write out equations of motion
that correspond to Newton's laws. Spaces that carry such structures are always
even-dimensional, and their underlying geometry is about two-dimensional area
and higher-dimensional volume rather than about length and angle, which are at
the root of much of familiar geometry. New methods are coming into symplectic
geometry from other subjects such as low--dimensional topology, and it appears
that an algebraic formalism can be devised to carry a number of these new
constructions and to reveal useful properties of them. &amp;#711;