* 1105531
* NMR Studies of Field-Induced Phases in Molecular Solids
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2011,07/31/2014
* Stuart Brown, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing Grant
* Paul Sokol
* 07/31/2014
* USD 375,000.00

****Technical Abstract**** In the course of this project, solid state magnetic
resonance techniques will be employed to address questions related to novel
magnetic field-induced phases. The systems to be studied are selected molecular
superconductors and insulators with non-magnetic ground states, each exhibiting
field-induced phases or phenomena with unexplored and unknown properties. These
include high-field phases in layered superconductors, in a charge density
wave/Spin-Peierls coupled system, and field-induced phenomena or phases in a
candidate spin-liquid system. Identification of new forms of order, sometimes
expected and long-sought for is the primary aim of the project, and the problems
and systems are chosen accordingly. In a related effort, an association between
charge ordering and frustration will be explored, with the goal of identifying a
pathway to new spin liquid materials using pressure as the tuning parameter. The
properties of the molecular crystals chosen for these studies are uniquely
applicable to the problems addressed. Signatures for phase transitions will be
looked for in the results of NMR spectroscopy and relaxation experiments, and
complimentary physical properties measurements will be undertaken as
appropriate. Magnetic resonance is often an ideal probe for these problems,
because of its compatibility to the required extreme conditions, and because it
is a local probe sensitive to the electronic environment through the hyperfine
coupling. When possible, the research will be conducted in our laboratory at
UCLA, and at the National High Magnetic Field Laboratory (NHMFL) for work
requiring higher magnetic fields. The project will support efforts carried out
by graduate and undergraduate students alike, who will be well-prepared for
further work in academic or industrial laboratories.

****Non-Technical Abstract**** The primary aim of this project is the creation
and investigation of novel phases of matter produced under extreme conditions,
such as high magnetic fields, low temperatures, and high pressures. The specific
problems and systems are chosen because of remarkable physical properties that
tend to emerge from systems with strong electron-electron interactions and in
low-dimensional systems. One such example we will be investigating is the
stabilization of novel superconducting phases by high magnetic fields. Varying
the non-thermal parameters (magnetic fields and pressure) allow for a continuous
tuning of the important interactions, which sometimes leads to emergent
properties and phases, as well as providing the conditions under which the
material can be studied. Much of the work will be carried using the methods of
solid state nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) at our laboratory at UCLA and at
the National High Magnetic Field Laboratory. NMR methods are locally sensitive
to the electronic environment at the site of the nucleus under study. Both
graduate and undergraduate students will carry out much of the experimental
program, and in so doing will develop expertise in cryogenics, high-pressure
techniques, and high-power radiofrequency methods, as well as a comprehensive
knowledge of materials. Each will be well-prepared for further work in
materials-related research or engineering laboratories.