* 1105615
* Scalable, cost-effective, high-actuator-count deformable mirrors for astronomical adaptive optics
* MPS,AST
* 07/01/2011,06/30/2015
* Thomas Bifano, Trustees of Boston University
* Continuing Grant
* Ralph Gaume
* 06/30/2015
* USD 899,151.00

Over the past decade, adaptive optics (AO) has become indispensible as a means
to compensate for aberrations introduced by atmospheric turbulence in large
ground-based telescopes. The resulting gains in resolution are especially
important for large telescopes. Indeed, because of their greater aperture, large
ground-based telescopes have exceeded in narrow fields the fidelity possible
with orbiting observatories and have led to exciting recent advances in the
observation of exoplanets, characterization of planetary rings and atmospheres,
and studies of galactic structure. The universal optical component that allows
for this wavefront compensation is a deformable mirror (DM), which must operate
at frequencies above 1 kHz and whose actuator count scales with the area of the
telescope primary mirror. Indeed, DMs with tens of thousands of actuators are
required for planned extremely large telescopes (ELTs) - those with apertures
greater than ~20-m.

The technology to make high-actuator density DMs with high production yield and
therefore low cost does not exist today. A main objective of work planned by Dr.
T. Bifano of Boston University is to develop such manufacturing technologies
using a microelectromechanical systems (MEMS) approach. A critical failure mode
of current large-format DMs has been the thousands of fragile electrical traces
that route signals along the front surface from bonding pads located near the
periphery of the module. This problem worsens rapidly as the actuator count
increases, culminating in a yield of less than 1% for the latest attempts at
constructing a high-count DM for the Gemini Planet Imager (GPI). Dr. Bifano's
plans to circumvent this problem involve replacing the dense network of surface
traces with through-wafer interconnects and bonding to a backside package. While
this basic technique is not unprecedented in modern electronics manufacturing,
technical challenges include the very large voltages (~250V) that must be
endured by the silicon substrate to achieve the required DM stroke of ~3.5
microns. However, the payoff is large, since the availability of reliable high-
actuator-count DMs would catalyze advances in promising imaging techniques such
as Multi-Object AO and Extreme AO. An outcome of the proposed project will be
fully functional MEMS DM prototypes with 2048 actuators, evaluated at a leading
astronomical AO test bed. Funding for development high actuator count DMs for
next-generation AO is being provided by NSF's Division of Astronomical Sciences
through its Advanced Technologies and Instrumentation program.