* 1105710
* Geometric Submanifolds of Manifolds
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2015
* David McReynolds, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 08/31/2015
* USD 145,999.00

This project is centers around understanding Riemannian manifolds via
submanifolds. This topic and these methods have been central in Riemannian
geometry since its conception, and have direct ties to problems and methods in
geometric group theory. With regard to submanifolds, the PI seeks to further
investigate the geometric data encoded by the primitive totally geodesic
submanifolds of a fixed Riemannian n-manifold. The simplest case of
1-dimensional totally geodesic submanifolds is nothing more than the geodesic
length spectrum and has garnered interest for more than 50 years. In addition,
the geodesic length spectrum has strong connections with the eigenvalue spectrum
of the Laplace-Beltrami operator and analysis on manifolds. In addition to this
study, the PI plans on investigating which manifolds arise as totally geodesic
submanifolds of a fixed Riemannian manifold. Two cases are locally symmetric
manifolds of non-compact type and the moduli space of genus g curves with n
marked points. In the latter case, most prominent are the Teichmuller curves and
their associated fundamental groups Veech groups, which are interesting
geometrically, algebro-geometrically, and dynamically. In addition, the PI seeks
obstructions or special properties of submanifolds of a fixed manifold, not only
in an effort to understand the fixed manifold but also to better understand
obstructions to isometrically immersing manifolds into other manifolds. Lastly,
the PI plans to investigate the asymptotic behavior of geometric counting
functions, what geometric data is encoded by these functions, and ties to this
topic outside of geometry. These function counting the totally geodesic
manifolds of a fixed type as a function of volume and a basic entities, which in
the simplest cases are known to have ties to geometric dynamics and applications
to number theory.

The objects that arise in the present proposal permeate mathematics as
fundamental examples tied to basic problems and areas. They were fathered not by
mathematics but from pure and applied science. Moreover, over time, have been
proven to be centrally important not only in mathematics but in physics,
chemistry, and computer science. The PI hopes to foster further these important
connections not only directly with specific results but also in disseminating
the core ideaology of the PI's proposal.