* 1105653
* Synthesis of Heterocyclic Natural Products
* MPS,CHE
* 08/15/2011,07/31/2015
* Steven Weinreb, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Suk-Wah Tam-Chang
* 07/31/2015
* USD 420,000.00

The primary objective of this research program is to continue to develop a
combination of novel synthetic methods and new strategies for the synthesis of
bioactive heterocycles and alkaloid natural products. Under the support of the
Chemical Synthesis Program of the Chemistry Division, Prof. Weinreb at
Pennsylvania State University will conduct target oriented total syntheses of a
number of structurally unique and complex nitrogen-containing natural products.
Moreover, new synthetic methodology involving inter- and intramolecular
conjugate additions to nitrosoalkenes will be explored including delineating
stereochemical features of the process. Methodology will also be investigated
for effecting catalytic enantioselective conjugate additions of carbon and
heteronucleophiles to nitrososalkenes. This work aims to provide widely useful
new methodology for alpha-alkylation of aldehydes and ketones via an "Umpolung"
process. Intermolecular versions of conjugate additions of carbon nucleophiles
to nitrosoalkenes will constitute key steps in total syntheses of some of the
vallesamine class of indole alkaloids. Studies will be conducted on the use of
an intramolecular Michael addition of a nitrosoalkene in an enantioselective
total synthesis of the unique indole alkaloid actinophyllic acid, a potent
inhibitor of the enzyme carboxypeptidase U. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Emphasis will
be placed upon producing and refining methodology having potentially broad
applicability and practical value to organic and medicinal chemists involved in
synthesis of chemotherapeutic agents. Pharmaceutical research and drug
development has a multibillion dollar annual impact on the US economy, and its
success is heavily dependent on synthetic methodology provided by academic
laboratories. The PI will continue to disseminate the results of the research
conducted under this grant by presenting seminars at pharmaceutical companies
and conferences in both the US and abroad. In addition, this grant will provide
practical training for M.S. and Ph.D. students in sophisticated synthetic
organic and heterocyclic chemistry. The young scientists to be trained under
this NSF grant will eventually take research positions in the chemical industry,
most often in pharmaceutical or other health-related corporations, thereby
having an important economic impact as well as providing significant health
benefits to the populations of the US and the world.