* 1105256
* RUI: Supramolecular main-chain liquid crystalline networks as a probe of mesogen formation and stability
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2011,05/31/2015
* Kurt Wiegel, University of Wisconsin-Eau Claire
* Standard Grant
* Michael J. Scott
* 05/31/2015
* USD 170,000.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Initial investigations funded by the
Solid State and Materials Chemistry(SSMC) Program have indicated that the
creation of supramolecular liquid crystalline networks produce materials with
very interesting properties - simple one-ringed pyridyl systems produce networks
that tie the reduction of liquid crystallinity in with statistical correlations
of hydrogen bond acceptors. Similarly, more rigid groups allow for higher
concentrations of disruptor inclusion. Non-macromolecular systems, created from
simple 4-alkoxybenzoic acid groups retain liquid crystallinity at disruptor
loadings above 99%. Continuation of funding from SSMC will allow for the
development of new systems of varying functionality of the disrupting hydrogen
bond acceptor groups (bis, tris and tetrakis), increasing rigidity and size of
the hydrogen bond acceptor components (one ring pyridyl groups or longer,
stilbazole structures). The study will include introduction of flexibility into
all hydrogen bond accepting systems: ethyleneglycoxy chains for distonic,
mesogen-forming acceptors (three, four and five) and alkyl chains (2, 4, 6 and
11 carbons) for increasing flexible netpoint creation. These systems will be
studied using spectroscopic, thermal and x-ray analytical techniques. Special
attention will be paid to the compositions of systems that only just eliminate
liquid crystallinity, as these will be used as a probe for mesophase stability.
The creation of these new liquid crystalline systems will provide valuable
insight into the ability of a mesophase to stabilize in unfavorable, constrained
(networked) conditions, providing insight into the nature of the formation of a
mesophase, and a comparison of the quantity and strength of supramolecular
forces involved in the formation of liquid crystals. The results from this work
will have a broad impact on the field of supramolecular liquid crystals. The
applications of hydrogen bonded mesogens are limited by the fragility of the
associative chain structure. Imparting new characteristics to supramolecular
liquid crystalline systems would provide new materials, combining the
stabilities of covalent species with the lability and healing capabilities of
hydrogen bonded associative chain structures. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NON
TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This supported work will study the
effects of reversible bonding on liquid crystalline polymers and networks. These
materials will aid in understanding the effects of non-permanent linkages on the
formation of materials important to the optical display industry. New
visualization devices could be designed from the results of this work. Beyond
the scientific impact of this project, activities will be used to enhance
research infrastructure and give undergraduate students opportunities to carry
out potentially industrially significant work. Over half of the student body at
the University of Wisconsin- Eau Claire is low-income (11%) or first generation
(41%) and about 60% are female, all of which are underrepresented in the
scientific communities. According to the American Chemical Society UW-Eau Claire
was recently ranked third nationally in the number of chemistry graduates -the
highest of any Wisconsin college or university. Also, almost half of all UW- Eau
Claire Chemistry undergraduates matriculate into graduate or professional
programs. The research activities described will greatly enhance student
training and intellectual development through hands-on experience with
sophisticated techniques, equipment and the opportunities to develop their work
for publication in professional journals and to present their findings at
international meetings to an audience of the experts in the field.