* 1105719
* NSF NSF Geo-Data Informatics: Exploring the Life Cycle, Citation and Integration of Geo-Data
* GEO,EAR
* 02/15/2011,01/31/2013
* Peter Fox, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Leonard E. Johnson
* 01/31/2013
* USD 99,999.00

The purpose of this workshop is to address the complexities of
cyberinfrastructure and effective use of technology to increase the productivity
and capabilities of the geosciences community. Building on a substantial
bibliography of reports from workshops, advisory committees, and government
agencies, the focus of this workshop will be in three principle areas:

1) Develop and nurture a community of practice. Identifying and encouraging the
use standards in cyberinfrastructure, such as use of SOAs for access and use of
data, that will support trans-disciplinary work well into the future (e.g. GIS
standards that have been adopted by geosciences researchers). It is recognized
that there will be a variety of approaches used by different groups within
geosciences. However, these standards, and interoperability among them, will
improve over time, if technology history provides any guidance. It is important
the geosciences community influence the development of standards that are widely
used in more diverse communities. Developing effective methods to influence
standards and practices will benefit the geosciences. 2) Address the full
lifecycle of data. NSF data policy encourages researchers and educators to share
data. The recent implementation of a required data management plan for each
project proposal submitted to NSF encourages the community to consider the full
lifecycle of data that is generated during a grant. There are several approaches
to lifecycle paradigms and adoption of community practices, the choice of
technology employed, and the development of partnerships all influence the
implementation of the full lifecycle of data. 3) Symbiotic partnerships.
Partnerships with Federal agencies, international organizations, non-
governmental organizations, and industry are essential for the long-term success
of the geosciences. Much of the geosciences community supported by NSF depends
on data, software, and practices gathered, developed and encouraged by other
entities. For example, data provided by USGS, NOAA, and NASA are invaluable in
the conduct of many NSF supported research activities. However, the full value
of the research community to the agencies and organizations nationally and
internationally has yet to be realized because symbiotic interactions have not
been developed to their full potential.

The principal deliverable from the workshop will be a state-of-the-field report
to NSF and the USGS (a co-convener of the workshop) of the geoinformatics
community?s capabilities and needs that could in turn ultimately benefit from an
academic-multi-agency community-focused set of development activities.
Additional deliverables would include: a) readiness assessment and
identification of gaps for both technology and education around geo-data
informatics and their priorities;;b) grand challenge opportunities as well as
immediate next steps; and c) Identification of additional stakeholders and means
to include their inputs.

If this workshop is successful in setting directions for the development of:
community cyberinfrastructure practices, a culture of consideration for the
lifecycle of data, and paradigms for mutually beneficial partnerships, then the
foundation for cross-directorate and trans-disciplinary research will be greatly
enhanced.