* 1105524
* Detecting Cancer at the Single-Cell Level Using Endogenous Signal Biomolecular Sensors
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2015
* Leonidas Bleris, University of Texas at Dallas
* Standard Grant
* Friedrich Srienc
* 08/31/2015
* USD 346,566.00

Cancer is a class of cellular diseases characterized by uncontrolled growth,
invasion, and metastasis. Although cancer is multifaceted with complex
underlying genetic determinants, emerging evidence points to common signatures
at the level of intracellular signaling across different tissue and cancer
types. A system capable of detecting combinations of these intracellular
molecular signals in cells has significant potential for the diagnosis,
prevention, treatment, and monitoring of the disease at a single-cell level.
Recently, scientists have developed first generation genetic circuits and
sensors that operate as information processing systems in cells. The proposed
research will develop and study molecular biosensors engineered to detect and
monitor endogenous microRNAs, a class of small, noncoding RNAs that regulate
gene expression by targeting RNA transcripts. The objectives of the proposed
research are to: (a) design and optimize molecular biosensors that respond with
sensitivity and specificity to combinations of endogenous microRNAs, (b) develop
monoclonal tumor cell lines with integrated biosensors based on the NCI-60
panel, and (c) study microRNAs and their relationship to disease by monitoring
their expression through the cell cycle in response to drug
treatment.&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual merit: MicroRNAs have emerged as important
modulators in both development and disease, including cancer. Experimental
evidence implicates aberrant microRNA expression profiles in most human
malignancies. The ability to process microRNA information reliably (with single-
cell resolution) will generate new tools for basic cancer research and lead to
new cancer treatment modalities. Specifically, the application of the microRNA
biosensors to tumor cell lines will dramatically advance our understanding of
microRNA expression and dynamics in living cells. The development of monoclonal
cell lines with the selected microRNA sensors will pave the way for a new class
of tools for the study of microRNAs. This will be a major new direction that
will spark a range of equivalent studies in other cell lines and with other
microRNAs. &lt;br/&gt;Broader impact: The experiments will be performed in
NCI-60 colon, hematologic, lung, and pancreatic tumor cell lines. The criteria
for the selection of the particular cell lines was based: on the prevalence of
lung cancer and colon cancer in the United States (the leading cause of cancer
death for both men and women and the second leading cause of cancer deaths for
both men and women combined, respectively); because pancreatic and hematologic
cancers have very poor 5-year survival (pancreatic cancer in particular)
underscoring the urgent need for new diagnostic and treatment tools. The
collection of monoclonal cell lines harboring the biomolecular networks will be
made available to the scientific community. The proposed research will also form
an educational platform where students will be exposed to an integrated research
environment, combining theory and experiments at the intersection of biology and
engineering.