* 1105178
* Microwave Counting Statistics of Quantum Electronic Systems
* MPS,DMR
* 09/15/2011,08/31/2015
* Maxim Vavilov, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Paul Sokol
* 08/31/2015
* USD 350,000.00

****Technical Abstract**** Coincidence counting techniques will be employed to
probe the temporal correlations and full counting statistics of microwave
photons emitted by phase coherent conductors and parametrically modulated,
nonlinear superconducting quantum cavities. The microwave photon counter element
is a large-area Josephson junction. When the junction is appropriately biased,
the absorption of a single microwave photon induces a transition to the voltage
state, resulting in a large and easily measured classical signal. In the context
of mesoscopic noise, microwave coincidence counting will provide access to the
full statistics of the microwave radiation emitted by phase coherent conductors.
The microwave photon statistics are directly related to the electron counting
statistics, a subject of intense theoretical and experimental interest for a
more than a decade. Moreover, multi-photon correlators of the noise will provide
a window on electron-electron correlations and characteristic energy scales in
mesoscopic samples such as quantum point contacts, tunnel junctions, and
diffusive metallic nanowires. In the context of circuit quantum electrodynamics
(cQED), microwave photon counting will provide access to temporal correlations
of microwave photons emitted by nonlinear superconducting quantum cavities as a
rigorous probe of QED in the strong coupling regime. Correlations of emitted
photons in parametrically modulated cavities will serve as a probe of the
quantum radiation due to the dynamical Casimir effect. This experiment-theory
program is rich in educational opportunities for participating students.

Non-Technical Abstract**** To fully characterize an electronic device, one must
measure not only the average current through the device, but also the
fluctuations or "noise" of that current. In a large scale electrical resistor,
many independent electrons contribute to the current and the fluctuations are
distributed according to the familiar bell curve. For an ultrasmall or
mesoscopic electronic device, however, charge transport is governed by the laws
of quantum mechanics, and strong interactions between electrons or between
electrons and their environment can imprint subtle signatures on the
fluctuations. In this case, electronic noise can be used as a powerful probe of
the underlying physical mechanisms that govern transport. This program is
devoted to a study of noise and fluctuation statistics in these mesoscopic
conductors, where transport involves the motion of single or few electrons and
where quantum effects and strong interactions of the charge carriers play a
critical role. The experiments will employ a newly developed superconducting
detector that is sensitive to single microwave photons emitted by the mesoscopic
conductors. This program will deepen our basic understanding of electronic
transport in the quantum regime. This understanding will be essential to
evaluate the performance of novel electronic devices as device scales become
ever smaller, to the point where quantum phenomena can no longer be ignored.
Detection technology developed during the course of this program could lead to
advances in measurement for a variety of applications ranging from quantum
information science to astrophysics. This program will involve the extensive
participation of graduate researchers, and is rich in educational opportunities
for both experimenters and theorists.