* 1105301
* Spin and positional disorder in complex oxides
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2014
* Ram Seshadri, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Continuing Grant
* Michael J. Scott
* 08/31/2014
* USD 425,000.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY

This research program focuses on developing an understanding of two kinds of
disorder: of electronic spins, and of incoherent (random) displacements of ions
in otherwise perfectly crystalline functional materials. In many magnetic
systems, there exist temperature regimes where the spins are neither completely
disordered nor fully ordered. These regimes are particularly notable in systems
with strong magnetic frustration. Analogies between such systems and polar
compounds have been recently developed, wherein displacements in the positions
of ions from their ideal sites in the structure due to second-order Jahn-Teller
distortions result in electric dipoles being formed that remain disordered and
incoherent, even at low temperatures. The link between these distinct phenomena
is found in magnetoelectric compounds where complex ordering of spins in conical
arrangements result in polar, and even ferroelectric ground states in otherwise
perfectly centrosymmetric materials, due to coupling of spins with displacements
in atomic positions. The goal is to search for new oxide systems where some of
these disordering phenomena can be explored, and simultaneously, to develop
tools for their understanding. The investigations should lead to better
understanding of materials at the forefront of topics in hard-condensed matter
science, including quantum spin liquids and ferroelectric metals, and thereby
help to build the foundations for the next generation of multifunctional
materials for electronics and computing. Finally, the techniques development
aspect of the proposed research will contribute to a growing toolkit of probes
for understanding structure/function relations in condensed matter. Integral to
this undertaking will be the training of the next generation of materials
scientists who would develop materials for future advanced technologies. The
work is supported by the Solid State and Materials Chemistry Program at National
Science Foundation's Division of Materials Research.

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY

The development of new materials displaying useful functions frequently provides
the underpinnings for the emergence of new technologies. This research program
contributes to precisely this: creating and understanding crystalline solid
matter displaying novel behavior that emerges as a result of the complexity of
the material. The materials of interest to this program are expected to
eventually impact new ways of storing and manipulating matter in beyond-Moore's
Law approaches to the processing of information. Integral to this proposal will
be the training of undergraduate and graduate students with the skill-sets
required to think of new functional materials, to develop strategies to prepare
and stabilize them, and to have the expertise to characterize them using state-
of-the-art techniques. The seamless integration of computational methods for
materials by design into the experimental work will also be an important
training goal. The undergraduate and graduate students carrying out the proposed
research will also be integrated into outreach programs to local K-12 students,
focusing on developing tutorial videos and portable demonstrations that
emphasize materials research as an exciting branch of research that is crucial
to technological advancement, and whose scientific foundations are based on
establishing relations between the composition, structure, and property of
materials. The work is supported by the Solid State and Materials Chemistry
Program of the National Science Foundation's Division of Materials Research.