* 1105829
* Chain Trajectory of Semicrystalline Polymers in Bulk and Single Crystals by Solid-state NMR
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2015
* Toshikazu Miyoshi, University of Akron
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 08/31/2015
* USD 360,000.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to shed light on a
centrally important but controversial issue in polymer crystallization, namely
the trajectory of the molecular chains throughout the crystal and to answer the
question of how do polymer chains deposit at the growth front in polymer
crystals. The PI proposes a new experimental scheme to elucidate the chain
trajectory of polymers in bulk and single crystals based on 13C selective
isotope labeling and advanced solid-state NMR. Here, combined use of 1) specific
isotope labeling, 2) 13C-13C spatial correlation, and high resolution NMR will
allow to access chain trajectory (adjacent re-entry fractions and directions) of
polymer chains in the crystalline regions. Using this new strategy, the PI will
investigate how i) chemical structures such as functions, chemical defect, and
molecular weights, ii) kinetics, and iii) entanglements influence chain
trajectory in crystalline regions. This information is particularly important
for understanding polymer crystallization on a molecular
level.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Polymers
are important synthetic materials whose properties depend critically on the
structure of their constituent crystals. While their structures have been
studied for decades, details of the location and trajectory of individual
polymer molecules (which resemble very long chains) are still uncertain.
Techniques used so far have led to disagreements and controversial
interpretations in the literature. The PI proposes a combination of new advanced
magnetic resonance methodologies and precise chemical labeling of the polymer
molecules to help shed an answer to these questions. The students will benefit
from interdisciplinary education in polymer chemistry and physics, as well as
gaining expertise in advanced characterization techniques.