* 1105567
* Conference: Hemipteran-Plant Interactions Symposium, July 11-14, 2011, Brazil
* BIO,IOS
* 05/01/2011,04/30/2012
* Greg Walker, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Michael Mishkind
* 04/30/2012
* USD 13,000.00

This award supports an international symposium on the interactions between
herbivorous hemipteran insects and the plants on which they feed. The
interactions between herbivorous Hemiptera and their host plants has been the
subject of many scientific studies because herbivorous Hemiptera comprise some
of the world's worst agricultural pests. Their mouthparts are designed as
miniature hypodermic needles, similar to those of mosquitoes, but they feed on
plant sap rather than blood. Just the same as the specialized feeding mechanism
of mosquitoes makes them important vectors of animal diseases, herbivorous
hemipterans are the most important vectors worldwide of plant diseases,
including diseases of crop plants. Their hypodermic needle-like mouthparts are
thin enough to pierce individual plant cells which allow these insects to
specialize feeding on particular cell types. This ability has led to the
evolution of intimate physiological interactions between these insects and the
plants upon which they feed. Consequently, major future advances in the study of
these interactions will require an interdisciplinary approach that brings
together entomologists and plant physiologists. Studies of these interactions
provides the biological foundation for determining mechanisms of plant
resistance against these insects and for understanding the mechanisms of
transmission of plant pathogens by hemipteran vectors, both areas of increasing
importance as a growing world populations stretches our agricultural resources
thin. Entomologists and plant biologists working in isolation can advance this
field only so far. Future major advances in Hemiptera-plant interactions will
require intimate collaboration between entomologists and plant biologists, and
therein lies the importance of this symposium: to bring together entomologists
and plant biologists to exchange ideas and forge new collaborations. With an eye
to the future, the travel support from NSF will go primarily to new young
investigators in order to foster interdisciplinary collaborations early in their
careers.