* 1105961
* MuSR Studies of Exotic Spin and Charge Behaviors in Novel Superconductors, Metals, and Semiconductors
* MPS,DMR
* 07/15/2011,06/30/2016
* Yasutomo Uemura, Columbia University
* Continuing Grant
* Tomasz Durakiewicz
* 06/30/2016
* USD 530,000.00

****Technical Abstract****&lt;br/&gt;Muon spin relaxation (MuSR) measurements
provide unique information on the ordered volume fraction, moment size, slow
spin fluctuations, and critical behavior for studies of magnetic ordering, and
allow reliable determination of the superfluid density in type-II
superconductors. The present project aims to study exotic spin and charge
correlations in novel superconducting and magnetic systems by extensive MuSR
measurements at TRIUMF (Canada) and PSI (Switzerland). The present research
covers: (1) quantum critical behaviors and Skyrmion spin correlations in weak
itinerant ferro/helical magnets MnSi and FeGe, (2) novel ferromagnetic system
Li(Zn,Mn)As generated by doping charge (with excess Li) and spin (with Mn) into
the I-II-V semiconductor LiZnAs, and (3) various FeAs, CuO and heavy fermion
superconductors, with a special focus on strange/unexplained behaviors in the
overdoped regions. Success of the present project will advance understanding of
very strong and unconventional spin-charge couplings found in many of these
systems, and possibly contribute to development of new superconducting and spin-
tronics systems and devices. The MuSR measurements will be performed in
extensive international collaborations, providing opportunities for development
of graduate, undergraduate and post-doctoral students and researchers in a
unique multi-national environment and facilities. Outreach plans include
development of on-line lecture courses, and involvement of high school
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;****Non Technical Abstract****&lt;br/&gt;Over the
last 30 years, solid state physics has developed with discoveries of many novel
and unconventional materials and phenomena. They include high-Tc CuO
superconductors, doped ferromagnetic semiconductors, and systems existing in the
boundary of magnetically ordered and disordered (or suprconducting) states. The
key element of these systems is strong interaction between spins (origin of
magnetism) and charges (required for metallic, semiconducting, or
superconducting behaviors). Another notable development of modern solid state
physics is the use of large accelerator facilities which produce high-intensity
beams of X-rays, neutrons and muons. The present project will use positive muons
obtained at dedicated high-intensity accelerator facilities in Canada (TRIUMF)
and Switzerland (PSI) to elucidate detailed relationship between magnetic (spin)
and conductive (charge) phenomena. Rsearch advances may contribute to
development of novel materials for superconducting and / or spin-sensitive
electronics (spintronics) devices. The muon measurements will be performed in
international collaboration including gropus from the US, Canada, Japan, China,
Brazil, UK and Switzerland, which will help development of students and
researchers in a unique multi-national environment. Educational/outreach
activities include the development of on-line lecture courses for solid state
physics, associated with text books and lab courses. In cooperation with
TRIUMF's outreach activities, the project supports involvements of high school
students and physics teachers in forefront experimental research using very
large accelerator facilities.