* 1105569
* Permutation Patterns 2011
* MPS,DMS
* 02/15/2011,01/31/2013
* Don Rawlings, California Polytechnic State University Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 01/31/2013
* USD 20,000.00

This grant supports a conference on Permutation Patterns in the Summer of 2011
at the California Polytechnic State University in San Luis Obispo, California.
As in past conferences, we expect to attract many graduate students and junior
researchers. In total, we expect around 70 participants and around 35 talks. The
topic of the conference is permutation patterns and, more generally, the concept
of pattern in mathematical objects such as partitions, words, and other
structures such as genome sequences. A permutation of length n is a
rearrangement of the integers 1 through n. If a permutation sigma can be found
by erasing some of the integers in a permutation tau and renumbering the
remaining integers in sequential order with 1 through k, then we say that sigma
is involved in tau. The study of permutation patterns is concerned with
understanding this involvement relation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The definition of
involvement can be rephrased in a variety of contexts such as geometric or
model-theoretic. In computer science, sets of permutations which are closed
under involvement are found in the study of sorting devices such as stacks,
queues, and finite networks. The past decade or so has seen a confluence of
ideas stemming from combinatorics and the computer science, creating new and
developing avenues of research in mathematics, theoretical computer science,
computability and complexity theory, and computational algebra. In addition to
the continuing interest in the combinatorics and sorting mechanism problems,
some major new directions include the structural theory of permutation patterns
(constructions, decompositions, etc.), asymptotics, variations and
generalizations such as the concept of generalized pattern avoidance, packing
densities, algorithmic and decidability problems, and geometrical
methods.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The study of permutation patterns has emerged as a
significant branch of enumerative combinatorics over the past couple of decades.
Hundreds of papers on permutation patterns have appeared relatively recently.
The number of researchers in the area is increasing and the attendance in the
annual conference on permutation patterns has steadily grown since its inception
in 2003. Research is international across North America, Europe, Asia, and
Australasia. This is a subject of global interest.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
subject of permutation patterns has a relatively low mathematical overhead. Some
of the commonly used tools used to investigate permutation patterns include
generating functions, algorithm design, experimental computation; tools which
permeate combinatorics and computer science. Therefore, this subject is
accessible to entry-level researchers. Our conference will provide opportunities
for young researchers to learn about and begin to make contributions to the
theory. The number of graduate students who have attended the last two meetings
is an indication that research in this subject area is growing.