* 1105474
* Predictive Modeling of Organic-based Magnetic and Multiferroic Tunnel Junctions
* MPS,DMR
* 09/15/2011,08/31/2016
* Julian Velev, University of Puerto Rico
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 08/31/2016
* USD 150,000.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports theoretical and
computational research that is aimed at first principles modeling of organic-
based magnetic and multiferroic tunnel junctions. The field of spintronics has
been successful in producing magnetoresistive devices for magnetic memory and
sensor applications. These employ giant magnetoresistance or tunneling
magnetoresistance phenomena that provide a sizable change of resistance in
response to altering magnetic alignment of the two ferromagnetic electrodes in a
spin valve or a magnetic tunnel junction. Organic materials are considered
promising for applications in spintronics due to their long spin-relaxation
times. They also have other advantages, such as virtually unlimited chemical
variability and relatively low production costs. Most studies of organic
materials for spintronics have so far focused on non-polar dielectrics or
semiconductors serving as passive elements in spin transport devices. In this
project the PI will investigate the possibility of producing novel functionality
by using organic materials in spintronic and multifunctional devices, in
particular magnetic and multiferroic tunnel junctions with organic
barriers.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Organic materials used as barriers in magnetic
tunnel junctions offer immediate benefits such as sharper interfaces and smaller
leakage current. The PI will investigate the properties of magnetic tunnel
junctions with dielectric organic barriers. Of particular interest will be the
structure of the metal-organic interface, the spin polarization, and the size
and sign of the tunneling magnetoresistance effect. The PI will also seek to
provide a new degree of freedom in the functionality of magnetoresistive devices
by replacing the dielectric organic barrier with a ferroelectric one resulting
in a multiferroic junction. Furthermore, the PI will investigate the possibility
of tailoring the surface magnetic anisotropy of a magnetic film by an adjacent
organic ferroelectric to electrically control the magnetization orientation,
which could yield entirely new device concepts, such as electric field-
controlled magnetic data storage. The PI also aimes to elucidate microscopic
mechanisms responsible for conductance in organic materials with the goal of
making all-organic electronics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award also supports
training graduate as well as undergraduate students in the area of computational
condensed matter physics. This training will provide the students valuable
experience in cutting-edge research which will be conducive to future employment
in leading industrial and academic laboratories. In addition, the PI will
develop special topics courses in the field of electronic structure theory that
will be offered at his institution and made available through a new nanoscience
hub. There will be a particular emphasis on the involvement of underrepresented
Hispanic students in the PI's research activities. This award contributes to the
PI's efforts to improve the cyberinfrastructure and foster computational science
at the University of Puerto Rico.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NONTECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports theoretical and computational
research and education in the area of materials physics. There is a strong
industry demand in new materials sensitive to both electric and magnetic fields.
These find applications in high-density low-power electronics capable of
retaining stored information even when not powered. Such applications require
smaller, faster, and more powerful devices with longer battery life. The PI will
model materials on computers to aid the experimental search for functional
materials. This effort benefits from theoretical and computational tools that
have become increasingly more powerful, and offer reasonable accuracy to test
realistic material systems resulting. The PI will investigate the incorporation
of organic materials in electronic devices for memory and storage applications.
Organic materials, which are made predominantly of light elements such as
carbon, hydrogen, and oxygen, have the important property that they can preserve
the magnetic orientation of the electron over long distances. This property, in
addition to the very large chemical and functional variety offered by these
materials could be very useful for applications on spin-based electronics and to
engineer new functionality in organic-based materials and interfaces. The PI's
computational investigations are aimed to stimulate experimental research on
organic-based multifunctional devices and memories. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award also supports training graduate as well as undergraduate students in the
area of computational condensed matter physics. This training will provide the
students valuable experience in cutting-edge research which will be conducive to
future employment in leading industrial and academic laboratories. In addition,
the PI will develop special topics courses in the field of electronic structure
theory that will be offered at his institution and made available through a new
nanoscience hub. There will be a particular emphasis on the involvement of
underrepresented Hispanic students in the PI's research activities. This award
contributes to the PI's efforts to improve the cyberinfrastructure and foster
computational science at the University of Puerto Rico.