* 1105339
* Interfaces and heterostructures with topological superconductors
* MPS,DMR
* 09/15/2011,07/31/2016
* Ilya Vekhter, Louisiana State University
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 07/31/2016
* USD 300,000.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;This award supports theoretical investigation of
interfaces and heterostructures involving non-centrosymmetric superconductors.
The PI will investigate the properties of the surface and edge states arising in
such materials due to their topological properties and explore how these states
are affected and can be controlled by creating structures that put them in
contact with magnetic and other superconducting materials. The planned research
is rooted in the PI's experience in collaborations with experimental groups, and
in his involvement in the analysis of recently discovered unconventional
superconductors without center of inversion.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI will
use an array of theoretical and computational methods to investigate the
properties of such states. Previous work clearly showed that self-consistent
treatment of the superconducting order is essential for the correct description
of the bound states and will be implemented throughout the work. The PI will
compute spectral features and magnetic properties of the bound states at the
interfaces with normal metals, magnetic metals and insulators, and other
superconductors, and will determine electrical and spin currents in biased
junctions. The research will especially focus on the Josephson and proximity
effects and on spin transport in such structures. These studies contribute to
the knowledge base of topological materials enabling possible future
technological applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research will provide a
valuable learning environment for students who will develop analytical and
computing skills that will prepare them for a variety of
careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;This award
supports theoretical investigation of robust states of matter that arise at
interfaces and in artificially structured materials involving novel
superconducting materials. Superconductivity, the ability to conduct current
without heating, or dissipation, and magnetism, the property that allows the
compass needle to point in the direction of magnetic field, are but two examples
of features which enable functionality of our technology. Very recently,
researchers started to focus on other ways electrons might organize themselves,
so-called topological states of matter. These hold promise for potential
technological applications beyond the capabilities of well-studied states, such
as superconductivity and magnetism.&lt;br/&gt;In these new types of materials
the enormously large collective of electrons is believed to support a new state
of electronic matter that has properties that are robust to the normally
deleterious effects of perturbations and defects. It is somewhat like a car
tire: no matter how deformed it may be by pressing at the curb or a rock in the
road, tracing around the outside of the tire one always encompasses the hole in
the middle - an essential property of a tire. These topological quantum states
appear most clearly when we look at the edges and boundaries of the
sample.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technological applications of topological quantum
states and the materials that exhibit them require understanding how to
manipulate the signature states that live on surfaces and boundaries of the
material. This project involves research and educational activities aimed to
understand how to control the magnetic and electronic properties of the
interfaces involving topological superconductors, materials which support both
electrical current without dissipation throughout the bulk and the associated
surface states that may be magnetized or carry magnetic currents. Topological
superconductivity is believed to have been recently discovered in certain
materials. Together with students, the PI will study how the useful features of
topological states can be influenced and controlled by creating contacts between
topological superconductors and other magnetic and superconducting materials.
The PI will aslo study the effects of applied voltages and currents. This
knowledge will provide advances in the fundamental understanding of how to
manipulate topological quantum states near interfaces contributing to the
intellectual foundations of new device technologies. The project includes
international collaborations.