* 1105672
* GOALI/FRG: Layered Systems with Dynamically Evolving Structure
* MPS,DMR
* 10/01/2011,09/30/2017
* Carlos Levi, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Continuing Grant
* Lynnette Madsen
* 09/30/2017
* USD 1,966,681.00

NON-TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION: Mounting concerns about the availability,
environmental impact and cost of energy on the economic health and well being of
society provide strong motivation for substantial improvements in the efficiency
of propulsion and power generation systems. Crucial to these improvements are
material systems capable of higher temperature operation, epitomized by multi-
layer engineered surfaces in gas turbine engines. An interdisciplinary
academic/industry team aims to develop the scientific understanding needed to
meet the challenge and guide progress in this critical technology. Emphasis is
on (i) the science-based discovery of materials with the requisite performance
and durability in the unprecedented conditions expected in future engines, and
(ii) establishing the relationships between materials chemistry, structure and
properties to enable materials design and implementation. By collaborating
closely with a leading engine manufacturer, the outcomes of the scientific
research have a direct and more immediate impact on technology and its design
infrastructure. The project builds on established relationships between the
academic and industrial participants and a network of international
collaborators that create an exceptional educational environment where students
(i) work on scientifically challenging problems with substantial potential for
technological impact, (ii) are mentored by an interdisciplinary team of academic
and industrial experts in the field, and (iii) have opportunities for research
internships at industrial laboratories and international institutions. The team
has an established record of promoting the participation of undergraduates,
women and members of underrepresented groups in research projects and
international experiences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL DETAILS: The
overarching objective of this project is to establish a science-based framework
for underpinning the conceptual design of new materials systems for gas turbine
engines with substantially improved efficiency. The aims of the research are (i)
to understand the limitations of current materials to meet the
temperature/performance targets of advanced engine technology, (ii) to explore
new directions in materials design, and (iii) to develop the science base needed
for implementation. Key elements of the strategy include (i) an
interdisciplinary, systems-based approach, (ii) the use of multiphase
constituent layers designed to evolve readily into a desirable configuration and
retain functionality over the life of the system, and (iii) the development of
modeling approaches that allow efficient assessment of concepts and guide their
experimental validation. Because of the chemical and morphological complexity of
the layered architectures, novel computational tools are needed to capture and
integrate the dynamics of the system and the individual layers. Simulations are
coupled with a strong experimental activity to identify and solve the critical
challenges in design, synthesis/processing, and characterization of the
structures and their constitutive behavior. Scientific advances are envisaged
within the following themes: (i) constitutive behavior of multiphase oxides and
alloys, as well as their interfaces, at relevant temperatures (ii) synthesis of
metastable structures and their evolution into phase assemblages with the
desired attributes, (iii) the thermodynamics, diffusion and phase transformation
mechanisms/kinetics underpinning said evolution, (iv) the role of stresses
arising from the internal system dynamics and/or imposed thermal/mechanical
stimuli on the structural stability and evolution of damage, (v) approaches to
probe the state of the system and its properties at various stages in the
evolution. The project offers unique educational experiences for students and
post-doctoral scholars by (i) learning first-hand how to work within an
interdisciplinary research group focused on a scientific theme in the context of
a critical technology; (ii) acquiring knowledge of industrial research-team
protocols by combining well designed internships with co-supervision by the
industrial team members; and (iii) participating in international research
exchanges with foreign institutions (in Australia, Japan, Germany and the UK)
and in topical workshops. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;FUNDING: This National Science
Foundation project is co-funded by two of the Office of International Science
and Engineering (OISE)'s Programs: (1) East Asia and Pacific, and (2) Europe and
Eurasia; the Engineering Directorate and the Mathematical and Physical Sciences
Directorate.