* 1105029
* Theory of Polymer Crystallization
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2014
* Murugappan Muthukumar, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 08/31/2014
* USD 300,000.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports theoretical research
and education with an aim to develop theories of polymer crystallization and
directed polymer assembly, by employing simulation techniques and statistical
mechanics. Crystallization of polymers from solutions and melts is one of the
longstanding research areas in polymer science. A fundamental understanding of
how polymer chains organize into hierarchical structures remains elusive. The
conformational entropy of flexible polymer molecules makes the crystallization
phenomenon of polymers distinct from ordering of small molecular systems. The
same entropic aspects of polymers are manifest in various directed assemblies of
diblock copolymers and biological polymers. Previous work by the PI to address
the effects of the conformational entropy has resulted in novel ways of
interpreting the rich phenomenology of polymer crystallization. These are
complementary to the traditional arguments in the literature, which essentially
ignore the conformational entropy. This award supports research that will build
on recent new ideas to explore several related ordering phenomena of polymers.
Specifically, (a) lamellar morphology in polymeric spherulites, (b) kinetics of
growth fronts in polymer solutions and melts, and (c) directed assembly of
polymers will be addressed. This project is aimed at building new conceptual
models and discovering new laws of polymer assembly. The proposed theoretical
work complements experimental investigations being actively pursued in
laboratories worldwide.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NON-TECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports integrated computational and
theoretical research and education aimed to understand how, polymers, large
long-chain molecules made of many smaller repeating molecular units, organize
into ordered states. Of particular interest is how they crystallize. The many
ways long-chain molecules can twist and bend makes the crystallization process
of polymers distinct from that of many other materials. The PI will use computer
simulations and build on previous work, his own and that of others, to develop
an understanding of polymer crystallization. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The results
of this research may have impact in numerous applied areas such as polymer
processing, the fabrication of polymeric materials down to scales some ten
thousand times smaller than a human hair, and the process by which molecules and
other 'building blocks' of materials assemble themselves to form biological
structures and living matter. Many, if not most, modern materials are made from
processed semicrystalline polymers, which are the subjects of the proposed
theoretical and modeling investigation. A fundamental understanding of the
behavior of this important class of materials will help to design and process
novel polymeric materials with enhanced benefits to our society. This activity
provides support for training of graduate students in this challenging research
area and the workforce of the twenty first century.