* 1105238
* GOALI/Collaborative: Impact of Mixed Network Formers on the Structure and Properties of Oxide Glasses
* MPS,DMR
* 09/15/2011,08/31/2016
* Liping Huang, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Lynnette Madsen
* 08/31/2016
* USD 338,740.00

NON-TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION: An accurate knowledge of the microscopic structure of
glass is critical for enabling future breakthroughs in glass science and
technology; this progress is impeded by the inherent structural complexity of
glass, particularly in practical multicomponent glass systems of industrial
interest. As glass research enters a new decade, addressing technological
challenges requires an unprecedented knowledge of structure-property
relationships of glasses and the impact of slight compositional variations on
the resulting macroscopic properties. In this project, an integrated
experimental and theoretical approach builds a comprehensive, unified view of
the microscopic physics of glass and its relationship to the macroscopic
properties of technological importance. This integration starts with the
development of models for interatomic potentials, where experiments provide
structural and property data that are being used during the parameters fitting
process. Building reliable and validated potentials enables the design of glass
compositions with realistic processing conditions for new applications of
technological importance. This integrated approach is dramatically changing the
route of glass research and is starting a new paradigm for designing new glass
compositions based on computation, rather than just traditional empirical
approaches.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION: Practical glasses are
multicomponent and usually contain more than one glass-forming oxide such as
silica, alumina, and boron oxide. Fundamental understanding of the mixed glass-
former effect on the structure and properties of glasses is important to glass
processing as well as their technical applications. In this collaborative
project, the team composed of researchers at the University of North Texas,
Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute and Corning Inc. are combining atomistic
simulations and experimental studies to gain insights of the mixed glass-former
effect on industrially-important glass systems. The purpose of this project is
to establish a general methodology for developing new interatomic potentials for
oxide glasses with mixed network formers (SiO2, B2O3, and Al2O3). Specifically,
they are developing new potentials based on a common functional form to capture
the coordination variation and charge transfer for aluminosilicate,
borosilicate, and boroaluminosilicate glasses. A general procedure is being
formulated to fit potential parameters to the structure and properties of
glasses obtained from their integrated experimental work on well-designed glass
compositions of these systems. These newly developed potentials will be
validated by experimental studies and used to perform systematic molecular
dynamics (MD) simulations to understand the structural origins of glass
properties including boron and aluminum anomalies. Simulations are also being
used to predict optimal glass compositions and processing conditions for various
technological applications. This project is providing training to graduate
students and experiences as summer interns at leading industrial research
laboratories for skill development in the experimental and computational aspects
of glass research. New computational methods developed in this project are being
incorporated into graduate and undergraduate level courses and research
programs, as well as into the introduction of computational glass science to
high school students.