* 1105635
* Degenerate dispersive effects in partial and lattice differential equations
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2015
* Jay Wright, Drexel University
* Continuing Grant
* Henry Warchall
* 08/31/2015
* USD 202,837.00

A spatially extended system is said to be dispersive when the speed of
propagation of a wave depends upon that wave's frequency. Linear dispersive
effects play a fundamental role in the study of a large number of physical
scenarios and there has been an explosion of results concerning semi-linear
dispersive equations. Nevertheless there are situations in which the speed of
propagation of a wave depends on the wave's frequency as well as its amplitude.
That is to say the mechanism which generates dispersion is nonlinear. It is the
purpose of this project to develop mathematically rigorous theory for such
equations when the nonlinear dispersive effects are degenerate (i.e., they
vanish very rapidly as the amplitude tends to zero). The degeneracy of the
equations allows for the existence of classical solutions which are not smooth
and there is substantial numerical and formal evidence that cases arise in which
degenerate dispersion leads to catastrophic instability akin to that of a
backwards heat equation. Consequently, one of the principal goals of the project
is to develop the existence theory for degenerate dispersive partial
differential equations.

Degenerate dispersive equations arise as models for the dynamics of chains and
lattices of hard spheres. Experimental results demonstrate that such chains
exhibit tightly focused pulses which are easily generated and highly tunable.
These narrow pulses are expected to find uses in non-destructive testing, shock
absorption, remote sensing and medical imaging. At this time, there is no
theoretically rigorous explanation for the stability and robust nature of these
pulses. Though there are results concerning similar physical problems where the
dispersive effects are not degenerate, they rely strongly on the fact that slow
moving pulses are very wide and very small in amplitude. In the case of hard
spheres, the interesting pulse solutions have a fixed width, independent of
speed and amplitude and it is not obvious how to extend the known results to
this case. A primary goal of the project is developing mathematical tools for
the study of the stability and robustness of such pulses. The inclusion and
training of graduate and undergraduate students is an integral part of this
project. Among other projects, undergraduate students will be involved into
investigation of an important application, models for traffic flow.