* 1105145
* Studies in Fluids:  Splashing, Singularities and Memory Formation
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2011,06/30/2014
* Sidney Nagel, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Paul Sokol
* 06/30/2014
* USD 391,007.00

Technical Abstract&lt;br/&gt;This award has two broad goals: to study memory in
various condensed matter systems and to study the flow of fluids with negligible
surface tension. The first project concentrates on memory and memory loss in
far-from-equilibrium disordered systems that have been "trained" to have a
specific behavior. There may a generic class of memory, that can be seen in such
systems, that has unusual properties in that, without noise, the more one trains
the system the less it remembers. The project also includes a study of how
submerged air bubbles can remember initial conditions through a breakup
singularity and an investigation of rejuvenation and memory in aging glassy
systems. The second project, on fluids with negligible surface tension, includes
a study of fingering instabilities in driven miscible fluids as well as granular
jets, where the granular matter can be considered as a fluid. Postdoctoral
associates and graduate students will be trained in the study of complex
phenomena. Because much of this research deals with macroscopic phenomena, it
provides an excellent starting place for bringing undergraduate and high-school
students into the laboratory. This research affords excellent outreach to the
public. Some of the work has been a focus of museum exhibits at the Museum of
Science and Industry in Chicago and the Exploratorium in San
Francisco.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Non-Technical Abstract&lt;br/&gt;This award has
two overarching goals: to study the formation of memories and to study fluids
with negligible surface tension. The first project concentrates on memory
formation in far-from-equilibrium disordered systems. Previous work from this
laboratory had uncovered unusual behavior that may be generic. When a system is
repeatedly "trained" over an extended period of time, one normally expects that
memory retention will improve with repetition. However, in the cases of interest
here, the opposite occurs -the more one trains a system, the less it remembers.
The project seeks to understand what causes such behavior and the extent to
which such behavior can be seen in a variety of materials including biological
ones. The second project, on fluids with negligible surface tension, includes a
study of fingering instabilities in driven miscible fluids as well as granular
jets, where the granular matter can be considered to be a fluid. Both research
topics have significant technological implications. Postdoctoral associates and
graduate students will be trained in the study of complex phenomena. Because
much of this research deals with macroscopic phenomena, it also provides an
excellent starting place for bringing undergraduate and high-school students
into a research laboratory. Because the phenomena are so accessible, this
research affords excellent outreach to the public. This includes museum exhibits
at the Museum of Science and Industry in Chicago and the Exploratorium in San
Francisco.