* 1105289
* International Planning Visit:  Investigating the Interactions Between Dissolved Organic Matter, Microbial Communities, and Arsenic Biogeochemistry in Groundwater of a Pristine Delt
* O/D,OISE
* 08/01/2011,06/30/2012
* Natalie Mladenov, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Carleen Maitland
* 06/30/2012
* USD 19,943.00

This planning visit will develop an international collaborative research and
training project on the topic of interactions between dissolved organic matter,
microbial communities, and arsenic biogeochemistry in groundwater of the
Okavango Delta, Botswana. The planning visit will bring together U.S. scientists
and engineers from the University of Colorado and Kansas State University with
scientists from the Botswana Geologic Survey and the Okavango Research Institute
(ORI) to develop a compelling research plan, collect samples for preliminary
analyses, and meet with science teachers from Maun Senior Secondary School to
plan future educational outreach activities for U.S. K-12 teachers. The research
team will also examine the laboratory facilities at ORI, identify field research
sites, identify appropriate in-country mentors for graduate students involved in
the research, and begin preparation of a research proposal targeted for the NSF
EAR Hydrologic Sciences (HS) division. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual merit:
Naturally-occurring arsenic in groundwater is a global problem with serious
health consequences for millions of people worldwide, yet the processes by which
arsenic is mobilized from sediments are not well understood. This planning visit
will coordinate future research to develop a process-level understanding of the
reactions between organic matter and microorganisms in metal oxide-rich
sediments that influence arsenic mobilization in groundwater. The improved
understanding of dissolved organic material transformations along groundwater
flow paths and flow path-related shifts in microbial community composition is
extremely important for understanding (and predicting) arsenic mobilization in
diverse groundwater environments. The evapotranspiration-driven groundwater flow
that is characteristic of islands in the Okavango Delta provides a unique
opportunity to investigate questions related to the evolution of microbial
communities and associated biogeochemical processes that lead to arsenic
mobilization. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts: In addition to broadening
the understanding of the scientific community understanding on the global
problem of groundwater arsenic contamination, this planning visit will support
two graduate students, who will have the opportunity to be involved in the
project from its conception. Meetings between US scientists and teachers at Maun
Senior Secondary School will build new relationships that are the basis for
future educational outreach in the form of Research Experience for Teachers and
Research Experience for Undergraduates.