* 1105173
* In-situ Observtion of Annealing Behaviors of Bulk Metallic Polycrystals
* MPS,DMR
* 09/15/2011,08/31/2015
* Robert Suter, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Continuing Grant
* Diana Farkas
* 08/31/2015
* USD 421,030.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY: Polycrystals are ubiquitous materials that serve in extreme
and mundane environments, ranging from nuclear reactors and turbine blades to
structural supports and transportation infrastructure. Until recently, it has
not been possible to spatially resolve relevant structural details deep inside
polycrystalline materials as they evolve in response to, for example, thermal
annealing. In this project focused high energy x-rays generated at the Advanced
Photon Source at the Argonne National Laboratory will be used in combination
with the National Science Foundation's TeraGrid supercomputer network to non-
destructively measure and reconstruct the crystallographic orientation field of
polycrystals in three dimensions. In well-ordered materials, crystalline grain
ensembles will be observed as they evolve during annealing; both statistical and
local information will be extracted from large microstructure data sets. In
materials with significant defect contents, it will be possible to measure
orientation gradients within grains and to watch defect structures move and
evolve as the material reaches a lower energy, more ordered state. Work under
this grant will advance understanding of how polycrystalline materials respond
to high temperatures. The results will be used to develop improved understanding
of previously hidden phenomena with the goal of establishing validated models
with predictive power.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY: Because
polycrystals are so broadly used in industrial, energy, and defense systems, the
potential economic and energy impact of improved basic scientific understanding
of how polycrystalline microstructures evolve during annealing can be huge. The
experiments in this project will use a Department of Energy national user
facility (the Advanced Photon Source at Argonne National Laboratory, one of the
world's most powerful x-ray sources) while the analysis of data will involve the
National Science Foundation's TeraGrid supercomputer network. The resulting data
will provide a unique look at the quantities that are relevant for building
theories of how materials behave. A major objective of the research is to apply
the understanding gained to the development of materials with improved
properties. Graduate and undergraduate students, working with faculty and post-
doctoral researchers from science, mathematics and engineering departments, will
be mentored. They will become skilled in x-ray science that can be applied to
many materials problems and will experience the high-performance computing
world. The broad impact of the experimental program will be substantially
increased through interactions with the modeling community.