* 1105081
* Experimental and Theoretical Investigations of Gum Metal
* MPS,DMR
* 09/15/2011,08/31/2014
* Daryl Chrzan, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* Gary Shiflet
* 08/31/2014
* USD 420,000.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY: Gum metals are Ti-Nb based alloys that display remarkable
mechanical properties, including super-elasticity, super-strength, large
ductility, zero coefficient of thermal expansion and elastic constants that
remain constant over a range of temperatures. Surprisingly, plasticity in these
materials appears to be mediated neither by dislocation motion nor by phase
transformation. Instead, these materials appear to deform at their ideal
strength. If so, these alloys represent a new type of structural alloy. Their
unusual mechanical behavior is linked to a strong elastic anisotropy that
develops as the composition of the alloy is driven towards a phase
transformation. This anisotropy allows for easy dislocation pinning, the extreme
spreading of the dislocation cores, and plays a role in the suppression of phase
transformations that might otherwise weaken the alloys. The project involves two
primary goals. First it aims to understand experimentally the precise mechanism
governing plasticity in these unusual alloys. This understanding will be
developed using a combination of nanoindentation and transmission electron
microscopy experiments. Second, the project will develop theoretical tools and
ideas capable of explaining the observed deformation behavior. Initial
theoretical studies will focus on the structure of dislocations within Gum
Metals paying particular attention to the implications of spread dislocation
cores and dislocation core overlap. The understanding so obtained will be used
to identify new alloys systems with the potential to deform similarly to Gum
Metals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY: The ideal strength of a
material is the largest possible load the material can withstand before becoming
permanently deformed. Typically, the observed strength of a material is 1/100th
or less of its ideal strength, largely because defects known as dislocations are
able to move throughout the crystal at stresses well below the ideal strength.
This understanding lies at the heart of modern metallurgy, and guides the
development of most structural alloys. Gum Metal is a recently discovered Ti-Nb
based alloy with a long list of remarkable mechanical properties. The most
striking characteristic is that Gum Metal appears to deform at ideal strength
via a unique dislocation-free deformation mechanism. The goal of this research
is to identify and understand the deformation mechanism(s) that gives rise to
the remarkable properties of Gum Metal, and to use this understanding to develop
the metallurgical principles that govern Gum Metal behavior. These principles
will then be used to search for new materials that display mechanical properties
similar to Gum Metal. The identification of novel metallurgical principles has
the potential to enable the development of a new class of structural materials.
Such materials would impact a broad range of technologies including
transportation and energy generation. Students working towards their doctoral
degrees will conduct much of the research. Course materials geared toward
introducing high school physics students to the discipline of materials science
and engineering will be developed and exemplified by the role of structural
materials in the sport of skateboarding---a sport popular with teenagers.