* 1105387
* Soft Modes and Critical Properties of Shear Flows Near the Jamming Threshold
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2014
* Matthieu Wyart, New York University
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 08/31/2014
* USD 270,000.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY

The Division of Materials Research contributes funds to this award. It supports
theoretical and computational research and education on soft condensed matter
and non-equilibrium statistical mechanics at the interface of materials research
and mathematics. The research includes the study of the flow of particulate
fluids, such as granular matter, emulsions or suspensions, in the vicinity of
the jamming transition where these materials solidify. In various ways, the
research contributes to the advance of non-equilibrium statistical mechanics,
and to the rheology of complex fluids.

The PI aims to use methods from theoretical physics to understand dense flows of
particulate fluids. The rheology and the effects of confinement on flow
properties near jamming have been studied experimentally in a variety of
materials. It emerges that these fluids display a critical behavior at the
jamming transition where the dynamics stops: the motion of the particles becomes
more and more collective as the transition is approached, and the constitutive
relations relating stress, strain rate and packing fraction scale with distance
to threshold. The PI plans to study such phenomena through a combination of
techniques from non-equilibrium statistical mechanics, probability theory, and
geometry, with particular emphasis understanding the spatial nature of the 'soft
modes' - the collective allowed motions of the particles- and their coupling to
the flow. The PI plans in particular to construct a detailed theory of the
relationship between the geometry of particle clusters generated in flows, their
convection and break-up, and the soft modes characterizing them. Numerical
simulations will be used to quantify these relationships, and to test for the
applicability of concepts that have recently enhanced understanding of isotropic
jammed materials, in particular the idea of marginal stability.

This award also supports interdisciplinary training for graduate students and
post-docs through the opportunities provided by the research.

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY:

The Division of Materials Research contributes funds to this award. It supports
theoretical and numerical research and education on soft condensed matter and
non-equilibrium statistical mechanics at the interface of materials research and
mathematics. The research includes the study of the flow of particulate fluids,
such as granular matter, emulsions, or suspensions, in the vicinity of the
jamming transition where these flowing materials become rigid. For example food
grains in a silo can flow easily through hoppers or the flowing grain becomes
rigid and abruptly stops. In various ways, the research contributes to the
advance of non-equilibrium statistical mechanics - the study of systems of many
particles or components that are far from balance, and to the rheology of
complex fluids.

The PI aims to use methods from theoretical physics to understand dense flows of
particulate fluids. Particulate fluids, such as granular materials, are the most
commonly processed materials in industry after water. Controlling the rheology
of these materials is of considerable interest including in the cosmetic,
energy, food and pharmaceutical industries. Potential applications of the funded
research include controlling the fluidization of particulate fluids to lower the
cost of their processing and transport. Fluidization is crucial for example for
the extraction and transport of oil sands, that represent two thirds of liquid
hydrocarbon resources but that are very costly to process. A better
understanding of how particulate fluids flow contributes to efforts to make
these resources available.

This research contributes to the intellectual foundations of the discovery of
new materials, new technologies through a better understanding of the
fundamental microscopic principles that governs them.

This award also supports interdisciplinary training for graduate students and
post-docs through the opportunities provided by the research.