* 1105121
* "Collaborative Research: Dynamical Processes in Semiconductor Nanowires in the Quantum Regime"
* MPS,DMR
* 09/15/2011,08/31/2014
* Jan Yarrison-Rice, Miami University
* Continuing Grant
* Paul Sokol
* 08/31/2014
* USD 80,402.00

****Technical Abstract**** Semiconductor nanowires have recently emerged as a
new class of materials with significant potential for the advancement of
understanding of fundamental physics and for new applications in device physics.
This project will bring together expertise in state-of-the-art semiconductor
nanowire growth, in modeling of these structures, and in unique excitation
spectroscopies in order to advance the understanding of dynamical properties of
semiconductor nanowires whose diameters are in the quantum regime. This project
will: support the design and growth of unique radial and axial nanowire
heterostructures; develop new optical tools for measurement of quantum states
and their interactions; investigate nanowire heterostructures in the quantum
regime using these new tools; employ highly localized electric fields to
manipulate and probe the electronic states in the nanowire heterostructures;
carry out optical and transport measurements; and explore spin dynamics in these
nanowire heterostructures. By designing, growing, and probing nanowire radial
and axial heterostructures with length scales from 5 nm - 50 nm, we will access
the truly quantum regime in these materials. Graduate and undergraduate students
will be trained in state-of-the-art techniques, which are an excellent
preparation for careers ranging from research and education in academia, to
applied development research in technologically advanced industries. The goal of
this research is to advance the understanding of dynamical processes in
semiconductor nanowires in the quantum regime.

****Non-Technical Abstract**** Semiconductor nanowires have recently emerged as
a new class of materials with significant potential for the advancement of
understanding of fundamental physics and for new applications in device physics.
The research in this project will bring together expertise in state-of-the-art
semiconductor nanowire growth, in modeling of these structures, and in
experimental efforts that will advance the understanding of semiconductor
nanowires whose diameters are less than 50 nm (1/1000 of the diameter of a human
hair), a range where the materials themselves are comparable to the size of the
wavelength of electrons. Remarkable phenomena and new technological
opportunities are expected when synthetic materials can be designed so as to
control the electron wavefunctions. These states can be probed using both
optical and transport measurements by using highly localized electric fields,
magnetic fields, and utilizing unique nanowire heterostructures. This research
will be particularly directed towards the effect of spins in these materials
where both new physics and new technologies may be enabled. Graduate and
undergraduate students will be trained in state-of-the-art optical and
electronic techniques for looking at single nanowires. Such training is
excellent preparation for careers from research and teaching in academia to
applied development in the most technologically advanced industries. The overall
goal of this research is to advance the understanding of dynamical processes in
semiconductor nanowires in the quantum regime