* 1105185
* Solution-Processable Graphene Quantum Dots for Thin-Film Photovoltaics
* MPS,DMR
* 06/15/2011,10/31/2014
* Liang-shi Li, Indiana University
* Continuing Grant
* Michael J. Scott
* 10/31/2014
* USD 410,000.00

TECHNICALSUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;This project supported by the Solid State and
Materials Chemistry and Electronic and Photonic Materials Programs will develop
solution-processable graphene quantum dots (QDs) with precisely controlled
structures and study their electro-optical properties for thin-film
photovoltaics. The goal is to exploit the unique properties of the graphene QDs,
such as their broad, tunable absorption spectra, large extinction coefficient,
and long hot-carrier lifetimes, to overcome some major difficulties in
development of solution-processed solar cells. Soluble, well-defined graphene
QDs will be synthesized and investigated so that their properties can be
optimized for energy conversion. Since graphenes are made of abundant elements
on Earth and are environmentally friendly, the proposed research could result in
low-cost solar electricity with minimal adverse environmental impact, and thus
lead to sustainable ways of using carbon for energy applications.&lt;br/&gt;The
graphene QDs are synthesized through stepwise solution chemistry and therefore
have precisely controlled structures and properties. The energy relaxation
dynamics in the QDs will be investigated, which is an essential process for
utilization of the photon energy absorbed. In addition, their properties, such
as absorption spectra, redox potentials, electron transfer dynamics, and their
interaction with metal oxides, will be optimized for dye-sensitized solar cells.
The size, shape, and functionalization of the graphenes will be varied in a
tightly controlled way, so that the parameters dictating their performance in
the photovoltaic devices can be indentified and understood.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NON-TECHNICALSUMMARY &lt;br/&gt;The research proposed
herein is to create a new type of carbon material that can be processed in
simple ways for efficient thin-film solar cells. Because they are readily
available and are environmentally friendly, the materials could lead to low-cost
solar cells with minimal adverse environmental impact. The success of the
proposed work could lead to a sustainable way of using carbon for energy, that
is, instead of carbon-based energy sources(like coal) the carbon materials used
in this project will be the active media that harvests and converts sunlight to
electricity. &lt;br/&gt;The proposed research will be an excellent recruiting
and training tool for young scientists, because it targets challenges that
increasingly draw interest of students, and because of its interdisciplinary
nature. For example, studies showed that interdisciplinary science programs
tended to attract and retain more female students. Through undergraduate
classroom and outreach programs, the research will have impact beyond the reach
of traditional university teaching, and improve science literacy of the general
public.