* 1105432
* Contact structures and Floer homology theories
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2011,05/31/2015
* Ko Honda, University of Southern California
* Continuing Grant
* Joanna Kania-Bartoszynska
* 05/31/2015
* USD 331,961.00

Contact structures play a central role in 3- and 4-dimensional topology, in no
small part due to its relationship with the various Floer homology theories -
contact homology, Heegaard Floer homology, embedded contact homology, and
Seiberg-Witten Floer homology - all of which have had spectacular applications
over the last decade. The main goal of the PI's research program is to
understand what happens to these Floer homology theories when we glue contact
3-manifolds with boundary. The cut-and-paste theory of contact structures in
dimension three - developed by numerous authors including the PI - is expected
to play an important role. As part of the program, the PI plans to study a
certain category, called the contact category and constructed from contact
structures, which is the "categorical glue" for gluing contact manifolds with
boundary. The PI, in joint work with Colin and Ghiggini, also plans to establish
the equivalence of two of the Floer homology theories - Heegaard Floer homology
and embedded contact homology - using the framework of open book decompositions
due to Giroux; this can be interpreted as a gluing result for relative embedded
contact homology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI proposes a study of 3- and
4-dimensional spaces using a probe called a contact structure. The 3- and
4-dimensional spaces we study will locally be similar to the standard
(Euclidean) 3- and 4-dimensional spaces. These objects may be very complicated
globally, but a local observer cannot tell the difference, just as an ant cannot
tell whether it is sitting on a flat plane or a very large sphere. A more
thorough mathematical understanding of contact structures should contribute
significantly towards our understanding of 3- and 4-dimensional shapes, from the
knotting of DNA at the microscopic level to the shape of the universe at the
macroscopic level.