* 1105726
* GOALI: An Investigation of Depolymerization and Condensation Reactions of Lignin Under Alkaline Conditions
* MPS,CHE
* 09/15/2011,08/31/2016
* Bandaru Ramarao, SUNY College of Environmental Science and Forestry
* Standard Grant
* Colby Foss
* 08/31/2016
* USD 214,000.00

The Chemical Structure, Dynamics and Mechanisms Program supports Professor
Raymond C. Francis at SUNY College of Environmental Science and Forestry with
this Grant Opportunity for Academic Liaison with Industry (GOALI) award. He will
work with Dr. Aaron Levitt, a Research Associate at Andritz, Inc. Professor
Francis will work to further enhance energy recovery from pulping effluent or
black liquor (BL), which contains 45-55% of the original chip mass from the
pulping process and has a relatively high caloric value. Energy recovery is
hampered by high sulfur content, thus, the overall aim is to further investigate
the non-sulfur NaOH/anthraquinone process (soda/AQ or SAQ) and more specifically
to try to understand why SAQ pulps are more difficult to bleach than kraft
pulps. A detailed study of the bleachability problem has led to improvements in
the SAQ process where new approaches may lead to a commercially viable
process.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With the support of the Chemical Structure,
Dynamics and Mechanisms Program in the Chemistry Division at the National
Science Foundation, Dr. Raymond C. Francis will demonstrate how society would
benefit if more energy were to be produced from wood and other biomass
(CO2-neutral sources) and by a reduction in the emission of reduced sulfur
compounds into the environment. Development of new mechanisms, techniques and
analytical tools that can be used by the entire scientific community is also
likely to result from the research. The NSF funding would directly and
indirectly help to educate and train graduate students in the critical area of
process modifications to increase energy and chemical production from wood and
other biomass that are abundant. Professor Francis presently supervises four PhD
and one MSc students, including a black male and a female who should both
graduate with PhD degrees by August 2011. He has also graduated three females
with MSc degrees since May 2008 and all three have enjoyed great success since
then. NSF funding would assist the university co-PI in continuing to disseminate
new knowledge through publications and conferences and to attract industry
support. Nine refereed publications have been achieved since the program started
in March 2006 and numerous presentations have been made at International
Conferences.