* 1105438
* Summer Research Program in Solid State Chemistry
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2011,12/31/2012
* David Johnson, University of Oregon Eugene
* Standard Grant
* Michael J. Scott
* 12/31/2012
* USD 105,000.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY: This project, supported by the Solid State and Materials
Chemistry program, provides a combined tutorial and summer research program
focused in solid-state and materials chemistry designed for rising senior or
junior undergraduate students and faculty members from primarily undergraduate
institutions that want to increase their knowledge of solid state chemistry. An
introductory tutorial, held at the University of Oregon, immerses student and
faculty participants in the concepts and applications of solid state chemistry
through a series of morning lectures and afternoon hands-on laboratories. The
tutorial week includes introductions and hands on use of x-ray diffraction,
transmission electron microscopy, scanning electron microscopy, electron
microprobe analysis and a variety of surface analysis techniques. At the close
of the tutorial, the participants disperse to their assigned host laboratory for
an eight-week research session. The host laboratories are located throughout the
United States. At each host laboratory, the individual participant will become
an active part of the research team, working on a project assigned by the host.
Participants return to Oregon at the end of the research phase for a final
symposium where they share their successes, frustrations and overall experiences
with their peers through presentations, a poster session and group discussions.
This cements the network that formed during tutorial week, and allows the
participants to see the breadth and depth of opportunities available in the
field of solid state chemistry research. The goal of this program is to increase
the number, diversity and caliber of young chemists pursuing graduate studies in
the field of solid state and materials chemistry. The program recruits students
directly from undergraduate institutions with high minority enrollments and
helps faculty at these institutions to incorporate solid state chemistry into
their curricula. NON TECHNICAL SUMMARY: This project, supported by the Solid
State and Materials Chemistry program, provides a combined tutorial and summer
research program focused in solid-state and materials chemistry designed for
rising senior or junior undergraduate students and faculty members from
primarily undergraduate institutions that want to increase their knowledge of
solid state chemistry. An introductory tutorial, held at the University of
Oregon, immerses student and faculty participants in the concepts and
applications of solid state chemistry through a series of morning lectures and
afternoon hands-on laboratories. The participants get hands on experience with
state of the art equipment and learn from experts. At the close of the tutorial,
the participants disperse to their assigned host laboratory for an eight-week
research experience. The host laboratories are located throughout the United
States and are supervised by leading researchers in solid state and materials
chemistry. At each host laboratory, the individual participant will become an
active part of the research team, working on a project assigned by the host.
Participants return to Oregon at the end of the research phase for a final
symposium where they share their successes, frustrations and overall experiences
with their peers through presentations, a poster session and group discussions.
This cements the network that formed during tutorial week, and allows the
participants to see the breadth and depth of opportunities available in the
field of solid state and materials chemistry. The goal of this program is to
increase the number, diversity and caliber of young chemists pursuing graduate
studies in the field of solid state and materials chemistry. The program
recruits students directly from undergraduate institutions with high minority
enrollments and helps faculty incorporate solid state chemistry into their
curricula.