* 1105324
* Conference: Advances in Optics for Biotechnology, Medicine and Surgery XII, June 5-8, 2011, Naples, Florida
* ENG,CBET
* 04/01/2011,03/31/2012
* Reid Thompson, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Kaiming Ye
* 03/31/2012
* USD 15,000.00

1105324, Hillman

Advances in Optics for Biotechnology, Medicine and Surgery is a small (~120
attendees), interdisciplinary conference focused on the field of biomedical
optics. The conference will be held from the 5-8th June 2011 at Naples Beach
Hotel, Naples, Florida, USA. Sessions will be composed of invited talks from
senior and rising experts focusing on key and emerging aspects of the biomedical
optics field. A poster session will provide students and post-docs with ample
opportunity to describe and discuss their work, and free-time and social
activities will stimulate and promote networking. Substantial effort will be
devoted to ensuring geographic, disciplinary, racial, gender and experiential
diversity of our participants. Funding from the NSF will allow us to offset the
registration costs of 4 students, 4 fellows and young investigators and 8
speakers. Biomedical optics encompasses the interdisciplinary development of new
technologies that harness fundamental interactions between light and tissue. The
field has already generated a wide range of imaging, diagnostic and therapeutic
approaches that have impacted modern medicine. Biomedical optics has also had a
profound influence on biomedical research, with advances in microscopy and in-
vivo imaging tools keeping pace with the rapid development of transgenic
fluorescent-protein in-vivo models and contrast agents with molecular
specificity. With these two areas combined, biomedical optics is a continually
evolving field impacting both medicine and the basic sciences.

Intellectual Merit: Biomedical optics is a term used to broadly describe almost
any technology that exploits light for biomedical applications. The fundamental
physics of light transport in tissue and fluorescence and absorption
spectroscopy remain at the field's core, yet every year sees the evolution of
new technologies for light generation, detection and manipulation as well as new
contrast agents, algorithms and biomedical applications, all of which quickly
advance the field into new areas. Examples of this in the past 2-3 years include
super-resolution microscopy approaches such as PALM and STORM, as well as opto-
genetics; a new biological technique that allows excitatory cells to be switched
on and off using light.

So while this meeting will be the 12th in a series that has been running for
over 20 years, every year has seen continual evolution of the program to
encompass cutting edge new advances in the field. We recognize, for example,
that it is important for experts in optics to understand the principles,
potential, and implications of new approaches such as opto-genetics, since their
expertise could significantly improve the way that these valuable new tools can
be utilized. Similarly, introducing chemists to the different optical approaches
to implementing super-resolution microscopy may lead to improved strategies for
developing novel contrast agents. The unique format of this small meeting is
highly conducive to intensive training at the cutting edge of our field,
allowing new concepts to be introduced and then openly discussed.

Broader Impacts: Biomedical optics advances are generally borne from the
juxtaposition of engineering, physics, mathematics, biology, chemistry and
clinical medicine. To train in this highly interdisciplinary field, one must
master all aspects of optics, device development, data acquisition, modeling and
analysis, in addition to a thorough understanding of the biomedical problems
being addressed. Many breakthroughs have resulted from simply pairing the right
technique with the right biomedical application; realizations that require open
interdisciplinary discussion. Widespread adoption of new biomedical optics
technologies also requires that end users receive training that allows them to
appreciate the fundamental principles governing operation of a particular
technology, and therefore both its benefits and limitations.

As such, our field relies upon meetings that draw together experts from all
facets of biomedical optics research, including scientists, engineers,
clinicians and industry experts, to enable this cross-fertilization. The
conference for which we are requesting support serves exactly this purpose: To
provide a forum for sharing creative ideas across broad areas of engineering,
basic science and medicine, as well as an opportunity for students, trainees and
young investigators to diversify their knowledge and develop relationships with
key leaders in the field.