* 1105329
* Surface-Directed Differentiation of Human Mesenchymal Stem Cells on Orthogonal Peptide Concentration Gradient Surfaces
* MPS,DMR
* 09/15/2011,08/31/2014
* Matthew Becker, University of Akron
* Continuing Grant
* Joseph A. Akkara
* 08/31/2014
* USD 420,000.00

This award by the Biomaterials program in the Division of Materials Research to
University of Akron is in support of research that seeks to quantify the
concentration dependence and spatial nature of ligand-receptor interactions,
which influence cell differentiation pathways in human mesenchymal stem cells.
Future advances in regenerative medicine will require the use of more than one
peptide or bioactive molecule to drive stem cells into well-defined specifically
differentiated populations. While many investigations have focused on individual
molecular interactions at discrete concentrations, a complete interactome of the
concentration dependence of extra cellular matrix-derived, osteogenic growth
peptide and short peptide fragments of bone morphogenic proteins singly and in
combination has remained elusive. The gradient approach also affords a method to
decouple local signaling that occurs due to cell-integrin interactions from
soluble paracrine effects. When identified, this information will drive the
design of higher-order bioactive and biomimetic materials for use in several
applications where synthetic materials contact biological systems. The aims of
the proposal outline an approach to fabricate and characterize both
unidirectional and orthogonal peptide concentration (10-200 pm/cm2 for
unidirectional and 10-100 pm/cm2 for orthogonal) gradients. Using a
multidimensional characterization approach with surface spectroscopy,
immunohistochemistry, automated fluorescence microscopy and real-time polymerase
chain reaction, the project will capture the concentration thresholds and
synergistic signaling events that influence cell proliferation, lineage
commitment and population heterogeneities. The multidisciplinary research
ecosystem will offer training opportunities to researchers at all levels (high
school, undergraduate, graduate and postdoctoral) at the cutting edge of
materials chemistry, chemical biology and regenerative medicine. In partnership
with a local high school, real world research activities will be incorporated
into age-appropriate modules into upper level biology courses and will be used
to teach fundamental concepts and relationships between both physics and
chemistry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;One of the major remaining barriers to advancing
regenerative medicine into mainstream applications is the issue of reliable,
safe cell sources. In the near term, stem cells for surgical implantation must
come from the person needing the replacement part (autologous sourcing). This
limitation will require a pre-surgical isolation of stem cells followed by an
expansion protocol ex vivo (outside the body) to generate enough stem cells for
the scaffold seeding. The existing synthetic materials are insufficient for
these protocols. This proposal outlines an approach to identify the optimal
combinations and concentrations of small biomimetic peptides to yield large
quantities of well-defined stem cell populations. The autologous approach is
free of most safety and ethical concerns that have been raised by various
populations. If successful, the identified concentrations will have far reaching
impact on our understanding of how individual and combinations of peptides
influence cell differentiation and furthermore improve the quantity and quality
of well-defined stem cell populations available for research and clinical
investigations. The multidisciplinary research environment offers opportunities
for training at all levels (high school, undergraduate, graduate and
postdoctoral). The project involves training students, undergraduate, and high
school students from a local school. The age appropriate educational modules
will be designed to teach fundamental principles to high school biology courses
at various levels using advanced research topics. It is critical to encourage
students at this age to understand the importance of engineering principles and
how they relate to advancing human health. This project is expected to support
the nation's efforts to increase the numbers and diversity of the engineering
student pipeline that require one to reach down and providing unique research
opportunities to underrepresented/minority students populations which encourage
the pursuit of science and engineering careers.