* 1105336
* Exchange-Coupled Magnetism in Self-Organized Metallic Alloy Nanochessboard Structures
* MPS,DMR
* 01/01/2012,12/31/2016
* J. Floro, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Birgit Schwenzer
* 12/31/2016
* USD 330,000.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY: Exchange-coupled magnetic systems are composite magnetic
materials consisting of a mixture of magnetically hard and soft phases. By
integrating these phases at the nanoscale it is possible to obtain
simultaneously the best properties of each phase. A key challenge is to enhance
the magnetic properties by improving the regularity of the nanostructure at the
10 nm length scale. This research proposes to achieve this through the
development of the self-organized nanochessboard. This novel structure consists
of a quasi-periodic tiling of the hard magnetic tetragonal (L10) phase
interleaved with a soft magnetic cubic (L12) phase on the nanometer length
scale. The nanoschessboard forms by pseudospinodal decomposition around the
eutectoid composition in Co-Pt, Fe-Pt and Fe-Pd alloys. The structure features a
nanoscale period conducive to strong exchange-coupled magnetism, while the high
degree of regularity will enable the development of a deeper understanding of
the structure-property relationship, and is expected to enhance the magnetic
performance. This investigation will correlate how magnetic properties evolve as
the nanochessboard structure is modified by varying the tiling period, the
magnetic properties of the individual phases, and the tiling
morphology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY: Magnetic materials
underpin several technologies of incredible importance to modern society,
including electric motors and digital data storage. There is strong economic
motivation to improve the properties of magnetic materials, which could, for
example, reduce the weight of a motor or increase the density of data storage.
This research will exploit a novel self-organization process to form a composite
magnetic material, known as an "exchange-spring magnet", that offers greatly
improved magnetic behavior. The new material that will be produced and studied
here looks like a chessboard, except that the squares of the chessboard are only
nanometers across, and consist of different magnetic materials that closely
interact to improve performance. The research is expected to impact the
important field of permanent magnet design, where exchange coupling is exploited
to obtain maximum energy storage, and will also impact the field of magnetic
recording media, where exchange-coupling is used to reduce coercivity in highly
anisotropic, nanoscale ordered phases. Beyond the scientific and technological
impacts of this research lies a strong commitment by the principal investigator
to integrate research and education through the training of graduate students,
and the exposure of undergraduate students to the research environment.
Furthermore, the principal investigator directs and participates in extensive
outreach activities focused on "teaching nano to the public". Magnetism provides
a highly visual, appealing approach to learning about nanoscale behavior. These
outreach activities target a diverse population, including schools in
underserved regions of central Virginia.