* 1105575
* Collaborative: Engineered Nonlinear Optical Materials Based on Hybrid Nanocomposites
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2011,05/31/2014
* Stephen Forrest, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Z.  Ying
* 05/31/2014
* USD 200,034.00

Technical: This collaborative research project at CUNY Queens College and
University of Michigan aims to develop a new class of nonlinear optical
materials that combine the advantages of organic, inorganic and metallic
systems. Composite structures comprising hybridized excitons that have the
desirable nonlinear optical properties of large oscillator strength (organic
like), low saturation power (inorganic like), and quasiparticles (exciton-
plasmon polaritons) that form through the strong interaction between inorganic
excitons and plasmons of metal nanoparticles are investigated. The research
project is expected to realize these hybridized materials systems through (i)
dipole-dipole interaction of the Frenkel and Wannier-Mott excitons at the
organic-inorganic interface and (ii) strong coupling between inorganic excitons
and plasmons of metal nanoparticles using layered nanocomposite geometry.
Nonlinear optical properties and morphology of the materials are investigated
using a variety of spectroscopic and structural characterization
techniques.&lt;br/&gt;Non-technical: The project addresses basic research issues
in a topical area of materials science with high technological relevance. A
successful outcome of this research project will make substantial contributions
to the field of nonlinear optics by exploring a new class of engineered
nonlinear optical materials. Besides potential applications such as efficient
all-optical switching elements, imaging, spectroscopy and second harmonic
generation, these materials can potentially contribute to the interdisciplinary
field of quantum informatics. The collaborative project also trains, creates
research opportunities, and helps instill interest in science and engineering
for graduate, undergraduate and high school students, from diverse backgrounds
and ethnicities.