* 1105617
* CAPP: Combining Algal and Plant Photosynthesis
* BIO,EF
* 03/15/2011,02/28/2015
* Martin Jonikas, Carnegie Institution of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Kent Chapman
* 02/28/2015
* USD 725,927.00

There is a clear need to increase crop productivity to feed our growing
population. The enzyme RuBisCO is critical for the fixation of carbon dioxide
into sugars in all plants, but its low efficiency makes it a major bottleneck in
photosynthesis. To compensate for RuBisCO's low efficiency, plants with a
photosynthetic process known as "C-3" (such as rice and wheat) devote a large
fraction of their resources to producing the RuBisCO protein, which constitutes
up to 50% of the total protein in their leaves. Unlike C3 plants, many algae
have developed a means to drastically reduce the amounts of RuBisCO protein
needed for efficient photosynthesis, by using a biophysical carbon concentrating
mechanism (CCM). The CCM increases the carbon dioxide concentration within a
subcellular compartment called the pyrenoid where RuBisCO is located, thus
enhancing carbon dioxide assimilation with less RuBisCO protein.&lt;br/&gt;The
ambitious goal of this program is to transfer the CCM from the green alga
Chlamydomonas to the model C3 plant Arabidopsis, thus improving rates of carbon
dioxide assimilation. The program will use a cutting-edge genome-wide screen to
discover novel components of the algal CCM, including pyrenoid components. The
physiological functions, localizations and physical interactions of known and
newly-discovered components will be characterized by molecular and cell
biological approaches, including electron microscopy and mass spectrometry. A
modified RuBisCO will be developed and inserted into Arabidopsis to enable
formation of a pyrenoid-like organelle. Known components and, progressively, key
newly-discovered components, will be transferred to Arabidopsis and their impact
on photosynthesis will be assessed. The process will be guided and supported by
the development of advanced computational models.&lt;br/&gt;This transformative
program represents a leap forward towards improving the photosynthetic
efficiency of C3 crop plants, by introduction of a biophysical CCM from green
algae. Additionally, the research will provide a much clearer molecular
definition of the algal CCM, which is a fundamentally important yet poorly
understood biological process. The research will provide undergraduate students
opportunities to learn from a broad base of biological research.