* 1105509
* Disordered Systems and Stochastic Growth Phenomena
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2011,10/31/2014
* Ilya Gruzberg, University of Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 10/31/2014
* USD 255,000.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Division of Materials Research and
the Division of Mathematical Sciences contribute funds to this award. This award
supports research and education in theoretical condensed matter physics in two
related subjects: disordered systems and stochastic growth
phenomena.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The projects the PI will engage on disordered
systems include: the study of conformal invariance, multifractal critical
functions, and symmetry of multifractal spectra at Anderson transitions;
critical states and the integer quantum Hall effect in low magnetic fields;
general network models for Anderson localization in all symmetry classes and the
supersymmetry method for them; the theory of quantum Hall transitions and other
disordered critical points in two dimensions based on conformal restriction
theory and Schramm-Loewner evolution; localization and Anderson transitions in
class D, including the random bond Ising model; network models with structural
disorder, and other disordered systems on random surfaces.&lt;br/&gt;In the area
of stochastic growth the specific projects will be the Schramm-Loewner evolution
for critical systems with extended chiral symmetries: Wess-Zumino-Witten models
and parafermionc theories; theoretical and mathematical aspects of conformal
restriction in the bulk; models of stochastic growth interpolating between
deterministic Laplacian growth and stochastic diffusion-limited aggregation and
similar processes; stochastic perturbations of general classical integrable
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed theoretical developments connect with
experimental studies of quantum Hall transitions and of various driven systems
exhibiting unstable interfacial motion. The research will also make contact with
direct computer simulations through collaborators who are experts in large-scale
numerical simulations. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research has a strong education
component involving the training of graduate students, and involves substantial
international collaboration with research teams in France, Germany, and Japan,
which will enrich the research enterprise in the physical sciences in the
US.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NON-TECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Division of Materials Research and the Division
of Mathematical Sciences contribute funds to this award. This award supports
research and education in theoretical condensed matter physics in two related
subjects: disordered systems and stochastic growth phenomena.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Impurities, lattice imperfections, and other forms of
disorder crucially affect properties of electronic and other materials. Disorder
alone can prevent electric current from flowing, turning a metal into an
insulator. This is a consequence of the wave nature of the electron and the
interference of electron waves scattered by impurities. The PI will use
sophisticated theoretical concepts and mathematical methods to advance
understanding of this transformation between a metal and an insulator as the
amount of disorder is varied. The PI will also study how this transformation
takes place in a quantum Hall system where electron conduction is richly
complex. A quantum Hall system is a gas of electrons confined to a plane in an
artificial semiconductor structure with an applied magnetic field perpendicular
to the plane. The conduction of electrons through a quantum Hall system varies
in interesting ways depending on the strength of the magnetic field. Of
particular interest is the effect of the interplay of the magnetic field with
disorder on the conduction of electrons through a quantum Hall system.
&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The PI will also use sophisticated mathematical methods
to advance understanding of random patterns that arise in growth. Examples of
such patterns are evident in soot particles, bacterial colonies grown in a Petri
dish, fingered patterns of minerals deposited by water seeping through porous
rock, and vortices in turbulent fluid flows. The shapes that arise are generally
rough and fractal - when examined more closely, a magnified image looks the same
as the unaided image. These fractals are often driven by random forces,
requiring their characterization in terms of probabilities.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;The research has a strong education component involving the training
of graduate students, and involves substantial international collaboration with
research teams in France, Germany, and Japan, which will enrich the research
enterprise in the physical sciences in the US.