* 1105468
* Experimental Investigation of Dynamic Abnormal Grain Growth
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2011,05/31/2016
* Eric Taleff, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* Diana Farkas
* 05/31/2016
* USD 500,000.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY: Dynamic abnormal grain growth (DAGG) is a recently-discovered
secondary recrystallization phenomenon that occurs only during plastic
deformation at elevated temperature. DAGG can rapidly produce very large single
crystals in the solid state at relatively low homologous temperatures,
approximately 0.65 Tm, a feat not possible by any other process. The dynamic
nature of DAGG is its most unique characteristic and poses new challenges to
current understandings of abnormal grain growth and grain-boundary migration,
foundational topics in the metals science of microstructure evolution. To date,
DAGG has been observed in only two materials, Mo and Ta BCC refractory metals.
The proposed research will investigate the processes which give rise to DAGG in
these metals and then develop new metal systems susceptible to DAGG. Research
goals include developing (1) a capability to predict when and in what materials
DAGG will occur and (2) a capability to control DAGG in materials susceptible to
abnormal grain growth. The resulting mechanistic understanding of DAGG will be
used to predict the occurrence of DAGG under conditions of technological
importance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY: Dynamic abnormal grain
growth (DAGG) is a recently-discovered phenomenon in the field of materials
science. DAGG occurs while deforming polycrystalline material at elevated
temperature and has been used to grow large single crystals in molybdenum and
tantalum for scientific studies. Beyond this initial practical application, DAGG
represents an opportunity to gain new fundamental insights into the evolution of
material microstructure. Controlling material microstructure is critical to the
manufacture of advanced components in many industries, particularly the
transportation industries. Potential impacts of this research include creating
new materials and improving the quality of manufactured components. The proposed
research will enhance collaborations with General Motors and Sandia National
Laboratory. Both graduate and undergraduate students will be trained in the
fields of materials and metals science through research activities and as well
as mentoring during academic studies. Outreach activities which promote science
and engineering to the local community will be supported.