* 1105622
* Understanding Structure and Response in Thermally-Responsive Block Copolymer Assemblies
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2011,12/31/2014
* Robert Grubbs, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Continuing Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 12/31/2014
* USD 345,000.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Responsive polymer assemblies show great
promise in a range of applications, including drug delivery, sensing, and
catalysis. Crucial to the elaboration of these systems is the development of
polymers that undergo rapid, predictable, and reversible changes between
assemblies with different sizes and structures. For applications involving
encapsulation of other species within polymer vesicles, the development of more
efficient encapsulation methods is also of great importance. To meet these
challenges, the PI and co-workers have previously prepared temperature-
responsive ABC triblock copolymers with poly(ethylene oxide) (PEO) as a
hydrophilic block, poly(N-isopropylacrylamide) as a thermoresponsive block, and
polyisprene as a cross-linkable hydrophobic block, which form assemblies that
undergo large changes in size and shape around a critical temperature, however
the reorganization of small assemblies (micelles of 20 nm diameter) into larger
assemblies (vesicles of &gt;100 nm diameter) at elevated temperatures was found
to take several weeks. Recently, related copolymers with poly(butylene oxide-
stat-ethylene oxide) responsive blocks, in which there are weaker interchain
interactions in the absence of water, were found to undergo significant
structural transformations within several hours. This research will probe the
hypothesis that weakening interchain interactions in the dehydrated state is
critical to increasing assembly transformation rate. This research will further
the understanding of these block copolymer systems and their potential
applications. Specifically, the PI and co-workers will investigate new
hydrophilic-responsive-hydrophobic triblock copolymers, further probe possible
structural transformations (e.g., micelle-to-worm-like micelle), more deeply
investigate the kinetics of the assembly transformation process, and carry out
encapsulation and release studies with block copolymer assemblies. The further
study of these novel responsive systems offers the potential to expand and
transform the applications of polymer-based
nanostructures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NON-TECHNICAL
SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Nanometer-sized assemblies of polymer molecules
show much promise in a range of applications, from the treatment of cancer and
other diseases to the development of new sensory devices. This research will
further our understanding of polymer assemblies that are designed to undergo
specific changes in size and shape upon exposure to heat or other stimuli. In
doing so, it will lay the groundwork for future efforts to use these materials
in applications where the response to stimulus can be coupled to a specific
application, such as release of a chemotherapy agent or the detection of
specific molecules. This research will be carried out by graduate and
undergraduate students as part of their scientific training and will involve
collaboration with other researchers at Stony Brook University, Brookhaven
National Laboratory, and Warwick University (UK). The PI will work through the
State University of New York Louis Stokes Alliance for Minority Participation
(SUNY LSAMP) program to recruit undergraduate students to participate in
research in the chemistry department. Results of this work will be presented at
internationally-attended scientific meetings and the PhD students involved in
the project will maintain a website/blog through which they will be able to
communicate their reflections on the project and the life of a scientific
researcher to the general public.