* 1105835
* MITEoR: a HERA pathfinder instrument for cheaper 21 cm precision cosmology
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2015
* Max Tegmark, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Ralph Gaume
* 08/31/2015
* USD 599,996.00

Mapping neutral hydrogen throughout our Universe via its redshifted 21 cm line
offers a unique opportunity to probe the cosmic "dark ages" and the formation of
the first luminous objects. Moreover, because it can map a much larger volume of
our Universe, it has the potential to overtake the cosmic microwave background
as the most sensitive cosmological probe of the epoch of reionization,
inflation, dark matter, dark energy, and neutrino masses. This potential has
stimulated growing community interest, reflected by the Hydrogen Epoch of
Reionization Arrays (HERA) effort and the Astro2010 Decadal Review, with initial
focus of technology development and demonstration.

The goal of this research is to develop a digital radio interferometer back-end
with a novel architecture, test it with a 64 dual-polarization antenna array,
and generate calibrated foreground maps covering much of the sky at 110-190 MHz,
all of which will help further HERA development. By exploiting a hierarchical
antenna grid and 4-dimensional Fast Fourier Transforms (FFT), the proposed
correlator cost scales as N log N with the number of independent elements rather
than as N^2 like other HERA pathfinder experiments, allowing significant cost
savings/collecting area increases down the road. Also, N independent sky beams
are imaged simultaneously, improving mapping sensitivity. By exploiting the
massive baseline redundancy in this antenna grid, gain and phase calibration for
all antennas can be made significantly more accurate and fully automated. This
can in turn produce more accurate modeling of the synthesized and primary beams,
which has been shown to improve the quality of the foreground modeling and
removal which is so crucial to 21 cm cosmology.

The proposed MIT Epoch of Reionization (MITEoR) instrument will be built on the
NSF-funded open-source CASPER FPGA hardware platform, ensuring that the
technology and instrumentation that we develop can be used by the worldwide
community and incorporated into future HERA instruments, regardless of their
antenna design and frequency range. In particular, most current visions for
massive future radio arrays (like HERA-II and SKA) involve large compact cores,
for which the technology that we will develop arguably offers both the lowest
correlator cost and the most accurate calibration.

Along with strengthening the foundation for the emerging standard model of
cosmology, this research should develop broadly useful technology, algorithms
and tools. The hierarchical FFT imaging idea is also relevant to other areas,
e.g., the search for radio transients and perhaps microwave background
polarization.

As in the past, such products of our work useful to the broader community (data,
algorithms, software, etc.) will promptly be made publicly available. The
proposed research will also provide valuable student training. Furthermore,
since the origin, evolution and fate of the universe have captivated the
imagination of the general public, our group will continue to be very engaged in
both formal and informal public outreach activities on this topic.