* 1105405
* Workshop on Multiscale Modeling and Analysis of  Complex Data in Biomedical Sciences, RPI Campus, Troy, NY
* ENG,CBET
* 03/15/2011,02/29/2012
* Bulent Yener, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Kaiming Ye
* 02/29/2012
* USD 15,000.00

1105405, Yener

The PI will organize a two day workshop which will examine multiscale approaches
to modeling, control, computation, simulation, knowledge extraction, and
visualization of complex systems biology problems by merging mathematical and
biological sciences.

The structure/function relationship paradigm is central to understanding how
biological systems function. The idea is deceptively simple: understanding the
structural organization of biological systems, from massive ecological systems
to the shape of a single protein, reveals the function of the system. The
concept is powerful enough to have inspired a 200+ year-long effort to describe
the components of our biological universe in ever finer detail, beginning with
the Linnean taxonomic system of cataloging organisms based on their structural
similarities, and culminating with microscale descriptions such as the complete
genomes of several organisms, including humans. The reductionist approach to
biological research has thus reigned supreme for generations, and as a result we
now understand how the linear arrangement of nucleotides encodes the linear
arrangement of amino acids, how proteins interact to form functional groups such
as signal transduction and metabolic pathways, etc. But at each level of
biological organization, we reach a wall- having reduced the complex biological
universe to a myriad of minute parts, we encounter new forms of complexity: data
overload and the "curse of dimensionality." Simply put, we've taken our
biological machines apart but can?t put them back together again- our ability to
accumulate reductionist data has outstripped our ability to understand it. Thus,
we encounter a gap in the structure/function relationship: having accumulated an
extraordinary amount of detailed information about biological structures, we
can't assemble it in a way that explains the correspondingly complex biological
functions these structures perform.

This gap is especially evident at the level of tissues, where most diseases and
injuries are manifest. Heart disease and cancer remain the top two causes of
death in the United States. One fundamental characteristic of both diseases is
tissue failure: namely, errors in the structural organization and function of
cells in the affected tissues. Likewise, it is estimated that one in six US
residents requires medical treatment for an injury each year, yet the process of
wound healing is so complex it is difficult to accurately predict how quickly
most serious wounds will heal. Existing models of wound healing rely on
clinically relevant, but somewhat superficial, measures of tissue state such as
reduction in wound area, linear advancement of wound edge, pain, and ease of
use. In fact, despite a multitude of genetic screens, biochemical assays, and
imaging techniques, the "gold standard" for diagnosis and evaluation remains the
expert opinion of highly trained pathologists who scan samples of the tissues in
histopathology slides. In other words, the human eye is currently the most
accurate tool we have available for identifying telltale alterations in the
structure and function of diseased and damaged tissues. And it is clear that
human judgment is not fail-proof: thousands of diseases are misdiagnosed every
year, costing hundreds of millions of dollars in wasted or ineffective medical
treatment. To improve diagnosis and treatment of diseases and wounds, we need a
better understanding of how the tremendous number of cellular and subcellular
parts is organized into functional tissues. One strategy for achieving this is
to employ robust methods for describing complex systems, adapted from math and
engineering disciplines far outside traditional biomedical fields. Viewed from
this perspective, tissue organization and function can be treated as a design
optimization problem: e.g., what is the optimal arrangement of cellular
constituents that achieves the best tissue performance? Thus the broader impacts
of the proposed workshop is immense.