* 1105470
* Geometry and Topology of Singular Structures with Applications to Computer Imaging
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2016
* James Damon, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 08/31/2016
* USD 118,686.00

Professor Damon has been investigating problems involving the geometry, topology
and deformation properties of singular structures, including stratified sets,
mappings, and nonisolated singularities, and the application of these results
for developing geometric methods for problems in computer imaging. He proposes
to further develop his work which applies to computer imaging and also continue
his theoretical work, based on recent discoveries, on the properties of highly
nonisolated singularities. He will extend the methods involving "skeletal
structures", which he introduced to capture the shape of objects in any
dimension, to obtain "skeletal/medial linking structures" for configurations of
multiple objects in images. Such a linking structure will provide a mathematical
structure which could be used for: the statistical analysis of medical images
involving multiple physiological features, improved segmentation in images, and
providing a rigorous unified mathematical framework for analyzing the
interaction of positional and shape information in images. As well his work will
develop new methods for studying highly nonisolated singularities whose topology
has been beyond the reach of previous methods developed for isolated
singularities. This involves determining the "vanishing topology" of the
singularities as well as the topology of the complements and Milnor fibers for
(highly singular) "free divisors" which naturally arise from representation
theory of solvable linear algebraic groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed
investigations to be carried out under this grant will concern both theoretical
work on singular spaces and its application to problems in medical imaging.
Singular spaces, which are different from our usual image of smoothly bending
objects, inevitably arise in the study of smooth objects. In the case of
configurations of smooth objects, the investigator will develop appropriate
singular structures which allow for the simultaneous analysis of the shapes of
the individual objects and their positional relations. Such structures can be
used for various imaging problems, such as for 3D medical images, where for
treatment and diagnosis, the exact relative position and features of multiple
physiological features must be determined. This will involve joint work with
several groups of computer scientists. The investigator will also investigate
the properties of these singular spaces when their structure is highly singular
and cannot be understood using traditional methods. He is developing a new
method for both simplifying the qualitative structure of such singularities and
providing explicit algebraic methods for computing qualitative numerical
invariants of the structures.