* 1105986
* Probing and manipulating superconductivity in nanostructures
* MPS,DMR
* 06/15/2011,05/31/2016
* Judy Wu, University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Lynnette Madsen
* 05/31/2016
* USD 509,625.00

NON-TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION: Superconductivity can play a significant role in
deregulated electricity markets and in lessening carbon dioxide emission and
other environmental impacts. The layered structure of high temperature
superconductor (HTS) materials result in many dramatic effects in their physical
properties especially their current carrying capability, or critical current
density, Jc, which is a critical parameter for numerous applications in
electrical devices and systems. Raising Jc has been the focus of world-wide
efforts in the field of applied superconductivity during the past two decades.
In particular, a long-standing question is whether the theoretical depairing
limit (Jd) can be reached in practical HTS conductors through self-assembly of
nanostructures designed to pin the magnetic vortices. Recent advances in
nanoscience have provided fresh opportunities in engineering the microstructures
of HTS materials. The approach undertaken in this project of designing physical
properties via controlling the charge carriers at the nanoscale represents a
leap forward from the traditionally empirical method in which the HTS materials
have been developed without a precise guidance of fundamental physics. Such
research also provides the forefront of education for the next generation in the
fields of nanoscience and material science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
DETAILS: Controlling microstructure with nanoscale precision has been a major
challenge in material research of HTS and other technologically interesting
materials due to the difficulties in processing controllably at nanoscale, and
the lack of understanding of the physics at such a scale. To address this
challenge, several novel processes for strain engineering at the nanoscale have
been developed in PI?s group through prior NSF support. In particular,
theoretical modeling and numerical simulation have been coherently integrated
into this research to provide insights and guidance in nanostructure
manipulation and fabrication. The complement of theory and experiment continues
in this project provides an efficient approach in understanding the growth
mechanism of nanostructures of HTS. Such an understanding is ubiquitous to
ultimately achieve the capability to manipulate the nanostructure properties.
This research divides into three themes. Theme 1 focuses on investigation of the
microscopic growth mechanisms (nucleation, initiation, evolution, etc.) of
nanostructures such as aligned arrays of nanotubes and nanorods in HTS YBa2Cu3O7
(YBCO) films. Theme 2 continues focuses on developing theoretical models and
numerical simulations to provide insight into the microscopic growth mechanism
of nanostructures in YBCO. Extending the modeling and simulation to cover a
large range of HTS materials and doping impurities helps explain experimental
observations and assists in fabricating nanostructures with specific physical
properties. Theme 3 explores superconductivity in graphene. The microscopic
transport behavior of massless 2D Dirac fermions in the superconducting state
will be studied for a superconductor-graphene-superconductor structure, e.g.,
Nb-graphene-Nb Josephson junctions. Experimental investigation of the
superconductivity in graphene is still in its infancy despite of many exciting
theoretical studies. This Nb-graphene-Nb hybrid system may provide a unique
system for exploring the physics of the relativistic Josephson effect.