* 1105031
* Relating Structure and Electrostatic Potentials in Organic Semiconductor Thin Films
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2014
* Greg Haugstad, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Michael J. Scott
* 08/31/2014
* USD 409,889.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY: In this renewal proposal to the Solid State and Materials
Chemistry Program, in the NSF Division of Materials Research, the Principal
Investigators (PIs) will continue their experimental efforts to uncover
fundamental microstructure-property relationships in organic semiconductors. In
particular, the goal is to probe the connection between film structure and
surface electrostatic potential. Surface potentials impact charge transport at
interfaces and thus are directly relevant to the performance of organic
electronic devices. For example, in a thin film transistor (TFT) the surface
potential at the organic semiconductor/insulator interface determines the charge
concentration, and the gradient in the surface potential determines the
direction of carrier flow. Surface potentials reflect many factors associated
with surfaces (or interfaces) including crystal structures, electronic energy
levels, defects, dipoles, fixed charges, contaminants, and illumination
conditions. The PIs will use high resolution Electric Force Microscopy (EFM) and
Kelvin Probe Force Microscopy (KFM) to measure and map surface potentials in
organic semiconductor films, and to correlate surface potential domains and
gradients with structural features. The work is designed to address a number of
questions including: How do epitaxial growth modes and grain morphologies in
organic semiconductor films impact surface potentials? Where do trapped charges
reside in organic semiconductors and can the trapping zones be correlated with
surface potential peaks or valleys? A principal outcome of this work will be
significantly improved understanding of electrostatic complexity in organic
semiconductor films and interfaces and correlation of this complexity with
microstructure. Films and interfaces that are central to the operation of OTFTs
and organic solar cells will be investigated, so that the relevance of the
results will be immediately apparent to the organic electronics research
community. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY: Organic semiconductors
are an important class of thin film electronic materials that have many
attractive properties including efficient luminescence, liquid phase
processability, and compatibility with plastic substrates; these advantages are
driving new applications ranging from flexible, rugged e-readers and smart cards
to low cost solar cells. Organic light emitting diodes (OLEDs), in particular,
have attained performance suitable for display technologies and are undergoing
commercialization, and there are also exciting prospects for organic
semiconductors in biosensors and printed electronics. Importantly, the
development of a mature organic semiconductor technology hinges on thorough
understanding of structure-processing-performance relationships. The overarching
goal of this proposal is to advance the materials science of organic
semiconductors by uncovering fundamental microstructure-property correlations in
model organic semiconductor systems. The work will be carried out by two
University of Minnesota faculty researchers in collaboration with PhD students.
Thus, a principal broader impact will be graduate level training of students in
materials science and engineering. In addition, the PIs will provide summer
research experiences for one Minneapolis area high school student and one
minority undergraduate each summer over the course of the award. The minority
undergraduate will be selected from a pool of science and engineering sophomores
and juniors at the University of Texas Pan American (UTPA), a largely Hispanic
serving institution. For student selection, the PIs will be assisted by a UTPA
faculty member who has performed summer research previously at Minnesota. The
goal will be to excite these young potential scientists about the opportunities
in materials research, while providing them real hands-on technical training.
The PIs will also continue to provide demonstrations of scanning probe
techniques to K-12 students, as they have done under their previous award.