* 1105558
* Charge transport through single redox molecules and water bridges
* MPS,CHE
* 08/15/2011,07/31/2015
* Nongjian Tao, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Colby Foss
* 07/31/2015
* USD 420,000.00

This project will be supported by the Chemical Structure, Dynamics, and
Mechanisms Program (CSDM) and the Macromolecular, Supramolecular and
Nanochemistry Program (MSN) of the Division of Chemistry. In this study,
Professor Nongjian Tao and his research group at Arizona State University will
develop single molecule break-junction techniques to study electronic
conductance through polyaromatic hydrocarbon molecules and molecular bridge
structures formed from water. Studying electron transport in single molecules is
a necessary step towards the ultimate goal of building electronic devices based
on single molecules, and it is also critical for a better understanding of many
chemical and biological processes, such as electrochemical reactions,
respiration and bioenergetics. Important questions that this project will
address include: What is the most efficient electron transport via a single
molecule? What are the factors that limit us from achieving the most efficient
electron transport? How can one understand and overcome these limiting factors,
thus controlling the charge transport efficiency? In order to have a direct
impact on electron transfer phenomena in biological and electrochemical systems,
one must understand the role of water molecules in electron transport. This
project will thus address also questions regarding water molecules: Is it
possible to directly measure the formation of hydrogen-bonded networks of water
molecules between two electrodes? If so, what are the conductivities of
different hydrogen-bonded networks of water bridges? Is there quantum
interference between different electron transport pathways associated with the
networks? &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;In order to provide students with
interdisciplinary and international training experience, this project will
leverage several on-campus undergraduate and graduate research programs to
recruit and train students from chemistry and other programs; host international
students and collaborate with international researchers; and start a community
outreach program via working with local public schools that have large minority
enrollments.