* 1105380
* RUI: Quantum Criticality, Frustrated Magnetism and Disorder
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2011,06/30/2016
* Oscar Bernal, California State L A University Auxiliary Services Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Tomasz Durakiewicz
* 06/30/2016
* USD 285,000.00

TECHNICAL ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;The project is aimed at understanding phase
transformations and the appearance of new phases of matter in condensed matter
systems. Of particular interest to this project is the study of quantum
criticality, a type of material behavior that indicates that a phase
transformation is occurring at the absolute zero of temperature. The project
also seeks to understand novel states of frustrated magnetic materials such as
"spin liquids" and non-magnetic "hidden order" phases. The study of the effects
of magnetic disordered in the behavior of newly synthesized metallic glasses is
the third focal point of this project. The techniques used in the project to
study these "strongly correlated" materials are mainly nuclear magnetic
resonance (NMR), and muon spin rotation (muSR). Examples of materials that will
be studied are: Yb3Pt4 (quantum criticality), Pr2Zr2O7 and Pr2Ir2O7 (frustrated
magnetism), and bulk metallic glasses doped with Gd (disordered magnetic
states). The project experiments will be carried out with the participation of
CSULA students, both locally and at user facilities in Canada and the USA. A
collaboration with CSULA Physics Department's University Preparatory Program
(UPP) will be implemented to engage UPP students in summer research internships.
Science field trips and general physics laboratory exercises for inner city high
school students will be carried out in this collaboration to provide minority
students with hands-on experiences. The project will facilitate the
participation in research and science fairs of motivated students from
neighboring Alhambra High School.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NON-TECHNICAL
ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;The project is aimed at understanding phase transformations
and the appearance of new phases of matter in novel solids and fluids.
Interesting new states of matter derive from the collective behavior of strongly
interacting atomic particles in the interior of a suitable material. The project
studies the behavior of these materials at very low temperatures. The three main
phenomena to study go by the names of "quantum criticality," "frustrated
magnetism," and "magnetic disorder." The techniques used in the project to study
these "strongly correlated" materials will be mainly nuclear magnetic resonance
(NMR) and muon spin rotation (muSR). Understanding these phenomena is of
fundamental importance for the development of new and improved materials for
potential applications in the future. The project activities will be carried out
with the participation of CSULA students, both locally and at user facilities in
Canada and the USA. A collaboration with CSULA Physics Department's University
Preparatory Program (UPP) will be implemented to engage UPP students in summer
research internships. Science field trips for inner city high school students
will be carried out in this collaboration to increase awareness of science and
technology, while providing minority students with hands-on experiences.
Motivated students from neighboring Alhambra High School will participate in
research and the project will promote their involvement in science fairs at
state and national levels.