* 1105553
* RUI:  Measurement of Density of States of (Ga,Mn)As and Diffusion of Photoinduced Order by Ultrafast Transient-Grating Spectroscopy
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2011,07/31/2015
* Christopher Weber, Santa Clara University
* Standard Grant
* Tomasz Durakiewicz
* 07/31/2015
* USD 190,000.00

****Technical Abstract****&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;(Ga,Mn)As is the best-studied of
the III-V dilute magnetic semiconductors (DMS). These materials offer possible
spintronic applications through the optical and electrical control of their
magnetic properties, but practical application awaits the design of new
materials with Curie temperature above room temperature. The Einstein relation
allows one to find the density of states at the Fermi level (DOS) based on
measurements of the resistivity and the hole diffusion coefficient, independent
of hole density. This project will use ultrafast optics to measure the hole
diffusion coefficient, and thereby determine the DOS. The experiment will apply
transient-grating spectroscopy to (Ga,Mn)As, thus measuring the spin diffusion
and the ambipolar diffusion; these two in turn, give the hole diffusion. These
measurements could distinguish between the widely supported valence-band and
impurity-band pictures of holes in (Ga,Mn)As. Since the holes mediate magnetic
exchange, the debate over their properties is fundamental to understanding
DMS's, and improved understanding could aid the development of new DMS
materials. Undergraduate students will participate in every part of the project.
They will learn about ultrafast lasers, optical alignment, data analysis,
magnetism, semiconductor physics, and spectroscopy. The experience will prepare
them for a wide variety of careers and graduate
programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;****Non-Technical
Abstract****&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The dilute magnetic semiconductors (DMS's)
become magnetic when they are "doped" with small quantities of impurities.
Magnetic semiconductors could be used in many proposed devices, including
nonvolatile transistors that would dramatically reduce computers' power
consumption, but practical use will require the design of new DMS materials that
operate at room temperature, rather than the subzero temperatures of current
materials. The search for such materials has suffered from a lack of theoretical
understanding of how a DMS becomes magnetic. GaMnAs is an archetypal DMS, but
there is sharp disagreement over the electronic processes that make it magnetic,
particularly over how mobile the "holes" are that control its magnetism. This
project will use ultrafast lasers, with pulses shorter than one ten-trillionth
of a second, to measure the holes' mobility, providing an improved understanding
of DMS's. The project will also investigate a related phenomenon, as yet poorly
understood, in which exposure to light strengthens the magnetism of GaMnAs.
Undergraduate students will participate in every part of the project,
contributing to experimental progress and being trained in experimental physics.
They will learn to use ultrafast lasers, get very good at optical alignment, and
become familiar with magnetism, semiconductor physics, and spectroscopy. Because
of the scientific and industrial relevance of these topics, and the rapid growth
of ultrafast technology, the students will be prepared for a wide variety of
careers and graduate programs.