* 1105485
* First principles simulations of battery materials
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2015
* Natalie Holzwarth, Wake Forest University
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 08/31/2015
* USD 300,000.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Division of Materials Research and
the Office of Cyberinfrastructure contribute funds to this award. It supports
research, software development, and education in materials modeling, with an
emphasis on the study of energy storage materials. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;One of
the goals of this work is to use state-of-the-art first principles simulation
methods to study several solid electrolyte materials. While the use of solid
electrolytes in commercial applications is currently limited, they will
undoubtedly be adopted for some energy storage applications in the near future,
due their desirable properties such as stability, durability, and safety
advantages. The simulations in this study will be performed on materials
composed of Li-P-O-N, Li-P-S, and their alloys in order to develop a complete
picture of what local structures and stoichiometries can optimize ionic
conductivity while still maintaining structural and chemical stability.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The second goal of this work is to improve the physical
representation of electron interactions within various simulation techniques,
which is especially important for materials containing localized orbitals, such
as those typically found in cathode materials. This effort will be aimed at
developing accurate and efficient implementations of orbital-dependent
functional treatments of the exchange-correlation interactions in electronic
structure codes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The training of students for carrying out
scientific research in general and for performing computational materials
research in particular is an important part of the educational component of this
project. Parts of the project are accessible to graduate as well as
undergraduate students at a broad range of levels. This aspect will help in
attracting new students to the field of computational materials science, in
particular, minority students from the nearby Winston-Salem State University.
Furthermore, the project is associated with several local and international
collaborations that will extend its impact. This includes collaborations with
several experimental groups at Wake Forest University and abroad, as well as
with several other computational groups to extend simulation capabilities and to
facilitate code development and dissemination.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NONTECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Division of Materials Research and the Office
of Cyberinfrastructure contribute funds to this award. It supports research,
software development, and education in materials modeling, with an emphasis on
the study of energy storage materials. The development of energy storage
technologies is one of the critical elements of a sustainable energy economy. In
particular, advances in battery capacity, safety, and stability are needed to
meet the projected energy storage needs. Basic research on materials which
comprise energy storage devices, including a concerted effort in computer
modeling, is key to achieving this goal. One of the goals of this work is to use
state-of-the-art parameter-free simulation methods that are based on fundamental
quantum mechanical principles to study several solid electrolyte materials. The
simulations in this study will be performed on materials composed of lithium,
phosphorous, oxygen, nitrogen, and sulfur to develop a complete picture of what
types of arrangements and compositions can optimize conductivity while still
maintaining structural and chemical stability. The second goal of this work is
geared toward software development and computational tool building, via
improving the physical representation of electron interactions within various
simulation techniques for energy storage materials. This effort will be aimed at
developing accurate and efficient implementations of electron interactions in
various electronic structure codes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The training of
students for carrying out scientific research in general and for performing
computational materials research in particular is an important part of the
educational component of this project. Parts of the project are accessible to
graduate as well as undergraduate students at a broad range of levels. This
aspect will help in attracting new students to the field of computational
materials science, in particular, minority students from the nearby Winston-
Salem State University. Furthermore, the project is associated with several
local and international collaborations that will extend its impact. This
includes collaborations with several experimental groups at Wake Forest
University and abroad, as well as with several other computational groups to
extend simulation capabilities and to facilitate code development and
dissemination.