* 1105455
* Shaping Colloids for Self Assembly
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2014
* David Pine, New York University
* Continuing Grant
* Paul Sokol
* 08/31/2014
* USD 390,000.00

Technical Abstract This project will explore and develop the role of particle
shape in the self assembly of colloids. Until recently, the basic shapes used in
colloidal self assembly have been limited to spheres and rods, which has limited
colloidal structures to fcc, bcc, and a few simple variants. The inability to
achieve the same richness of structures observed for atomic and molecular
crystals in colloidal crystals has been brought into sharp relief by the
challenge of making photonic colloidal crystals with the diamond or similar
symmetries, as such crystals should exhibit full photonic band gaps. This
project will focus on developing two new colloidal systems: (1) lock-and-key
colloids and (2) cubic colloids. Both sets of colloids represent a significant
departure from existing colloids and lead to new structures and new kinds of
phase transitions. The aim is to explore the various kinds of structures that
can be made using these new building blocks and to develop models that capture
the basic physics controlling their formation. The depletion interaction will be
used as the primary means of controlling the strength and range of the
interaction. The anisotropic shapes of the particles will be exploited to
generate directional and specific interactions, both of which are relatively new
to colloidal science. A related goal is to develop mechanisms for precise
control of the relative placement of colloids made from disparate materials,
thus increasing their potential for making useful new materials, including
photonic crystals, catalysts, and solar cells. The research will support the
education of a PhD student in interdisciplinary science involving physics,
chemistry, and materials science. Non-technical Abstract A central goal of 21st
century materials science is to fabricate nanomaterials from the "bottom up"
rather than relying on the traditional the "top down" approach. Thus, instead of
imprinting small structures on large objects, as is typically done in top-down
approaches for making computer chips, the idea is to make nanoscale components
that assemble themselves from the bottom up into complex useful materials. In
this bottom up approach, the small nanoscale components carry with them the
information required for them to assemble into the desired structures. This
project will explore strategies for bottom-up self-assembly of nanoscale objects
using particle shape as the mechanism by which particles recognize each other
and fit into a larger structural design, much as jigsaw puzzle pieces fit
together to form a large picture. The challenge is two-fold in that new
techniques to make particles with complex shapes will be developed along with
design schemes for directing their assembly. These methods should be useful in
developing new materials for optical switching and circuitry as well as for
solar cells. This project will support the education of a graduate student in
these advance techniques for careers in advanced science and technology.