* 1105541
* Nucleation and Growth of Epitaxial Graphene Formed by Physical Vapor Deposition
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2015
* Oscar Dubon, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* Z.  Ying
* 08/31/2015
* USD 341,767.00

Technical: This project is on the growth and properties of monolayer graphene
and graphene based heterostructures formed by solid-source molecular beam
epitaxy (MBE). The well-controlled carbon deposition rates made possible by MBE
enable the growth of films under a wide range of kinetic conditions while
removing effects related to carbon precursor chemistry, which exist naturally in
the commonly used chemical vapor deposition processes. The research is inspired
by recent studies of graphene grown on copper foils, which show graphene island
nucleation as the ultimate bottleneck to achieving pristine graphene in this
system. The project, building on these results, investigates the conditions that
lead to controlled graphene nucleation and probes the critical interactions
between graphene edge atoms and substrate adatoms, which play a key role in
island evolution. Experiments of graphene growth on different substrates by low-
energy electron microscopy is expected to provide fundamental insight into the
roles of substrate texture, lattice mismatch, substrate stepflow, and
interfacial interactions. In addition, MBE will be used to form graphene-
dielectric bilayers under ultrahigh vacuum conditions, which will be studied
further via electrical, structural and optical
measurements.&lt;br/&gt;Nontechnical: The project addresses basic research
issues in a topical area of materials science with high technological relevance.
The application of molecular beam epitaxy to graphene growth brings the
extensive capabilities of this advanced deposition technique into the fold of
graphene science and technology. If the project is successful, new
functionalities and enhanced properties can emerge through the formation of
pristine interfaces between graphene and other materials. An education plan is
integrated with the research and brings together emerging scholars from across
different levels of higher education, community college to graduate school, for
the study of graphene. Outreach project activities center on the integration of
original research concepts into summer experiences for undergraduates and
community college students from traditionally underrepresented groups in science
and engineering. Summer investigations on graphene will serve as test beds for
lab instructional modules that will be implemented in a senior-level, capstone
laboratory course.