* 1105296
* Light-Induced NO Release from Zeolite-Nitrosyl Composites: A New Biomaterial for the Prevention of Wound Infections
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2016
* Scott Oliver, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Continuing Grant
* Joseph A. Akkara
* 08/31/2016
* USD 390,000.00

This award by the Biomaterials Program of the Division of Materials Research to
the University of California Santa Cruz supports the collaborative research
efforts in developing a novel zeolite-based nitric oxide (NO) delivery platform
to combat and prevent infections arising from various drug-resistant pathogens.
Several photoactive NO complexes of metals (such as Mn, Fe and Ru) developed in
the PIs' laboratory will be first loaded into nano/mesoporous aluminosilicates
selected on the basis of their pore size and shape. The research approach will
be guided by computer-aided design to better fit the NO-complexes into the
pores, and their effective caging will be determined by powder X-ray
diffraction, infrared spectroscopy, scanning electron microscopy and energy
dispersive elemental mapping. The NO release from these composites will then be
determined by various techniques employing NO-sensitive electrodes. The effects
of the photoreleased NO from the composites on various bacterial colonies will
be carefully monitored to determine the dose effects by colony-counting
techniques and microscopy. Finally, different bandage material prototypes will
be developed by impregnating mats of biocompatible materials such as
carboxymethyl cellulose with the zeolite-nitrosyl powders. The advantages of
these designed NO-delivery biomaterials will include: a) site-selective NO
delivery to biological targets upon demand via light-triggering; b) entrapment
of the photoproducts within the cavities of the biocompatible zeolite host thus
avoiding their side-effects; and c) effective eradication of bacterial loads of
various drug-resistant strains (since pathogens seldom exhibit resistance to NO
as the antibiotic). Close interaction of the two PIs and the involvement of
their graduate and undergraduate students in the project are expected to lead in
interdisciplinary training at the interface of biology and materials chemistry.
Both PI groups regularly bring in underrepresented minority students as well as
Univ. California-bound community college minority students in science to work in
their laboratories, and these activities are expected to continue with this
project.

The emergence of Staph-related infections in the surgical units of hospitals
and complications due to bacterial fouling of implants and prosthetics in
patients have reached an alarming level, demanding new antimicrobial platforms
with greater efficiency. Although the strong antimicrobial effects of nitric
oxide (NO) have been established, delivery of high fluxes of NO to a biological
target (such as an infected wound) has not been possible due to lack of delivery
platforms that work upon demand. Recently, several photoactive NO complexes of
metals (metal nitrosyls) have been synthesized in the PI?s laboratory. Nitrosyl
complexes loaded into the nanopores of the silica-base mineral zeolites would be
novel NO-delivery systems to be triggered with low-power visible light. Such
materials could be applied either directly as powders or within bandage
materials on infected sites and the bacterial loads could be reduced with
photoreleased NO (from the nitrosyls) under the control of light. The proposed
zeolite-nitrosyl composites will therefore be a new treatment platform,
especially designed for antibiotic-resistant bacteria for which no other
treatments are currently available. Broader impacts with respect to teaching,
training and outreach programs of this project are in interdisciplinary training
of a large number of graduate and undergraduate students at the interface of
biology and materials research. The PIs have a strong track record in recruiting
summer students through different funded programs such as NSF REU/SURF, NIH
ACCESS and others that promote participation of students from underrepresented
groups. The dissemination plan provides details for publication in peer reviewed
journals, meeting presentations and other channels.