* 1105272
* Probing Conformational Transition Pathways of Protein-DNA  Complexes by Polarization-Modulated Fourier Imaging  Correlation Spectroscopy (PM-FICS)
* MPS,CHE
* 12/01/2010,11/30/2013
* Andrew Marcus, University of Oregon Eugene
* Standard Grant
* Colby Foss
* 11/30/2013
* USD 470,000.00

This award in the Chemistry of Life Processes (CLP) program supports work by
Professor Andrew H. Marcus at the University of Oregon to carry out fundamental
studies on the molecular mechanisms of DNA polymerase and helicase, two protein-
DNA complexes that are essential elements of the biological processes that enact
and regulate gene expression. Pairs of fluorescent nucleic acid base analogues
are substituted for native nucleotides at the forks and junctions of double
stranded and primer-template DNA. Polarized fluorescence fluctuation
measurements of the naked DNA constructs will reveal information about the
relative dipole angle of the base analogue sites, and their relative motions on
microsecond to sub-second time scales. Subsequent experiments will be carried
out on protein-DNA complexes to directly probe the mechanics of the protein
enzymatic sites during key steps of the replication process. These studies will
provide detailed information about the transition state pathways of DNA
synthesis, and investigate the possible existence of intermediate states
involved in replication fidelity. A significant component of the research
involves active recruitment and mentoring of students from under-represented
areas into the undergraduate and graduate training programs.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;These studies will add to our basic understanding of the
dynamic processes whereby the macromolecular machines of gene expression operate
in performing their biological functions. Potential benefits range from an
improved understanding of the molecular level interface between chemical and
biological behavior, to new general insights about the underlying principles of
nano-machines.