* 1105871
* Gromov-Witten invariants and mirror symmetry
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2011,06/30/2014
* Mark Gross, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 06/30/2014
* USD 243,000.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Award: DMS-1105871&lt;br/&gt;Principal
Investigator: Mark Gross&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The principal investigator plans
to study the geometry of mirror&lt;br/&gt;symmetry for Calabi-Yau manifolds.
This will be done from the&lt;br/&gt;perspective of a program developed jointly
with B. Siebert, which&lt;br/&gt;"tropicalizes" Calabi-Yau manifolds, using an
algebro-geometric&lt;br/&gt;version of the Strominger-Yau-Zaslow conjecture. In
particular,&lt;br/&gt;the principal investigator proposes to resolve a number of
the&lt;br/&gt;remaining key steps of this program; these steps should be
the&lt;br/&gt;component pieces of a complete conceptual proof of
mirror&lt;br/&gt;symmetry at genus zero. These steps include a general
gluing&lt;br/&gt;formula for the theory of logarithmic Gromov-Witten
invariants&lt;br/&gt;and a generalization of the tropical vertex of the
PI,&lt;br/&gt;Pandharipande and Siebert to all dimensions. In addition,
the&lt;br/&gt;program with Siebert has led to the construction of
canonical&lt;br/&gt;theta functions for lines bundles on (degenerating families)
of&lt;br/&gt;Calabi-Yau manifolds. The existence of such theta functions
is&lt;br/&gt;expected to have various applications, such as
geometric&lt;br/&gt;compactifications of the moduli space of K3 surfaces
(being&lt;br/&gt;pursued with P. Hacking and S. Keel) and a tropical approach
to&lt;br/&gt;homological mirror symmetry (being pursued with Siebert
and&lt;br/&gt;M. Abouzaid).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The work described in this
proposal lies at the intersection of&lt;br/&gt;string theory and geometry.
String theory replaces the&lt;br/&gt;traditional notion of the point particle
with a small loop of&lt;br/&gt;string, moving through space-time. To make string
theory&lt;br/&gt;compatible with quantum mechanics, space-time must
be&lt;br/&gt;ten-dimensional. Since space-time appears four-dimensional,
one&lt;br/&gt;expects six of these dimensions to be a very small "curled
up"&lt;br/&gt;geometric object. These geometric objects are called Calabi-
Yau&lt;br/&gt;manifolds. In the early 1990s, string theorists proposed
a&lt;br/&gt;remarkable association between completely different Calabi-
Yau&lt;br/&gt;manifolds: certain calculations extremely difficult to perform
on&lt;br/&gt;one Calabi-Yau manifold could be completed by
performing&lt;br/&gt;completely different, and much easier, calculations on
a&lt;br/&gt;different Calabi-Yau manifold. This discovery was known as
mirror&lt;br/&gt;symmetry. Since this time, many geometers have been trying
to&lt;br/&gt;understand the mathematics behind this
miraculous&lt;br/&gt;observation. New insights and explanations for this
phenomenon&lt;br/&gt;are developing rapidly, and these insights are leading to
new&lt;br/&gt;approaches to old problems in algebraic geometry. The
proposed&lt;br/&gt;work aims to both further understanding of mirror symmetry
and&lt;br/&gt;apply this understanding to produce new developments in
algebraic&lt;br/&gt;geometry.