* 1105437
* Carrier, Phonon and THz Dynamics in Narrow Gap and Carbon Based Nanostructures
* MPS,DMR
* 09/15/2011,08/31/2015
* Christopher Stanton, University of Florida
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 08/31/2015
* USD 300,000.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY

This award supports integrated research, education and outreach activities in
theoretical condensed matter physics. The goal of this project is to study and
model: 1) carrier-carrier, 2) carrier-phonon and 3) carrier-photon interactions
in narrow gap compound semiconductor heterostructures such as indium
antimonide/aluminum indium antimonide quantum wells and carbon based
nanostructures. These materials are promising for our next generation of high
speed transistors and detectors. Although seemingly very different, they share
common features, 1) an energy-wavevector relationship that is linear for large
wavevector, and 2) high room temperature mobilities.

This project involves calculating and modeling the time-dependent optical and
transport properties of semiconductor nanostructures. Foci include:

1.) Single-walled carbon nanotubes and graphene. While the unusual DC transport
properties of these materials have been previously studied, their dynamical
properties are proving to be equally interesting. Coherent phonons in carbon
nanotubes, graphene and graphene nanoribbons will be modeled.

2.) Narrow gap InSb heterostructures. With their small effective masses and
large g-factors, these materials are excellent candidates for fast transistors
or novel spintronic devices. The time-dependent optical properties of these
materials will be calculated and modeled to gain information about the
electronic and magnetic states and transport properties. Close coupling between
theory and experiment will provide an understanding of the carrier, spin, and
phonon dynamics.

Graduate students on this project will be trained in forefront research topics
in the nanosciences including the fields of semiconductor physics, quantum
optics, nanotube and nanoribbon physics, and transport theory. The students will
get a chance to participate and interact with researchers both in the U.S. and
also internationally. Results of their work will help determine which materials
are optimal for future high speed nano-electronic devices and detectors.

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY

This award integrates research, education and outreach in theoretical condensed
matter physics. The motivation of the project is to study and understand
properties of two new classes of nanostructured materials that are promising
materials for the next generation of high speed transistors, and optical sources
and detectors. These materials are: 1.) structures made of carbon that resemble
ribbons or tubes of nanoscale dimensions - some ten thousand times smaller than
the width of a human hair - called carbon nanotubes and carbon nanoribbons, 2.)
graphene which is a single layer of carbon atoms which resembles chickenwire on
the nanoscale with carbon atoms arranged at the vertices, and 3.) nanoscale
structures made of a compound composed of elements indium and antimony, called
indium antimonide.

While these materials at first seem may seem very different, they share several
common properties. In particular, their electronic properties are very similar
and at room temperature, electrons in graphene and indium antimonide
nanostructures can move faster and more easily than electrons in almost any
other material including silicon and gallium arsenide. This offers hope that
transistors based on these two materials may one day replace transistors based
on silicon technology, currently used in today's computers.

The PI will investigate how electrons in carbon and indium antimonide
nanostructures interact and scatter with 1.) other electrons, 2.) atoms that are
moving in the nanostructures and 3.) electromagnetic radiation. The interaction
with electromagnetic radiation is particularly intriguing since results suggest
that these materials might be used to generate and detect electromagnetic
radiation in the tera Hertz part of the spectrum which lies between microwaves
and infrared light. Tera Hertz radiation is non-ionizing; one day sources of
this radiation may replace X-rays in medical imaging with fewer harmful side
effects.

Graduate students on this project will be trained in forefront research topics
in the nanosciences including the fields of semiconductor physics, quantum
optics, nanotube and nanoribbon physics, and transport theory. The students will
get a chance to participate and interact with researchers both in the U.S. and
also internationally. Results of their work will help determine which materials
are optimal for future high speed nano-electronic devices and detectors.