* 1105536
* Aspects of Bakry-Emery Ricci Curvature
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2011,06/30/2015
* Guofang Wei, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 06/30/2015
* USD 209,000.00

Abstract

Award: DMS-1105536 Principal Investigator: Guofang Wei

This proposal studies the geometry and topology of smooth metric measure spaces
with Bakry-Emery Ricci curvature bounded from below and quasi-Einstein metrics.
The Bakry-Emery Ricci curvature is an important generalization of Ricci
curvature for smooth metric measure space, which occurs naturally as the
collapsed measured Gromov-Haudorff limit. Furthermore, the Bakry-Emery Ricci
curvature plays important roles in a variety of topics such as the study of
Ricci soliton, warped Einstein metric, diffusion process, logrithmic Sobolev
inequality, as well as in the extension of Ricci curvature lower bound for
metric measure space. The principal investigator will study the geometry of
Ricci solitons; relation between comparison geometry and Ricci flow and
obtaining a combined estimate for the first eigenvalue for Ricci positive and
nonnegative lower bound. The PI will also study the structures of the
fundamental groups for manifolds with lower integral Ricci curvature bound as
well as minimal volume of hyperbolic orbifolds.

Bakry-Emery Ricci curvature and Ricci soliton play a very important role in
Ricci flow, which led to the solution of Poincare conjecture. Quasi-Einstein
metrics is are important both in mathematics and physics. Smooth metric measure
space is also related to optimal transport, information geometry, discrete
geometry. The proposed activities would have impact on all these directions. The
fundamental group is the most fundamental (as the name implies) topological
information. Its understanding will greatly advance the study of the effect of
curvature bounds on the global topology of Riemannian manifolds, therefore will
be helpful in answering questions about the shape of the universe.