* 1105878
* Large Scale Synthesis of Near-Monodisperse Gold Nanorods and their Assembly into 3D Anisotropic Single Crystals
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2011,07/31/2018
* Anatoly Kolomeisky, William Marsh Rice University
* Continuing Grant
* Catherine Oertel
* 07/31/2018
* USD 648,000.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY &lt;br/&gt;This research project, supported by the Solid State
and Materials Chemistry (SSMC) Program in the Division of Materials Research,
National Science Foundation aims to study kinetically-controlled syntheses of
anisotropic gold nanostructures and their colloidal crystallization in aqueous
media. While numerous 3D crystals of spherical particles are known, there are no
analogous systems composed of rod-like building blocks. This is because nearly
all existing syntheses of nanorods cannot control their length, which often
makes them unsuitable for long range 3D crystallization. Seed-mediated synthesis
of gold nanorods is a rare example of the reaction producing rods that are
fairly well-defined in terms of their length. However, this method is currently
non-scalable and cannot offer a sufficient quantity of nanorods to conduct a
comprehensive study of their crystallization. This project will develop a route
that can scale the synthesis up to four orders of magnitude. The key of the
proposed approach is based on uniform amplification of preformed nanorods by
reducing residual gold ions on their surface. Preliminary findings show that
this goal can be achieved if the rate of reduction is very low, which allows for
complete suppression of random nucleation events. Once the large quantities of
near-monodisperse nanorods are produced, their crystallization into 3D single
crystals will be systematically studied. The project will determine the role of
various parameters such as size distribution and purity of rods, their
interaction with the underlying substrates, and the rate of solvent evaporation.
Of particular importance will be the role of CTAB surfactant that must be
present in solution during crystallization. When the best combination of
structural and physical variables is identified, periodic arrays of colloidal
single crystals will be assembled on lithographically patterned substrates.
Measurements of optical, electrical, and mechanical properties of crystals along
and perpendicular to the axes of nanorods will be performed in order to assess
their direction-dependent vectorial nature.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NON-TECHNICAL
SUMMARY &lt;br/&gt;Significant interest in gold nanoparticles with controlled
shapes has grown dramatically in the past decade. However, they are often too
difficult to make and/or purify. The current commercial price of gold nanorods
is more than 7,000 times the price of bulk gold. Therefore, a development of
more efficient large-scale synthesis will resolve the issue of their
accessibility, which is the main bottleneck of their real-life applications in
anticancer therapy, military devices, and invisible cloak technology. Better
understanding of mechanisms that govern the assembly of non-spherical particles
into large crystals will offer novel types of nanomaterials with direction-
dependent properties. The new scientific knowledge generated in the course of
this project will be widely disseminated via information sharing techniques and
Web2.0 communications. Video materials containing a detailed demonstration of
the synthesis of gold nanorods and real-time imaging of 3D crystals by optical
and electron microscopy will be posted on the YouTube and Rice University web
sites. Of particular importance will be the interactions with science teachers
from local middle schools that have a large population of minority students. The
PI and his graduate students will use their extensive experience with molecular
graphics for 3D visualization of nanostructures and colloidal assemblies in
order to create a unique type of activity in Houston public schools that
currently collaborate with Rice University. In addition, an exciting outreach
activity is planned at the intersection of science and art, which will involve
collaborative interactions with the Museum of Fine Arts, Houston.