* 1105819
* Teachers Domain: Indigenous Perspectives on Climate Change in the Pacific Region
* GEO,GEO
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2013
* Theodore Sicker, WGBH Educational Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Jill L. Karsten
* 08/31/2013
* USD 198,539.00

The WGBH Educational Foundation is collaborating with Pacific Resources for
Education and Learning (PREL) and the new Pacific Islands Climate Change
Education Partnership (PCEP) to produce a digital library collection of purpose-
built media resources presenting indigenous perspectives on climate change and
related threats to the eco-system throughout the Pacific Island region (USAPI).
Building upon findings from WGBH's Engaging Alaska Natives in the Geosciences
project, an OEDG-supported Track 2 initiative, this new Track 1 project applies
production strategies developed with indigenous populations in Alaska to a vast
geographic region facing a related set of environmental challenges. The
affiliation with PCEP enables informed, coordinated dissemination of these
resources to teachers, students, and other educators throughout the region's
multiple jurisdictions. Addressing such climate change-induced effects as sea-
level rise, coastal erosion, coral reef bleaching, ocean acidification, and
contamination of freshwater resources, topical foci is determined with the input
of partner organizations and an Advisory Board of scientists and educators.
Particular attention is being paid to indigenous perspectives on these impacts
and presenting traditional knowledge and value systems as complements to the
analyses of Western science. The goal is not only to inform the general public,
but also to inspire local students and teachers to engage actively in mitigating
the effects of climate change and to consider advanced study and possible
careers in related fields, as these challenges have such direct and immediate
impact on their lives. Deliverables include a collection of media resources
produced by, with, and/or about indigenous peoples across the USAPI (including
Hawaii, American Samoa, the Micronesian archipelago and the Mariana Islands),
each fully contextualized for presentation on the PBS LearningMedia platform,
the successor to WGBH's Teachers' Domain web site used for dissemination in the
earlier Alaska project.