* 1105148
* Workshop proposal: Recovering Uncompromised Samples of Aquifer Sands with In-Situ Groundwater from up to 300-m Depth in South and Southeast Asia
* GEO,EAR
* 01/15/2011,12/31/2011
* Alexander van Geen, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Laura Toran
* 12/31/2011
* USD 20,000.00

Groundwater aquifers are the main source of drinking water for about 2 billion
people worldwide. There is, however, growing public health concern about chronic
exposure to natural, geogenic contaminants that can be released from
uncontaminated sediment to groundwater. Natural constituents of untreated
groundwater currently recognized to be of significant health concern include
fluoride, manganese, and particularly arsenic in South and Southeast Asia. The
groundwater and sediment properties that regulate the release of these
potentially toxic constituents are often highly variable both vertically and
laterally. This high degree of spatial variability combined with a lack of
technology for sampling groundwater and aquifer sands simultaneously without
exposure to drilling fluid or atmospheric oxygen are a key reason that
contributing biogeochemical and hydrological factors have been difficult to
isolate. A promising avenue for overcoming this limitation is the addition of an
in situ freezing package to form a plug at the bottom of a core collected with
existing wire-line drilling tools developed by DOSECC (Drilling, Observation and
Sampling of the Earth?s Continental Crust Inc.), a not-for-profit corporation
supported in part by the National Science Foundation. This proposal is a request
to supplement an existing workshop grant from the International Continental
Scientific Drilling Program to develop the necessary sampling technology and to
generate a science plan for deploying the new technology over the next ten
years.

By analogy to large experiments in physics, the availability of unique
technology could foster the level of collaboration within a community of
geoscientists that is better suited than disparate efforts of the past to
understanding a complex environmental issue such as the groundwater arsenic
problem in South and Southeast Asia. Mitigation in the affected region continues
to be hampered by uncertainty concerning the sustainability of pumping from deep
low-arsenic aquifers that are increasingly tapped to provide safe drinking water
to millions of villagers. The proposed technology will contribute to reducing
this uncertainty and could subsequently be deployed for research on other issues
related to groundwater quality.