* 1105813
* Rigidity in functional spaces, symplectic approximation and geometry on the group of Hamiltonian diffeomorphisms
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2014
* Lev Buhovski, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 08/31/2014
* USD 120,000.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Award: DMS 1105813, Principal Investigator: Lev
Buhovski&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Rigidity in functional spaces is a relatively
recent discovery in symplectic geometry, and these projects will continue the
principal investigator's study of rigidity of Poisson brackets and other
multilinear differential operators on symplectic manifolds. An approximation
problem will also be studied: Given two smooth functions on a symplectic
manifold, is it possible to approximate them by another pair of functions whose
Poisson bracket is small in the uniform norm? Another line of investigation
concerns the group of Hamiltonian diffeomorphisms, in the Hofer metric. The
behavior of geodesics under the Hofer metric and under perturbations of it is an
example of the kinds of questions that remain open regarding these
diffeomorphisms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Symplectic geometry is the study of the
background structure for the Hamiltonian version of classical mechanics, and the
Poisson bracket referred to above is an operation on pairs of functions that is
used in mechanics to compare integrals of motion for a mechanical system and in
passing from a classical mechanical system to a counterpart system in quantum
theory. The subject has been studied since the nineteenth century, but the
introduction of new tools into symplectic geometry from the 1980s onward has
opened up many surprising phenomena, including the rigidity property cited
above, which shows that small perturbations of the definition of a Poisson
bracket operation have only small effects on the way it acts on pairs of
functions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&amp;#711;