* 1105640
* Collaborative Research: Determination of Ni-Fe-Cr Species Dependent Transport Through Control of Temperature, Irradiation, and Grain Size
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2015
* Todd Allen, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Diana Farkas
* 08/31/2015
* USD 370,000.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY: Ni-Fe-Cr based fcc alloys (e.g., Ni-based and austenitic
steel alloys) are frequently used as structural materials in a wide range of
technologies, including nuclear reactors. Many aspects of Ni-Fe-Cr alloy
microstructural evolution, particularly under irradiation, are controlled by
point defect transport with species dependencies that are still poorly
understood. In this project a novel approach to determine the species-dependent
diffusion coefficients in Ni-Fe-Cr steel alloys is proposed. It is based on
measurements and modeling of Radiation Induced Segregation (RIS) of
nanocrystalline materials. The proposed work integrates multiple approaches to
understanding point defect transport in Ni-Fe-Cr and to RIS, including grain
size control, RIS characterization tools (STEM-EDS, Focused Ion Beam, TEM, and
Atom Probe tomography), and multiscale ab initio based models (including cluster
expansion, kinetic Monte Carlo and rate theory modeling). The work will provide
a new level of insight into the magnitude and mechanisms of Ni-Fe-Cr species-
dependent transport and inform future microstructural modeling.

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY: Ni-Fe-Cr based steels are frequently used as structural
materials in a wide range of technologies, including nuclear reactors. Essential
aspects of the long-term reliability of these steels, particularly under
irradiation, are controlled by aspects of Ni, Fe, and Cr diffusion that are
still poorly understood. The PIs propose to integrate tools from materials
nanotechnology and molecular-scale computer simulation to provide new levels of
insight into how Ni, Fe, and Cr are transported in these steels under extreme
conditions. The results will be integrated into higher levels models that aid in
the prediction of steel reliability and the development of new materials. This
project will train graduate students and postdoctoral researchers to work on a
multi-location team and in fundamental areas of materials characterization,
modeling, and their interaction. This work will also further the involvement by
some of the investigators in the Women in Nuclear Science (WINS) organization
and activities at the Advanced Test Reactor National Scientific User Facility
(NSUF).