* 1105670
* Noncommutative Invariants of Singularities and Application to Index Theory
* MPS,DMS
* 10/01/2011,09/30/2014
* Markus Pflaum, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 09/30/2014
* USD 144,499.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Award: DMS 1105670, Principal Investigator: Markus
J. Pflaum&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed work will advance the study of
singularities by means of noncommutative geometry. Spaces with singularities
appear abundantly and naturally in various areas of mathematics. Standard
methods developed to study smooth manifolds or smooth varieties can in general
not be extended to the singular setting, so one has to develop new approaches.
Among the most promising new and original proposals which will provide progress
for singularity theory is the idea to determine the cyclic homology theory of
function algebras over spaces with singularities. This is the viewpoint from
noncommutative geometry which goes back to the work of A. Connes and which has
turned out to provide deeper mathematical insight not only into the structure
theory of noncommutative but also of commutative algebras. In addition to the
computation of cyclic homologies of function algebras over singular spaces, the
PI plans to combine recent results from the stratification theory of singular
spaces with noncommutative geometry to open up new paths to examine
singularities. The construction of new topological invariants of singularities
by this approach also promises to provide progress for index theory over spaces
with singularities. In particular, it is intended to define inertia spaces
associated to proper Lie groupoids and study their singularity structure with
the goal of constructing a mathematical device which keeps track of the
contribution of singularities to the cyclic homology of convolution algebras
over proper Lie groupoids. Finally, relative cyclic cohomology theory will be
used to construct and describe secondary invariants of geometric operators in
singular situations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Singularity theory is the mathematical
discipline in which one describes and studies geometrical objects containing so-
called singularities such as corners, edges or vertices. Besides these rather
elementary singularities, considerably more complicated ones appear not only in
mathematics itself but also in many physical or technical applications like for
example hydro dynamics, string theory, robotics or catastrophe theory, which
plays a fundamental role in the theoretical understanding of "catastrophic"
phenomena in laser physics or population dynamics. A better mathematical
understanding of singularities therefore will not only lead to progress within
mathematics but also will have its impact for theoretical physics or engineering
in situations where singular phenomena appear. The proposed project aims at
improving the foundational knowledge on singularities by connecting singularity
theory to another modern mathematical theory, namely noncommutative geometry. It
is to be expected that this way new mathematical invariants for singularities
can be constructed. This will provide further crucial steps towards a
classification of singularities as they appear in mathematics, the sciences or
engineering. To strengthen the broader impact of the project, the PI plans to
present visualizations of singularities via a website specifically designed to
disseminate mathematical knowledge.&lt;br/&gt;