* 1105000
* GOALI: Chiroptical Anisotropy
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2011,07/31/2017
* Bart Kahr, New York University
* Continuing Grant
* eugene zubarev
* 07/31/2017
* USD 820,000.00

TECHNICAL&lt;br/&gt;The two-century struggle to measure chiroptical properties
of organized, anisotropic media leaves an enormous hole in the science of
molecular and materials chirality. What little has been learned during the past
three decades has come haltingly. In order to unravel averaged, pseudo-scalar
solution chiroptical effects into quantities that can be compared with
electronic structures of real molecules, a database of molecular crystal tensors
is required. They must be measured using a methodology that is robust, can be
easily adopted, and can generate the quantity of data that enables comparison,
analysis, and understanding. Mueller matrix imaging polarimetry is the solution
because all linear optical properties can be determined simultaneously, it can
assay depolarization in imperfect samples, and is suited to the treatment of
non-normal incidence analytically. A fast device without moving optical
components will require the synchronous operation of four photoelastic
modulators. This has never been achieved but will be carried out with Hinds
Instruments of Hillsboro, Oregon, a leading developer of photoelastic modulators
and polarimeters, through collaboration of postdoctoral researchers in Oregon
and New York. The need for a commercial, turnkey polarimeter for oriented
materials is essential because chiroptical anisotropy is a chasm too large for
one group to bridge. With this device, the optical rotation of isomorphous
molecular crystals that lend themselves to the interpretation of small
structural perturbations will be measured. To avoid complications associated
with excitonic interactions in resonance, the anisotropy of circular dichroism
of "oriented gases" of dyes in host crystals will be studied. Mueller matrix
microscopes and polarimeters are also applicable to meso-structured materials
such as cholesteric liquid crystals and chiral sculpted meta-materials.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NON TECHNICAL&lt;br/&gt;Exactly two hundred years ago
(1811) Fran√ßois Arago first observed the rotation of the plane of light
polarization passing through a crystal of quartz along the direction of highest
symmetry. It is been said that no phenomenon "has had so profound an effect on
chemical thought as that of natural optical rotatory power" (Liehr, 1954.
Unfortunately, since that time it has been almost impossible to measure optical
rotation in organized media like crystals along general directions because the
electromagnetic field of light suffers greater perturbations in low-symmetry
environments that mask the phenomenon of interest. Thus, we remain ignorant
about the orientation dependence of optical rotation in molecules, a fundamental
light-matter interaction. Our project is aimed at developing an instrument for
measuring the polarization state of light in any medium quickly and accurately
enough so that we can derive the essential quantities. The device is based on
photoelastic modulators that can change the polarization state of light at a
rate of ~50,000 times per second. Using four such modulators, built by our GOALI
partner, Hinds instruments, we can generate a complex signal that can be treated
by the mathematical techniques of one of Arago's colleagues', Fourier. We have
established a relationship with the Bronx Academy of Science and Technology, an
underserved public high school with 98% native Spanish speakers. We provide, in
addition to research opportunities in our lab during the summer and academic
year, SAT tutoring, an advantage commonly exercised in wealthy school districts.
We are convinced that creating scientists, especially those from
underrepresented groups, requires first developing within students, one-by-one,
scientific identities, and ensuring that the basics are attended.