* 1105727
* Conference: IEEE EMBC2011: Integrating Technology and Medicine for a Healthier Tomorrow, Boston MA, August 30 - September 3, 2011
* ENG,CBET
* 03/15/2011,02/29/2012
* Paolo Bonato, Spaulding Rehabilitation Hospital
* Standard Grant
* Kaiming Ye
* 02/29/2012
* USD 25,000.00

1105727, Bonato&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will support the student
travel, junior researcher travel, student activities and the Student Paper
Competition at the 33rd Annual International Conference of the Engineering in
Medicine and Biology Society (EMBS) that will be held at the Copley Marriott
Hotel in Boston MA, USA from August 30 through September 3,
2011.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The mission of the Engineering in Medicine and
Biology Society (EMBS) of the IEEE is to advance the application of engineering
sciences and technology to medicine and biology, promote the profession, and
provide global leadership for the benefit of its members and humanity by
disseminating knowledge, setting standards, fostering professional development,
and recognizing excellence. To support its mission, EMBS of the IEEE has been
organizing annual conferences of the engineering in medicine and biology society
for past 30 years. Each year, this annual conference which is the largest
meeting of biomedical engineers in the world attracts 2000-3000 people including
about 800 students presenting more than 2000 papers from all over the world. The
student activities include a widely publicized and well-respected Student Paper
Competition and meetings with pioneers and leaders in biomedical engineering,
special symposiums and mentoring programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In 2011, EMBC
will be held at the Copley Marriott Hotel in Boston MA, USA from August 30
through September 3, 2011. It is expected that more than 2500 scientists,
engineers and students will be attending this conference from all over the
world. About 200 papers are expected to be submitted to the Student Paper
Competition. From those, fifteen finalists will be selected through the use of
an on-line review and judging system for making the final oral presentations
during the conference. The proposed funding will help US-based student finalists
to travel to present their research paper in the Student Paper Competition. It
will also provide the prizes for the winners of the
Competition.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The EMBC Student Competition is indeed a
critical portion of the conference, provides a forum where top-notch students
are able to compete with other superlative students in a wide array of eleven
bioengineering disciplines. Student participants are able to view their
research, and their presentation of that research, from a much broader
perspective. Without the incentive of this Competition, many students would be
unable or less likely to attend the conference, thus missing an introduction to
the world of knowledge available at such conferences. In addition, the
Competition plays a crucial role in recognizing the talents of women and
minorities in the field of bioengineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Competition
promotes not only education within bioengineering disciplines, but fosters the
next generation of bioengineers by providing a unique opportunity to students to
meet and network with the leading biomedical professionals and scientists in the
world.