* 1105277
* Archaeal Tetraether Liposomes
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2011,01/31/2016
* Parkson Chong, Temple University
* Continuing Grant
* Joseph A. Akkara
* 01/31/2016
* USD 420,000.00

This award by the Biomaterials program in the Division of Materials Research to
Temple University is in support of a research to gain a deeper molecular
understanding of the structure-activity relationship of archaeal tetraether
liposomes, and to improve their usage as biomaterials and explore their possible
new applications. The following two hypotheses will be tested by this project:
1) an increase in the number of cyclopentane rings in archaeal bipolar
tetraether lipids will decrease membrane volume fluctuations; and 2) volume
fluctuations can be quantitatively correlated to solute permeation and lipid
lateral diffusion. A variety of physical techniques such as high-pressure
fluorescence spectroscopy, molecular acoustics, pressure perturbation
calorimetry, and fluorescence recovery after photobleaching will be employed.
The expected results may lead to new designs for drug delivery, storage,
coating, and sensing, all of which may have profound technological and
biomedical implications. This research will bring in a rigorous
multidisciplinary program for training undergraduate and graduate students in
the field of biomaterials. The proposed international collaboration with
Professor Roland Winter's laboratory at the University of Dortmund, Germany,
will expose students to different research settings and enable them to have
access to many cutting-edge instruments that are not readily available at Temple
University.

The goals of this research are to isolate unusually robust lipids from the
thermoacidophilic archaea (microorganisms found in acidic hot springs), and to
study the physical properties of membranes formed from those lipids. These lipid
membranes hold great promise as useful and advanced biomaterials for a number of
technological applications such as drug storage, coating, environmental
protection, targeted delivery of therapeutic agents, and medical diagnosis. This
proposed research will build the scientific foundation for the development of
these potential applications and bring in a rigorous graduate training project
involving microbiology, chemistry, and biophysics. This multidisciplinary nature
will enhance and broaden students' education and research capability. Students
will have the opportunities to work on novel biomaterials, attend national
meetings to present their findings, and gain experience with the proposed
international collaboration. Undergraduate students at campus, one of the most
diverse universities in the nation, will be trained through the Temple
University Undergraduate Research Program. More than one third of University's
undergraduate students are from minority communities. This project also plans to
actively recruits students from local high schools and community colleges
students and expose them to scientific research experience.