* 1105208
* GOALI: A Multiscale Approach on Interfacial and Structural Interlocking Between Polymer Grafted Shape Memory Pillars
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2011,07/31/2014
* Ju Li, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 07/31/2014
* USD 262,463.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The award is based on complementary
research activities, including polymer synthesis, fabrication and
characterization in Yang's lab in Materials Science and Engineering (MSE) at the
University of Pennsylvania (Penn), theoretical modeling at the molecular and
meta-structural (ordered array) levels in Li's lab at Penn/MSE, in collaboration
with Xie's lab at General Motors Global Research &amp; Development Center (GM).
It builds upon their knowledge in shape memory polymer (SMP) chemistry and
surface chemistry toward robust and industrial scale adhesion. The focus of this
proposal is on the fundamentally unresolved question concerning the individual
and combined roles of surface chemistry, topography, and compliance on adhesion
at different length scales. Specifically, the PIs plan to: (1) fabricate SMP
pillar arrays with precise control over size, aspect ratio, and spacing; (2)
graft well-controlled polymer brushes to manipulate molecular interactions (e.g.
H-bonding and ion-pi interactions) for both bonding and debonding; (3)
systematically study adhesion and peeling off on complementary SMP pillars under
deformation and recovery, and (4) compare experimental results with multiscale
modeling throughout each relevant lengthscale and develop a complete mechanistic
view of interlocking dry adhesion. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NON-TECHNICAL
SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Adhesion between polymers plays an important role
in a wide range of industrial applications. Liquid based adhesives offer strong
adhesion, however their thermal curing is energy intensive and the adhesion is
generally not reversible. Nature provides us with remarkable examples of
reversible dry adhesion as manifested in burdock seeds and gecko foot hairs,
where no liquid or lengthy curing is involved in the adhesive attachment. This
proposal seeks to develop biomimetic superglue-like, yet reworkable, dry
adhesives. It will not only provide important scientific insights, but also
impact a wide range of technologies, including electronic packaging, automotive
and airplane assemblies, and soft robotics. Students at all levels will be
exposed to a diverse range of topics in chemistry, materials science and
engineering, soft mechanics, nanofabrication and computational modeling through
new training and outreach opportunities, including summer lectures by the
industrial researcher from General Motors, integration of the research outcome
in courses, engagement of high school and undergraduate students through summer
research and senior design projects, and industrial internship by a PhD student
at General Motors Global R&amp;D Center. The research outcome will also create a
significant opportunity to excite the general public, thereby engaging their
interest in Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics (STEM).