* 1105045
* Deformations and Collapsing of Curved Spaces
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/2011,07/31/2015
* Igor Belegradek, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Joanna Kania-Bartoszynska
* 07/31/2015
* USD 141,863.00

This proposal involves studying deformations and collapsing of Riemannian
metrics with various curvature bounds. A basic object of interest is the moduli
space of complete nonnegatively curved metrics on a given open manifold. Nearby
points in the moduli space often correspond to metrics that may appear
unrealated and are pulled next to each other by non-obvious diffeomorphisms
produced e.g. by surgery theory. Thus to detect nontrivial topology in the
moduli space one needs to relate comparison geometry input with machinery of
algebraic topology. To this end it is planned to investigate continuity of souls
under deformation, especially for manifolds with codimension two souls where the
geometry is rather rigid. It is proposed to obtain detailed structure of the
moduli space for low-dimensional manifolds. Another topic is studying collapse
of souls inside nonnegatively curved open manifolds by establishing relative
versions of the fibration theorems. Yet another project is to analyze collapse
of cusp cross-sections in finite volume manifolds of bounded negative curvature
that admit no negatively pinched metrics.

In broad terms the proposal seeks to understand how curvature of the space
controls its deformations and degenerations. The spaces considered range from
boundaries of three-dimensional convex bodies to their higher dimensional
analogs. It is proposed to investigate the manifold of all possible geometric
shapes that a given space can assume; the topological features of this manifold
of shapes are poorly understood.