* 1105291
* Dopant Distribution, Motion, and Electrochemical Transfer in Resistive Switching Heterostructures
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2011,05/31/2014
* Paul Salvador, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Continuing Grant
* Z.  Ying
* 05/31/2014
* USD 447,702.00

Technical: Resistive switching in oxide-based heterostructures (metal-oxide-
metal) has been known since the 1960's and has experienced a recent (since 2000)
explosion of commercial and scientific interest, particularly for nonvolatile
resistance-change random access memories.&lt;br/&gt;Resistive switching can be
defined as the process in which a material or heterostructure is able to
reversibly change (under electrical stimulation) between at least two resistance
values that are stable with time. Most of the competing mechanisms proposed to
explain resistive switching are qualitative and have only indirect observational
support. However, they nearly all involve the redistribution of dopants in the
oxide layer through ion motion. The project will interrogate in a quantitative
fashion the electrical potential and oxygen distribution in metal-oxide-metal
heterostructures, to quantify the oxygen motion within the oxide and across the
metal-oxide interface, and develop a predictive computational model that
captures the kinetic aspects of the switching process in three dimensions. The
integrated research and education program described aims to understand, design,
and produce nanoscale resistive switches appropriate for data storage and logic
devices. Testing of the hypotheses that uniform ion redistribution within a
heterostructure can be quantitatively characterized and ultimately optimized for
resistive switching will be studied. To do so the research will determine the
distribution of oxygen near, measure the oxygen exchange rates across, and
quantify the electrical potential near metal-oxide junctions and oxide
heterojunctions, designed and fabricated at Carnegie Mellon. A variety of
characterization methods, including secondary ion mass spectroscopy, electron
holography, scanning Kelvin probe microscopy, scanning electrochemical
microscopy, capacitance-based methods, and spatially resolved secondary ion mass
spectroscopy to interrogate ion redistribution and transfer will be used. A
multi-dimensional continuum level computational model will be developed that
describes the electrochemical transfer and ion redistribution in the resistive
switch, which will be verified by testing of nanoscale resistive switching
metal-oxide-metal devices, appropriate for future
applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Non-Technical: This project will have a broad
societal impact by providing the fundamental underpinnings to device design and
performance in novel ultra-high density data storage devices and reconfigurable
logic technologies. The research activities will impact the education of a
diverse group of Ph.D. and Undergraduate students through: laboratory and
computational research, an advanced elective course, and a sophomore-level
laboratory module. The new elective course, entitled 'Defect Interactions:
Enabling Advanced Functional Materials and Devices,' will provide concrete
examples of how defect interactions (such point defect motion near / across
interfaces in memristors) act as enablers in advanced devices, including
resistive switches, batteries, fuel cells, and high power electronics. A
laboratory module will be implemented in the sophomore level core materials
science course 'Defects in Materials.' It will demonstrate to students how point
defects behave in electrochemical materials. Finally, the PIs will organize a
research symposium on resistive switching at an international research
conference.