* 1105875
* NSCC/LA: People, Power, and Conflict in the Eurasian Migration System
* SBE,BCS
* 08/31/2010,08/31/2013
* Cynthia Buckley, Social Science Research Council
* Standard Grant
* Jacqueline Meszaros
* 08/31/2013
* USD 784,127.00

This award was funded through the Social and Behavioral Dimensions of National
Security, Conflict, and Cooperation competition, a joint venture between NSF and
the Department of Defense.

This project examines how international migration affects human security and
patterns of international influence. International migration affects the ability
to enforce international human rights, alters national cultural composition,
tests the limits of social and political tolerance, and binds national
economies. It also creates complex economic, social, and political linkages
between states that have an important influence on geopolitical considerations.
These analyses focus on migration within Eurasia, where documentation is
currently inadequate. Migration in the region is rarely included in debates over
migration theory despite its large population and significance for U.S. foreign
policy. Focusing on the Russian Federation, the investigators explore how
migration generates conflict and alters national power. Russia's emergence as
the core destination country within the Eurasian migration system, coupled with
its increasing tendency towards authoritarian rule, challenges assumptions
concerning the importance of liberal political orientations in destination
states, and may pose a strategic challenge to U.S. interests within the region.
This three-stage project seeks to improve understanding of the movement of
population within the Eurasian migration system and its implication for Russian
influence in the region. First, the research team examines population movement
within the system over the past twenty years, documenting the size and
composition of registered migration and developing estimates of unregistered
migration. Second, the investigators focus on the challenges of migrant
incorporation, conducting ethno-surveys within three sites of high international
in-migration within the Russian Federation. The research team supplements these
ethno-surveys with national case studies of an alternative migrant destination
(Ukraine), and four countries known for sending labor migrants to the Russian
Federation (Tajikistan, Uzbekistan, Georgia and Vietnam), highlighting how
remittances and labor out migration are incorporated into national development
strategies. In the third stage, the investigators turn to the assessment of
human and international security concerns, incorporating insights from regions
that send migrants to the Russian Federation on the relationship between
migration, remittance reliance, and Russian political influence. The findings
will add to current debates concerning globalization, development, and migration
while clarifying the implications of Russia's migration state status on
international stability and influence across a region central to U.S. security
goals.