* 1105193
* Research in geometric group theory
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2011,06/30/2015
* Mark Feighn, Rutgers University Newark
* Continuing Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 06/30/2015
* USD 275,895.00

Three rather ambitious projects are proposed in the area of geometric group
theory. The first is inspired by Zlil Sela's geometric solution of Tarski's
logic problem. The PI and Mladen Bestvina plan to complete their program to
solve by geometric means two forty-year-old problems of Mal'cev. They also
propose to generalize their methods and provide an alternate proof to the Tarski
problem. The second project, joint with Michael Handel, is to solve the
conjugacy problem for the outer automorphism group Out(F) of a free group F.
Much of the research in this area is driven by the similarities between linear
groups, surface mapping class groups, and Out(F). The conjugacy problem has been
solved for these other two classes. The final project, again joint with Mladen
Bestvina, is to better understand the geometry of outer automorphism groups of
free groups. In particular, it is proposed to show that a complex analogous to
the curve complex in the mapping class group setting is word hyperbolic.

Three projects are proposed in the area of geometric group theory. Geometric
group theory is a relatively young branch of mathematics in which problems from
other areas of mathematics are reformulated and then solved in geometric terms.
This approach has been successful in areas that are sometimes viewed as distant
from geometry. For example, Zlil Sela used geometric methods to solve an old
logic problem of Tarski. Inspired by Sela's methods, the PI and Mladen Bestvina
propose to solve two old logic problems of Mal'cev. Group theory is another area
where these methods have been particularly successful. Groups are ubiquitous in
math and the sciences. The set of symmetries of a molecule is an example. There
is an important class of groups called "free groups" from which all other groups
can be constructed. The set of symmetries of a free group F is another important
group, denoted Out(F), which has been the subject of much current interest. The
PI proposes two other projects focusing on Out(F). In one, he and Michael Handel
propose to solve an old and fundamental problem on Out(F), namely that its
conjugacy problem is solvable. In the other project, the PI and Bestvina propose
to better understand the intrinsic geometry of Out(F).