* 1105907
* RUI: Investigation of metal-to-metal charge transfer states in rare earth ion-doped solids
* MPS,DMR
* 09/15/2011,08/31/2015
* John Collins, Wheaton College
* Standard Grant
* Lynnette Madsen
* 08/31/2015
* USD 264,776.00

NON-TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION: This three-year research project is investigating a
promising class of materials for use as lighting and/or laser applications. The
materials of interest are oxides containing the rare earth ions praseodymium and
terbium, which give off red and green light, respectively. These materials are
interesting because there exists a quantum state that allows ultraviolet energy
to be put into the system efficiently. Subsequently, that energy can be
transformed to red or green light. By changing the composition of the materials,
it is possible to alter the characteristics of this quantum state to maximize
the energy input and extract light at the desired color. The goals of the
project are to: (1) gain insight into the physical and chemical properties of
this state, and (2) to optimize the visible light output of these systems for
applications to phosphors used in solid-state lighting and in display materials,
and for solid-state laser applications.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION: This three-year research
project investigates a charge transfer state of d0 transition metal oxides doped
with rare-earth ions (praseodymium and terbium) using the techniques of
luminescence spectroscopy. The project includes an experimental study into the
fundamental properties of the charge transfer state, and into its role in the
dynamics of the relaxation processes that lead to emission from the rare earth
ions. The energy of the charge transfer state is being tuned to maximize the
luminescence efficiency of the specified rare earth ions. This tuning is being
accomplished by changing the composition of the materials and by altering the
particle size down to the nm-scale. The project provides significant training to
undergraduates, giving them hands-on experience in the laboratory, allowing them
to present their work at scientific conferences, and by collaborating with
scientists at other universities.