* 1105077
* Nanostructured Metal/Polymer Composites for Plasmon-Enhanced  Emission and Amplification of Light
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2011,06/30/2015
* Miriam Deutsch, University of Oregon Eugene
* Continuing Grant
* Z.  Ying
* 06/30/2015
* USD 405,000.00

Technical: Future opto-electronic and plasmonic devices will rely on generation
and control of light-fields within custom-engineered composite materials and
nanostructures. In particular, controlled generation and amplification of light
in nanoscale materials is crucial for achieving next generation compact,
integrated nanophotonic devices. The research program focuses on the fabrication
and characterization of dispersion engineered composite metal/polymer
nanostructures for practical applications such as novel light emitters and
nanoscale plasmon-enhanced organic lasers. The research materials constitute an
important step towards achieving increased efficiency, coherent light emitters
that are also cost-efficient, processable and scalable. The research project
will proceed along two distinct directions. The first effort will address light
emission characteristics in composite planar structures comprising
semiconducting organic polymers and fractal silver films with tunable dispersive
properties. The second task will focus on organic light emitters coherently
coupled to ordered metallic meso-structures designed to exhibit a plasmon-
induced transparency ? the plasmonic analog to electromagnetically induced
transparency. Both tasks will address spatial light emission characteristics,
emission enhancement factors and their correlation with the integrated metal
nanostructures, spectra of the emitted fields and plasmon-enhanced laser action.
Results of this award will lead to (1) new methods for enhancing and controlling
light emission in metal/polymer nanocomposites, together with modeling tools and
design guidelines for achieving the desired functionalities. (2) New practical
architectures for efficient solid state light emitting materials.

Non Technical: Nanostructured metallodielectric composite materials hold the
potential for greatly impacting modern photonics, with applications to advanced
sensing, imaging and novel light emitting devices. The research work will have
significant impact on the development of such future technologies. Students
participating in this research will acquire expertise in the field of active
plasmonic materials. The research is interdisciplinary in nature, allowing
students to gain proficiency in materials science as well as classical and
quantum optics, and to develop both experimental and modeling skills. An
important goal of this project is to train students in the burgeoning field of
plasmonics by exposing university students of all levels to research and multi-
disciplinary scientific work. At the undergraduate level the aim is to expand
avenues for learning by offering a variety of research and mentoring
opportunities. At the graduate level the project addresses student involvement
in research, as well as participation in a variety of professional development
activities. The latter enable pursuing of scientific knowledge and interests in
less-traditional ways, such as participation in a departmentally funded student
proposal contest, or informal science education and leadership opportunities.
Moreover, the PI's commitment to community outreach and participation in
coordinated academic activities serve to further integrate scientific research
with evolving societal needs for science education.