* 1105243
* Atypical Photonic Slabs by Quasi-2D Colloidal Self-Assembly
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2011,06/30/2015
* Chekesha Watson, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Z.  Ying
* 06/30/2015
* USD 381,036.00

Technical: This project will address the challenge of introducing complexity in
photonic slab arrangements. Vertical variation throughout the thickness of
quasi-2D slabs will be introduced via colloidal processing under confinement.
Freezing between two and three dimensions accesses structural transitions in gap
regions incommensurate with integral layer spacing of thin particulate films.
From confocal microscopy of fluorescent-shell modified particles in wedge cell
geometry, the real space phase organization will be investigated as a function
of particle morphology, system density and cell height. The synthesis of shape
anisotropic colloids will be performed to prepare building blocks for
unconventionally ordered solids in addition to crystals under the imposed
packing constraints. Quantitative evaluation of order parameters and correlation
functions determined experimentally and from Monte Carlo simulations of the
confined states will inform simulation models to evaluate the optical properties
of the slab patterns and their various inverse embodimentsÂ¯ for example,
residual volume-, shell-, and skeleton inverse structures. Sol-gel and
nanoparticle precursors for solution processing as well as vapor phase
depositions will be applied in backfilling and co-assembly routes to inversion
to obtain high-refractive index contrast. The project will enhance the
understanding of how reduced symmetry, expanded dimensionality, and novel
classes of partial order structuring impact light-matter interactions in
photonic crystal slabs. To this aim, photonic band structures will be calculated
and the relative influence of structural parameters such as positional ordering,
orientation ordering, motif morphology, basis complexity, dielectric filling
fraction, refractive index contrast on the behavior of photonic bands at high
symmetry points in reciprocal space will be explored. Complimentary analysis of
mode field distributions will be applied to rationalize the formation of full 2D
photonic band gaps. A powerful experimental technique in its infancy for
application to photonic slab structures will be used to confirm stop band and
band gap frequencies, modified density of photonic states, in addition to the
experimental field distribution of photonic modes. Namely, the Electron Energy
Loss Spectroscopy technique applied in a Scanning Transmission Electron
Microscope will enable the photonic characterization at high spatial resolution.
For investigation of refraction properties of the slabs, equal frequency contour
plots will also be calculated and the light propagation in-plane through
atypical structures will be simulated to determine frequency and directions for
left-handed, right-handed, positive- and negative refraction behavior as a
function of structural parameter variants. Point source imaging for
appropriately indicated configurations defined by self-assembly will be studied
to evaluate resolution in the flat lens application of the photonic slab
materials. Through this project the structure-property-processing-performance
relationships will be established. NonTechnical: This award will enhance
undergraduate research opportunities for students in Historically Black Colleges
and Universities as well as Women's Colleges. The PI plans to engage
undergraduates to conduct research from these institutions through the REU
programs associated with the Cornell Shared Facilities. Enrichment will also be
offered through conference support for presenting research and for professional
development workshops. Lasting relationships with researchers in the home
institution will be sought for continued collaboration involving the visiting
student and potentially providing additional recruiting opportunities to
Cornell's graduate programs. An informal public education project is planned
around a distributed research and "Science as Art" model to place images of
materials research in public library exhibits which will promote the field. As
well, the organization of seminar series hosted by URM graduate fellows to
invite distinguished underrepresented minority (URM) faculty for research talks
and professional development.