* 1105641
* Identifying the origin of hardness in AlMgB14 and the orthorhombic boron-rich borides
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2015
* Scott Beckman, Iowa State University
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 08/31/2015
* USD 254,000.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports theoretical and
computational research and education aimed at studying the chemical bonding of
orthorhombic borides, typified by the AlMgB14 crystal. The AlMgB14 is a member
of a recently discovered family of crystals that have the potential to be
effective superhard materials. However, their relatively open structure and
flexible chemical composition make the experimentally observed hardness
surprising. At the atomic level, there is no comprehensive understanding of why
this crystal family is so hard or how their physical properties can be
controlled. The research supported by this award is focused on providing such
comprehensive understanding.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI will investigate both
the static and dynamical response of AlMgB14 crystals to elucidate the origin of
their mechanical properties at a fundamental level. The substitution of impurity
atoms to the lattice sites will be studied to understand the impact of chemical
substitution on the mechanical properties. The structure and energy of the
impurity atoms will be characterized. The results from PI's computations will be
compared to experimental investigations performed by his collaborators at Ames
Laboratory and at the University of Tennessee. The proposed research will not
only help elucidate the atomistic mechanisms responsible for the desirable
physical properties of these materials, but also allow for such properties to be
tailored. This effort could potentially lead to the development of a new,
designable class of superhard materials that will likely have significant
engineering applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The successful completion of this
project is expected to have a lasting positive impact on society because of the
economic and environmental importance of creating new superhard materials. There
is an imminent need for new hard and superhard materials that can be used to
improve machine tool lifetime, grinding medium, and wear-resistant coatings.
Improving manufacturing processes will simultaneously reduce the environmental
impact of manufacturing and produce economic cost-savings. Even modest
improvements in efficiency will result in substantial social benefits that will
be felt globally. Superhard materials, which have the potential to reduce energy
consumption and increase the lifetime of tools, are naturally an attractive
technology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI is committed to preparing the next
generation of scientists and engineers by actively mentoring graduate,
undergraduate, and high school students. To promote the field of Computational
Science at a secondary school level, the PI will develop an annual Saturday
workshop for high school students in the Omaha, NE metro area. By introducing
the students to the rich, real-world complexities of the natural sciences and
showing how computers are used to address them, the students will be exposed to
the broader context of these disciplines. This will naturally increase the
appeal of both computer science and the natural
sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award supports theoretical and computational research and education aimed at
studying the chemical bonding in a recently discovered class of materials,
typified by the AlMgB14 crystal. These materials have the potential to be
effective superhard materials due to their high strength, chemical inertness and
compositional flexibility. However, at the atomic level, there is no
comprehensive understanding of why this crystal family is so hard or how their
physical properties can be controlled. The research supported by this award is
focused on providing such comprehensive understanding.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
PI will investigate both the static and dynamical properties of AlMgB14 crystals
to elucidate the origin of their mechanical properties at a fundamental level.
In several computational studies, various impurity atoms will be added to
specific positions in the host crystal to understand whether such additions are
energetically favorable, and if so, whether they could have desirable impact on
the material's mechanical properties. The results from PI's computations will be
compared to experimental investigations performed by his collaborators at Ames
Laboratory and at the University of Tennessee. The research will not only help
elucidate the atomistic mechanisms responsible for the observed physical
properties of these materials, but also allow for such properties to be
tailored. This effort could potentially lead to the development of a new,
designable class of superhard materials that will likely have significant
engineering applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The successful completion of this
project is expected to have a lasting positive impact on society because of the
economic and environmental importance of creating new superhard materials. There
is an imminent need for new hard and superhard materials that can be used to
improve machine tool lifetime, grinding medium, and wear-resistant coatings.
Improving manufacturing processes will simultaneously reduce the environmental
impact of manufacturing and produce economic cost-savings. Even modest
improvements in efficiency will result in substantial social benefits that will
be felt globally. Superhard materials, which have the potential to reduce energy
consumption and increase the lifetime of tools, are naturally an attractive
technology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI is committed to preparing the next
generation of scientists and engineers by actively mentoring graduate,
undergraduate, and high school students. To promote the field of Computational
Science at a secondary school level, the PI will develop an annual Saturday
workshop for high school students in the Omaha, NE metro area. By introducing
the students to the rich, real-world complexities of the natural sciences and
showing how computers are used to address them, the students will be exposed to
the broader context of these disciplines. This will naturally increase the
appeal of both computer science and the natural sciences.