* 1105347
* Polymer-Derived In-Situ Metal-Matrix Nanocomposites:  A New Paradigm in Processing, Structure, and Properties of Dispersion Strengthened (copper) Alloys
* MPS,DMR
* 09/15/2011,08/31/2016
* Rishi Raj, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* Diana Farkas
* 08/31/2016
* USD 460,000.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY: A nanoscale dispersion of stable, non-coarsening ceramic
particles into a metal matrix is a precondition for metallic composites that
resist creep at high homologous temperatures. The goal of this program is to
develop the scientific underpinnings for a new method for dispersing fine
particles of a ceramic phase into a metal, and understanding how they influence
the mechanical properties. In this method the ceramic is introduced into the
metal as a polymer, which is then pyrolyzed in-situ to create the nanodispersed
ceramic phase. This research program will explore the basic mechanisms for the
in-situ conversion of the polymer into the ceramic. Copper, dispersed with
nanoparticles of a polymer-derived ceramic phase constituted from Si-C-N-O, will
be employed as the "model" material system for this investigation. The
microstructural stability and the creep and creep fracture behavior of the alloy
at temperatures approaching 950 °C (about 0.9 of the melting temperature) will
be investigated. Fundamental mechanisms that include how the size and spacing,
and the structure and bonding at the particle-matrix interface control the climb
of dislocations and the nucleation of voids under mechanical loading at high
temperatures, will be studied. A key issue is to elucidate how the interfacial
bonding influences the threshold stress, the ultimate goal being to achieve a
threshold stress that approaches the Orowan upper bound for the escape of
dislocations pinned by hard particles. Atomistic modeling isexpected to inform
the experimental results.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY: New
nanomaterials with unusual properties are often highly complex, both in the way
they are made and how they perform. For them to be successfully implemented into
next-generation systems, their performance must be underpinned by scientific
understanding and models. This research program is dedicated to the science and
development of novel high temperature metallic alloys that are potentially
important for future engineering systems. Their novelty lies in a polymer route
to the creation of a highly stable, nanoscale dispersion of ceramic particles in
a metal matrix. The research plan includes intimate international collaborations
in Austria and Germany that provide important expertise in atomic scale
characterization and modeling. The program has an aggressive plan for
dissemination of the scientific outcomes of this research, primarily through
International Meetings that are held every two years in Boulder, Colorado.