* 1106230
* Properties and Behavior of Transformation Interfaces in Metal Alloys
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2016
* James Howe, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Diana Farkas
* 08/31/2016
* USD 577,000.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY: The purpose of this research is to understand the dynamic
behavior, electron states, and interfacial energies of important transformation
interfaces in metal alloys. The proposed research will concentrate on two types
of interfaces that are still largely unexplored, and therefore, offer
considerable opportunity to discover new fundamental scientific phenomena
regarding their behavior. These are the solid-liquid interface, which will be
investigated using Al-Si base alloy powder particles, and incoherent interphase
boundaries, which will be investigated using massive transformation interfaces
in Mn-Al(-C) alloys. Some specific questions that will be addressed in the
proposed research are: i) Does equilibrium segregation occur at solid-liquid
interfaces, can it be predicted from thermodynamics, and does it precede
nucleation of a new phase at the interface? ii) Do faceted crystals present
their slowest-growing interfaces during growth and their fastest-growing
interfaces during dissolution as theory suggests? iii) How do interfacial
fluctuations that are observed at interfaces between solid Si and solid Al and
liquid Al-Si alloy occur, and how do they compare quantitatively with each other
and with computer simulations? iv) How do atoms and electrons behave in liquid
Al and Al-Si alloys as the liquids are undercooled in terms of the core and
valence electron states, and is ordering in the liquid revealed in these
properties? v) Do solid-liquid interface plasmons exist and if so, what are
their properties? vi) Do low-index interfaces (e.g. {111}) form during the
massive transformation for the same reasons as for grain boundaries? vii) Do
{111} random grain boundaries and incoherent massive interfaces both migrate by
the movement of atomic steps parallel to the {111} facet? These problems will be
answered using a combination of in-situ analytical transmission electron
microscopy (TEM) and other complementary experimental and computational
techniques. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY: The nature of the
solid-liquid interface is extremely important both scientifically and
technologically. For example, almost all engineering metal alloys, such as those
found in automobiles, jet engines and construction beams, start as a liquid
mixture that changes into a solid at the solid-liquid interface on cooling.
Likewise, the silicon wafers that are the basis of computer technology are large
single-crystals that are grown from a liquid melt. In spite of the importance of
the solid-liquid interface in these processes, there are few experimental data
available that directly show how the different elements in the liquid mixture
partition into the solid and liquid phases at the solid-liquid interface. This
research will show precisely how this occurs. Another important technological
interface that forms between two crystalline solids is called an incoherent
interface. This type of interface is also found in almost all useful engineering
metals such as those mentioned above, in the form of random grain and interphase
boundaries. Knowledge of the properties of such interfaces and how they behave
during metal processing is limited, but this research will reveal these
phenomena. In summary, this research will generate entirely new information
about important technological solid-liquid and solid-solid interfaces, thereby
enhancing our ability to control such interfaces to make better engineering
materials that are used throughout society. The results of this research will be
widely disseminated by making the in-situ microscope videos obtained during the
work available online, so that faculty, students and researchers will be able to
observe the videos and use them to further their understanding and teaching of
interface science.