* 1106131
* Growth and Interface Physics of Epitaxial Graphene
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2011,12/31/2016
* Phillip First, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* James H. Edgar
* 12/31/2016
* USD 465,000.00

This project is co-funded by the Electronic and Photonic Materials (EPM) and
Condensed Matter Physics (CMP) Programs in the Division of Materials Research
(DMR).&lt;br/&gt;Technical: This research project is on the growth and interface
physics of epitaxial graphene grown on silicon carbide (SiC) substrates.
Epitaxial graphene is a two-dimensional electron system with coherence lengths
that can exceed one micrometer at a temperature of 4 K, and with high electron
mobilities, even at room temperature. Multiple layers of graphene grown on the
silicon-terminated face of silicon carbide stack in a manner similar to
graphite. On the carbon-terminated face of SiC, the growth of multiple layers is
more unusual, with azimuthal rotation from one graphene layer to the next. This
has the effect of reducing the interaction between graphene layers. However, the
origin of this rotational stacking (and the electronic decoupling) is not known
with certainty. Using surface science methods (including characterization via
low-temperature scanning tunneling microscopy and related techniques), new
growth methods for epitaxial graphene on SiC will be developed and quantified.
The physics of interfaces of graphene based materials of different
dimensionalities, as well as intrinsic graphene properties, will be studied in
this project. Two dimensional interfaces include the graphene/SiC interface, the
interface between rotated graphene layers, and the metal/graphene interface. A
one-dimensional interface of interest is the graphene p-n junction, where
electron carriers on one side transmit into hole states on the other. The
electronic properties of one-dimensional (in-plane) grain boundaries separating
graphene lattices with different orientation are also investigated, and likewise
for step edges and lithographically-defined nanoribbons. "Zero-dimensional
interfaces" comprise point defects in graphene and graphene quantum dots. The
quantum dot of most concern for our work is a potential-well induced in graphene
by the measurement itself.&lt;br/&gt;Non-Technical: This research concerns the
development of graphene, a new material with potential applications to low-
power, nanometer-scale electronic devices. In this project, graphene refers to
one-atom-thick and few-atom-thick carbon films. The overall project ties
research to education at different levels via participation in programs designed
by education professionals. These programs often focus on the preparation of
students traditionally underrepresented in the physical sciences. For example,
Georgia high school teachers experience research in the PI's lab for 7-8 weeks
each summer through an on-campus Research Experience for Teachers program. The
experience enables them to bring modern science to the classroom.