* 1106284
* A Kilopixel, 2-Color, TES-Based Bolometer Camera for the IRAM 30 m Telescope
* MPS,AST
* 07/01/2011,06/30/2016
* Johannes Staguhn, Johns Hopkins University
* Continuing Grant
* Peter Kurczynski
* 06/30/2016
* USD 861,059.00

The mm/sub-mm spectral region is one of the last in the electromagnetic spectrum
to benefit from fundamental developments in technology that lead to many-pixel,
efficient detection of radiation. Transition Edge Sensors (TES) are small
bolometers operating near the superconducting temperature boundary that can be
constructed in array formats to efficiently detect sub-mm and mm-wave emission
over an extended image. One of the primary scientific applications of these
arrays is the detection of very young and obscured galaxies at high redshift
that emit most of their light in the infrared and sub-mm spectral regions and
provide direct information on early-epoch star formation and the formation and
evolution of central black holes.

To attack these scientific problems, Dr. Johannes Staguhn of Johns Hopkins
intends to build on the success of a previous NSF-supported TES-based mm-wave
instrument called GIZMO with a larger format, lower-noise, two-band camera
dubbed GIZMO-2. When used with the largest mm-wave telescope in the world - the
30-m IRAM telescope - the 1280-pixel array for the 1.2 mm wavelength will take
advantage of nearly the entire usable field of view (5 x 4 arcminutes) with
pixels somewhat smaller than the diffraction limit of ~9 arcseconds, and be
capable of more efficiently mapping the sky at mm-wavelengths than any other
camera available today. At the same time, measurements made with the 2 mm array
will provide 2-color information that can be used to obtain crude source
redshifts.

Cost-sharing for the development of GIZMO-2 is occurring through the
participation of several agencies. NASA/Goddard Space Flight Center is providing
the TES arrays, while the National Institute of Standards and Technology is
supplying the state-of-the-art Superconducting Quantum Interference Device
(SQUID) multiplexed readouts. NSF is responsible for the cryogenic apparatus,
optics, integration, etc, using funding provided by the Division of Astronomical
Sciences through its Advanced Technologies and Instrumentation program.