* 1106165
* Collaborative Research: Regulators of cellular microenvironment and multiscale osteointegration
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2011,06/30/2016
* Amy Wagoner Johnson, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Aleksandr Simonian
* 06/30/2016
* USD 410,996.00

ID: MPS/DMR/BMAT(7623) 1106165 PI: Wagoner Johnson, Amy ORG: University of
Illinois

ID: MPS/DMR/BMAT(7623) 1105591 PI: Murphy, William ORG: University of Wisconsin

Title: Collaborative Research: Regulators of cellular microenvironment and
multiscale osteointegration

INTELLECTUAL MERIT: Calcium Phosphates (CaP) are utilized in a wide range of
applications including implant coatings and in bone regeneration/repair because
of their many attributes that make them ideal to interface with bone. However,
the mechanisms regulating osteointegration of CaPs have yet to be understood.
Progress has stalled because of a lack of appropriate tools and methodologies
that can isolate key regulators as well as combine them in a controlled and
systematic way. Three factors stand out as particularly important for the CaP
system: microporosity, BMP-2, and biologic apatite. The potential dominating
mechanisms relating to osteointegration are hypothesized to be sequestration of
BMP-2 and enhanced formation of biologic apatite in the presence of micropores.
The goal is to quantify the relative importance of and potential interactions
between these factors at different stages of bone formation and to understand
the mechanisms behind their influence, using CaPs as a biomaterial platform and
a unique set of tools. CaPs with macro (>100um) and microporosity (<50um) have
greatly enhanced osteointegration as compared to those with only macroporosity.
While microporosity has been used primarily to enhance growth into macropores,
there is now evidence that microporosity is also a space for bone and its
inclusion in CaP scaffolds can result in multiscale ostointegration (MSO)- bone
growth throughout both macro and micropores. This has not been achieved with any
other system. The unique suite of tools will be used to examine the role of key
regulators, microporosity, BMP-2, and bioapatite, and the mechanisms behind
their influence on osteointegration. The tools allow for (1) control of
microporosity, which uniquely enables systematic exploration of microporosity
and related characteristics, (2) attaching BMP-2 to CaPs with varying levels of
affinity, which provides the unique opportunity to study the effects of both
sequestered and releasing BMP-2, and (3) the capability to grow biological
apatite on the surface of CaPs, which enables investigation of the influence of
biological apatite on cell response. Further, each of these parameters can be
independently controlled. The specific objectives are: (1) Determine the minimum
pore size through which cells will migrate given a potent chemotactic and
osteoinductive stimulus, BMP-2. This is critical for establishing bounds on pore
characteristics for MSO. (2) Determine the influence of the stimuli in
attracting mesenchymal stem cells to the substrate. (3) Determine the influence
of the stimuli in matrix production and mineralization.

BROADER IMPACTS: Taken together, the systematic approach used here to combine
the factors described and the proposed analysis will provide new insight into
the rational design of biomaterials that interface with bone. The potential
advances will lead to new understanding of bone/material interactions, could
have huge benefit for those affected by bone loss or joint failure (e.g. coated
implants), and could relieve some of the economic burden associated with these
procedures. The main educational activities are related to developing an
instructional module that uses an inquiry-based approach and engages science
teachers at the Campus Middle School for Girls (CMSG, Urbana, IL) in research
activities. The objective in working with CMSG is to positively influence girls'
perceptions of STEM, which may lead to their persistence in the field. The work
with CMSG is in partnership with an existing NSF NSEC, and the learning module
will become part of the existing educational programs in the NSF Center for use
in programs that target underrepresented groups.