* 1106050
* Manipulation of perovskite dielectrics with high electric fields and large strains
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2011,06/30/2016
* Paul Evans, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Lynnette Madsen
* 06/30/2016
* USD 421,438.00

NON-TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION:&lt;br/&gt;It is a persistent and important challenge
to achieve precise, reproducible, and dynamically adjustable control of
materials with applications in electronics, sensing, and clean energy. Electric
fields can be useful in this respect because they can produce dramatic and
surprising changes in the electronic and structural properties of these
materials. New technologies have resulted in the capability to apply large
electric fields to very thin layers without destroying them, yielding large but
not yet understood effects. This project probes the structural changes induced
in thin films of a particular class of materials based on metal complex oxides.
Experiments are being conducted using X-ray scattering, precisely characterizing
the crystallographic structure in applied fields. Undergraduates and graduate
students are involved in experiments at national X-ray scattering facilities and
in the interpretation of the experimental results using theoretical
calculations. Outreach activities based on the concepts in this project bring
concepts related to how the atomic-scale structure of materials is modified by
electric fields to wide audiences, including through the creation of on-line
structural models.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL DETAILS:&lt;br/&gt;High
electric fields promise to provide a new degree of freedom in studying and
ultimately controlling and exploiting structural phenomena in perovskite oxide
materials. High fields have the potential to induce structural phase
transitions, to modify the structural symmetry, and to increase the importance
of electrostriction, a largely negligible effect at low electric fields. This
project uses newly developed time-resolved X-ray microdiffraction
characterization techniques to probe the properties of perovskite complex oxides
in high electric fields and at large strains. Experiments are underway to
examine the dynamics of recently reported electric-field-driven structural phase
transitions between rhombohedral and tetragonal phases, probe the relationship
between piezoelectricity and crystallographic symmetry in superlattices, and
explore the limits of electrostrictive distortion in complex oxide dielectrics.
The project is preparing undergraduates and graduate students for careers in
science and technology and exposing them to research at national X-ray
scattering facilities. The atomic structure of these complex oxide materials and
the structural phenomena studied in this project are presented to broad
audiences using a series of interactive on-line structural models.