* 1106182
* Copolymer Nanostructures Containing Polyelectrolyte Blocks and their Complexes with Molecules of Complementary Charge
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2011,05/31/2015
* Judy Riffle, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 05/31/2015
* USD 381,000.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will employ principles of
multiphase block copolymer assembly to delineate the parameter space that
defines the structures, stabilities and release properties of a family of new
block copolybisphosphonate-small molecule nanostructures. Phosphonate groups are
well-known to complex strongly to a myriad of substrates including metals, metal
oxides, hydroxyapatite (bone), tooth enamel, and cationic drugs. Thus,
multiphase copolymers containing blocks with ammonium phosphonate pendant groups
will be synthesized with an emphasis on controlled block molecular weights and
architectures and they will be complexed with low molecular weight cargo
molecules with complementary charges to form nanostructures. Research will focus
on developing relationships among their chemical compositions, block
architectures, nanostructure sizes, shapes, charge, colloidal stabilities and
release characteristics. The knowledge gained will impact our understanding of
the roles of electrostatic complexation and polymer morphology relative to
formation and release of a wide variety of polymeric drug delivery complexes.
Students will have the opportunity to conduct research at the interface of
polymer science and biological sciences. Their work will be integrated into the
diverse, broader nanoscience team in the Institute for Critical Technologies and
Applied Sciences at VA Tech. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NON-TECHNICAL
SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dramatic progress in pharmaceutical sciences and
molecular biology since the 1970s now provides a myriad of therapeutic molecules
with potential for treating diseases and correcting genetic defects. The key
challenge to realize the benefits of these molecules lies in their safe and
effective delivery to the appropriate tissue and cell. Advances in the molecular
engineering of soft materials represent a leading solution to realize the
progress and investments heretofore made. This project introduces a family of
block copolymers containing strongly-complexing polyphosphonate anions that can
be transformed into nanostructures with potential for encapsulating, protecting,
then releasing a wide variety of drugs that have complementary cationic charge.
Students will learn to design and synthesize block copolymers and prepare
nanostructures, and they will work within a broader team to better understand
the properties of their new materials that can benefit society. The project
incorporates an intense effort to recruit and sustain a diverse group of
students at all levels.