* 1106180
* Tailoring Polymer Nanocomposite Properties by Nanoparticle Assembly
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2011,05/31/2014
* Sanat Kumar, Columbia University
* Continuing Grant
* Freddy Khoury
* 05/31/2014
* USD 427,000.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY: Novel materials based on polymer-grafted nanoparticles (NP)
are the focus of this proposal. Since inorganic NPs and organic polymers
typically "dislike" each other, these "hairy" particles behave like block-
copolymers or amphiphiles. They can, therefore, self-assemble into a range of
superstructures when placed in an organic matrix. Understanding the factors
controlling NP assembly, and how this assembly state affects the properties of
the resulting material are the central issues of interest. As part of this
global effort, four questions will be addressed in this proposal, two of which
relate to the fundamentals of the assembly process, while the last two refer to
the relationship between the NP assembly state and resulting properties: (i) Can
the materials science that governs block-copolymer-inspired "hairy" NP assembly
be critically delineated ? (ii) Can NP assembly be directed using external
fields, e.g., shear, with the ultimate goal of designing membranes with
directional transport properties? (iii) Can grafted NPs be assembled at
interfaces with the aim of compatibilizing immiscible polymer blends? Note that
this proposal will only address experimental aspects here, but shall leverage
two parallel theoretical efforts in the PIs group. Thus, a combined theory and
experiment based approach will be used to understand the fundamental
underpinnings of the applications of this novel class of materials.

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY: The main assertion of this proposal is that the control
over the spatial distribution of nanoparticles is central to creating new
polymeric materials with tunable properties. Thus, it is expected that the
proposed work will critically impact a range of novel applications, e.g., self-
healing materials, organic photovoltaics, batteries, water purification
membranes, drug delivery, and advanced lithography. These transformative
research activities are coupled to extensive education and outreach activities.
Motivated by recent successes in recruiting high school and undergraduate
students for summer research, the PI will recruit (and retain) underrepresented
students, both women and minorities, into the Chemical Engineering department at
Columbia. The PI is also working with the Chemical Engineering department at the
City College of New York and the New York Academy of Sciences to bring together
academics in the Greater New York area (faculty and students), local industry
and national laboratories in an annual chemical engineering symposium. The goal
is, not only to place students into local industry, but also to attract
industrial participants into higher degree and/or refresher programs at
Columbia.