* 1106364
* Superhard Metals
* MPS,DMR
* 11/15/2011,10/31/2015
* Richard Kaner, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing Grant
* Michael J. Scott
* 10/31/2015
* USD 692,000.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY Transition metal borides have attracted increasing interest
due to their physical properties that combine high hardness and electrical
conductivity with straightforward ambient pressure synthesis. If designed
properly, superhard metallic borides could lead to improved cutting tools and
wear-resistant coatings. Rhenium diboride (ReB2) is a good example of this new
and growing class of superhard, metallic borides. With support from the Solid
State and Materials Chemistry Program, the possibility of improving on the
properties of ReB2 by making solid solutions of ReB2 with other transition
metals to activate dislocation-pinning mechanisms that could create harder
materials will be explored. Less expensive transition metal borides will be
synthesized by replacing rhenium with the relatively inexpensive transition
metal tungsten. By completely replacing Re with W and increasing the boron
concentration, another interesting boride, tungsten tetraboride (WB4), can be
made which appears to have comparable hardness to ReB2. After characterizing its
physical properties including micro- and nano-indentation, ambient and high
pressure X-ray diffraction and resonant ultrasound spectroscopy of both
polycrystalline and single crystalline WB4, its structure will be reexamined
using neutron diffraction. This powerful tool should enable the determination of
the exact positions of the boron atoms in the unit cell, something that is
currently not known. This should provide better insight into the bulk modulus,
high hardness and other properties of WB4. Making solid solutions of WB4 with
other transition metal elements such as Ta, Mo, Cr and Mn, will be carried out
in order to potentially increase hardness and impart improved corrosion
protection, thermal stability and fracture toughness. A long-term goal of this
project is to explore the feasibility of using these superhard, metallic borides
for cutting tools. By taking advantage of their electrical conductivity, desired
shapes will be cut using electric discharge machining (EDM). Cutting tool
inserts will be made by EDM, and properties such as wear resistance will be
tested. Coatings will be developed and friction tests carried out. Broader
impact of this project will be achieved by engaging undergraduates in the
research and providing high school students and teachers with lectures and
demonstrations of materials and their applications. NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY The
search for new superhard metals holds both great scientific and practical
interest. Scientifically, an understanding of how and why materials known for
their malleability can be turned into ultra-incompressible, superhard compounds
will be gained. Practically, these metallic materials, no matter how hard, can
be cut into precise shapes using a readily available process known as electric
discharge machining. This will enable the exploration of their possible use for
milling, sawing and drilling. Electric discharge machining will be used to turn
these new materials into tools that will be tested for their ability to cut
ferrous metals. Scratch resistant coatings with low friction surfaces will also
be developed and tested. Broader impact of these projects will be achieved by
engaging undergraduates in the research and providing high school students and
teachers with lectures and demonstrations of materials and their applications.