* 1106947
* Collaborative Research: Cyberinfrastructure for Phase-Space Mapping - Free Energies, Phase Equilibria and Transition Paths
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2010,09/30/2012
* Lev Gelb, University of Texas at Dallas
* Continuing Grant
* Evelyn Goldfield
* 09/30/2012
* USD 103,190.00

David Kofke of the State University of New York at Buffalo, Sharon Glotzer of
the University of Michigan, Peter Cummings of Vanderbilt University, David
Chandler of the University of California at Berkeley, and Lev Gelb of Washingon
University are supported by NSF's Division of Chemistry and Division of Chemical
and Transport Systems, under the Division of Chemistry's Cyberinfrastructure and
Research Facilities Program. This collaborative project will develop
cyberinfrastructure that will enable the routine application of molecular
simulation methods to the calculation of free energies, phase equilibria, and
transition paths. This application area is the focus because: (a) the relevant
physical phenomena are of great scientific and practical importance; (b) robust
and user-friendly software for this general class of calculations is nearly non-
existent; (c) the relevant techniques can be formulated in a general way, so
with careful development the new infrastructure will apply to a very broad range
of systems and phenomena; (d) the area will benefit from advances in
methodology, which will make the techniques better suited for emerging problems
in nanotechnology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will make available an
important class of simulation methods that are presently underutilized by
nonspecialists. Also, the infrastructure will be developed in a way that
facilitates coordination among all those engaged in the development and
implementation of simulation methods, potentially seeding an open-source
movement in molecular and mesoscale simulation. Workshops, educational modules,
and outreach activities with industrial partners will maximize dissemination,
and undergraduate and graduate instructional activities are planned which will
incorporate results quickly into courses.&lt;br/&gt;