* 1106717
* Bayesian Variable Selection and Grouping
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/2011,07/31/2015
* Fei Liu, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 07/31/2015
* USD 121,279.00

The recent advancements in science and technology present a huge challenge of
handling large amount of data. Often the main objective is to retain the
relevant features or covariates in the data and to filter out the redundant
variables. In the statistical framework, this is known as variable selection.
The problem becomes extremely difficult when there are a large number of
covariates in comparison to the available sample size. Despite the great deal of
research effort on variable selection, knowledge on modeling the dependence
between the important variables is very limited and urgently needed in many
fields. Penalization based techniques like Lasso can be used for variable
selection purpose, but it cannot detect any grouping or dependency structure
between the covariates. While methods like Elastic-Net and Octagonal Shrinkage
and Clustering Algorithm for Regression (OSCAR) may be used to incorporate
grouping, one apparent major drawback for such methods is that they are not
based on any probabilistic framework. The project aims to develop probabilistic
models or priors incorporating the dependency relationship, for simultaneous
variable selection and grouping of closely related variables. The developed
model will automate the process as much as possible using highly flexible
Bayesian models characterized by a special dependency structure. The special
dependency structure is formulated through an extension of the Laplace matrices
of graphs (graph Laplacian) used in the machine learning and pattern recognition
literature for finding good clusters. The proposed prior distribution for the
graph Laplacian allows conjugacy and thereby greatly simplifies the computation.
The graph Laplacian prior proposed in this research is very useful for small and
moderately high dimension data sets. For data sets with a massive number of
predictors, explicit modeling of the pair wise dependence through graph
Laplacian is infeasible. Therefore, another goal in this research is to build a
coherent Bayesian model which is capable of reducing the dimension and at the
same time detecting the clusters of the nonzero coefficients through the graph
Laplacian prior formulation (on the reduced dimension data set) for very high
dimensional data sets. The proposed Bayesian Variable Selection and Grouping
methods would be developed under continuous response data, as well as binary and
count response data framework.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Due to enormous progress of
computer technology, explosion of the internet based information, and emerging
fields in biological sciences, high-dimensional complex data sets are now very
common in our life. The first big challenge handling such data sets is to
identify important features or covariates in them that are directly related and
most important to the desired response or outcomes. In statistics this is
commonly referred to as variable selection. This is the first objective of this
project. Second goal of this project is to find any grouping pattern among the
selected variables and enhance the understanding of how the features or
covariates are related among themselves. The investigator proposes a new
methodological framework to address these challenges. To account for any related
uncertainty the proposed methodology is based on probabilistic or Bayesian
framework. The practical implementation of the proposed models is done by
developing fast computer algorithms, which are able to handle data sets of any
size. The proposed work has enormous potential for real life applications,
especially in the field of computer science, engineering, genetics, marketing
research, and medicine. For example, the methods can be used to detect active
genes and study the relationship between those active genes in biology. Another
example arises in marketing segmentation for targeting a smaller market and
helping the decision makers to effectively reach all customers. The principal
investigator will distribute freely available and easy to use software along
with a short tutorial, which will allow researchers from other disciplines to
address their own scientific questions using the proposed methods. Based on the
ideas developed in this project the principal investigator will develop new
graduate courses, enhance the existing courses, and actively involve students in
the research. This will train the current generation of students to deal with
future challenges.