* 1106225
* GOALI: Tailoring the Electronic Structure of Few-Layer Graphene for Electronic and Optoelectronic Applications
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2015
* Tony Heinz, Columbia University
* Continuing Grant
* Z.  Ying
* 08/31/2015
* USD 569,606.00

Technical: This GOALI project aims to develop a systematic understanding of the
key electronic and optical properties of few-layer graphene and to apply this
knowledge to exploratory electronic and photonic devices. The project involves
collaboration between academia (Columbia University and Case Western Reserve
University) and industry (IBM T. J. Watson Research Center). Recent research has
revealed the remarkable electronic and optical properties of single-layer
graphene. Few-layer graphene retains many of the unique properties of single-
layer graphene while also providing much more flexibility in electronic
structure, including the availability of a tunable band gap. Through this
research project, scientists investigate how doping, electric fields and
crystallographic stacking alter the properties of few-layer graphene material.
Measurement techniques supporting these investigations include electrical
transport characterization, light absorption in the optical, infrared, and
terahertz spectral ranges, and Raman spectroscopy of phonons. The studies
examine both pristine few-layer graphene samples and films in electrostatically
gated device structures, which allow tuning of carrier densities and applied
electric fields. The knowledge gained from these investigations will inform
research on distinctive electronic and optoelectronic device applications of
few-layer graphene, such as field-effect transistors with high on-off ratios and
tunable infrared detectors and emitters.&lt;br/&gt;Non-technical: This project
addresses basic research issues in a topical area of materials science with
potential technological relevance. The research investigates the electronic and
optical properties of few-layer graphene, a material that consists of ordered
carbon films of just a few atomic layers in thickness. The project uses this
knowledge to examine model electronic and photonic devices based on this novel
material system. Success of the research will expand our fundamental
understanding of the properties of electrons in few-layer graphene and their
interaction with electric fields and light. In addition, applications of few-
layer graphene in electronics and photonics have the potential to impact fields
ranging from information technology to environmental monitoring. Through
integrated industry-academia collaboration, the program provides opportunities
for the training of graduate and undergraduate students in materials and in
device fabrication, characterization and modeling.