* 1106044
* Dynamics of Double-Stranded DNA in Confined Geometries
* MPS,DMR
* 09/15/2011,08/31/2014
* Helmut Strey, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Continuing Grant
* Aleksandr Simonian
* 08/31/2014
* USD 330,000.00

ID: MPS/DMR/BMAT(7623) 1106044 PI: Strey, Helmut ORG: SUNY Stony
Brook&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Title: Dynamics of double-stranded DNA in confined
geometries&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;INTELLECTUAL MERIT: This proposal is motivated
by previous work from the PI's lab on the diffusion of double-stranded DNA (ds-
DNA) molecules in 2-dimensional cavity arrays. This work investigated by
fluorescence imaging the diffusion of linear DNA through a medium of precisely
controlled (and known) pore structure. This structure was a periodic, two-
dimensional hexagonal array of spherical cavities interconnected by short
circular holes. Tracking many single molecule trajectories, it was found that,
for DNA radius of gyration approaching the cavity diameter, diffusion is
dominated by the sporadic hopping of DNA between cavities, a mechanism predicted
by the entropic barriers transport theory. Hopping corresponds to
configurational fluctuations that allow passage of a flexible polymer through a
pore constriction smaller than the average coil size. The diffusion of relaxed
ds-DNA circles has recently been compared with that of linear DNA of the same
length. It is observed that circular molecules diffuse from 2.5 to 5.6 times
slower than corresponding linear molecules of the same molecular weight, and 3.7
to 10.6 times slower than corresponding linear molecules of the same average
dimension. Such results qualitatively reveal that linear molecules may form
loops during translocation through holes between cavities, but the probability
of such events is low. The predominant mode of diffusion for linear molecules is
end first. This proposal addresses this passage in more detail. Does a polymer
thread by one of its ends or loop by one of its mid-segments or do both
processes occur with equal facility? This question is addressed in several
stages that independently address important fundamental questions in polymer
dynamics: (1) Create 2-color end-labeled molecules of varying molecular weights
that will enable the study of internal and solution polymer dynamics using
fluorescence correlation spectroscopy. (2) Study internal polymer dynamics in
slit-like nanochannels to deepen our understanding of laterally confined
polymers using FCS and optical microscopy. (3) Measure partitioning and hopping
frequencies of linear ds-DNA and nicked circular DNA between cavities and
connecting channels as a function DNA length and the array dimensions (height,
cavity diameter, constriction width, and length). (4) Characterize the threading
dynamics of double-labeled DNA in cavity arrays.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;BROADER
IMPACTS: Many technologies for macromolecular manipulation, purification, and
separation rely on an environment of molecular level constraints to create
selective macromolecular motion. It is proposed to develop a deeper
understanding of the thermodynamics and dynamics of nanoscale polymer
confinement by preparing fluidic devices and cavity arrays in which
macromolecules can be examined by single molecule fluorescence visualization.
The project will also address a very important technological area of separating
different polymer topologies (e.g. linear vs. circular). The main educational
goal is to train and mentor graduate and undergraduate students to enable them
to pursue their career in research and engineering. This research effort will
produce students that have a rigorous science background, are independent
thinkers, and have an understanding of intellectual property and real world
applications. In addition, the PI will continue to reach out to high-school
students through the Stony Brook Simons program as mentor and science judge.
Some of those students, after their lab experience, have been very successful in
science competitions such as LISF and the Intel competition. In addition, the PI
will host and design a website that allows sharing of techniques and tricks in
nanofabrication and nano/microfluidics with the research community. Such a
website will enable researchers and students to learn and share the intricacies
of nano- and microfluidics.