* 1106569
* Collaborative Research:  Fog Drop Reactions of Green Leaf Volatiles as a Source of Secondary Organic Aerosols
* GEO,AGS
* 09/15/2011,08/31/2015
* Kalliat Valsaraj, Louisiana State University
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Edgerton
* 08/31/2015
* USD 393,561.00

Green leaf volatiles (GLVs) are potentially significant but of unknown
importance as a source of aqueous-phase secondary organic aerosol (SOA). GLVs
are reactive, oxygenated, organic compounds that are emitted from plants in
significant quantities and that can react both at the surface of fog drops and
within the bulk of the drops. These aqueous reactions can occur via
photochemically generated oxidants such as hydroxyl radical, singlet molecular
oxygen, and excited triplet states of organic compounds. GLVs are also oxidized
in the gas phase to make more water soluble products that could also participate
in fog-drop reactions to form SOA. The hypothesis driving this research is that
the uptake and photooxidation of GLVs and their first generation oxidation
products can be a significant source of secondary organic carbon in fogwater.
This hypothesis will be tested through four objectives: (1) Collect and
chemically characterize fogwaters from Louisiana and California. (2) Measure GLV
photooxidation, changes in organic composition, and the formation of SOA in
illuminated fogwaters. (3) Quantify photooxidants in the illuminated fog waters
and their reactivity with GLVs. (4) Integrate results from each objective in
order to determine the mechanisms for GLV reactions in fogwaters and assess the
significance of GLVs as an aqueous source of SOA.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A post-
doctoral scholar, a graduate student, and undergraduate students will be
mentored during the project, including through an LSU-UCD undergraduate exchange
research program. The results from the research will be integrated into
undergraduate and graduate teaching at both institutions. And, because fog
events can affect the concentrations of regulated pollutants, especially PM2.5,
in both Louisiana and California, results from this work will inform state air
quality policy agencies.