* 1106494
* Monte Carlo Methods for Analysis of Large Spatial Data
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2011,06/30/2015
* Marc Genton, Texas A&M Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 06/30/2015
* USD 190,000.00

Spatial data sets are analyzed in many scientific disciplines, such as ecology,
geology, and environmental sciences. However, the classical approaches, such as
Kriging and Bayesian hierarchical Gaussian modeling, often break down for large
data sets due to expensive matrix inverse operations, whose computational
complexity increases in cubic order with the number of spatial locations. To
alleviate this difficulty, various approximation approaches, such as covariance
tapering, lower-dimensional space spatial process approximation, likelihood
approximation and Markov random field approximations, have been proposed under
the general idea of approximating the original spatial model with a
computationally convenient model. A general concern on these approaches is the
adequacy of approximation. In this proposal, the investigators propose three new
approaches, Bayesian auxiliary lattice approach, Bayesian site selection
approach and marginal inference approach. The Bayesian auxiliary lattice
approach introduces an auxiliary lattice to the space of observations and
defines a hidden Gaussian Markov random field on the auxiliary lattice. By using
some analytical results of Gaussian Markov random fields, the Bayesian auxiliary
lattice approach completely avoids the problem of matrix inversion in likelihood
evaluation. The Bayesian site selection approach reformulates the problem of
spatial model estimation as a problem of Bayesian variable selection. It works
with only a small proportion of the data at each iteration and thus
significantly reduces the dimension of the data. The marginal inference approach
is proposed based on the idea of bootstrap resampling. Like the Bayesian site
selection approach, it works with only a small proportion of the data at each
iteration and thus significantly reduces the dimension of the data. It is worth
noting that the Bayesian site selection and marginal inference approaches are
conceptually very different from the approximation approaches existing in the
literature. The existing approximation approaches are to approximate the
original model using a computationally convenient model. Instead, the Bayesian
site selection and marginal inference approaches seek to reduce the dimension of
the data, while not sacrificing the complexity of the original model. In this
proposal, the investigators also extend the proposed approaches to spatio-
temporal models with applications to satellite climate data. How to deal with
missing data for spatio-temporal models are addressed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
intellectual merit of this project is to provide some computationally efficient
or data dimension reduction approaches for statistical analysis of large spatial
data. The new approaches address some core problems in spatial data analysis,
such as large matrix inversion and missing data imputation. The new approaches
are expected to play a major role in statistical analysis of geostatistical
data, satellite climate data and other large spatial data. This project will
have broader impacts in both communities of spatial statistics and computational
atmospheric sciences. The research results will be disseminated to the
communities via direct collaboration with researchers in other disciplines,
conference presentations, books, and papers to be published in academic
journals. The project will have also significant impacts on education through
direct &lt;br/&gt;involvement of graduate students in the project and
incorporation of results into undergraduate and graduate courses.