* 1106362
* Ethnoarchaeological investigation of the Yup'ik seal poke storage system in southwestern Alaska
* GEO,OPP
* 08/01/2011,07/31/2016
* Liam Frink, University of Nevada Las Vegas
* Continuing Grant
* Anna M. Kerttula
* 07/31/2016
* USD 232,750.00

This is an ethnoarchaelogical investigation into the seal poke storage system
that was utilized for storing subsistence resources by Arctic peoples since
prehistoric times. The seal poke storage system was a highly innovative and
efficient subsistence technique that was used across the Arctic and until just
recently by the Yup?ik people of coastal southwestern Alaska. Women would
expertly construct the airtight storage container from the whole skin of seals.
Inside they would put the blubber, other fish, and greens and place the
containers in pits of cool water. Inside the blubber would render into oil and
the other contents would marinate and could be successfully stored for up to
five years. Today however AlaskaNative people store their oil in plastic
buckets, which can go rancid in the summer heat. This research will document how
the pokes are made and used and the possible effects that traditional storing
and processing methods in this region may have had on the quality of foods. In
addition, long term food storage systems are a key element to increasing
populations, which in turn can lead to more complex social systems.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI has worked in villages along the Alaskan coast
since 1996 and will collaborate with Yup?ik elder women and men (the last
generation to know how to construct the pokes) to reconstruct two seal pokes and
store them in the traditional manner. Over a two year period the project will
compare the nutritional composition of the seal poke oil with samples from
families who will keep their oil in plastic buckets. This projects? combination
of field and laboratory analysis will contribute to a finer understanding of
subsistence foods, health, and changed technology. The data generated on the
nutritional and toxicological differences between traditional and contemporary
practices may have significant impact on health and practice in this region (and
elsewhere) and promises to benefit Alaskan Native people. This investigation
will not only provide ethnoarchaeological information on how people constructed
this specific storage system but ultimately information that can be applied to
the archaeological record and provide insights into the evolution of social
complexity in the Arctic.