* 1106054
* Collaborative Research: Large-Aperture Experiment to Detect the Dark Age (LEDA)
* MPS,AST
* 08/15/2011,01/31/2016
* Gregory Taylor, University of New Mexico
* Continuing Grant
* Ralph Gaume
* 01/31/2016
* USD 432,876.00

Technical Abstract&lt;br/&gt;The Large Aperture Experiment to Detect the Dark
Ages (LEDA) project seeks to detect hyperfine emission from neutral Hydrogen (21
cm rest wavelength) in the intergalactic medium about 100 million years after
the Big Bang (redshifts 16-40). A detection would deliver the first
observational constraints on models of structure formation and on the formation
of the first stars and black holes in the Universe. LEDA will develop and
integrate signal processing instrumentation into the new first station of the
Long Wavelength Array (LWA). This comprises a large-N correlator serving all 512
dipole antennas of the LWA-1, leveraging a packetized CASPER architecture and
combining FPGAs and GPUs for the F and X stages. Iterative calibration and
imaging will rely on warped snapshot imaging and be drawn from a GPU-enabled
library (CUWARP) that is designed specifically to support wide-field full
polarization imaging with fixed dipole arrays. Calibration techniques will
include correction for ionospheric refraction and direction dependent dipole
gains, and exploration of pulsar data analysis to improve performance. Accurate
calibration and imaging will be crucial requirements for LEDA, necessary to
subtract the bright foreground sky and detect the faint neutral Hydrogen signal.
From the computational standpoint, LEDA is a O(100) TeraFlop per second
challenge that enables a scalable architecture looking toward development of
radio arrays requiring power efficient 10 PetaFlop per second performance. Stage
two of the Hydrogen Epoch of Reionization Array (HERA2) is one
example.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Lay Abstract&lt;br/&gt;When did the first stars
form? These stars are expected to be much more massive than the stars that are
around us today. Did supermassive black holes form at the same time, earlier, or
later? One of the great challenges of cosmology today is the study of these
first generation objects. Their formation is widely hypothesized to have begun
about 100 million years after the Big Bang, but no data are available to test
this theory. The only available means to study the Universe at so young an age
(just 1% of what it is today) is via electromagnetic radiation from the
intergalactic medium between the stars and black holes. Today, this is hot and
ionized plasma, but in the early Universe it was a vast reservoir of cold
neutral Hydrogen gas that fed the formation of the first stars and black holes
and radiated long wavelength radiation copiously.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The LEDA
project seeks to apply frontier radio astronomical techniques to make the first
detection of this signal. LEDA will build a "radio camera" for deployment to the
Long Wavelength Array, a radio telescope in New Mexico whose first 100m-diameter
aperture was recently completed. The LEDA camera will combine several innovative
technologies and data analysis techniques, giving students and young scientists
the opportunity to join in cutting-edge science and development of the most
advanced tools. In particular, LEDA will harness the massive computing power and
flexibility of Graphics Processing Units (GPUs) - the engines that power video
games - to make instantaneous images of nearly the whole sky at up to 10 meters
wavelength (10 million times longer than visible
radiation).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;From these images the light of our and other
galaxies will be subtracted with high accuracy, enabling a search for signals
from the dawn of the Universe. LEDA will push the frontiers of cosmology while
contributing groundwork for future radio astronomical facilities where massive
computing and signal processing systems will be lynchpins. Cross-disciplinary
outgrowths of the LEDA effort will benefit astronomical, computational and solar
sciences.