* 1106056
* Symposium on Mechanics of Development, Farmington, Pennsylvania, June 21, 2011
* ENG,CBET
* 05/01/2011,04/30/2012
* Larry Taber, Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Kaiming Ye
* 04/30/2012
* USD 10,000.00

1106056, Taber&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A one-day symposium on the Mechanics of
Development will be held on June 21, 2011, immediately prior to the 2011 Summer
Bioengineering Conference in Farmington, Pennsylvania. This symposium will be
the Third US National Symposium on Frontiers in Biomechanics, which is sponsored
by the US National Committee on Biomechanics (USNCB). The meeting will bring
together developmental biologists and bioengineers/physicists to discuss recent
advances in this new field and how new collaborations can attack specific
problems in embryonic development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Developmental biologists
have been interested in morphogenesis and the fundamental physical forces that
shape embryos and organs for well over a hundred years, but with the advent of
molecular genetic techniques most interest turned toward mapping the signaling
pathways that regulate development. This research has been extraordinarily
fruitful, providing insights into the causes of human disease and birth defects.
In the meantime, however, the physical aspects of development have received
relatively little attention, leading to a fundamental lack of understanding of
the connection between molecular mechanisms and the physical processes that
actually construct the embryo. Recently, some developmental biologists have
begun to recognize this gap and now consider the physical aspects of
embryogenesis in their research. To address these questions a diverse range of
ad-hoc collaborations and interdisciplinary groups of biologists, engineers,
physicists, and mathematicians have been formed. However, these collaborations
remain few in number.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The main objectives of this meeting
are (1) to foster collaborations between engineers and developmental biologists;
(2) to stimulate interest among engineers in embryonic development; and (3) to
define problems in developmental biology that deserve more attention in the
future, especially those problems that are relatively unknown or
underappreciated by the engineering community. At this meeting, speakers will
discuss how they attack specific problems in embryonic development, as well as
what they feel are the most important areas for future study. This symposium
apparently will be the first national meeting to bring together leading
researchers in developmental biology and biomechanical engineering to discuss
the physical mechanisms of development, focusing primarily on morphogenesis. The
focus of this Symposium on the interface between biomechanics and development
and its venue prior to a large national bioengineering meeting provides a unique
opportunity to expand the breadth of the field and encourage new
investigators.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: This meeting will shape
the emerging fields of developmental mechanics, synthetic biology, and tissue
engineering. These apparently diverse fields share many common questions and
goals but have little opportunity to interact. This meeting proposes to bring
together both prominent researchers and young investigators from these three
fields seeking new areas of collaboration and research.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: A noteworthy feature of Frontiers meetings
is their emphasis on young investigators. Typically more than half of those in
attendance are Ph.D. students, postdoctoral fellows, and young faculty. Funds
from this grant will provide support to as many young investigators as possible.
A lunch-time workshop and panel discussion will provide ample opportunity for
one-on-one interactions between speakers and symposium participants.