* 1106854
* Studies in Factorial and Response Surface Designs
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/2011,12/31/2014
* Hongquan Xu, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 12/31/2014
* USD 100,000.00

The objectives of this proposal are to develop new design theories and
methodology for factor screening and response surface exploration and to
construct efficient factorial and composite designs for practical use. The first
part of this proposal studies fractional factorial designs constructed via
quaternary codes. These designs often have a complex aliasing structure and a
novel approach is introduced for finding defining relations among factors. A
general theory is developed for obtaining important design properties such as
resolution and wordlength pattern. Novel methods and algorithms are proposed for
constructing optimal designs. These designs are shown to have better statistical
properties than existing ones in the literature in terms of aberration,
resolution and projectivity. The second part studies orthogonal array-based
composite designs that consist of a two-level factorial design and a three-level
orthogonal array. These composite designs have many desirable features and are
effective for factor screening and response surface modeling. They can be used
in a single experiment or in a sequential experiment. Efficient composite
designs are constructed for practical use and they are shown to be better than
central composite designs and other existing designs. This proposal employs a
combination of mathematical, coding-theoretical and computational tools to
tackle various important issues such as design properties and construction
methods.

Experimental design and analysis is an effective and commonly used tool in
scientific investigations and industrial applications. Factorial designs are
cost-efficient experimental plans for identifying important factors from a pool
of variables; response surface designs are crucial for understanding a process
or system and building empirical models. Such designs have been successfully
used in industrial manufacturing for improving quality and productivity. Recent
novel applications include biomedical experiments conducted at UCLA in order to
find effective antiviral drug combinations or drug cocktails for treating herpes
simplex virus and vesicular stomatitis virus. This proposal aims at developing
novel methodology for constructing new efficient factorial and response surface
designs. The results of the proposed research can be quickly assimilated into
undergraduate and graduate courses on design and analysis of experiments for
course enrichment. The proposed methods and designs can be applied in a wide
variety of fields of application, including engineering, physical and chemical
sciences, medicine and life sciences. The proposed research can lead to better
practice in experimentation and help shorten investigation time and reduce
experimental cost tremendously.