* 1106142
* Phenotypic Modulation of Smooth Muscle Cells on Biodegradable Elastomeric Substrates
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2011,06/30/2015
* Shanfeng Wang, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* Joseph A. Akkara
* 06/30/2015
* USD 251,600.00

This award by the Biomaterials program in the Division of Materials Research to
University of Tennessee at Knoxville is to design, synthesize, modify and
fabricate biodegradable and photo-linkable elastomeric polymers based on poly
(caprolactone acrylates) with multiple side chains. These modified and
functionalized polymers may find potential application as scaffolds to control
the growth and differentiation of smooth muscle cells. The surfaces of the poly
(caprolactone acrylates) will be modified by incorporating photo-polymerizable
hydrophilic polyethylene glycol and poly (L-lysine) at varied length and
compositions. These modified polymers with special surface features will be used
to fabricate into pre-designed 2D and 3D substrates and scaffolds, and later
will be evaluated for tissue growth with modulated phenotype and other
behaviors. Intrinsic material properties of these polymeric scaffolds will be
calibrated to modulate and control the cell growth and differentiation. By
integrating rational synthesis strategies and microfabrication methods of
polymeric materials, the researcher will quantify, differentiate, and correlate
the cell-material interactions to obtain precise understanding on how these
polymer scaffolds and the cells work together as one system. The scientific
broader impact of the project is in developing an understanding in the use of
polymeric scaffolds for the control the phenotype of smooth muscle cells, and
potential applications of these modified cells in the repair and regeneration of
cardiovascular tissues. The researcher is planning to develop workshops and
courses in Biomaterials, and Surface Science of Polymers and Biomaterials and
Biomaterials Fabrication and Processing for graduate and undergraduate students.
Providing summer research experience for undergraduate students; recruitment and
mentoring of students from minority and underrepresented groups; dissemination
of discoveries to K-12 students through outreach program; developing lab/course
modules for high-school teachers and students; and distance education are some
of the other outreach activities planned in this project.

This project is to design, synthesize, modify and fabricate biodegradable and
photo-linkable elastomeric polymers with multiple side chains of different
length and composition for potential application of these polymers as scaffolds
to control the growth and differentiation of smooth muscle cells. These modified
polymers with special surface features will be fabricated into pre-designed 2D
and 3D structures and later will be evaluated as tissue scaffolds to modulate
the phenotype and other cell behavior. Intrinsic material properties of these
polymeric scaffolds will modified to control and modulate the cell growth and
differentiation. Smooth muscle cells with controlled phenotype may find
applications in the repair and regeneration of cardiovascular tissues. With this
project, the researcher plans to develop workshops and courses in Biomaterials,
and Surface Science of Polymers and Biomaterials and Biomaterials Fabrication
and Processing. Additionally, this research project will be integrated with the
following training and outreach activities: 1) summer research experience for
undergraduate students; 2) recruitment and mentoring of students from minority
and underrepresented groups; 3) dissemination of discoveries to K-12 students
through outreach program; and 4) developing lab/course modules for high-school
teachers and students.