* 1106691
* Multivariate Depth and Quantile Functions: Foundations and Applications
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2015
* Robert Serfling, University of Texas at Dallas
* Continuing Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 08/31/2015
* USD 299,452.00

High dimension and/or complexity is now standard in applications of statistical
data analysis, and typically data now is multivariate. Advances in computational
resources make it feasible to implement quite sophisticated methods. This
supports the development of powerful approaches that systematically take into
account the special geometric features intrinsic to multivariate data sets.
Especially important is the setting of nonparametric multivariate methods. This,
of course, presents conceptual challenges. In particular, multivariate depth and
quantile functions now provide a major approach that has become well-established
in recent years but also is in active further development. In this project, the
PI addresses significant open issues and directions in both the foundations and
the applications of this approach. The latter inspire the former, and the former
yields tools for the latter. This project advances core statistical science by
developing useful extended foundations and underpinnings for multivariate depth
and quantile functions. The results have even wider application and broadly
enhance the role of statistical science in applications, permitting new kinds of
problems to be treated more meaningfully and more powerfully. Central themes of
the project are: I. Transformations to Produce Equivariance and Invariance of
Statistical Procedures, II. Spatial Depth-Based Trimming to Produce Robustness
without Undue Computational Burden, and III. Development and Exploitation of a
New Synergy Between Depth Function Methods and Level Set Methods for Treating
Contours. Topic I provides tools for the modification of statistical procedures
so that they acquire desired certain equivariance or invariance properties that
may not hold otherwise. Topic II investigates recent solutions to two related
but different problems: (i) robustification of the spatial quantile and
outlyingness functions, and (ii) simultaneously computationally easy, robust,
and affine equivariant scatter estimators. Topic III investigates a promising
but hitherto unexplored synergy between depth function methods on one hand and
level set methods on the other. Besides these major thrusts, the project also
addresses formulation of multivariate L-statistics, systematic exploration of a
depth-outlyingness-quantile-rank paradigm, studies on integrated data depth, and
studies on depth methods in functional data analysis. As a whole, the project is
intended to have transformative impacts on modern approaches to data handling
through statistical science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Statistical data analysis and
modeling now accommodates pressing new arenas of application involving data that
is multivariate, using many variables taken together. All areas of science,
engineering, government, and industry now routinely involve multivariate data,
typically complex in structure and high in number of variables. The three key
technical thrusts of this project address important and timely concerns arising
in dealing with multivariate data. For example, in dealing with outliers in
multivariate data, we need the classification of which points are outliers not
to change simply when there is a simple change of coordinate system, such as
metric to British. Also, for example, the contours that delineate the middle 50%
or 75% or 90% of a data set should be determined efficiently and accurately
without undue interference from extreme outlying data points not central to the
data. Or, for example, when striking geometric features or patterns are
discovered as in data mining, it is necessary to determine whether such findings
are genuine features inherently meaningful or whether they are simply artifacts
of the particular coordinate system that has been adopted and to be ignored.
Another key effort of this project is to develop a new framework that brings
together two different but related methodologies in multivariate analysis that
have been recently developed independently (level sets and depth functions) and
enables them to be applied together in a coordinated manner. This strengthens
the understanding and the roles of these methodologies in their particular
domains of application. The project also contributes to education and
development of human resources in statistical science by involving graduate
students and undergraduate students. Cross-stimulation among project
participants, which may include visiting researchers, is achieved through
regular meetings and a team approach. The participation of underrepresented
groups and junior faculty and professionals is encouraged and fostered by the
PI. The results and findings of the project are disseminated by the PI through
high-profile conference presentations, journal publications, website postings,
and introduction into the graduate curriculum.