* 1106293
* Theoretical Approaches to Multi-Scale Complex Systems
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2014
* Zohar Nussinov, Washington University
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 08/31/2014
* USD 255,000.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY

This award supports research and education in theoretical condensed matter
physics aimed at revealing the potentially complex structure of materials. The
PI will use ideas from statistical mechanics and network theory to reveal
natural structures in various materials across spatial and temporal scales.
Analysis of experimental data of structural glasses as well as complex
electronic materials will be performed with the aid of methods developed in the
course of the research.

The research has two thrusts:

(1) In complex materials there are in general possibly many important length and
time scales that characterize correlations. Aside from multiple correlation
lengths describing the exponential decay of correlations, in some materials
there are length scales that characterize periodic spatial or temporal
modulations. The PI will investigate the evolution of these length scales as a
function of temperature and other parameters.

(2) The PI will demonstrate the existence of quantum dynamical heterogeneities
in electronic systems, similar to those in classical glass formers. The PI will
establish the existence of such heterogeneities via mapping to classical models
and methods to analyze experimental data.

This award also supports training a postdoctoral research associate and a
graduate student as well as the further developing courses on advanced
statistical mechanics and quantum information. The PI will also engage high
school and undergraduate students to design software packages that illustrate
the use of some of the techniques to be developed during the course of the
research.

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY

This award supports research and education in theoretical condensed matter
physics for the discovery of subtle hidden structures in complex materials.
Currently, there are no universal tools for examining complex physical systems
in a general and systematic way that reveal their pertinent features from the
smallest fundamental unit to the largest scale encompassing the entire system.
In a perfect crystal, a fundamental structure of atoms, called a unit cell, can
be replicated to reproduce the structure of the entire system. This concept
enables a fundamental understanding of many solid materials in great detail. In
complex systems and materials, rich new structures appear on additional
intermediate scales. Some of the oldest and, after several millennia, still
heavily investigated materials are glasses. More recent challenges include the
high temperature superconductors and heavy fermion compounds that exhibit a rich
array of behavior including superconductivity, wherein electrical current flows
without resistance, and complicated magnetic characteristics. It is often
unclear which of the many features of these kinds of physical systems holds the
key to understanding certain properties or phenomena in these materials.
Hypothesized models often fail to provide an adequate or even qualitatively
correct description of important properties of phenomena. The PI aims to develop
innovative methods that pinpoint important features and enable progress by
regarding complex materials and physical systems as large networks and employing
tools from network analysis to flesh out their essential features across scales
of time and length.

This award also supports training a postdoctoral research associate and a
graduate student as well as the further developing courses on advanced
statistical mechanics and quantum information. The PI will also engage high
school and undergraduate students to design software packages that illustrate
the use of some of the techniques to be developed during the course of the
research.