* 1106379
* Dynamics of Localized Photoexcitations in Condensed Matter Systems
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2011,06/30/2016
* Susan Dexheimer, Washington State University
* Continuing Grant
* Linda Sapochak
* 06/30/2016
* USD 391,880.00

Technical abstract: Localization of electronic states plays a critical role in
determining the properties of a wide range of materials: polaron formation has a
profound impact on the charge transport properties of electronic materials, and
formation of self-trapped excitons, or exciton-polarons, dramatically changes
optical properties and energy transport mechanisms. While the equilibrium
properties of quasiparticles are well-established in many systems, a full
understanding of the dynamics of the process of quasiparticle formation has yet
to be achieved. In addition to its fundamental significance, such knowledge
promises a means to understand, and thereby exploit, the fast electronic and
optical response of materials. This project consists of studies of the coupled
electronic and vibrational dynamics inherent to localization, carried out in
quasi-one-dimensional materials in which the strength of the electron-phonon
interactions that drive the localization dynamics can be systematically tuned.
Studies of these systems will be accomplished using femtosecond time-resolved
techniques that are sensitive to electronic, vibrational, and structural
dynamics. The synergistic combination of time-resolved spectroscopic and x-ray
techniques, together with theoretical modeling, promises to enhance the
understanding of photoinduced structural changes, both in these systems and more
generally. Non-technical abstract: Localization of electronic states plays a
critical role in determining the properties of a wide range of materials. The
formation of localized charge carriers, or polarons, has a profound impact on
the charge transport properties of electronic materials, and the formation of
localized electronic excitations (self-trapped excitons or exciton-polarons)
dramatically changes optical properties and energy transport mechanisms. In
addition to its fundamental significance, knowledge of the underlying physics of
localization processes promises a means to understand, and thereby exploit, the
fast electronic and optical response of materials. This project studies the
coupled electronic and vibrational dynamics inherent to localization, carried
out in materials in which the strength of the electron-phonon interactions that
drive the localization dynamics can be systematically tuned. Studies of these
materials will be accomplished using ultrafast time-resolved techniques that are
sensitive to electronic, vibrational, and structural dynamics. The synergistic
combination of time-resolved spectroscopic and x-ray techniques, together with
theoretical modeling, promises to enhance the understanding of photoinduced
structural changes, both in these systems and more generally. This project will
support the work of 2 Ph.D. students. The combination of basic research
involving fundamental issues in condensed matter physics with practical issues
in experiment development provides an excellent training ground; students
working in ultrafast spectroscopy of electronic materials are well-prepared to
enter positions in academia, government laboratories, and hightech industry,
given their background in both basic and applied work.