* 1106411
* Tools for Change: A Project for Stepping Up Retention of Women in the Academic STEM Pipeline
* EHR,HRD
* 09/15/2011,01/31/2015
* Joan Williams, University of California, Hastings College of the Law
* Standard Grant
* Jessie Dearo
* 01/31/2015
* USD 583,265.00

The University of California, Hastings College of the Law ADVANCE PAID project
is a partnership with the Association for Women in Science (AWIS) that focuses
on the development and dissemination of workshop tools and modules to
institutions of higher education. These tools are expected to accomplish several
critical objectives including, providing institutions with economic data that
builds the case for gender equity policies; development and dissemination of
knowledge associated with underrepresented minority women; implementation of
user friendly workshops-in-a-box; improvement and dissemination of survey
protocols and related products; and, leveraging of multiple and easily
accessible outlets for dissemination of relevant information.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit. The UC Hastings project is a strategic
partnership with a national organization that has a complementary focus on
enhancing the representation of women in the academic STEM disciplines. With the
broad network of AWIS and the expertise of the PIs, this partnership will
utilize a train-the-trainer model to provides workshops-in-a-box, develop a
rigorous economic analysis of retaining women in the academy, determine
mechanisms for disaggregating gender bias by race and/or ethnicity and provide
meaningful tools for change dissemination. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact.
The proposed project is expected to reach beyond higher education to include
other AWIS chapters and non-profit STEM organizations. As such, there are
significant broader impacts associated with the workshops. Additionally, by
utilizing the national platform of AWIS, traditional means of dissemination are
broadened to the greatest extent possible. Thus, the outcomes of the project
that are related to women in STEM will easily reach a broad audience and
contribute to engaging both institutions of higher education and STEM
organizations in best practices related to promoting gender equity.