* 1106814
* Collaborative Research: Applied Probability and Time Series Modeling
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2011,04/30/2012
* Hernando Ombao, Brown University
* Continuing Grant
* Haiyan Cai
* 04/30/2012
* USD 31,169.00

An investigation of the properties of Levy-driven CARMA (continuous-time ARMA)
processes will be undertaken and efficient methods of inference developed. The
results will be applied to the study of stochastic volatility models with Levy-
driven CARMA volatility that have applications that go beyond finance to
turbulence and some neuroscience processes. Time series in which the parameters
are constant over time-intervals between change-points constitute an important
class of non-stationary time series which has been found particularly useful in
hydrology, seismology, neuroscience, environmental science and finance.
Properties and applications of a new estimation technique based on the
minimization of the minimum description length of a model that includes the
number of change-points and their locations as parameters will be developed and
extended to cover a general class of processes with structural breaks. It is
hoped that this technique can also be adapted for detection of both additive and
innovational outliers. Linear and nonlinear models for multivariate time series,
with a view towards modeling temporal brain dynamics, will also play a major
role in this research proposal. These models include a mixture of possibly
nonlinear vector autoregressions and a class of not necessarily causal vector
autoregressions. The latter class, although linear, exhibits features previously
only associated with nonlinear models and allows for the possibility of
foresight in the sense of dependence of one or more components of future shocks.

In the last fifteen years, there has been a widely-recognized need for the
development of new models and techniques for the analysis of time series data
from scientific, engineering, biomedical, financial, and neuroscience
applications. Some of the features required of these new models are
nonlinearity, complex dependence structures, strong deviations from normality
and non-stationarity. In neuroscience, environmental and financial modeling
there is also a demand for continuous-time models which incorporate these
features. The current proposal addresses these needs. It seeks to enhance
understanding of the physical, biomedical, and economic processes represented by
the models. The development of efficient estimation and simulation techniques
will be an essential component of the research.