* 1106173
* Understanding and Controlling the Growth of Foliated Graphene on Carbon Nanotube Sidewalls
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2011,06/30/2015
* Charles Parker, Duke University
* Continuing Grant
* Z.  Ying
* 06/30/2015
* USD 305,982.00

Technical: This project is on "foliated graphene" or thin carbon sheets grown on
the sidewall of multiwall carbon nanotubes. Studying this materials system from
the nucleation and growth to the atomic level surface chemistry and structure to
the electronic properties will enable a rigorous intellectual assessment of this
unique material and the development of phenomenological models of nucleation and
growth. An iterative nucleation, growth, materials analysis, and properties
measurements feedback loop is expected to be established through this research
project to insure the most rapid and effective knowledge creation and
implementation. A combined kinetic-thermodynamic approach is used to evaluate
foliated graphene nucleation thresholds as well as measure growth rates as a
function of critical parameters such as carbon nanotube diameter, catalyst
nanoparticle size and temperature to understand rate determining steps and
activation energies for the model development. Electron microscopy, Raman
scattering and photoemission spectroscopy measurements are used to examine the
structure, chemistry and graphene-nanotube interfaces as a function of these
nucleation and growth parameters. &lt;br/&gt;Nontechnical: The project addresses
basic research issues in a topical area of materials science and engineering
with potential technological relevance. High charge densities of the graphene
edges will be exploited via supercapacitance (for energy storage), charge
injection (for neural stimulation electrodes), and field emission (for vacuum
microelectronic devices). The research is expected to provide insight into the
growth mechanisms of nanostructured carbon materials. Graduate and undergraduate
students are trained in an interdisciplinary environment for materials growth,
characterization, and modeling.