* 1106223
* Texture and Texture Transformations in Thin Metal Films
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2014
* Shefford Baker, Cornell University
* Continuing Grant
* Gary Shiflet
* 08/31/2014
* USD 402,000.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY: Thin metal films are critical elements in many nano- and
micro-fabricated technologies including microelectronics, optics, sensors, and
catalysts. Due to dimensional constraints, such films are often found to be
textured; that is, the individual metal crystallites comprising the film are
preferentially oriented with certain types of crystal planes parallel to the
film plane. Since the properties of the film depend strongly on the orientations
present, understanding texture is critical to understanding the performance and
reliability of devices containing thin films. There is good general agreement on
the driving forces leading to texture formation. However existing models predict
that only one texture component should occur at equilibrium, while mixed
textures are common. To understand this, the kinetics of texture transformations
in real films must be understood. In this project, the Baker group will study
the kinetics of the transformation from as-deposited to as-annealed texture in
thin metal films. Preliminary work suggested that inhomogeneous 3-D stress
states that arise in such films may stabilize the mixed texture. To investigate
this, the Baker group will produce films with very good control over film
structure and chemistry, characterize film structure, including measurements of
grain size distributions as a function of orientation, and will determine the
volume fractions of the different texture components, and stress states in them,
using in-situ synchrotron x-ray diffraction and TEM methods. They will use a
high-throughput method that allows them to investigate multiple parameters with
every film deposition. Detailed finite element simulations will be conducted to
study the stress distributions within individual crystallites, and analytical
models will be used to link stress states, kinetic models, and thermodynamic
models into a construct that should strongly enhance prediction and control of
thin film texture, and therefore properties.

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY: Thin metal films---metal layers less than one tenth the
thickness of a human hair---are essential elements in computer chips, optical
systems, catalytic converters, and many other high-tech devices. These films are
made up of many tiny metal crystals, called "grains". Because the films are so
thin, grains tend to orient themselves so that certain directions in their
crystal structure align with the plane of the film. The properties of thin
films, and therefore the performance and reliability of devices containing thin
films, depend very sensitively on these orientations. This topic has been
studied for many years but people do not yet have the ability to predict how a
film or a device will behave. The Baker group at Cornell University has proposed
that the way that loads are distributed across the grains can stabilize
different combinations of orientations. To study this, they will make films,
characterize their structure and behavior using sophisticated tools such as the
Cornell High Energy Synchrotron Source (CHESS) and will generate computer models
to help interpret their results. The knowledge generated in this project will
help make it possible to continue to miniaturize the next generation of
nanofabricated devices and should help to improve performance and reliability in
all devices that contain thin metal films. This project will involve
undergraduates at both Cornell and at Houghton College, a small non-PhD-granting
institution in upstate New York. Undergraduate participation will enhance both
the scientific output of the project and the educational experience of those
students. Undergraduates will participate fully in the research, and will
present their work in presentations at professional society meetings and in
peer-reviewed papers. Houghton students will be advised at Houghton by Prof.
Brandon Hoffman, but will spend summers working with the Baker group at Cornell.
Baker group graduate students and post-docs are active in outreach activities to
area schools and institutions. A benefit of the current project is that images
of grain orientation distributions can be quite striking and can often stand on
their own as art, making a nice icebreaker for talking about materials science
to non-scientists.