* 1106543
* ICE-T: In-Cloud Measurements of Black Carbon, Dust, CCN, Cloud Droplet Size and Ice Particle Shapes Over the Caribbean Sea
* GEO,AGS
* 08/15/2011,07/31/2013
* Gregory Kok, Droplet Measurement Technologies
* Continuing Grant
* Bradley F. Smull
* 07/31/2013
* USD 196,814.00

This two-year effort will support collection and interpretation of fundamental
aerosol and cloud microphysical measurements from instrumentation developed by
Droplet Measurement Technology, Inc. (DMT) as operated aboard the NSF/NCAR C-130
aircraft during the ICE-T (the "Ice in Clouds Experiment-Tropical") field
campaign. Unambiguous measurements of the mass of refractory black carbon (soot)
particles to be made via a single-particle soot spectrometer (SP2), including
residuals obtained from cloud droplet and ice crystal residues, will serve to
describe how soot and dust particles are removed from the atmosphere as well as
if (and perhaps how) these particles serve as efficient ice nuclei. Measurements
of aerosol size distributions, shape and refractive index by DMT's aerosol
particle spectrometer with depolarization (APSD) instrument will also be
obtained.

The intellectual merit of this effort rests in the identification of those
mechanisms leading to first-ice within comparatively shallow (and relatively
ubiquitous) maritime convective clouds, which owing to their relatively short
lifetimes may serve as a source of ambient ice that effectively seeds later
developing cumulus clouds at relatively warm (ca. -10 degC) temperatures as well
as through secondary ice production. Broader impacts of this research include
expanded interactions and synergies between supported investigators active in
instrument design with university-based researchers and students specializing in
interpretation of large suites of data emerging from these and other
instruments. Owing to one co-investigator's affiliation with the National
Autonomous University of Mexico (UNAM), international collaborations and
contributions to the advancement of science in a developing nation will also be
encouraged.