* 1106266
* Metal-Organometallic Frameworks Supporting Catalytically Active Moieties
* MPS,DMR
* 06/15/2011,05/31/2015
* Kevin Holman, Georgetown University
* Continuing Grant
* Michael J. Scott
* 05/31/2015
* USD 405,000.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;This project is supported by the Solid State and
Materials Chemistry (SSMC) program in the Division of Materials Research (DMR).
Metal-organic frameworks (MOFs) have for some years now been at the forefront in
the discovery of new materials with applications dependent upon the exhibition
of porosity. The supported research of Professor K. Travis Holman and coworkers
at Georgetown University is synergistic with, but atypical of, the extensive
efforts in metal-organic framework (MOF) chemistry to date. The work aims to
develop microporous metal-organometallic frameworks (MOMFs) possessing
metallocyclopentadienyl or metalloarene substituents, ultimately for use in
heterogeneous catalysis. The research will involve the development of new
families of aryl carboxylate ligands to which are appended various
organometallic moieties. In analogy to the exploitation of aryl carboxylate
ligands to sustain microporosity in traditional MOF materials, a large number of
metal-organometallic frameworks can be derived from the new organometallic
arylcarboxylates. Preliminary data shows that the organometallic ligands are
fully compatible with MOF syntheses, microporous MOMFs with large pore volumes
can be achieved, and new and/or existing MOF architectures can sustain the
organometallic moieties in question. The resulting MOMFs are and will thereby be
engendered with organometallic moieties that are feasible chemical precursors to
known organometallic catalysts. Efforts will be directed at the post-synthetic
activation of these moieties for application as heterogeneous catalysis for a
wide range of atom-economic organic transformations. Activation parameters and
benchmark reactions will be studied. The proposal seeks to significantly broaden
the range of available heterogeneous MOF-based catalysts and extend them to
hitherto unstudied reactions in porous materials&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NON-
TECHNICAL SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;Microporous materials - that is, those that possess
permanent, accessible channels on the size-scale of individual small molecules
(&lt; 2 nm) find a host of applications in industrial settings: ion-exchange,
selective sorption, separations, important large and small scale chemical
transformations, etc. They are integrated into the world economy on a large
scale and new microporous materials with improved performance in a variety of
traditional and emerging areas (e.g., fuel cell membrane technology, separations
and fuel refinement technologies, CO2 sequestration, other forms of
environmental remediation including nuclear waste remediation, gas/fuel storage,
commodity and specialty chemicals) are continually being developed. Metal-
organic frameworks (MOFs) have emerged in the past 15+ years as probably the
most promising class of new microporous materials and, of the many rapidly
emerging applications for MOFs, one of the most promising is in their use as
heterogeneous catalysts - i.e. to facilitate new, commercially relevant chemical
transformations. With support from the Solid-State and Materials Chemistry
program in the Division of Materials Research, this project seeks to
dramatically expand the scope of MOF materials through the development of a new
family of analogous materials that can be described as metal-organometallic
frameworks (MOMFs). MOMFs will integrate important known and emerging catalysts
into microporous MOF architectures leading to enhanced chemical properties and
greater industrial compatibility for these catalysts. The funds will support the
education of five PhD student-years, several undergraduate students, and high
school students. The project also seeks to broaden the impact of this materials-
oriented work via educational outreach on multiple fronts. The proposed work
attempts to significantly contribute to the NSF's mission to promote achievement
and progress in science/engineering and its potential to contribute to the
Nation by integrating educational development and basic research that is
impactful to the nation's various chemical technologies.