* 1106666
* Two-Parameter Homogenization Problems in Superconductivity and Related Problems
* MPS,DMS
* 10/01/2011,09/30/2016
* Leonid Berlyand, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Michael Steuerwalt
* 09/30/2016
* USD 289,771.00

Berlyand&lt;br/&gt;DMS-1106666&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; The project is concerned
with the theoretical development and applications of homogenization theory. This
theory studies the properties of heterogeneous materials (primarily composites),
which are of critical importance for modern technology. Fundamental questions
are raised in the process of modeling such materials -- primarily in the fields
of PDEs and Calculus of Variations. The work addresses special classes of
homogenization problems where, in addition to the homogenization parameter,
another small material parameter (e.g., the inverse Ginzburg-Landau parameter)
is present. The results and techniques developed for two-parameter
homogenization problems essentially depend on the relation between these
parameters, and several such relations are considered. These problems are
studied in the context of Ginzburg-Landau models for superconducting composites.
Specifically, the investigator and his collaborators study pinning by holes in
small superconducting samples. Here the main mathematical issue is the
homogenization limit in a nonstandard discrete/continuum nonlinear finite-
dimensional variational problem with integer constraints for the unknown family
of degrees of vortices. The investigator and his collaborators develop Gamma
convergence techniques for such problems. It is expected that the homogenization
vorticity drastically depends on the relation between the geometrical parameters
(size of the holes and distances between them) and the material parameter. In
particular, the investigator and his collaborators look for special scaling
relations, which result in vortices with multiple degrees. Also, the
investigator and his collaborators develop novel techniques of Gamma-convergence
for the study of nonlinear random homogenization problems. Applications of these
techniques for material science problems are considered. One of the key issues
is the identification of new effects due to randomness when compared to
periodically located inclusions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; The project is primarily
motivated by the quest for energy-efficient materials that comprise a foundation
for a new generation of superconductivity-based microelectronics. It utilizes
Ginzburg-Landau models of superconductivity, describing their ability to carry
electric current without power loss. In practical applications of
superconductivity the passing current creates magnetic vortices that move,
dissipate the energy, and destroy the superconducting state. Thus the central
problem for practical application is the problem of immobilization of vortices,
known among specialists as the problem of vortex pinning. The approach studied
here offers an efficient tool to tackle this problem and to develop practical
recipes for an artificial manufacturing pinning configuration in superconducting
wires to crucially improve their performance. The project has a direct impact on
the education and future careers of graduate students. They receive an
interdisciplinary training through interactions with the investigator's
collaborators at Argonne National Laboratory. Additionally, the investigator
continues involving undergraduate students in his NSF-supported research
projects.