* 1106219
* Multiscale Simulation and Experimental Study of Thermotransport in Binary Alloys
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2011,12/31/2015
* Yongho Sohn, The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Continuing Grant
* Diana Farkas
* 12/31/2015
* USD 390,000.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY: When large temperature gradients are present in metallic
alloys, compositional gradients and phase transformations can occur, potentially
leading to mechanical failure or undesirable changes in properties. This effect,
known as thermotransport, is not well understood at the atomic scale for solids.
Currently, there are no theoretical approaches to predict the relevant transport
parameters. The PIs propose to elucidate thermotranport using phase-field
modeling in conjunction with a multiscale computational approach based on
atomic-scale simulation that includes molecular-dynamics and kinetic Monte-Carlo
simulations. To compute key transport parameters, the local free energy profiles
for vacancy diffusion in the presence of a temperature gradient will be
computed. This approach enables direct computation of dissipative processes
relevant to transport. Theoretical predictions will be validated using the
results of experiments on Cu-Ni and Ni-Al binary
alloys.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY: In materials relevant for
many applications, including nuclear-fuel alloys, interconnects for electronic
circuits, and alloys for gas-turbine engines, the relentless drive towards
higher efficiencies, increased temperatures, and smaller dimensions results in
very large temperature gradients during operation. As a result of large
temperature gradients, constituent atoms tend to be redistributed, leading to
composition gradients and phase transformations. This effect, known as
thermotransport, results in property changes in engineered components. For
example, constituent redistribution in turbine blades can lead to mechanical
failure. In this project, the PIs will use simulation at the atomic and
continuum scales, along with experiments, to elucidate thermotransport in Ni-Al
and Cu-Ni binary alloys. The ability to predict and understand thermotransport
is expected to have a major impact on the stability of alloys used in high-
temperature environments. Ph.D. students will be trained in the experimental and
computational studies. Computational tools will be accessible to students in the
statewide Florida Society for Materials Simulation. A summer 'Materials Camp'
for K-12 students and teachers, including students from groups under-represented
in science careers, will be hosted. The results will be made available to the
community and integrated into commercial software packages for the simulation of
diffusion in multicomponent alloys.