* 1106210
* Collaborative Research: Properties and Synthesis of Atomically Thin Molybdenum Disulfide
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2011,06/30/2015
* Tony Heinz, University of California-Riverside
* Continuing Grant
* Z.  Ying
* 06/30/2015
* USD 370,861.00

Technical: This collaborative research project aims to advance both scientific
knowledge and synthesis of molybdenum disulfide in its atomically thin form. The
research will elucidate the distinctive physical characteristics of this new
material, including its electronic properties (band structure and its response
to doping), optical properties (absorption, photoluminescence, and
photoconductivity), vibrational properties (phonon frequencies and lifetimes),
and its electrical transport properties (mobility and gating in different
regimes). The principal investigators aim to develop a method for the synthesis
of atomically thin MoS2 layers by a sequence of sulfur-loading of a copper
surface followed by exposure to molybdenum. If successful, the research project
will lead to practical methods to produce large-area samples of molybdenum
disulfide in its atomically thin form and with controlled doping.&lt;br/&gt;Non-
technical: The project addresses basic research issues in a topical area of
materials science with high technological relevance. The research elucidates the
behavior in the single-layer limit of a semiconductor (as opposed to graphene,
which is a semimetal and has no energy gap), contributes to our general
understanding of materials on the nanoscale, and creates the basis for future
applications of this and related material systems in electronics and
optoelectronics. Graduate and undergraduate students are trained in an
interdisciplinary environment. The project also promotes collaboration of
scientists in two academic institutions with one of them being an accredited
Minority Serving Institution.