* 1106974
* Collaborative Research: RNMS: Statistical Methods for Atmospheric and Oceanic Sciences
* MPS,DMS
* 10/01/2011,09/30/2018
* Michael Stein, University of Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 09/30/2018
* USD 881,453.00

STATMOS (STatistical methods for ATMospheric and Oceanic
Sciences)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports a Research Network in the
Mathematical Sciences. Recent events in climate science have highlighted the
need for increased participation of statisticians. While mathematics plays an
important role in modeling fluid dynamics, statistics specializes in quantifying
uncertainty. The objective of this project is to build a network of
statisticians with interest in atmospheric and ocean science. The hubs of the
network (and some nodes) have personnel both in statistics and in atmospheric
and ocean science; the National Center for Atmospheric Research is a common node
connected to each of the nodes. The network will also connect with similar
networks in the Pacific Northwest and in Europe, and will provide the research
necessary for decision makers to make informed decisions, based on accurate
assessment of uncertainty. Scientifically, the exchanges between the nodes of
the network will help foster a cadre of young researchers, including both
undergraduate and graduate students, able to work across disciplines, developing
relevant methodologies and applying them to important scientific problems.
Students at early stages in their careers will get effectively integrated in the
statistical and scientific community. This will help them to build a network in
the community of statisticians working on multidisciplinary problems.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;The research topics of this project cover broad areas, with a common
theme being multivariate nonstationary non-Gaussian spatio-temporal models,
which are needed to describe a changing world. Network researchers will study
extreme events in space and time, will develop methods to compare models to
data, will make uncertainty assessments for scenario-based climate projections,
and will produce computationally efficient ways to deal with large amounts of
data from observations and numerical models. The particular combination of
research and teaching carried out by the network will ensure that the knowledge
generated by the group will immediately be transmitted to graduate
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;STATMOS Research Network home page:
http://www.nrcse.washington.edu/statmos/