* 1106529
* RET Site: Research Experience for Teachers in Manufacturing for Competitiveness in the United States (RETainUS)
* ENG,EEC
* 11/01/2010,11/30/2014
* Mohamed Abdelrahman, Texas A&M University-Kingsville
* Continuing Grant
* Mary Poats
* 11/30/2014
* USD 236,626.00

This award provides funding for a 3 year continuing award to support a Research
Experiences for Teachers (RET) in Engineering Site program at the Tennessee
Technological University (TTU) entitled, "RET Site: Research Experience for
Teachers in Manufacturing for Competitiveness in the United States
(RETainUS),"under the direction of Dr. Mohamed Abdelrahman.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Research Experiences for Teachers (RET) in
Engineering Site hosted by the Center for Manufacturing Research at TTU will
provide a total of 30 math and science high school teachers (10 per year for 3
years) with a 6-week multi-disciplinary summer experience in manufacturing
research with an academic year follow-up plan. This proposed program will
contribute to retaining and advancing the manufacturing base in the U.S. through
meaningful changes in the teachers' understanding of manufacturing and how it
relates to the Math and Science Curriculum. This program aims at improving the
teachers' comprehension of the research and development process through hands-on
experience and real world problems that relate to: a) advancing the state of the
art in conventional manufacturing processes such as metalcasting; b) new trends
in manufacturing such as rapid prototyping, c) emerging technologies such as
nanomaterials and manufacturing of fuel cells and special coating materials, and
d) enabling technologies serving manufacturing processes in general such as
intelligent optimization. Special attention will be given to counties and
schools where minorities and underserved populations are concentrated. In
addtion to working with in-service teachers, RETainUS will expose pre-service
teachers to the exciting world of engineering research and how to uniquely
incorporate it into the learning environment.