* 1106464
* RAPID:  A Nonmagnetic Sinker Bar for Magnetic Logging on IODP Expedition 330
* GEO,OCE
* 12/01/2010,11/30/2011
* Jeffrey Gee, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Janecek
* 11/30/2011
* USD 17,980.00

Intellectual Merit: IODP Expedition 330 to the Louisville Seamounts starts 12
December 2010 from Auckland, New Zealand. A primary objective of drilling at the
Louisville volcanic chain is to document the possible motion of the Louisville
hotspot between 80 and 50 Ma. High quality paleomagnetic data are required to
document this motion and to compare with the 15° shift observed for the Hawaiian
hotspot over this time interval. These data, together with detailed radiometric
ages, will provide the basis for calibrating and testing various geodynamic
models.The most robust paleolatitude information will be derived from detailed
demagnetization studies of the aziumuthally-unoriented core samples. In
addition, we will deploy the Göttingen Borehole Magnetometer (GBM) to make
3-component&lt;br/&gt;magnetic borehole measurements. The main benefit of the
GBM is that fiber-optic gryos should allow fully oriented component magnetic
anomalies to be determined and magnetization declination to be estimated,
facilitating identification of individual flows and a more robust estimate of
hotspot and Pacific plate motions. Tests reveal that the sinker bar and
centralizer to be used with the GBM both generate substantial magnetic anomalies
(up to 10,000 nT at a distance of 1m). These large signals, and importantly the
likely changes in these signals on different deployments, compromise the
benefits of the magnetic logging.We therefore propose fabrication of a
nonmagnetic sinker bar that will allow determination of accurate component
magnetic anomalies (and remanent declinations) on Expedition 330 and subsequent
expeditions. The large magnetic signature of the existing sinker bar and
centralizer were documented in August; the short time before Expedition 330
begins requires rapid requires rapid fabrication of this tool.&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts: High quality paleomagnetic and age data are required to document the
motion of the Louisville hotspot, a primary goal of Expedition 330. The proposed
GBM magnetic logging has the potential to provide fully oriented vector magnetic
anomalies in the borehole, significantly enhancing the constraints on the past
motion of the Louisville hotspot and Pacific plate motion. A number of
Expedition participants will be involved in interpretation of the borehole
magnetometer results and integrating these results with data from the recovered
core material.