* 1106483
* Statistical Inference for Tree Models with Strong Hierarchical Autocorrelation
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2011,06/30/2015
* Cecile Ane, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 06/30/2015
* USD 206,505.00

Models with tree-structured, hierarchical autocorrelation are used when sampling
units are related to each other. Their inheritance history is modeled by a tree,
which is used to parametrize the residual correlation structure among
observations. The project will develop an asymptotic theory for these
autocorrelation models, arising from an Ornstein-Uhlenbeck process along the
tree. As the number of tips in the tree grows indefinitely, the investigators
will determine which parameters are microergodic and which parameters are not.
The asymptotic consistency and the rate of convergence of the maximum likelihood
estimator are expected to vary importantly depending on the microergodicity of
the parameter and on topological properties of the tree. Analogies will be built
between this asymptotic framework and the infill asymptotic framework in spatial
statistics, when observations are collected on a dense set of locations within a
bounded region of space. The project will refine the concept of effective sample
size for hierarchically autocorrelated data and study optimal sampling designs.
This work will provide important steps toward developing appropriate model
selection tools for the detection of possibly many Ornstein-Uhlenbeck selection
regimes, with a large number of model parameters compared to the sample size.

Tree models with hierarchical autocorrelation arose first in evolutionary
biology and ecology, with the comparison of biological species. These models are
now used in many other areas, ranging from the study of rapidly evolving viruses
to the study of human language evolution. The Ornstein-Uhlenbeck model is used
to detect selection as opposed to neutral evolution, to discover changes in
selective regime and to determine driving factors of selection. The project will
provide a unified statistical asymptotic framework for these models and will
inform best practices for empirical studies. Computational tools will be broadly
disseminated, and opportunities will be provided for training at the interface
between statistics and biology.