* 1106110
* Experimental Studies of Persistent Currents in Normal Metals
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2011,07/31/2015
* Jack Harris, Yale University
* Continuing Grant
* Tomasz Durakiewicz
* 07/31/2015
* USD 381,000.00

****TECHNICAL ABSTRACT****&lt;br/&gt;Persistent currents are one of the most
dramatic phenomena of mesoscopic physics. The notion of a disipationless
electrical current flowing through a resistor is quite counterintuitive,
although at its simplest, it is a manifestation of the same phenomena that
allows isolated atoms to posses orbital angular momentum in their electronic
ground state. In mesoscopic solid-state devices, a considerable body of
theoretical work suggests that persistent currents may be quite sensitive to a
variety of many body effects. However until recently, the reliable measurement
of persistent currents was technically very challenging. This project will use
newly developed detection techniques to measure persistent currents in regimes
where many body effects are expected to be dominant. Specifically,
micromechanical torsional magnetometry will be used to measure the average
current in diffusive metal rings at low magnetic fields, where it has been
predicted that the same interaction effects that give rise to BCS
superconductivity can lead to dramatically enhanced persistent current in the
normal state. In addition, the same techniques will be used to measure the
persistent current in high-mobility two dimensional electron gases, both in low
magnetic fields (where the persistent current can be used to study the spectra
of chaotic or integrable samples), and at high magnetic fields, where the
persistent current can be used to probe the statistics of the quasiparticles.
This project will support the training of a Ph.D. student, who will learn a
variety of technical skills, including semiconductor micro- and nano-
fabrication, cryogenics, fiber optics, micromechanics, and ultrasensitive
measurement techniques.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;****NON-TECHNICAL
ABSTRACT****&lt;br/&gt;One of the most striking results of applying the theory
of quantum mechanics to an entire electrical circuit is the prediction that,
despite the electrical resistance of the circuit, electrical current can flow
perpetually through it without gaining or losing energy. This phenomenon is
known as persistent current, and is directly analogous to the more familiar
orbits of electrons around the nucleus of an atom. However in the setting of an
electrical circuit, the orbitals which produce the persistent current are
flowing through metal wires which are ten thousand times longer than a single
atom. Until recently it was considered nearly impossible to measure these
currents reliably, but this project will use newly-developed measurement
techniques to study persistent currents in a variety of different materials.
This goal is motivated by the theoretical prediction that the basic properties
of the persistent current (for example, its size and the direction of its flow)
can tell us a great deal about two exotic but extremely important phenomena:
superconductivity (in which a metal loses all resistance to electrical currents)
and the fractional quantum Hall state (in which electrons in a semiconductor
bind together with a magnetic field to create particles that have no analog in
nature). This project will advance our understanding of these phenomena, and
will also result in new types of instruments for studying the behavior of
electrons in small, isolated samples. This project will support the training of
a Ph.D. student, who will learn a variety of technical skills, including
semiconductor micro- and nano-fabrication, cryogenics, fiber optics,
micromechanics, and ultrasensitive measurement techniques.