* 1106586
* Dimension Reduction for Non-Regular Statistical Models with Applications
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/2011,07/31/2014
* Chunming Zhang, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 07/31/2014
* USD 100,000.00

The proposal aims to develop new statistical theory and methodology on dimension
reduction for high-dimensional non-regular models which allow for discontinuity
with respect to a subset of the parameters or covariates. Such models arise
naturally from applications in various fields, such as statistics,
biostatistics, climate, marketing research, management, economics and finance.
They can capture many important features of the data structure and association
between the explanatory and response variables which either low-dimensional or
regular models alone cannot duplicate. This proposal focuses primarily on
threshold models, an important class of non-regular models which has a wide
variety of applications in statistics, biostatistics, and economics. While the
literature on threshold models for low-dimensional data is comprehensive, the
statistical theory and methods for threshold models applied to high-dimensional
data are undeveloped due to four central challenges: (I) statistical
nonregularities of the estimation, (II) increasing dimensionality, (III) unknown
or incomplete distributions of response variables, (IV) computational
difficulties. By introducing penalization techniques, a number of related
research topics are proposed for investigation. New tools for statistical
inference and computational algorithms of non-regular models applied to large
and high-dimensional data, for example the brain imaging data, will be
developed.

These new developments will allow scientists to efficiently analyze data with
substantially increased flexibility, interpretability and reduced modeling
biases. In addition, the investigator will integrate new mathematical,
probabilistic and computational tools with those in sciences and engineering.
Dissemination of these developments will enhance new knowledge discoveries, and
strengthen interdisciplinary collaborations. The research will also serve an
educational purpose through multi-disciplinary courses on the contemporary
state-of-the-art data mining and machine learning, and benefit the training and
learning of undergraduate, graduate students and underrepresented minorities.