* 1106171
* The SED Machine: an Efficient Transient Classifier
* MPS,AST
* 07/01/2011,06/30/2014
* Nicholas Konidaris, California Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Eric Bloemhof
* 06/30/2014
* USD 675,000.00

The concurrent realization of large aperture, wide-field telescopes; sensitive,
large pixel-count detector arrays; and high-speed data networks/computing
systems has ushered in what is sometimes regarded as the epoch of "time-domain"
astronomy, wherein large portions of the sky are sampled several times per night
to identify erupting, flaring, rotating, or orbiting sources that are not
distinguishable in traditional "staring" modes of observing. Several large-scale
surveys are either in progress or in various stages of development, the most
ambitious of which is the Large Synoptic Survey Telescope (LSST), which uses an
8.4-m special-purpose telescope that will produce 30 terabytes of data per night
and discover more than a quarter-million supernova per year. Many more objects
of yet unknown character are likely to be found.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The many
science objectives of these enormous time-domain surveys will be fully realized
only through rapid and efficient follow-up by what must be an array of support
telescopes. Fortunately, characterization as to the type of transient source and
redshift often requires only low-resolution optical/near-IR spectroscopy and
therefore modest aperture if the telescopes are equipped with high-throughput
instrumentation. An important step in this direction is the "SED Machine" being
planned by post-doctoral fellow Nicholas Konidaris at the California Institute
of Technology (Pasadena). The instrument is basically a low-resolution prism-
dispersed spectrograph equipped with highly transmissive coatings and an
integral field unit to access a broad central region of the image. Initial
design estimates put the throughput of the spectrograph on a par with the
highest achieved for any astronomical spectrograph in the
world.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dr. Konidaris has assembled a talented and ambitious
team of young astronomers and students who will build the first of these systems
for the Mt. Palomar 60-inch Oschin Schmidt telescope and who plan to address
objects now being found through the Palomar Transient Factory (PTF) project. The
team will be overseen by Caltech faculty, and includes an exciting element of
outreach through the targeted participation of under-represented undergraduate
students in the area. Moreover, the SED Machine is intended to serve as a
prototype for copies that could be constructed at a fraction of the parts cost
of the original, the first copy being intended for the National Central
University, Institute of Astronomy, Taiwan.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Funding for
development and construction of the prototype spectrograph is being provided by
NSF's Division of Astronomical Sciences through its Advanced Technologies and
Instrumentation program.