* 1106014
* Topological Defects, Curved Geometries, and Shape Evolution in Soft Matter
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2015
* Robin Selinger, Kent State University
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 08/31/2015
* USD 360,000.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;This award is funded by the Division of Materials
Research and supports theoretical and computational research and education in
soft matter physics. This interdisciplinary project also brings together
research ideas and tools from the fields of differential geometry, applied
mechanics, and computational materials science. The primary goal of the project
is to explain properties and behavior of orientationally ordered soft matter
such as lipid vesicles, liquid crystals, and liquid crystal elastomers. Such
materials display geometric frustration when curved geometries make uniform
orientational order impossible. In such material systems, time evolution of
defect microstructure and overall sample shape is closely coupled. Competing
kinetics of defect migration and sample shape evolution allow the formation of
either simple geometric shapes or complex, disordered structures that are deeply
metastable. The PIs will use a suite of simulation techniques and theoretical
tools to explore such phenomena in a variety of soft matter and biological
systems: (1) Lipid membranes: shape evolution of vesicles in a tilted gel phase
or a nematic phase, phase separation of tilted domains in vesicles, and pore
formation and lamellar phases in bilayers with distinct leaflets; (2) Liquid-
crystal elastomers: nematic elastomers with defects, and with the flexoelectric
effect, the coupling between bend and electrostatic polarization; (3) Liquid
crystals in confined geometries: thin films on curved solid substrates, droplets
or shells in the nematic or cholesteric phase, and lamellar liquid-crystal
phases in curved environments. In all these cases, the PIs will collaborate with
experimental scientists to compare predictions with experiments on physical and
biological systems. &lt;br/&gt;This complex interaction between topological
defects and curvature is a fundamental mechanism driving pattern formation and
shape evolution in soft matter with orientational order. Modeling simultaneous
co-evolution of defect textures and sample deformation will reveal kinetic
effects not yet addressed in existing analytical theories, but which are
important to understand experiments. This work will thus contribute to
fundamental understanding of the properties and behavior of soft matter.
&lt;br/&gt;This award also supports education of students and the development of
novel simulation techniques. Deeper understanding of defect textures and shape
evolution in gel phase lipids will impact the field of membrane mechanics with
potential applications in self-assembly, encapsulation methods, and cell
biology. Understanding defect texture dynamics in liquid crystals will
contribute to development of low-power display technologies, and predictive
modeling of liquid crystal elastomers may lead to new devices that change shape
with temperature. The PI's will also coordinate a volunteer research internship
program for high school students that will promote enrollment in STEM college
majors and build aspirations for future science
careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;This award
supports theoretical and computer simulation studies of soft matter, with a
focus on materials composed of elongated molecules that tend to order
spontaneously in parallel alignment, such as liquid crystals, liquid crystalline
rubber, and lipid membranes. Because a material's elastic behavior depends on
its underlying molecular structure, these materials sometimes form unusual
patterns and shapes when heated or cooled through a phase transition in which
their molecular alignment is altered. This kind of behavior is seen particularly
when the material is in the shape of a hollow sphere or other curved geometry
where fully ordered parallel alignment of molecules is not possible, and defects
- irregularities in molecular orientation - are inevitable. The project team
will employ a variety of theoretical and simulation tools to explore the way
these defects give rise to the formation of complex sample shapes and patterns.
This work aims to explore and to explain this fundamental mechanism driving
pattern formation and shape evolution in soft matter with orientational
order.&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts of the work include education of future
scientists and the development of novel simulation techniques. Potential
technological applications of the membrane research include encapsulation
methods and cell biology, and potential applications of the liquid-crystal
research include low-power display technologies and actuators. This project is
well-suited to train the next generation researchers in the methods of both
chemical physics and computational materials modeling. The PIs will also
coordinate a volunteer research internship program for high school students that
will promote enrollment in STEM college majors and build aspirations for future
science careers.