* 1106912
* Principal Component Analysis and Its Regularization
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/2011,07/31/2015
* Haipeng Shen, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 07/31/2015
* USD 250,000.00

The proposed research concerns Principal Component Analysis (PCA) and its
various regularizations: Sparse PCA and Functional PCA. The investigator
proposes five research projects to address major challenges in these areas. PCA
is a ubiquitous multivariate analysis technique for dimension reduction.
Regularization of PCA becomes essential for large dimensionality, especially in
the unconventional ``High Dimension-Low Sample Size'' (HDLSS) setting. HDLSS has
become a common feature of data encountered in many divergent fields such as
medical imaging and microarray analysis, but is outside of the domain of
classical multivariate analysis. The first project studies asymptotic properties
of PCA and Sparse PCA when the number of variables is much larger than the
sample size; consistency and strong inconsistency regions will be characterized;
various asymptotic frameworks will be considered. The results offer theoretical
insights into appropriate understanding of the results from PCA and Sparse PCA.
The next four projects add innovative and valuable analysis tools to the field
of functional data analysis. The first two aim at developing two-way functional
PCA techniques for non-standard data including those with exponential family
distributions and hazard rates. The last two deal with dependent functional data
such as spatial-temporal data and time series of
curves.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research is motivated by and will have
immediate beneficial impacts on cancer and neuro disorder research, medical
imaging, and workforce management of labor-intensive service systems. In
addition, the developed statistical methods will be useful in fields far beyond
these motivating applications, such as demography, quantitative sociology,
financial econometrics, and spatial-temporal modeling. Complementary activities
are planned to foster the dissemination of the research results quickly and
broadly. The problems addressed are also of broad interest to general society,
in terms of pressing issues such as human risky behaviors, health care policies,
social security planning, and worker productivity. The research activities are a
natural venue for training graduate students in these exciting new research
areas. The collaborative projects and the relevant data have natural second uses
in the classroom. Methods proposed are useful for developing an advanced
statistics research topic course. Strong mentoring of junior female scientists
and minority students is another important component of the proposal.