* 1106857
* Russian Indigenous and Environmental Collaboration to Promote Sustainable Use of the Arctic
* GEO,OPP
* 02/01/2011,01/31/2012
* Galina Angarova, Pacific Environment and Resources Center
* Standard Grant
* Erica Hill
* 01/31/2012
* USD 49,449.00

This is a small workshop project to support the participation of Arctic
indigenous scholars and students in a discussion of Arctic sustainability. The
workshop is to be held in Krasnoyarsk, Russia following the larger international
conference, "Arctic: A Territory of Dialogue." The main theme of interest from
this conference to be discussed at the Krasnoyarsk workshop is: How science and
communities can collaborate on topics crucial to the vision of Arctic
sustainability - key topics to be discussed are: how short lived climate forcers
impact climate change; impacts of seismic exploration on marine mammals,
fisheries and other subsistence resources; the observed changes in Pacific
walrus populations in relationship to climate change; the broader Russian
national vision of the Arctic, e.g., resource development in a changing Arctic
and the cross boarder national Beringia park, to name a few.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Pacific Environment will facilitate the participation of
over 40 scientists, indigenous leaders, policy experts, and students in the
workshop. Following the workshop PE will continue web-based communication forums
among the participants and implement a "Young Leaders'" program that continues
to facilitate indigenous youth participation in future workshops on key issues
affecting their communities.