* 1106024
* Ab Initio Approaches to Martensitic Transformations in Metallic Alloys
* MPS,DMR
* 10/01/2011,09/30/2015
* Vidvuds Ozolins, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 09/30/2015
* USD 300,000.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY

This award supports theoretical and computational research that is focused on
developing and using first principles methods to compute free energies for
various competing mechanisms of martensitic transformations. These diffusionless
displacive transformations which occur in a wide variety of metals,
semiconductors, and ceramics, play a special role in materials science. They
constitute the fundamental strengthening mechanism of steels and are directly
responsible for the shape memory effect and superelasticity in shape memory
alloys. The PI will develop and implement efficient ab initio methods based on
density functional theory that will allow for accurate calculations of
electronic, vibrational, and magnetic entropy contributions to the free energies
of various martensitic transformation paths. Specifically, the main objectives
are:

(1) Calculation of free energies and entropies of metastable and experimentally
unstable phases, which will provide a valuable database for phase diagram
calculations of multi-component alloys,

(2) Calculation of thermodynamics of high-temperature martensitic transformation
paths in iron, which will simultaneously include vibrational and spin disorder
entropies,

(3) Development of efficient methods for calculating free energy barriers and
first-principles derived Landau-type free energy functionals for common
martensitic transformation paths in high-temperature shape memory alloys, and

(4) Development of new methods for treating composition effects on
thermodynamics of martensitic transformations.

Successful completion of the proposed research program will lead to better
understanding of the thermodynamic driving forces and microstructural mechanisms
of martensitic transformations, hence providing fundamental basis for rational
design of new high-temperature shape memory alloy systems.

This award also supports the education of graduate students and the introduction
of undergraduate students to modern computational methods. The PI will partner
with the California NanoSystems Institute and the Center X to leverage their
ongoing efforts to increase participation of minority students and members of
underrepresented groups in engineering, science, and technology. The research
will also aid in the improvement of computational science instruction aids via
the development of high-throughput molecular dynamics simulations, which is a
software platform that aims to streamline the process of performing molecular
dynamics simulations. The software to be developed will be disseminated freely
through the PI's group website.

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY This award supports theoretical and computational research
that is focused on developing and using parameter-free methods for elucidating
the fundamental mechanisms of a special class of transformations, called
"martensitic", that occur in some types of solids. In martensitic
transformations, atoms arranged in a particular initial order diffuse by
relatively small amounts compared to their interatomic distance, in a
cooperative and homogeneous movement, resulting in a new atomic arrangement with
a different shape or symmetry. These transformations are both scientifically and
technologically important, as they constitute the fundamental strengthening
mechanism of steels, and they are directly responsible for the shape memory
effect, wherein a deformed alloy "remembers" its original, cold-forged shape and
returns to it when heated.

The PI will develop and implement efficient computational methods that will
allow for calculating various contributions that stabilize atomic arrangements
along martensitic transformation paths. Successful completion of the proposed
research program will lead to better understanding of the thermodynamic driving
forces and atomistic mechanisms of martensitic transformations, hence providing
fundamental basis for the rational design of new high-temperature shape memory
alloy systems.

The educational component of this award involves the education of graduate
students and the introduction of undergraduate students to modern computational
methods. The PI will partner with the California NanoSystems Institute and the
Center X to leverage their ongoing efforts to increase participation of minority
students and members of underrepresented groups in engineering, science, and
technology. The research will also aid in the improvement of computational
science instruction aids via the development of high-throughput molecular
dynamics simulations, which is a software platform that aims to streamline the
process of performing computer simulations of physical movements of atoms or
molecules interacting with each other. The software to be developed will be
disseminated freely through the PI's group website.