* 1106775
* Travel Support for Younger Scientists to Attend International Symposium on Ionic Polymerization IP'11, July 10-15, 2011, Akron, OH.
* MPS,DMR
* 02/01/2011,01/31/2012
* Robson Storey, University of Southern Mississippi
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 01/31/2012
* USD 4,000.00

The International Symposium on Ionic Polymerization is a major world gathering
on this important topic within the field of polymer chemistry. The next meeting
(IP??11) will be in Akron, OH, on July 10-15, 2011. The co-organizers are
Professor Judit Puskas (U. of Akron) and Professor Robson Storey (The U. of
Southern Mississippi). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
ABSTRACT:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Ionic polymerizations find critical applications
in the fields of synthetic rubber, lubricating oil and fuel additives, resins,
tackifiers, and adhesives, engineering plastics, architectural sealants, and
more recently, bio-medical polymers. The kinetic and mechanistic understanding
of living polymerizations, which has led to an ongoing revolution in polymer
synthetic control, was pioneered first in the area of ionic polymerizations.
Ionic polymerizations are complex processes due to multiple states of
association between the growing ion and its counterion and the strong effect of
reaction conditions on the partitioning of the chains among these states. The
field of ionic polymerization remains a challenging and fertile area of
scientific endeavor. The symposium will explore latest developments across the
broad horizon of all types of ionic polymerizations and their resulting
materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NON-TECHNICAL ABSTRACT:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
International Symposium on Ionic Polymerization provides a critical forum for
the exchange of ideas and expertise within this field and helps foster entirely
new research directions. Especially critical to this process is the involvement
of younger scientists. Therefore, IP??11 will include a special session entitled
?gRising Stars,?h consisting of younger speakers and discussion leaders. This
will enhance the positive, broader impact of the symposium on the scientific
community as a whole, by promoting the professional and scientific development
of our future leaders in this important technical area. Travel awards will be
made to a number of these younger scientists using the requested funds.