* 1106153
* Targeting cancer stem cell self-renewal and proliferation mechanisms using in vitro microscale models
* ENG,CBET
* 08/15/2011,07/31/2015
* Xiling Shen, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Friedrich Srienc
* 07/31/2015
* USD 513,249.00

Project Summary&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Almost half a million new cases of
colorectal cancer (CRC) worldwide are diagnosed each year. Unfortunately, the
great majority of patients are not cured by current chemotherapy. Recent
clinical data has led to the hierarchical tumor model, which proposes that a
minority of tumor cells (cancer initiating cells) are responsible for the
majority of the metastatic potential. Colorectal cancer initiating cells (CCIC)
are highly resistant to current CRC chemotherapy, but they share many features
with normal colon stem cells. Identifying drugs with anti-CCIC activity that are
not toxic to normal colon stem cells is an important, high-impact goal that can
improve CRC chemotherapy and patient survival.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There are
primarily two kinds of assays for screening drugs that specifically target CCIC,
but both have their limitations. In vitro assays are fast but most "hits" fail
when tested in human, mainly due to dose-limiting toxicities against normal
intestine and other organs. In vivo animal assays are expensive and time
consuming for screening a large number of compounds. They are better for
uncovering side effects, but still do not place human cells in the appropriate
microenvironment to study intercellular interactions important for
chemoresistance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In
this proposal, the team will combine cancer biology and physical science to
develop a novel drug-screening platform to identify drugs that specifically
target CCIC. In Aim 1, the team will characterize drug effectiveness and
toxicity using an in vitro gastrointestinal tract (GI) microscale cell culture
analog (ìCCÁ), coupled with a multi-chamber silicon PK-PD model representing the
systemic circulation. This device provides a much more physiological environment
for drug testing than current in vitro technologies. In Aim 2, the team will
examine the drug effects on intestinal homeostasis using a microscale 3D
hydrogel GI structure that mimics the geometry of human intestinal crypts. In
Aim 3, the promising drug candidates will be tested in a state-of-the-art in
vivo CCIC mouse model. We will use these three assays sequentially to identify
safe CCIC drugs from a library of compound.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impact&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed study attempts to develop several
fundamental technologies that can potentially revolutionize the process of CRC
drug discovery. If proven successful, the team will disseminate this method to
the colon cancer research community and make an impact on millions of
lives.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The educational part of this career proposal is
devoted to providing future researchers with exposure to Biomedical Engineering.
The undergraduate Cornell iGEM team will combine genetic engineering with
microfluidic devices for their annual project competition. An annual workshops
will be organized for the Institute for Biology Teachers to introduce Biomedical
Devices to the middle school and high school teachers. The team will also
develop a week-long research workshop for the CURIE Academy, a summer immersion
program for engaging high school girls interested in engineering.