* 1106106
* Molecular-Scale Membrane Curvature Generation in Protein-Lipid Systems: Electrostatics, Hydrophobicity, and Geometry
* MPS,DMR
* 09/15/2011,08/31/2015
* Gerard Wong, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing Grant
* Joseph A. Akkara
* 08/31/2015
* USD 450,000.00

This award by the Biomaterials program in the Division of Materials Research to
University of California Los Angeles aims to leverage recently developed
knowledge of electrostatics and hydrophobicity in the context of self assembly
in cell membranes. How and why protein-lipid interactions generate molecular
scale membrane curvature will be studied with respect to current interest in
antimicrobials and apoptosis proteins. The rational design of antimicrobials and
the regulation of apoptosis, or programmed cell death would be the potential
outcomes of these studies. With respect to antimicrobials, there is an urgent
need for effective ones to kill new strains of antibiotic-resistant bacteria.
Antimicrobial peptides (AMPs) that kill bacteria occur in a broad range of
animals, but their mechanisms of action are not well understood. A new class of
AMPs of particular importance to humans called defensins will be studied with
this project in developing an understanding how and why defensins kill bacteria
by producing pores in their cell membranes but not in mammalian cell membranes.
The second part of the project is to study B cell lymphoma 2 (BCL2) proteins,
which are responsible for programmed cell death, a process through which
unwanted or defective cells are killed by inducing pore formation in
mitochondria. This project plans to quantify how BCL2 induces topological
changes in the mitochondrial membrane that cause the death of cells. With
respect to broader impact, this multi-disciplinary project is expected to
provide ample educational opportunities to both graduate and undergraduate
students. In addition, the proposed research topics are conducive to training
for academic and industrial employment. The project will provide research
internships to underrepresented undergraduate students and veterans. There are
specific plans for the incorporation of results from this research project into
the advanced undergraduate/graduate classes of the investigator. Supplemental
enrichment educational modules will be provided to economically disadvantaged
students at the local high schools.

This research project aims to leverage recently developed knowledge in physics
to understand two related problems, one that impacts infectious diseases, and
second one that impacts cancer. The first part of this project would be
development of new antimicrobials. There is an urgent need for new antibiotics
with the increasing incidences of infections by antibiotic-resistant bacteria.
Antimicrobial peptides (AMPs) that have killed bacteria for millions of years
occur in a broad range of animals, but their mechanism of actions are not well
understood. One objective of this project will be studying a class of
antimicrobial peptides of particular importance to humans called defensins.
Mechanisms by which these peptides kill bacteria by creating pores in their cell
membranes, but not in human cell membranes, will be investigated by this
project. The knowledge base developed by these studies would be of benefit in
developing new synthetic antimicrobials. The second part of this project will be
in studying proteins that are responsible for program cell death. These
proteins, B cell lymphoma 2 (BCL2), are responsible for so-called programmed
cell death, a process through which unwanted or defective cells are killed. For
reasons not well understood, cancer cells do not do this. With this research
project, the investigators will examine quantitatively how this programmed cell
death is accomplished by these proteins. A successful outcome from these studies
could lead to the development of new therapeutic strategies in the treatment of
a wide range of cancers. With respect to broader impacts, this multi-
disciplinary nature of this project will provide ample educational opportunities
to students in providing them training for academic and industrial employment.
Specific plans are detailed in the proposal to provide research internships to
underrepresented undergraduate and veteran students. In addition, results from
this research will be incorporated into the PI's advanced undergraduate/graduate
classes. Supplemental educational modules also will be provided to economically
disadvantaged students at local high schools.