* 1106972
* Transmission Eigenvalues and Inverse Scattering Theory
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2011,07/31/2014
* David Colton, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* Lora Billings
* 07/31/2014
* USD 225,000.00

The transmission eigenvalue problem is a non-selfadjoint eigenvalue problem that
originally arose in inverse scattering theory but has also recently appeared in
thermo-acoustic imaging. The importance of transmission eigenvalues in inverse
scattering theory is that these eigenvalues can be determined from the measured
scattering data and they carry information about the material properties of the
scatterer. This proposal is concerned with a mathematical investigation of
transmission eigenvalues in electromagnetic scattering theory and the
application of these results to problems in nondestructive testing. Until now
research on transmission eigenvalues and their applications has concentrated on
the case when the scatterer is a dielectric. Even in this restricted case, only
partial results are available when the the scatterer has cavities, cracks or
inclusions (such situations are of course important in nondestructive testing).
The investigators plan to extend these existing results for dielectrics to the
case when the scatterer may have cavities, cracks or inclusions as well as being
absorbing or dispersive. This leads, among other problems, to a study of complex
transmission eigenvalues and an investigation of whether or not real eigenvalues
exist in this case. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt; The nondestructive testing of
materials in the areas of defense and manufacturing has become an increasingly
important area from the points of view of both reliability and cost saving.
Unfortunately, in many areas of national importance simple and effective methods
for testing material for structural imperfections is still in its infancy. In
this proposal the investigators will mathematically examine the possibility of
using a newly discovered data set that can be obtained from the interrogation of
materials by electromagnetic waves. This data set consists of what are called
"transmission eigenvalues" and such eigenvalues carry information about the
structural stability of the material being tested. In order to utilize these
eigenvalues for the nondestructive testing of realistic materials it is
necessary to examine the case when the material being tested is partially
conducting, i.e. can absorb energy from the interrogating electromagnetic wave
as well as the case when the material properties are frequency dependent, i.e.
the material is "dispersive". This project is devoted to the problem of
understanding 1) what information transmission eigenvalues provide about
absorbing and dispersive material which may have imperfections and 2) how these
transmission eigenvalues can be effectively determined from the measured
scattering data.