* 1106167
* Spin Control in One-Dimensional Quantum Dots
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2011,07/31/2014
* Nina Markovic, Johns Hopkins University
* Continuing Grant
* Paul Sokol
* 07/31/2014
* USD 360,000.00

****TECHNICAL ABSTRACT**** The project aims to design and manipulate quantum
states of electrons in one-dimensional quantum dots fabricated from carbon
nanotubes. Ultrashort carbon nanotubes are experimental representations of a
one-dimensional potential well, in which the allowed energy level spacing
depends strongly on the length of the nanotube. By coupling a short section of a
nanotube to ferromagnetic or superconducting electrodes via tunnel junctions,
one can achieve fine control of the electronic quantum states on the nanotube.
These quantum states will be studied through conductance and current shot noise
measurements, which will depend strongly on the spins of the electrons. This
project will support the education of graduate and undergraduate students, who
will receive hands-on training in cutting-edge nanofabrication and low-
temperature measurement techniques. In addition to exploring the fundamental
issues of custom-designing and controlling quantum states of electrons, the
results will serve as the basis for development of novel spin-based quantum
devices. In particular, the possibility of creating and observing elusive
Majorana fermions would have an enormous impact on both the fundamental
understanding of physics and the future topological quantum computing
technology.

****NON-TECHNICAL ABSTRACT**** Electrons are elementary particles with an
intrinsic quantum property called spin, which can be either "up" or "down". In
quantum mechanics, electrons have all the properties of particles with spin, but
they also behave as waves. As a consequence of their wave nature, the energies
of electrons in a one-dimensional wire can only take certain allowed values -
just like the note played on a guitar string depends on the length of the
string, the energy of an electron in a quantum wire depends on the length of the
wire. This project aims to design and manipulate the energy states and the spins
of electrons in short sections of carbon nanotubes. This will be achieved via
electrical measurements that will use spin-sensitive configurations of
ferromagnetic and superconducting electrodes. This project will support the
education of graduate and undergraduate students, who will receive hands-on
training in cutting-edge nanofabrication and measurement techniques at
temperatures close to absolute zero. In addition to exploring the fundamental
physics of custom-designing and controlling quantum states of electrons, the
results will serve as the basis for development of novel spin-based quantum
devices. The project offers a unique opportunity to create and observe a new
state of matter, which would enable the development of fundamentally fault-
tolerant quantum computing technology.