* 1106288
* Nuclear Hyperpolarization in Semiconductors
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2011,06/30/2014
* Jeffrey Reimer, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* Paul Sokol
* 06/30/2014
* USD 389,786.00

Technical Abstract&lt;br/&gt;The work seeks to understand and control the
physical processes leading to nuclear spin angular momentum. Massively athermal
nuclear spin polarizations will be generated via electron-nuclear cross-
relaxation in semiconducting materials, where the electrons have been
eigenstate-prepared by optical pumping or spin-injection methods. The work will
begin with a systematic study of electron-nuclear cross relaxation in a host of
materials that are engineered to test mechanisms for nuclear hyperpolarization.
In the course of these studies nuclear hyperpolarization in new materials is
anticipated, and if the past is any indication, new phenomenology will also be
manifest. This work will use the newly developed understanding of nuclear
hyperpolarization to design new experiments and build devices that test and
exploit electron-nuclear couplings. These devices include spin-injection
delivery of massive nuclear polarization to inorganic solids, the preparation of
nanoscale regions of hyperpolarization, and the coupling of these and other
devices so as to prepare reservoirs of highly spin-polarized
solvents.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Non-Technical Abstract&lt;br/&gt;The nuclei of
many atoms on the Periodic Table possess a property known as spin, a property
that has enabled technologies such as magnetic resonance imaging, or MRI. There
are many other technologies that could exploit this fundamental property of
atoms, yet these technologies are precluded from commercial development because
the sensitivity of the methods that detect nuclear spin is too low. The
electrons that comprise atoms and molecules also have spin, and this electron
spin can be manipulated with light and magnetic materials. This project will
support two students, one each at UC Berkeley and City College of New York, to
manipulate electron spins so that nearby nuclear spins can be detected with
greatly enhanced sensitivity. There are two reasons for conducting these
studies: the first is that the interaction between electrons and nuclear spins
is of inherent scientific interest; the second is that control of nuclear spins
in the vicinity of electrons spins could both greatly enhance the sensitivity of
methods such as MRI, but could also lead to the design of new quantum computers.