* 1106070
* Structural Studies of Thin Films for Microelectronics Applications
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2011,06/30/2016
* Torgny Gustafsson, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Continuing Grant
* Tania M. Paskova
* 06/30/2016
* USD 430,000.00

This project is co-funded by the Electronic and Photonic Materials (EPM) and
Ceramics (CER) Programs in the Division of Materials Research
(DMR).&lt;br/&gt;Technical: The past several years have seen a significant
increase in research of ultrathin (up to 5 nanometers) epitaxial films.
Exciting, new phenomena, such as novel electronic functionalities found in oxide
materials, have been discovered. The properties of interfaces and surfaces are
central to an understanding of these new phenomena. This project is centered on
developing an atomistic picture of the structure and composition of several
materials systems. The main experimental approach is medium-energy ion
scattering, which is complemented and correlated in particular with scanning
transmission electron microscopy, and also with scanning probe microscopy,
photoelectron spectroscopy and electrical measurements. Specific research
projects include (i) investigations of the interfaces between complex oxide
materials, (ii) studies of materials whose bandgap can be manipulated over a
very large range, making them promising candidates for novel optical and
photochemical applications, and (iii) epitaxial films of topological insulators
with potential impact on quantum computing.&lt;br/&gt;Nontechnical: A central
focus of materials science today is the creation of new materials with novel and
useful properties. Entirely new functionalities can result in commercially
important new devices for computation, communication and energy applications. In
order to understand the properties of these materials it is crucial to know on
an atomic level their composition and the way the different atoms are arranged.
This project is centered on studies of the structure and composition of several
new materials systems. The main experimental approach is based on using
energetic ions to probe surface and interface composition, a powerful tool to
probe buried interfaces. It is complemented with a wide variety of
spectroscopies sensitive to the electronic structure. The research project
provides excellent opportunities for hands-on experience for students in the
development and use of sophisticated scientific equipment and broadens their
scientific horizons through established collaborations with scientists from
Latin America. The direct and visually oriented nature of the information
obtained makes it easy to communicate the excitement of materials science to
students all the way from middle school to advanced graduate students.