* 1106992
* The ACE Partnership for Adaptation, Implementation, and Dissemination: Awareness of, Commitment to, and Empowerment of women scientists at FIU
* EDU,EES
* 08/15/2011,07/31/2016
* Asia Eaton, Florida International University
* Standard Grant
* Jessie Dearo
* 07/31/2016
* USD 573,419.00

The project plans to partner with the University of Michigan and adapt
activities developed by the University of Michigan ADVANCE program to FIU's
primarily-undergraduate, Hispanic-Serving Institution. The first goal of the
project is to increase awareness of campus stakeholders about issues surrounding
women STEM faculty. The second goal is the professional development of STEM
women including leadership skills development, assertiveness and communication
skills, and strategic career planning. The third goal is to increase the hiring,
retention and promotion of STEM women on the FIU campus.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;INTELLECTUAL MERIT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
partnership with the experienced PI of the University of Michigan ADVANCE IT
grant is an excellent way to increase the likely success of the program at FIU.
They have provided excellent details of how the partnership will be managed and
are poised to test a model of adaptation through partnerships. The PIs have done
a nice job of identifying successful ADVANCE programming and adapting it to
their environment. In addition they have selected programming that is relevant
to the circumstances at FIU as identified by previous climate surveys. The PI
team has a strong mix of abilities and significant authority on the FIU campus
to spearhead the initiatives. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;BROADER
IMPACTS&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;FIU is an Hispanic serving institution and the
addition of female STEM faculty has the potential to have a significant impact
on the aspirations of their Hispanic students. The partnership model as
suggested in this grant is a novel way to adapt successful programming to a new
setting. If successful, there is great potential for broad impacts across many
institution types. The exceptional evaluation and dissemination plans also bode
well for the broader impacts of the project.