* 1106214
* Computational Studies of Nanocrystal Growth
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2015
* Alain Karma, Northeastern University
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 08/31/2015
* USD 480,000.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports integrated research
and education in computational approaches aimed at understanding and quantifying
the growth physics of nanocrystals, in particular semiconducting nanowires. The
combination of quantum confinement, superior transport and diverse surface
structures have led to the emergence of semiconducting nanowires as materials of
choice for next generation nanoelectronic devices and nanoelectromechanical
systems. The realization of almost all of the envisioned applications relies on
high-yield nanowire synthesis with controlled morphology and composition. The
research focuses on classical vapor-liquid-solid growth, wherein a low melting
nanoparticle catalyses vapour phase reduction of the gas precursor and also
serves as a conduit for essentially one-dimensional mass transfer to the growing
nanowire. Fundamental questions remain on aspects related to nanowire growth
rate, steady-state diameter and growth orientation selection, in particular for
small nanowires with diameters less than a few tens of nanometers. The
underlying size dependent effects related to structure, energetics and dynamics
of constituent interfaces necessitate a detailed understanding of the growth
process that bridges atomic and continuum scales. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PIs
will combine computational approaches on atomic and continuum scales to study
both equilibrium and non-equilibrium aspects of nanocrystalline growth, focusing
on the well-characterized Au-catalyzed silicon nanowire growth system. The
atomistically informed multi-physics approach is centered around classical
molecular dynamics and suitably tailored Monte-Carlo based techniques,
integrated within appropriately designed kinetic Monte-Carlo and phase field
simulations. The atomistic computations are aimed at quantifying the energetics
and kinetics of the consitutent interfaces, and the equilibrium as well as near-
equilibrium structure, composition and morphology of the nanowire/catalyst
particle system. The atomistic understanding is transferred to i) a tailored
kinetic Monte-Carlo approach, and ii) phase-field models that allow the PIs to
address the growth aspects in their full complexity at the meso- and continuum
scales. It is expected that the insights gained from this research will be
applicable to a broad set of technologically relevant nanowire
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research component will be integrated into
educational and outreach activities that include i) the summer research
discovery program and research internships made available through an NSF-funded
interdisciplinary program to promote interest in Mathematics, Physics, Biology,
and the sciences among college and high-school students, ii) participation and
mentorship within the Materials Research Society chapter at Northeastern
University, iii) the development of nanoscale-relevant curricula, iv) design of
two capstone projects on nanowire growth and mechanics, v) participation in
outreach at local schools and museums in the Boston area and through the Society
for Women Engineers at Northeastern University, and vi) integration of related
computational efforts within the region via the formation of a New England
Network on Computational Sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NONTECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports theoretical and computational
research and educational activities centered on improving our fundamental
understanding of the synthesis of technologically relevant materials that have
some of their spatial dimensions confined to very small length scales. A primary
focus will be semiconducting "nanowires", which are extended along one direction
and have cross-sectional diameters of the order of up to several "nanometers",
where a nanometer is one billionth the size of a meter. Such nanowires are of
significant technological interest for next-generation electronic devices,
energy systems, as well as systems that integrate electronic and mechanical
functionality at the nanometer length scale. In spite of detailed experimental
observations, the mechanisms that govern the formation of nanowires including
size, shape, growth orientation and composition remain poorly understood. Since
the realization of almost all of the envisioned applications of nanowires relies
on high-yield nanowire synthesis with controlled structure and composition, a
detailed theoretical understanding of the growth process at a fundamental level
is urgently needed. In this research program, the PIs will combine various
state-of-the-art computational approaches on the atomistic and continuum scales
to elucidate basic mechanisms of nanowire formation. The insight gained from
this multi-physics approach is expected to apply to a broad set of
technologically relevant elemental and compound materials at the
nanoscale.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research component will be integrated into
educational and outreach activities that include i) the summer research
discovery program and research internships made available through an NSF-funded
interdisciplinary program to promote interest in Mathematics, Physics, Biology,
and the sciences among college and high-school students, ii) participation and
mentorship within the Materials Research Society chapter at Northeastern
University, iii) the development of nanoscale-relevant curricula, iv) design of
two capstone projects on nanowire growth and mechanics, v) participation in
outreach at local schools and museums in the Boston area and through the Society
for Women Engineers at Northeastern University, and vi) integration of related
computational efforts within the region via the formation of a New England
Network on Computational Sciences.