* 1106184
* Fundamental Investigation and Development of Screw Dislocation-Driven Nanowire Growth
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2011,06/30/2015
* Song Jin, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Michael J. Scott
* 06/30/2015
* USD 397,000.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY: This project supported by Solid State and Materials Chemistry
Program seeks to develop the rational design and synthesis of one-dimensional
(1D) nanowire materials whose growth is driven by screw dislocations and to
investigate their fundamental characteristics. Nanowires and other 1D
nanomaterials possess interesting properties that have already found many
applications in nanoelectronics, nanophotonics, solar energy conversion,
thermoelectrics, and energy storage. Professor Song Jin and his students had
discovered a nanowire growth mechanism completely different from the traditional
metal-catalyzed nanowire growth, in which axial screw dislocations drive the
anisotropic 1D crystal growth and enable the formation of 1D nanostructures.
Bridging classical crystal growth theories with modern nanomaterial synthesis,
this project focuses on the fundamental investigation and development of screw
dislocation-driven nanowire growth to extend its generality among diverse
materials, demonstrate the versatility in creating more complex nanostructures,
scale up the solution catalyst-free growth of nanowires, and understand the
physical properties of dislocation-driven nanowires. This understanding will
create a new dimension in the rational design and synthesis of 1D nanomaterials
and enable exploitation of a catalyst-free growth mechanism for large scale/low
cost solution growth of 1D nanomaterials for diverse applications. NON-TECHNICAL
SUMMARY: Nanowires and other one-dimensional (1D) nanomaterials have significant
applications in nanoelectronics, nanophotonics, solar energy conversion,
thermoelectrics, and energy storage. Professor Song Jin and his students had
discovered a different way of synthesizing nanowire materials that are driven by
screw dislocation defects. This new mechanism of nanowire growth will be studied
and further developed so that its significant advantages can be rationally
exploited to open up a new dimension in the synthesis of 1D nanomaterials,
especially for large scale and low cost solution growth. The proposed research
can potentially have transformative impacts on the rational synthesis of 1D
nanomaterials that will enable a variety of large scale applications of these
materials, such as in renewable energy. Furthermore, education and outreach will
be integrated with active research in this project by recruiting
underrepresented undergraduate students to participate in nanomaterial research,
by developing new modules for a web course on nanoscience and nanotechnology,
and by further developing a nanoscience workshop for high school students and
teachers.