* 1106150
* Mixed metal melts as solvents for materials synthesis
* MPS,DMR
* 06/15/2011,09/30/2015
* Susan Latturner, Florida State University
* Continuing Grant
* Michael J. Scott
* 09/30/2015
* USD 390,000.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research is supported by the Solid
State and Materials Chemistry program of the NSF Division of Materials Research.
This project will investigate the synthesis of new intermetallics, Zintl phases,
and complex salts from metal fluxes comprised of two elements. Synthesis in
metal flux allows reactions to take place in a molten solution; this liquid
state method enables crystal growth and the formation of unusual new metastable
phases. Combining two different metals to act as a mixed solvent allows for
lower reaction temperatures due to eutectic formation, and improved solubility
of a wider range of reactants. Two areas will be explored: the synthesis of
magnetic intermetallic phases in lanthanide/transition metal (Ln/T) eutectic
fluxes, and the synthesis of lightweight Zintl phases and complex salt-like
compounds in alkaline earth-rich (AE) flux mixtures. The Ln/T flux syntheses
will yield new compounds with complex crystal structures and magnetic properties
stemming from magnetic moments of both the lanthanide and the transition metal
element. Possible magnetic behavior that may arise includes magnetic ordering,
spin glass behavior, superconductivity, magnetoresistive behavior, mixed valence
and heavy fermion behavior. Reactions in alkaline earth rich fluxes will produce
a wide range of classes of materials, depending on the flux metals used. Fluxes
rich in highly electropositive Ca, Sr, or Ba will strongly reduce main group
elements to form new Zintl phases and complex salts. These include new complex
hydride phases which may be of interest for hydrogen storage. Using Mg-rich
fluxes will yield more borderline products which do not exhibit complete charge
transfer and may as a result show metal-to-insulator transitions.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Solid
State and Materials Chemistry program of the NSF Division of Materials Research
supports exploration of unusual synthetic methods which may lead to discovery of
new compounds with useful properties. The metal flux technique uses molten
metals as solvents for synthesis and crystal growth of alloys and
intermetallics. Magnetic compounds are being sought by carrying out reactions of
a variety of elements in flux mixtures of two magnetic metals (a lanthanide
metal and a transition metal). Light weight alloys for hydrogen storage and
potential aerospace applications are being sought from reactions of elements in
flux mixtures comprised of lightweight metals such as Li, Mg, and Ca. Flux
growth often yields products in the form of large crystals; this allows for use
of a large suite of characterization techniques which will lead to a better
understanding of how magnetic and electronic properties are derived from the
structure and composition of the compounds. This research will educate
undergraduate, graduate and postdoctoral researchers in materials chemistry,
which will strengthen the developing program in materials science at Florida
State University. This highly interdisciplinary project involves collaboration
with scientists in a variety of areas (such as chemistry, physics, and
engineering); this will allow the participants to understand the increasingly
complex nature of modern science.