* 1106315
* Excitations, Topological Defects and Quantum Transport in Superconductors and Superfluid 3He in Confined Geometries
* MPS,DMR
* 11/01/2011,10/31/2015
* James Sauls, Northwestern University
* Continuing Grant
* Alexios Klironomos
* 10/31/2015
* USD 440,000.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports research and
education in theoretical condensed matter physics for the prediction and
discovery of physical properties, particularly non-equilibrium phenomena, in
quantum liquids, random solids, superconductors, and heterogeneous electronic
and magnetic materials. This research responds in part to recent discoveries and
predictions of new phases of condensed matter, including "topological condensed
matter", in which the both topology and symmetry play central roles in
determining their physical properties. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specific studies
that will be pursued with this award include the development of quantitative
signatures based on mass, spin and charge transport, acoustic and optical
spectroscopy of topological excitations in superconductors and quantum fluids.
Closely related research includes theoretical investigations of collective
surface excitations and non-equilibrium properties of superfluid helium-three
and chiral spin-triplet superconductors, e.g. Sr2RuO4 and UPt3, in thin films,
conducting channels, and point contacts. A key goal is to predict and quantify
signatures of surface states and their transport properties for topological
superconductors and superfluids. Another thread in this research is the
investigation of vortices and domain walls, and mechanisms of dissipation in
topological superconductors and superfluids. This topic is important for
understanding limits of the concept of "topological protection" in condensed
matter. Finally, the PI will employ theoretical models and statistical methods
for analyzing the interplay between ordering associated with symmetry breaking
phase transitions, transport in quantum fluids and solids and extrinsic disorder
that is present in virtually all macroscopic forms of matter.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed theoretical developments connect with
experimental studies of the quantum liquid phases of helium-three infused into
ultra-low density silica glass, called aerogel. These studies are important to
our basic understanding of condensed matter, and hold promise for
transformational applications. Quantum condensed phases, topological condensed
matter, novel electronic superconductors and heterogeneous superconducting and
magnetic materials have potential for next-generation electronic devices for
quantum information and computation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research has a
strong education component involving the training of graduate students and a
continuation of the PI's history and commitment in recruiting undergraduates in
cutting edge research projects. The research involves substantial international
collaboration with research teams in the United Kingdom, France and Japan
focused on the proposed research, which will enrich the research enterprise in
the physical sciences in the US.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NON-TECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports research and education in
theoretical condensed matter physics for the prediction and discovery of
physical properties, particularly those that are realized in situations far from
equilibrium, in superfluids and superconductors, and in various electronic and
magnetic materials that can support so-called "topological phases".
Superfluidity is a state of matter in which the matter behaves like a fluid
without any viscosity and maintains the same temperature throughout itself. At
low temperatures, superconductors have the property that electricity can flow
through them without any resistance. Topological phases, new states of matter
with exotic properties, exhibit a very subtle type of internal organization of
electrons, and are believed to hold the key to building a new generation of
fault-tolerant computers that employ quantum mechanics to drastically outperform
today's fastest computers for certain tasks. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
properties of such materials are governed by the laws of quantum physics and
organizing mathematical principles based on symmetry and topology, which is a
major area of mathematics that deals with spatial properties preserved under
continuous deformations of objects. The research relates to recent experimental
discoveries establishing the existence of new quantum phases of liquid helium
confined in small regions of space, such as cavities that are some 100 times
smaller than the human hair, droplets or ultra-thin channels and films,
superconducting materials whose electrical properties co-exist with magnetic
properties, and hybrid materials composed of superconductors, magnets and the
so-called "topological insulators" that cannot conduct electricity in their
interior but allow movement of charges on their edges or boundaries. The
research focuses on confined geometries because new physical properties are
predicted to occur on surfaces and interfaces of these materials.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Many properties of condensed matter that have been
predicted and discovered as a result of basic research have resulted in
applications and new technologies, from instrumentation for medial diagnostics
to electronic and magnetic devices for information storage and high-speed
computation that have transformed our society. Topological condensed matter in
confined geometries, new electronic materials and heterogeneous superconducting
and magnetic materials have potential for next-generation electronic devices for
quantum information and computation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research program
has a strong education component involving the training of graduate students and
a continuation of the PI's history and commitment in recruiting undergraduates
in cutting edge research projects. The research involves substantial
international collaboration with research teams in the United Kingdom, France
and Japan focused on the proposed research, which will enrich the research
enterprise in the physical sciences in the US.