* 1106943
* Materials World Network: Titanomagnetite Decomposition and Magnetic Sensors for Their Terrestrial and Extraterrestrial Observation.
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2016
* David Laughlin, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Continuing Grant
* Lynnette Madsen
* 08/31/2016
* USD 588,160.00

This effort, based on collaboration with the Instituto Nacional de TÃ©cnica
Aeroespacial (INTA) in Madrid, Spain, examines the role of nanostructure on the
temperature-dependent remanent magnetic state of spinodally decomposed two phase
mixtures in the Fe2TiO4-Fe3O4 pseudo-binary titanomagnetite system. The pseudo-
binary Fe2TiO4-Fe3O4 system is an interesting system for using magnetic
measurements to probe the kinetics of phase transformations. This oxide system
has a miscibility gap with spinodal decomposition. The two phases appearing in
the decomposition are a strongly magnetic magnetite and a more weakly magnetic
Ti-rich spinel. Many starting compounds in a homogeneous metastable solid
solution are non-magnetic at temperatures where the decomposition kinetics can
be monitored in reasonable experimental times. The magnetite formed by the
decomposition reaction is magnetic at these temperatures and its magnetization
is a measure of the volume fraction transformed. Time-dependent magnetization
measurements are used to monitor the kinetics of spinodal decomposition for
compositions within the spinodes and nucleation and growth kinetics for
compositions outside of the spinodes. The investigators at Carnegie Mellon
University (CMU) have developed synthesis routes for compounds in the
pseudobinary Fe2TiO4-Fe3O4 system that allow to more accurately define the
asymmetric miscibility gap in this system. The fine microstructure resulting
from spinodal decomposition and exchange anisotropy mechanisms for coupling may
explain a large slowly decaying remanent state for these minerals on Mars. The
non-saturating behavior of Ti-rich spinels is hypothesized as arising from to
non-collinear spins. The coupling of the spins in the ferrimagnetic magnetite in
modulated spinodal structures is of interest. Certain compounds are of further
interest because they have magnetic transitions that are within the day to night
temperature swing on Mars and can therefore be detected with miniaturized
magnetic sensors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research also sheds light on the role
of these minerals on terrestrial and extraterrestrial magnetic field anomalies
and uses magnetic measurements as a probe of the kinetics of decomposition. The
titanomagnetites offer a rich magnetic system to explore the role of fine
microstructure on magnetic properties. They are important minerals in basalts
and a commonly occurring mineral on the moon and Mars. Since both the moon and
Mars lack an intense global magnetic field, magnetic mapping is even more
powerful on these two bodies than on Earth. On Earth magnetic surveys are
complicated by the presence of the main field, which makes measurements of
crustal anomalies challenging and difficult to discern. The global magnetic
mapping together with the study of the minerals of the crust and surface and
their remanent state can give clues to the geomagnetic evolution of a planet.
Miniaturized magnetic sensors are further developed at INTA, with support from
the Spanish Ministry of Science and Innovation, based on magnetic films
developed at CMU that allow the remanent magnetic state of extraterrestrial
minerals to be studied within the natural day to night temperature swing on the
Martian surface. These sensors are also made available for characterization of
biomagnetic systems on Earth. The proposed research involves two shared Ph.D
students and develops mechanisms for undergraduate student exchanges. Students
will also attend an INTA summer school on "Mars and its Enigmas" held at INTA. A
second "Small Magnetic Sensors and Sensor Materials" satellite meeting to the
Magnetism and Magnetic Materials (MMM) Conference will be proposed to
disseminate results.