* 1106646
* Advancing Women in Science and Engineering in the University of Wisconsin System
* EHR,HRD
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2017
* Jennifer Mihalick, University of Wisconsin-Oshkosh
* Standard Grant
* Jessie Dearo
* 08/31/2017
* USD 171,011.00

The proposed project includes two main professional development activities
designed to address specific problems for the advancement of STEM women in the
University of Wisconsin (UW) system. The first will provide opportunities for
STEM female postdocs from the two UW PhD granting institutions to give
seminars/practice job talks at one of the eleven comprehensive institutions in
the UW system. The second initiative is a horizontal mentoring program for 50
senior women broken down into nine or ten disciplinary groups of four to six
members each. The goal is to advance careers, reduce isolation, and energize
senior women STEM faculty. The proposal intends to use the existing structure of
the Women &amp; Science Program housed on the UWO campus to administrate the new
programs. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;INTELLECTUAL
MERIT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Although the two initiatives are not theoretically
linked they both address identified needs on the UW campuses. The Women &amp;
Science Program has existed on the UWO campus since 1996 and has consistently
provided programming for STEM women in the UW system as well as helped to
administer MentorNet. Key personnel have the skills and support to carry out
these two activities. Both activities are adapted from highly-successful
exemplars in the ADVANCE community. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;BROADER
IMPACTS&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The evaluation and dissemination plans are well
conceived which contributes to the likelihood that they will be able to make a
significant contribution to the literature. Furthermore, the PI has an excellent
track record of disseminating her project findings. The programming across
different institution types within a state system is a model that could be
easily replicated if successful.