* 1106136
* Adaptive Optics for the CHARA Array
* MPS,AST
* 07/01/2011,06/30/2016
* Harold McAlister, Georgia State University Research Foundation, Inc.
* Continuing Grant
* James Neff
* 06/30/2016
* USD 1,109,182.00

On the summit of Mt. Wilson overlooking Los Angeles sits a Y-shaped array of six
1-m aperture telescopes operating as an optical/near-infrared interferometric
array with baselines from 33 to 331 meters, or angular resolutions of better
than 1 milliarcsecond. This far exceeds the resolution of the largest ground-
based and orbiting telescopes, and is even an order of magnitude better than
will be possible with the extremely large telescopes (ELTs) planned for the next
decade. Since construction of the Mt. Wilson array was completed in 2005 by
Georgia State University's Center for High Angular Resolution Astronomy (CHARA),
it has yielded the first direct detection of gravity darkening on a single star,
the first angular diameter for a halo population star, the first image of a
single, main-sequence star, and the first direct image of an interacting binary,
among other advances. Almost every new measurement reveals that our
understanding of stellar astronomy was in some aspect incomplete or
simplistic.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In the first CHARA array upgrade since
construction, Georgia State's Dr. T. ten Brummelaar and collaborators have
carefully considered the most cost-effective approaches to enhance the
sensitivity of the instrument. They intend to redesign the tip-tilt/wavefront
sensor to use an improved detector and eliminate 19 reflections, plus enhance
the wavefront control through the addition of a simple low-order adaptive optics
(AO) system. Together, these modifications should yield sensitivity increases of
~50x for many targets, with greater improvements in the near-IR. New important
areas of study include highly reddened targets such as protoplanetary disks
around young stars, active galactic nuclei, and close binary stellar systems,
including those containing neutron stars and stellar black
holes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Access to the Mt. Wilson interferometer is afforded
to consortium members but also to the general astronomical community through an
open allocation process managed by the National Optical Astronomy Observatories
(NOAO). Through the array, CHARA is training the next generation of scientific
and technical experts in the field of interferometry, and scientific results
emerging from the facility are incorporated in undergraduate courses as well as
public outreach activities. Funding for upgrading the Mt. Wilson optical/near-IR
interferometer is being provided by NSF's Division of Astronomical Sciences
through its Advanced Technologies and Instrumentation program.