* 1106503
* EAGER: Towards Simultaneous Optical Sensing of Multiple Analytes With a Multiple Surface-Plasmon-Polariton-Wave Platform
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2011,01/31/2013
* Akhlesh Lakhtakia, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Alexander Revzin
* 01/31/2013
* USD 57,483.00

1106503 &lt;br/&gt;Lakhtakia &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit. The
dispersal of chemical wastes from industrial processes, pesticides from
agricultural run-offs, metal leaching from landfills, all exemplify the growing
problem of pollution of water resources. The deliberate introduction of
pesticides and bacteria by terrorists in the nation's water resources is a
related potential problem. Today's optical sensors are designed to detect one
analyte at a time. If each sensor could sense more than one analyte, the
rapidity of detection would be greatly enhanced.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Theory has
shown that more than one surface- plasmon-polariton (SPP) wave can be excited at
the planar interface of a metal film and a nanomaterial called a chiral
sculptured thin film (CSTF) at a specific free-space wavelength, in contrast to
the only one SPP wave that can be excited in conventional platforms for SPP-
based optical sensing technology. The aim of this 1-year EAGER project to
theoretically and experimentally understand the underlying principles towards
the use of a metal/CSTF interface for multi-analyte sensing with just one
optical sensor.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With experimental data available for
titanium-oxide and tantalum-oxide columnar thin films and aluminum thin films,
calculations will be made to reasonably map the occurrence of multiple SPP-wave
modes in relation to the deposition conditions of CSTFs. Aluminum and CSTFs will
be deposited in the commonplace Kretschmann configuration to verify the
prediction of multiple SPP-wave modes experimentally. Lastly, a proof-of-concept
sensing experiment will be performed by infiltrating a CSTF with water and
noting the angular shifts in the Kretschmann configuration.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Two incomplete links exist between the theoretical
foundation and the realization of a multi-analyte sensor. First, clear and
comprehensive experimental verification of the multiple SPP-wave modes guided by
the metal/CSTF interface has to be carried out. Second, the sputtered metal film
will also be porous, in addition to the CSTF being porous, so that the
characteristics of the proposed sensor could be more complicated than thought.
Hence, this is a high-risk proposal for non-EAGER funding mechanisms to be
fruitfully invoked. Success will result in a high pay-off, as the capacity for
sensing biochemicals in fluids would be greatly
enhanced.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact. This project will engage one US
graduate student in interdisciplinary research that bridges topics in
nanomaterials synthesis and optical reflectance/transmittance measurements. The
PI's endowed professorial chair will fund the participation of an undergraduate
engineering student at Penn State in the proposed research. Both students will
be required to develop their presentation skills by participating in the annual
student-run College of Engineering Research Symposium at Penn State. The project
will also initiate a tight collaboration with Groupe GDG Énvironmente Lte,
Quebec, Canada, an industrial leader in environmental health technology, with a
strong focus on new diagnostics tools based on sensors and lab-on-a-chip
technology.