* 1106891
* Advances in Bayesian Model Choice
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2011,06/30/2015
* Merlise Clyde, Duke University
* Continuing Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 06/30/2015
* USD 250,000.00

The investigator considers new default prior distributions
for&lt;br/&gt;Bayesian model selection and model averaging in linear and
generalized&lt;br/&gt;linear models. Prior choice for model specific parameters
and for&lt;br/&gt;prior model probabilities is of critical importance,
particularly for&lt;br/&gt;modeling high dimensional relationships where
subjective&lt;br/&gt;specifications are impractical or where an ``objective''
analysis is&lt;br/&gt;desired. New families of objective priors that have
desirable risk&lt;br/&gt;properties, adapt to unknown degrees of sparsity, and
also permit&lt;br/&gt;tractable computations for large scale model search are
studied. In&lt;br/&gt;high dimensional problems, the dimension of the model
space is&lt;br/&gt;astronomical. Innovative methodology and algorithms for large
scale&lt;br/&gt;stochastic search and model averaging for high dimensional
model&lt;br/&gt;spaces are developed, with an emphasis on algorithms that
exploit the&lt;br/&gt;architecture of Graphical Processing Units (GPUs). GPUs
provide the&lt;br/&gt;computing power of a distributed cluster, but at a
fraction of their&lt;br/&gt;cost and space/cooling requirements, but require
care in the&lt;br/&gt;development of statistical algorithms that take advantage
of their&lt;br/&gt;architecture.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Advances in technology
have led to the collection of high dimensional&lt;br/&gt;data structures,
spawning an increasingly complex array of statistical&lt;br/&gt;models for data.
Goals of data analysis may include prediction and/or&lt;br/&gt;selection of a
subset of models to test particular theories or to&lt;br/&gt;reduce attention
from many speculative models to a few well chosen&lt;br/&gt;models; these are
fundamental problems in statistics and throughout&lt;br/&gt;the sciences. In
such settings, model uncertainty is ubiquitous.&lt;br/&gt;Bayesian methods offer
an effective and conceptually appealing&lt;br/&gt;approach for addressing model
uncertainty through Bayesian model&lt;br/&gt;averaging, incorporating both
parameter and model uncertainty, while&lt;br/&gt;still permitting selection of a
model via coherent decision-theoretic&lt;br/&gt;principles. The methodological
developments are driven by issues that&lt;br/&gt;arise from the following
applications 1) identifying important factors&lt;br/&gt;to predict protein
activity; 2) predicting risk of international&lt;br/&gt;conflict; 3) health
effects of criteria pollutants; and 4) identifying&lt;br/&gt;single nucleotide
polymorphisms that are associated with ovarian&lt;br/&gt;cancer risk. As
prediction and model selection are some of&lt;br/&gt;the most fundamental and
widespread problems in the sciences and&lt;br/&gt;beyond, the project's impact
extends beyond the applications listed&lt;br/&gt;above. The development and
distribution of software ensures that&lt;br/&gt;these methods are widely
available.