* 1106395
* Problems in Bayesian Model Selection and Development and Analysis of Markov Chain Sampling Algorithms
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2015
* James Hobert, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 08/31/2015
* USD 239,998.00

Bayesian methods are now routinely used in very complex models, with posterior
distributions estimated by Markov chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) methods. There are
two consequences to this. First, complex Bayesian models are virtually always
governed by some hyperparameters, which have a large impact on subsequent
inference. Therefore, there is now a strong need for methods that enable
selection of these hyperparameters. Second, the Markov chains used to estimate
the posterior distributions now run in non-standard spaces, for example large
function spaces, and there is a need for the development of MCMC methods that
will work well in non-standard spaces. The investigators develop methods for
efficiently estimating marginal likelihoods for large number of hyperparameter
values. This will enable implementation of the empirical Bayes method, and also
enables users to determine classes of hyperparameter values which constitute
reasonable choices. The exploration of intractable posterior distributions
resulting from complex Bayesian models often requires MCMC. Unfortunately, in
contrast with classical Monte Carlo, establishing central limit theorems (CLTs)
for MCMC estimators is not straightforward. This is a serious practical problem
because the ability to choose an appropriate MCMC sample size hinges upon the
existence of a CLT. The investigators use spectral methods to develop checkable
sufficient conditions for CLTs as well as methods for comparing the asymptotic
efficiency of MCMC algorithms with the same target distribution. They apply the
theoretical results to very concrete problems of model selection and assessment.

Model selection in complex situations is an important and pervasive problem in
scientific and medical research. It includes in particular variable selection in
regression, where a few important variables are to be selected from many
candidates and used for understanding, prediction and decision making. Different
models can lead to different conclusions, with potential impact on public
policy. The investigators develop efficient computational methods for
determining optimal models in complex settings. The project has an educational
component in that graduate students are involved in the research under the
supervision of the investigators.