* 1106317
* Investigating links between atmospheric chemistry and climate using oxygen isotope measurements of sulfate and nitrate from Greenland ice cores
* GEO,OPP
* 09/15/2011,08/31/2016
* Becky Alexander, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Marc Stieglitz
* 08/31/2016
* USD 383,050.00

Observation of the tight correlation between greenhouse gas concentrations and
indicators of temperature from the ice core record has had a profound impact on
our understanding of the relationship between greenhouse gases and climate.
However, despite many decades of research, we still do not have a firm
understanding of the causes of the variability in greenhouse gas concentrations.
The hydroxyl radical (OH) plays a major role in determining the lifetimes of
atmospheric trace gases important to both climate change (e.g. CH4) and human
health (e.g. CO), and largely determines the oxidative capacity of the
atmosphere. The oxygen isotopic composition (&amp;#8710;17O) of nitrate and
sulfate aerosols extracted from ice cores provides information about the
chemistry of past atmospheres, and can serve as a tool for evaluating model
simulations of paleo atmospheric chemistry. Initial measurements of sulfate and
nitrate &amp;#8710;17O from the Vostok, Antarctica ice core suggest higher
tropospheric O3 concentrations in polar-regions and higher OH concentrations in
the mid- to high-latitudes during the last glacial period relative to the
preindustrial Holocene. Quantitative interpretation of these data sets is
ongoing using a global chemistry-climate model containing the isotopic tracers,
and demonstrates the sensitivity of nitrate and sulfate &amp;#8710;17O to
oxidant concentrations. Currently, no measurements of sulfate and nitrate
&amp;#8710;17O exist on the glacial-interglacial timescale in the Northern
Hemisphere. Our goal here is to expand the existing observational data set on
the glacial-interglacial timescale to the Northern Hemisphere in order to test
the hypothesis that variability in methane concentrations on the on this
timescale is largely (50%) due to changes in tropospheric OH concentrations, as
has been suggested by terrestrial vegetation modeling. We also will provide a
first look into whether changes in OH may partially explain variability of
methane during two abrupt climate events. Quantitative information about the
sink strength of methane will transform our ability to quantitatively interpret
the methane record as a proxy for terrestrial climate conditions, and as such
improve our understanding of the mechanistic feedbacks between climate change
and the sources and sinks of methane. Understanding the affects of a changing
climate on atmospheric chemistry and the oxidizing capacity of the atmosphere is
crucial for predicting the impacts of future climate change on local and
regional air pollution and human health. The project will involve training two
graduate students (one US and one French) in the tools of geochemical analysis
in an interdisciplinary and international context.