* 1106023
* Nanoscale Studies of Topological Insulators
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2011,07/31/2014
* Jennifer Hoffman, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Tomasz Durakiewicz
* 07/31/2014
* USD 375,000.00

Technical Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Topological insulators are a newly
discovered class of materials with insulating bulk states and metallic surface
states. The surface states are chiral and spin-polarized, and therefore
protected from backscattering.&lt;br/&gt;The spin structure and topological
nature of the surface states in these materials make them a novel playground for
studying magnetism, topological superconductivity and exotic particles on the
one hand, and enabling dissipationless spin transport and topological quantum
computing on the other.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award will support low
temperature scanning tunneling microscopy (STM) and spectroscopy (STS) studies
on topological insulators (Bi2X3 class). The spin texture of the topological
surface states will be studied using a sub-Kelvin STM and spin-polarized STM in
conjunction with two-axis high-field magnets. Quasiparticle interference, an
established STS technique, will be used to determine physical quantities of
interest, e.g. the Fermi velocity and g-factor of surface states. Bulk and
surface doping with magnetic impurities will be used to study the interplay of
these surface states with magnetism. Bulk intercalation and epitaxial film
growth will be used to look for topological interactions with
superconductivity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The award will support the education and
training of two graduate students and will create a rich intellectual
environment through collaborations with theory and complementary experimental te
chniques.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;*************************************************
*&lt;br/&gt;Non-Technical Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Every few years a new
class of materials is discovered and takes the scientific world by storm with
novel physics and technological promise. In 2009, the discovery of topological
insulators created one such ripple. A topological insulator (TI) is an
electrical insulator in its interior. On its surface, however, it is not only a
metal with charges free to move, but a special metal where those charges are
prevented from backscattering, removing the primary source of dissipation and
heating in microelectronics. These properties make TIs promising candidates for
enabling a couple of futuristic technologies: spintronics, a very low power
replacement for conventional electronics, and quantum computing, a
transformational method of rapidly solving computationally intensive
problems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award will support studies of topological
insulators using scanning tunneling microscopes - instruments that map
electronic behavior at the atomic scale. Surface-sensitive probes like these are
ideally suited to study the novel surface properties of these materials. In
collaboration with theory and other experimental techniques, the path toward
these and other new technologies will be assessed.