* 1106890
* Advancing Female Faculty: Institutional climate, Retention and Mentoring (AFFIRM)
* EDU,EES
* 08/15/2011,07/31/2017
* Mary Boyd, University of San Diego
* Standard Grant
* sharon bird
* 07/31/2017
* USD 599,414.00

The University of San Diego is a primarily undergraduate institution that
proposes a variety of activities designed to recruit and retain women STEM
faculty with a particular focus on women of color. The first primary goal of
this project is to improve the climate through a climate survey and interactive
role playing presentations. The second primary goal is to improve recruitment
through the development of toolkits, trainings, cross-cultural competency
workshops, and policy change. The third goal of improved retention and
advancement is pursued through workshops on work/life balance, tenure and
promotion, and professional writing as well as a mentoring program and a
distinguished URM women scientist lecture series. All programming has a unique
and well informed focus on women of color.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;INTELLECTUAL
MERIT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of this proposal lies in its
firm grounding in the social science literature, especially the literature about
women of color in the academy. Their cluster of proposed activities is likely to
positively impact the women on the USD campus and stands to serve as a model for
increasing the representation of STEM women of color across the country.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;BROADER IMPACTS&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Problems with the
recruitment and retention of women-of-color STEM faculty plague the academy and
weaken the scientific workforce. This multi-faceted project provides a roadmap
to alleviate the problem in smaller, less research-intensive institutions. Their
evaluation and dissemination plans are well conceived which contributes to the
likelihood that they will be able to make a significant contribution to the
literature.