* 1106487
* Collaborative Research: Massive Parallel Laser Direct-Write of Sub-micron Dent Array for Quantum Leap of Fatigue Performance
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/2010,04/30/2012
* Shaochen Chen, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Mary Toney
* 04/30/2012
* USD 85,847.00

The objective of this research is to develop an efficient, accurate, and low-
cost laser direct-write process for fabricating a sub-micron dent array on
precision components to enhance fatigue performance. A synergistic experimental,
theoretical, and computational study will be conducted. The research approach is
to develop a massively parallel laser direct-write process for fabricating a
sub-micron dent array on precision surfaces, and create a finite element
analysis model to capture mechanical behaviors at pertinent small scales to
understand the mechanisms of laser/material interactions and predict dent
geometry, transient and residual stress, and surface material properties.
Surface integrity will be comprehensively characterized, including surface
finish, dent geometry, residual stress, micro/nano hardness and modulus, and
microstructures. Rolling contact fatigue tests at both lab and production scales
will be conducted to determine the effects of a sub-micron dent array on
component fatigue life. Finally, a physics-based finite element simulation model
of rolling contact will be developed to elucidate fatigue damage mechanisms in
the presence of a sub-micron dent array.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will
create a new knowledge base of laser processing for manufacturing precision
components. The broad impact includes an efficient and cost-effective surface
treatment process for making micro surface structures with high efficiency, high
accuracy, and low cost to meet production needs. The research supports the
economy by improving the U.S. position in the manufacturing industry. This
collaborative research will enrich the education infrastructure, promote
facility sharing, disseminate research results, and enhance collaboration and
technology transfer between researchers and educators at academia and industry.
In addition, this research fosters ongoing outreach activities, including
Shelton State University and Stillman Community College in Tuscaloosa, Alabama
and Austin Community College in Austin, Texas, to undergraduates from groups
that are underrepresented in science and engineering.&lt;br/&gt;