* 1106956
* Nonparametric Inference for Complex Physical Models
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/2011,07/31/2013
* Larry Wasserman, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 07/31/2013
* USD 100,000.00

The recent years have seen rapid growth in the depth, richness, and scope
of&lt;br/&gt;scientific data, a trend that is likely to accelerate. At the same
time, &lt;br/&gt;simulation and analytical models have sharpened to
unprecedented detail&lt;br/&gt;the understanding of the processes that generate
these data. But what has &lt;br/&gt;advanced more slowly is the methodology to
efficiently combine the information &lt;br/&gt;from rich, massive data sets with
the detailed, and often nonlinear, &lt;br/&gt;constraints of theory and
simulations. This project will bridge that gap.&lt;br/&gt;The investigators
develop, implement, and disseminate new statistical methods&lt;br/&gt;that can
fully exploit the available data by adhering to the constraints
&lt;br/&gt;imposed by current theoretical understanding. The central idea in the
&lt;br/&gt;work is constructing sparse, possibly nonlinear, representations of
both &lt;br/&gt;the data and the distributions for the data predicted by theory.
These &lt;br/&gt;representations can then be transformed onto a common space to
allow sharp &lt;br/&gt;inferences that respect the inherent geometry of the
model. The methodology &lt;br/&gt;developed in this project will apply to a wide
range of scientific problems.&lt;br/&gt;The investigators focus, however, on a
critical challenge in astronomy: using &lt;br/&gt;observations of Type Ia
supernovae to improve constraints on cosmological &lt;br/&gt;theories explaining
the nature of dark energy, a significant, yet little-&lt;br/&gt;understood,
component of the Universe.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Crucial scientific fields have
enjoyed huge advances in the ability both to&lt;br/&gt;gather high-quality data
and to understand the physical systems that generated &lt;br/&gt;these data.
Nevertheless, the full societal and scientific value of &lt;br/&gt;this progress
will only be realized with new, advanced statistical methods
of&lt;br/&gt;analyzing the massive amounts of available data. The investigators
develop &lt;br/&gt;statistical methods for combining theoretical modelling and
observational evidence into &lt;br/&gt;improved understanding of these physical
processes. The analysis of these data will &lt;br/&gt;requirenot only new
methods, but also the use of high-performance computing resources. There is a
particular need for these tools in cosmology and astronomy, and this project
will bring together statisticians and astronomers to combine expertise, but this
research is motivated by problems that are present in other fields, such as the
climate sciences.