* 1106518
* Fourier Methods in the Analysis of nonstationary and nonlinear stochastic processes
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2011,07/31/2015
* Suhasini Subba Rao, Texas A&M Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 07/31/2015
* USD 127,137.00

The investigator develops new Fourier based methods for analyzing nonstationary
and nonlinear time series. Fourier analysis is the well established de facto
tool for analyzing linear, stationary time series. There are several reasons for
this (i) the discrete Fourier transform asymptotically uncorrelates a stationary
time series (ii) if the time series is stationary and linear, then estimates of
the spectral density function can be used to identify the underlying linear
model (iii) the spectral density function can be used as a means of checking
goodness of fit of a linear model. However, it has long been observed that
several time series models do not fit well within the stationary, linear model
framework. Over long periods of time the assumption of stationarity is often
quite unrealistic. Even over short periods of time, the assumption of linearity
can be too strong. Applying standard Fourier methods to such data can lead to
uninformative and misleading conclusions. But in contrast to linear models,
there does not exist universal methods for comparing non-nested, nonlinear
models, checking adequacy of any given model, etc. As increasingly complex time
series models are introduced, it has become increasingly important to develop
such methods, and the investigator addresses these issues. The investigator
focuses on three areas where, in applications, nonstationarity and nonlinearity
can arise (i) nonstationary discrete time stochastic processes (ii) functional
time series with random sampling (iii) nonlinear, stationary time series. These
are detailed below. In the first project the investigator exploits the fact that
the discrete Fourier transform only decorrelates second order stationary time
series to characterize and model nonstationary behavior. In the second project
the investigator considers continuous time series, which are only observed at
discrete, randomly sampled time points. Here the focus is on functional time
series, and the investigator defines a modified version of the discrete Fourier
transform to test for stationarity and to develop goodness of fit tests. As
mentioned above, often the assumption of linearity can be too strong, and in the
third project the investigator considers stationary time series' which are not
necessarily linear. The investigator defines a variant of the spectral density
which captures the pair-wise dependence structure of a time series. This
transformation allows one to understand the dependence structure of the time
series on different parts of the domain of the time series. Using this
transformation the investigator checks for model adequacy, tests for equality of
pair-wise dependence between two time series and measures the dependence between
two time series through an appropriate transformations of the data.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The analysis of data which is observed over time (usually
called a time series) is studied in several disciplines, including the
atmospheric sciences, economics etc. As the observations are over time, usually
there is dependence (a simple measure of dependence is correlation) between
neighboring observations. Understanding and modeling this dependence allows one
to forecast (for example, future global temperatures) and compare various
different time series (for example, different financial markets). Under the
assumption that the time series is stationary (the overall structure does not
change over time), and linear (the transition in the times series is smooth), a
rich literature on modeling the correlation structure exists. However, there are
several real data examples where there are no realistic reasons that these
assumptions should hold true, and indeed they could be an oversimplification of
the system or simply wrong. In this project, the investigator develops
statistical tools which allows one to check whether a time series satisfies the
usual assumptions, and if not, how they may violate these assumptions, what
impact this may have on standard statistical analysis and how it may effect the
conclusions.