* 1106187
* Spatial and Temporal Complexity in Disordered Strongly Correlated Electronic Systems
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2011,07/31/2015
* Erica Carlson, Purdue University
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 07/31/2015
* USD 285,000.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY:

Novel materials with strong electronic correlations can lead to spontaneous
electronic pattern formation and complexity at the nanoscale. Understanding the
formation of these patterns may be a key to our understanding of the macroscopic
electronic properties and to our eventual technological control of these
materials. The PI will use techniques from disordered and glassy systems to
determine the fundamental physics governing the nanoscale pattern formation.
Broader impacts include mentoring graduate women in physics, outreach to high
schools, and the training of graduate students.

While there is growing consensus that many strongly correlated electronic
systems are highly susceptible to pattern formation at the nanoscale,
unfortunately most of our theoretical and experimental tools are designed for
understanding and detecting homogeneous phases of matter. The PI will design and
develop new ways of understanding, detecting, and characterizing electronic
pattern formation in strongly correlated electronic systems at the nanoscale,
especially in the presence of strong disorder effects. The PI will employ
techniques from the study of glasses and disordered phases both in and out of
equilibrium with the aim to determine the fundamental physics governing the
nanoscale pattern formation, as well as how the macroscopic behavior that arises
from novel nanoscale structure. A goal of the research is that several
conventional and widely available experimental techniques will include new modes
of the way data is acquired and its analysis and new theoretical tools that
enable the detection and characterization of novel phases of matter.

The PI will continue to develop the mentoring program she began for graduate
women in the physics program at her home institution. The PI will visit local
high schools to discuss her research. This outreach combines interactive hands-
on superconductivity demonstrations with education about current condensed
matter research. In addition, the proposed work will advance the training of one
graduate student.



NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY:

This award supports theoretical research and education on the complex pattern
formation which has been observed to occur among the electrons in an interesting
class of materials that include high-temperature superconductors and colossal
magnetoresistance materials.

Useful conceptualizations of electronic states in many materials are often based
on the idea that electronic states inside the material are uniform. The
electronic states in ordinary metal wires, in semiconductors and in some magnets
are examples. High temperature superconductors have emerged as examples that
break this paradigm in a new way. The electrons themselves form intricate
patterns inside the materials. This kind of clumpy behavior among the electrons
may hold the key to some of the exotic properties which have been observed in
the larger class of strongly correlated materials. The name reflects the role of
strong interactions among electrons leading to correlations in their motions. Of
specific interest to the PI are technologically important properties such as
high temperature superconductivity, which may have impact on technologies to
increase energy efficiency, and colossal magnetoresistance materials which
exhibit an amazingly large change in resistance to electric current flow when
placed in a magnetic field. Some examples of this pattern formation are also
fractal in character, meaning that the patterns simultaneously incorporate
similar structural details at small, medium, and large length scales.

Current theoretical and experimental techniques are inadequate for detecting or
classifying the clumpy behavior of the electrons inside these materials. The PI
will design and develop new ways of understanding, detecting, and characterizing
electronic pattern formation in these strongly correlated materials on the
length scales of atoms and molecules. In order to accomplish this, the PI will
use techniques from the study of glasses such as window glass and other
disordered materials with an aim to determine the fundamental physics
responsible for the complex pattern formation of the electrons inside these
materials. A possible outcome of this research is that several conventional and
widely available experimental techniques will have at their disposal new modes
of data acquisition and analysis and new concepts that will enable the detection
and characterization of new inhomogeneous phases of matter.

This project also supports training one graduate student, mentoring graduate
women in physics, and outreach to local high schools which combines interactive
hands-on superconductivity demonstrations with education about the PI's current
research in condensed matter physics.