* 1106391
* Linear Avalanche HgCdTe Arrays for Photon Counting AO Wavefront Sensing
* MPS,AST
* 08/15/2011,07/31/2017
* Donald N. B. Hall, University of Hawaii
* Continuing Grant
* Nigel Sharp
* 07/31/2017
* USD 2,197,706.00

Since the mid 1990's, Adaptive Optics (AO) techniques have revolutionized
ground-based observational astronomy at optical and infrared (IR) wavelengths.
The precise sensing of the atmosphere's distortion of the wavefront from a
natural or laser guide star is crucial to achieving a telescope's diffraction
limit. Dr. Donald Hall of the University of Hawaii proposes to adapt, and
optimize for AO wavefront sensing, sensors developed through the nation's
substantial investment in space and military LADAR by producing modest format
arrays and demonstrating their photon counting performance for wavefront sensing
at the telescope. To achieve this, the technique utilizes the unique linear
avalanche properties of HgCdTe, a substance already the material of choice for
astronomy in the 1 - 5 micron waveband and the technology base for production of
large format arrays for near-IR astronomy. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project
will hybridize 32x32 arrays of HgCdTe linear-mode avalanche photo-diodes to an
optimized 64-output readout. These hybrids will count individual near-IR photons
with wavelengths between 0.85 and 2.5 microns with high quantum efficiency, at
frame rates approaching 100 KHz, and with no degradation of their fundamental
Poisson statistics. The goal is to produce over a thousand readout dies and to
make several dozen high-quality hybridized arrays available for initial
characterization followed by deployment in telescope AO
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;While the proposed investigation has the potential
to revolutionize AO wavefront sensing and all aspects of the science it enables
on ground based telescopes, it barely taps the surface of broader applications
that extend beyond astronomy. The investigation will also encompass potential
solar applications and likely enabling coronal AO sensing. Finally, society will
benefit from the development of the technique, its application beyond astronomy,
and the exciting scientific discoveries it will make
possible.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Funding for development and construction of the
prototype spectrograph is being provided by NSF's Division of Astronomical
Sciences through its Advanced Technologies and Instrumentation program.