* 1106005
* Rapid Fabrication of Bio-Inspired Microvascular Networks
* MPS,DMR
* 09/15/2011,05/31/2016
* Arul Jayaraman, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Continuing Grant
* Joseph A. Akkara
* 05/31/2016
* USD 422,000.00

This award by the Biomaterials program in the Division of Materials Research to
Texas Engineering Experiment Station is to carry out fundamental studies aimed
at establishing advanced sciences capable of rapidly and inexpensively embedding
3-D vascular networks inside biomaterial scaffolds at organ-level size and
scales. This proposed research will overcome existing knowledge gaps by: 1)
applying a novel electrostatic discharge process to construct microvascular
networks with controlled size and branching characteristics in biomedically
relevant polymeric substrates; 2) developing new processing steps that further
refine the size, spatial distribution, and surface characteristics of the
branched microchannels so that they can deliver optimal transport for cell
culture when embedded in porous scaffolds; 3) establishing the capacity of the
networks for transport of oxygen, nutrients, and waste; and 4) performing cell
culture experiments to determine the optimal range of parameters for tissue
engineering. In addition to laying a foundation for a revolutionary step forward
in tissue engineering, this project will train graduate and undergraduate
students in areas at the frontiers of materials science, biomedical engineering,
and chemical engineering. A broad educational impact will be achieved by
leveraging a partnership with the National Center for Electron Beam Research at
Texas A&amp;M, where this research will be prominently incorporated as a
permanent part of the materials showcase during regular tours given to students
from across Texas at the elementary, junior-high, and high-school levels.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The development of technology to engineer
artificial tissue and organ structures suitable for implantation and replacement
of damaged or diseased counterparts in the body has the potential to save
countless lives and catalyze a revolution the field of medicine. But a key
reason this is not yet possible is the lack of an efficient process to construct
3-D vascular networks in biocompatible substrate materials at organ-level size
and scale. The proposed research will address this need in a radically different
way that can lay a foundation to establish new and powerful methods for mass-
production of vascularized tissue scaffolds. The electrostatic discharge
approach developed here (akin to capturing lightning inside a plastic block)
will make it possible to rapidly construct these networks, while simultaneously
providing unique and relatable educational experiences that introduce and
stimulate student interest in areas at the frontiers of biomaterials and tissue
engineering. A broad educational impact will be achieved by leveraging a
partnership with the National Center for Electron Beam Research at Texas
A&amp;M, where research results from this project will be showcased during
regular tours given to elementary, junior-high, and high-school students from
across Texas.