* 1106118
* Cancer stem cell phenotyping: Establishing correlations and regulatory crosstalk between molecular markers and mechanical/rheological properties
* ENG,CBET
* 08/15/2011,07/31/2016
* David Tees, Ohio University
* Standard Grant
* Steven Peretti
* 07/31/2016
* USD 511,995.00

While significant progress has been made in the fight against cancer largely due
to drastic improvements in diagnostic techniques and treatment methods,
therapies have been much less effective in combating those tumors that have
spread to other organs, or metastasized. Specific subsets of cancer cells, known
as cancer stem cells, may be primarily responsible for establishing these
metastatic colonies, but the exact mechanisms are unknown, in no small part due
to a lack of a universal molecular definition for cancer stem cells, through
which these cells can be isolated and studied. &lt;br/&gt;For this research
project, the research team hypothesizes that cancer stem cells possess inherent
rheological and viscoelastic properties that facilitate metastatic invasion and
growth, and that these mechanical properties may be used to specifically
identify cancer stem cells in complement to the molecular phenotype. The team
will test this hypothesis by conducting studies that aim (1) to determine
correlations between cellular mechanical properties and the CD44+/CD24- breast
cancer stem cell phenotype, and (2) to identify regulatory crosstalk between
cellular mechanical properties and the CD44+/CD24- breast cancer stem cell
phenotype. &lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: This research seeks to address complex
issues at the interface of the physical sciences and oncology. Therefore,
principles and techniques from chemical engineering, biophysics, and medical
sciences will be employed to achieve the study goals. The transformative studies
and novel methodologies in this project will ultimately reveal molecular
pathways regulating mechanical properties of cancer stem cells, subject matter
that remains unaddressed by the scientific community to date. &lt;br/&gt;Broader
impacts: This project integrates multidisciplinary research with education and
will have broader impacts on engineering and the life sciences, training of the
next generation of bioengineering researchers, biotechnology development, and
public health. The PI and co-PIs will mentor students participating in this
research project through experiences that allow them to advance their own
scientific knowledge as well as contribute to the wider scientific body, gain
employment in engineering or biological fields, or pursue advanced degrees in
these disciplines. This project will also have a significant impact on society
and public health, as the research findings can be used to develop diagnostics,
prognostics, and therapeutics to more specifically target deadly breast cancer
stem cells.