* 1106576
* Multi-armed Bandit Problems with Covariates
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2011,10/31/2014
* Yuhong Yang, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 10/31/2014
* USD 249,987.00

Multi-armed bandit (MAB) refers to a class of sequential decision making
problems where in each step one needs to choose a population from which a random
reward will be generated. The goal is to maximize the total accumulated reward.
The literature on MAB, with few exceptions, ignores available covariates. In
this project, the PI will study MAB with covariates in general frameworks and
develop methodologies as well as theories for various applications. The project
will 1) provide methods for selecting key covariates; 2) establish consistency
in variable selection; 3) establish consistency of the allocation rule in terms
of the accumulated reward; 4) derive the rate of convergence of the accumulated
reward relative to the oracle choices. In addition, nonparametric estimation of
the mean reward functions and model combinations will be utilized for achieving
higher expected reward. Strategies that simultaneously achieve high expected
reward and also provide sufficient information for identifying the best arm
(with high probability) will be sought.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In practice of
medicine, treatments previously shown to be the best at population levels in
clinical trials are given to new patients with minimal consideration of his/her
own personal characteristics such as genetic profile. If practically feasible,
there is every reason for a patient to be treated in a way that the outcomes of
all previous treatments of patients with the same disease will have been taken
into account and consequently the most promising individualized treatment is
selected based on genetic information, clinical assessments, and all the
accumulated trial/treatment results. The proposed research will set up
statistical frameworks and build theories and methodologies for application of
individualized medicine using the statistical machinery of sequential allocation
with covariates. Besides medicine, sequential allocation has applications in
operations research, industrial engineering, economics and other fields. Due to
the ease of getting and processing information furnished by the exponential
growth of modern technology, with new research to bring effective use of key
predictors, applications of sequential allocation with covariates will make a
real impact, saving lives, improving health, promoting business, and reducing
operating cost for the society.