* 1106432
* Right Censorship Model and Doubly-Censorship Model Allowing Dependent Survival Time and Censoring Times
* MPS,DMS
* 07/15/2011,06/30/2015
* Qiqing Yu, SUNY at Binghamton
* Standard Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 06/30/2015
* USD 160,001.00

The properties of the non-parametric maximum likelihood estimator (NPMLE) of the
cumulative distribution function (cdf) of the survival times of a population
have been studied for a long time under the standard right censorship (RC)
model, which assumes independent censoring. The independent assumption is
sometimes not justified in applications. In this project a new RC model that
allows dependent censoring is introduced. The new model is more realistic in
many applications including the analysis of survival times of cancer patients in
a follow-up study that the investigator and his collaborators are engaged in.
Under the new model, the PI plans to establish the asymptotic properties of the
NPMLE of the survival function on the real line. New models that allow the
dependent censoring for doubly censored data and other types of interval-
censored data will also be investigated.

Right censored and doubly-censored data occur frequently in industrial
experiments and medical research. The new models proposed by the investigator
are motivated by the needs in the cancer research in which the investigator is
analyzing certain breast cancer data provided by the Memorial Sloan-Kettering
Cancer Center. The results from this project will be useful in the analysis of
the data from clinical trials and engineering reliability studies. The
theoretical results will contritute to the advancement of the statistical theory
of survival analysis.