* 1106208
* Bioengineering Single Crystal Growth
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2015
* Derk Joester, Northwestern University
* Continuing Grant
* Aleksandr Simonian
* 08/31/2015
* USD 593,065.00

ID: MPS/DMR/BMAT(7623) 1106208 PI: Joester, Derk ORG: Northwestern
University&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Title: Bioengineering Single Crystal
Growth&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;INTELLECTUAL MERIT: Biological mineralized tissues
(e.g. bones, teeth, shells) are sophisticated organic-inorganic composites with
hierarchical architecture down to the nm-scale. Their functional roles include
mechanical strengthening, optical elements, and gravity or magnetic field
sensing. Optimized in hundreds of millions of years of evolution, organisms have
achieved remarkable engineering feats such as high bone toughness at low weight,
self-sharpening teeth, self-repair capability, and low energy footprint,
sustainable syntheses. Many of the hallmarks of biological crystal growth have
yet to be reproduced in vitro: curving and/or branching single crystals, control
over polymorph, use of amorphous precursors, and nm scale control of organic-
inorganic composites. This project investigates approaches to control the
cooperative growth of single crystals in cell culture with the goal to quite
literally grow materials with properties optimized for their intended use. The
biomineralization system in sea urchin serves as the platform for these studies.
The following specific tasks will be pursued to explore and develop the range
and limits of bioengineering single crystal shape, connectivity, and larger
composite structures by guided biological deposition: (1) Explore, by multi-
dimensional live cell microscopy, cellular dynamics on micro-patterns to better
understand phenomena of bridging between sticky patches, motility of cells on
lectin patterns, and formation of branch and/or fusion sites. (2) Characterize
interplay of spicule mineral, organic matrix, and cellular machinery at key
points in the spicule development, namely the initial deposit, linear spicules,
branch sites, and joints. (3) Overexpress and purify the endogenous signaling
factor SpVEGF-3 as a universal inducer of spiculogenesis in primary mesenchyme
cell (PMC) cultures, and explore immobilization of the VEGF to study its role as
a chemo-attractant. (4) Investigate spicule matrix protein sorting signals in
PMCs and determine minimum signal peptide required to target proteins to the
spicule compartment. (5) Use fusion proteins to study spicule matrix, and
attempt to influence polymorph selection by expression of exogenous polymorph
switches such as Starmaker. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;BROADER IMPACTS: The ability
to grow novel functional materials at ambient temperatures from seawater could
create entirely new approaches to sustainable materials synthesis. In addition,
the PI will expose freshmen and sophomores to sea urchin biomineralization and
soft lithography in the context of new ?Discovery Lab? modules that are part of
an entry-level materials science class. From this class and through minority
recruitment channels at centers such as the MRSEC and others, he will recruit
undergraduate researchers for academic year and summer research projects. Such
students receive highly interdisciplinary training in bio-related areas (e.g.
molecular biology, biochemistry, and cell culture) that will complement clean
room training, photo and soft lithography, and materials characterization by
cutting-edge techniques. The project will continue to develop modules for the
mobile lab jump-started with the previous award to carry aspects of this
research to local high and middle schools. In addition, a murder mystery
activity that is being developed with the Chicago Botanic Garden will be adapted
for use at the Shedd Aquarium. Finally, the PI will leverage resources at
Northwestern University to reach out to society at large through participation
in a range of events that include lab tours and public lectures.