* 1106516
* Bayesian Models and Methods for Dynamic and Spatio-Dynamic Systems
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2011,12/31/2014
* Mike West, Duke University
* Continuing Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 12/31/2014
* USD 400,000.00

The research concerns novel statistical theory, models and methods for
structured dynamic and spatio-dynamic multivariate processes. The scope includes
theoretical developments of new classes of stochastic process models for dynamic
covariancestructures in multi- and matrix-variate time series, including novel
classes of stationary Markov processes for multivariate volatility modeling.
Theoretical and applied developments include new approaches to sparsity modeling
for increasingly high-dimensional, time-varying parameter stochastic systems,
applying to dynamic regression, time-varying vector auto-regression, dynamic
factor models and covariance volatility models. Additional research focuses on
new classes of spatial lattice and spatially-varying random field models,
coupled with time series processes to define flexible models of spatio-temporal
models for increasingly high-resolution lattice data observed through time. The
investigator develops Bayesian simulation-based statistical computation--
including GPU-based parallelized algorithms-- for model implementations, and
cross-disciplinary applications in financial time series as well as studies in
atmospheric and biomedical sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Faced with
increasingly high-dimensional data sets generated in studies of temporal and
spatial systems, statistical science research aims to substantially advance the
ability to represent, analyze and use mathematical models of increasing
dimension, realism and complexity. The investigator develops mathematical and
statistical modelling theory and associated simulation-based computational
methods for a range of contexts, motivated in part by collaborative cross-
disciplinary applications in areas of finance, atmospheric science and the
neurosciences. Innovations in statistical research include: (i) new and improved
models for describing and predicting change in time of the complex patterns of
relationships among several or many time series-- such as financial indicators,
or nano-technology based recordings of neural signals in brain imaging; (ii) new
theory and methods for inducing sparsity-- i.e., controlling complexity-- of
applied stochastic models, to enable scaling to increasingly high-dimensional
problems, such as arise in high-resolution satellite imaging in atmospheric
studies as well as large-scale financial time series;(iii) innovations in
simulation techniques for statistical computing, including parallel desktop
computing, to advance the ability to fit, explore and use models of increasing
scale and complexity and with increasingly large data sets. With cross-
disciplinary collaborators and students, the research advances core mathematical
and statistical modeling theory and technology, and contributes new, refined and
relevant approaches to modeling and dataanalysis in several specific applied
contexts as well as generating methods for broader use.