* 1106779
* Energetic Radiation from Lightning Leaders: Effects and Origins
* GEO,AGS
* 09/15/2011,08/31/2016
* Victor Pasko, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Edward L. Bensman
* 08/31/2016
* USD 404,713.00

Neither the exact mechanisms through which lighting is initially triggered and
propagates through the free atmosphere nor the relationship of these processes
to recently emerging observations of high-energy emissions associated with
active thunderstorms are well understood. This research will apply state-of-the-
art numerical simulation methods to investigate the emission of energetic
electrons from lightning-related charge-streamer and stepped-leader discharges
and the propagation of the associated energetic radiation (from X-rays to hard
X-rays and terrestrial gamma-ray flashes) through the Earth's atmosphere. The
only known mechanism capable of explaining generation of associated high-energy
electrons is the "runaway process" by which energy gained from an imposed
electric field exceeds that lost to collisions, thus accelerating electrons to
very high energies (&gt;1 MeV). To-date, two scenarios for initially "seeding"
this runaway breakdown process have been proposed: (1) cosmic rays, and (2)
"thermal" runaway induced by extremely high electric fields. Theoretical and
experimental studies have shown the paramount importance of the coupling of
streamer and leader discharge dynamics to the thermal runaway process, which is
in-turn now thought to be inseparable from emission of X-rays by lightning or
production of terrestrial gamma-ray flashes. Targeted observations of high-
energy radiative emissions by thunderstorms and associated electrical activity
have recently been obtained from ground-based, airborne and satellite platforms,
but the detailed nature of relationships among these previously uncorrelated
phenomena have not previously been quantified as this project sets out to
do.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Intellectual Merit of this activity is defined by
efforts to develop a unifying theoretically-sound explanation for the location,
timing and specific nature of observed high-energy radiation originating in the
Earth's atmosphere. The importance of related questions is emphasized by the
need to quantify the intensity of radiation emitted from lightning and to
understand its relationship to the formation and propagation of lightning
channels, and extends to the possibility of adverse health impacts for
crewmembers and passengers of aircraft transiting regions of strong thunderstorm
activity. Broader impacts of this effort will come through development of an
interdisciplinary research program, via graduate and undergraduate student
education and training, and through dissemination of results using illuminating
graphical methods.