* 1106331
* Theoretical and Computational Modeling of Soft Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2014
* Alan Denton, North Dakota State University Fargo
* Standard Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 08/31/2014
* USD 208,000.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports theoretical studies
and educational activities in the interdisciplinary field of soft materials
science. Soft materials, such as colloidal dispersions and polymer solutions and
melts, display remarkable thermal, mechanical, and optical properties that
emerge from self-assembly of macromolecules into diverse structures. Predicting
and controlling the structure, phase behavior, and dynamics of such materials
require a deep understanding of the forces and correlations between
macromolecules. Recent experimental observations demonstrate that strong ion-ion
coupling, incorporation of nanoparticles, and application of external fields can
profoundly influence the self-assembly of colloidal and polymeric materials.
Motivated by these experiments, this project addresses several technologically
relevant issues regarding the behavior of colloid-nanoparticle suspensions and
polymer-nanoparticle composites. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specifically, the
research will address the following fundamental questions: (1) Through what
mechanisms can nanoparticles affect the stability of colloidal suspensions? (2)
By tuning interparticle interactions, can we predict and control how
nanoparticles perturb polymer conformations and induce coils to swell or shrink?
(3) How should external fields be configured to guide self-assembly of soft
materials? These unresolved questions will be addressed through a coarse-grained
modeling approach that combines a variety of statistical mechanical methods.
Poisson-Boltzmann theory, effective-interaction theory, classical density-
functional theory, and Monte Carlo simulations will be developed and applied to
probe length and time scales that are inaccessible to ab initio simulations. The
ultimate goal of this research is to advance fundamental understanding of soft
matter to the point of facilitating discovery and fabrication of novel,
multifunctional, and environmentally sustainable nanostructured
materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Guiding the self-assembly of colloids,
nanoparticles, and polymers has many potential applications. For example,
enhancing phase stability of colloidal suspensions can aid the design and
fabrication of photonic band-gap materials for optical switching. Engineering
nanoparticles with tailored properties holds promise for modifying morphology of
soft materials and controlling drug delivery. Understanding crowding of proteins
by macromolecules within the cytoplasm has profound implications for
manipulating the functions of biological cells. Furthermore, since suspensions
of colloids and nanoparticles evolve slowly and can be imaged in real space,
they can yield insights into the behavior of hard materials. Finally, the
methods developed for colloidal and polymeric systems can be adapted to
biologically relevant systems, such as biopolymers, virus suspensions, and
polyelectrolyte microgels and microcapsules.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Educational
impacts of this project include training of undergraduate students and a
postdoctoral fellow in soft matter physics and computational modeling methods;
development of courses for graduate students in physics and interdisciplinary
materials science programs; and support of outreach programs for local schools
and Native American students throughout the state of North
Dakota.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award supports theoretical studies and educational activities in the
interdisciplinary and technologically relevant field of soft materials science.
Soft materials, which are composed of giant molecules called macromolecules,
display remarkable physical properties that emerge from spontaneous organization
of diverse structures. Common types of macromolecules are colloids, which are an
ultra-divided form of matter consisting of particles some one-thousandth to one-
millionth the size of the human hair, and polymers which are long chain-like
molecules making up many natural and synthetic materials. Charge-stabilized
colloids pervade industry and nature: familiar examples include aqueous paints,
detergents, and clays, to name a few. Polymers are the building blocks of such
ubiquitous materials as plastics and rubbers, and are key components of
biomaterials including DNA and proteins.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Predicting and
controlling the behavior of soft materials requires a deep understanding of the
highly tunable forces acting between macromolecules. Recent experimental
observations demonstrate that incorporation of nanoparticles and application of
external electric or magnetic fields can profoundly influence the self-assembly
of colloidal and polymeric materials. Motivated by these experiments, this
project applies an array of theoretical and computer modeling methods to address
technologically relevant issues regarding the physical behavior of colloid-
nanoparticle suspensions and polymer-nanoparticle composites.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;By clarifying several technologically important issues,
outcomes of this work are expected to have broad significance for materials
scientists and engineers by providing powerful tools to rationally design novel
materials with potential applications to renewable energy and medicine.
Furthermore, since suspensions of colloids and nanoparticles evolve slowly and
can be imaged in real space, they can yield insights into the behavior of hard
materials. Finally, the modeling methods developed will be broadly adaptable to
a variety of macromolecular systems, including biological
materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Educational impacts of this project include
training of undergraduate students and a postdoctoral fellow in soft matter
physics and computational modeling methods; development of courses for graduate
students in physics and interdisciplinary materials science programs; and
support of outreach programs for local schools and Native American students
throughout the state of North Dakota.