* 1106058
* Optimizing Ion Mobility, Chemical Stability, and Mechanical Rigidity in Composite Electrolytes
* MPS,DMR
* 10/01/2011,09/30/2017
* John Kieffer, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Lynnette Madsen
* 09/30/2017
* USD 552,030.00

NON-TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION: Energy storage is a critical aspect of sustainable
and renewable energy technologies, and mobile information systems. While the
chemical nature of anode and cathode determines the amount of energy that can be
stored in a battery of a given size, the separator material (or electrolyte)
controls its charge cycling rates, lifetime, and structural integrity. High
conductance of the ion responsible for the electrochemical conversion (e.g.,
lithium) facilitates high power release and short recharge times. Chemical
compatibility between electrolyte and electrode materials prevents the formation
of blocking layers that would suppress the electrochemical process. Mechanical
rigidity of the electrolyte inhibits dendrite growth that can short circuit the
device and lead to catastrophic failure (e.g., spontaneous combustion).
Unfortunately, these performance criteria rely on conflicting materials
properties, and the challenge lies in devising a composite structure that
maximizes all these attributes. In this research, a combination of simulation-
based predictive design, advanced materials synthesis approaches,
microstructural characterization, and performance monitoring is employed to
develop new composite electrolytes with unsurpassed performance. This project
contributes to the development of human resources in an innovative way by
training a doctoral student in combining experimental and computational tools of
investigation, and providing research experiences for undergraduate students.
Connections with secondary school educators are reached through an ASM High
School Teachers Camp. As well, they are pursuing a new masters mentoring program
for students from minority serving institutions. It is expected to have a dual
benefit - on one hand, students are gaining insight into scientific research,
and on the other hand, faculty are better-positioned to proactively recruit
underrepresented minorities and women into doctoral programs in science and
engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL DETAILS: The objective of this
research is to develop composite battery electrolytes that exhibit high Li+
conductivity, that are mechanically rigid enough to suppress lithium dendrite
growth and safely separate electrodes in self-supporting device structures, and
that possess an electrochemical stability range wide enough to accommodate large
electrode potential differences. While high ionic conductivity and transference
numbers are important for the charge-discharge rates of batteries, stiffness and
electrochemical stability are essential for taking advantage of the full redox
potential of Li metal, and thus increase the gravimetric capacity of energy
storage for these devices. A combination of molecular simulation-based
predictive design, hybrid organic-inorganic sol-gel synthesis, in situ
monitoring of microstructural developments using inelastic light scattering, and
dielectric impedance measurements is used to systematically explore materials
chemistries and building block functionalities for the creation of nano-porous
heterogeneous electrolytes. By targeting enhanced stiffness, geometrically
optimized Li+ migration paths, minimal dissipative coupling between cation and
donor, and tunable redox potentials, these hybrid network structures are
designed to exhibit unsurpassed performance as rechargeable battery
electrolytes.