* 1106753
* Statistical Problems in Closed-Loop Diabetes Control
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/2011,07/31/2015
* Cun-Hui Zhang, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 07/31/2015
* USD 300,000.00

The project focuses on developing statistical models, methods and related theory
for closed-loop diabetes control. An artificial pancreas with a closed-loop
insulin delivery system, still in an early stage of its development, is expected
to revolutionize the way diabetes is treated. As the PIs and many others
recognized, a major impediment to the goal of developing an artificial pancreas
is the unreliability of the glucose sensor. Sensor technology is not so new and
it is also remarkably clever, but frequent recalibration is needed because of
the physical processes underlying the way sensors work. The proposed project
will solve the problem of proper recalibration by appropriate physical modeling
of the metabolic processes involved. Sensors measure current in interstitial
space (subcutaneous fat) at fixed time increments all around the clock. The
current is nominally proportional to the amount of glucose in the space, but
there are two problems with the measurements. Firstly, there is a delay in
diffusion of glucose from the bloodstream into fat so that the glucose density
in the fat lags the glucose density in the bloodstream. Secondly, there is a
defense mechanism (white blood cells) which surround the electrode as a foreign
body and attempt to get rid of it via biofouling. The white blood cells
interfere with current flow and produce erroneous measurements unless accurate
recalibration is performed. The proposed approach has not been tried and is
expected to significantly outperform the current implementation of the sensor
technology based on more straightforward regression without gaining the benefit
and insight of the proposed physical modeling. A new differential equation
approach will be used to deal with the delay problem related to glucose sensor.
The differential equation is widely accepted and the rate for the diffusion of
glucose from the blood into interstitial space governs the relationship between
the glucose densities in the bloodstream and interstitial spaces. The diffusion
rate and the effect of biofouling will be estimated from finger stick metered
measurements taken a few times a day. A main innovation in the proposed approach
is statistical models using the physics of the delay and biofouling
problems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;An artificial pancreas will be a godsend to the
millions of Americans faced with the 24 hour a day tedium of having to decide
when and how much insulin to inject. If this could be done automatically for
them then the only task they would continue to have is to remember to replace
insulin in the well of their insulin pump. An artificial pancreas would give
them an effective treatment for their disease.