* 1106426
* The Effects of Solar Variability on Earth's Climate: A Workshop
* GEO,AGS
* 04/15/2011,03/31/2013
* Michael Moloney, National Academy of Sciences
* Standard Grant
* Ilia Roussev
* 03/31/2013
* USD 49,984.00

The NRC will form an ad hoc committee to organize and conduct a public workshop
to examine our state of knowledge regarding the Earth's climate response to
solar variability. This workshop will assist NSF and NASA in assessing potential
avenues for future research. The committee will hold meetings to develop the
agenda for the workshop and define topics for invited presentations and
discussions. Ultimately, the NRC committee will prepare a workshop report that
will summarize the event, without specific findings or recommendations.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The specific topics for inclusion at the workshop will be
developed through discussions among NASA, NSF, and NRC. However, the topics
might include the following: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;- What is the evidence of the
impact of solar variability on climate, particularly in the lower atmosphere,
over decadal time scales? &lt;br/&gt;- What can we learn of climate responses to
solar variability using paleo climate records? &lt;br/&gt;- Are there any
significant climate impacts of solar variability on regional scales?
&lt;br/&gt;- What are the research directions, additional observations and/or
model improvements necessary to improve our understanding and forecast ability
regarding solar variability and climate, particularly over the solar cycle time
scale? &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This workshop will contribute to deteriming future
research in global climate change, one of today's most critical science policy
issues. A more in-depth understanding of the complexity of the Earth's response
to solar radiative forcing and the recurring variability of the solar cycle will
provide insights into the Sun-Earth system as a whole.