* 1106535
* Statistical Methodology and Applications to Economics, Engineering and Genetics
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2011,06/30/2015
* Tze Lai, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 06/30/2015
* USD 399,939.00

An important objective of the proposed research is to &lt;br/&gt;develop methods
for gene mapping, i.e., the identification &lt;br/&gt;of genomic regions
containing a gene (or genes) affecting &lt;br/&gt;a trait of interest in either
humans or in experimental organisms. &lt;br/&gt;Searching a parameter set for
the location of one or more &lt;br/&gt;signals in a noisy background arise in
gene mapping where the &lt;br/&gt;signals indicate the presence of a gene.
Similar problems arise &lt;br/&gt;in brain mapping, astronomy, and
bioinformatics. An important &lt;br/&gt;part of their solution involves the
probability that a random field &lt;br/&gt;exceeds a high threshold. A unified
analytic approach and &lt;br/&gt;sequential Monte Carlo methods will be
developed to evaluate &lt;br/&gt;these boundary crossing probabilities. Other
methodological &lt;br/&gt;innovations of the proposed research are new dynamic
empirical &lt;br/&gt;Bayes models and methods, sequential surveillance
procedures, &lt;br/&gt;and adaptive control schemes for input-output systems
that may &lt;br/&gt;undergo occasional abrupt structural changes. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;The dynamic empirical Bayes approach under development has
&lt;br/&gt;applications to insurance rate-making, dynamic panel data in
&lt;br/&gt;economics, longitudinal data in biomedical studies, and risk
&lt;br/&gt;management. Sequential surveillance and adaptive risk control
&lt;br/&gt;are of timely relevance in the aftermath of the recent financial
&lt;br/&gt;crisis and oil spill disaster. Sequential Monte Carlo methods have
&lt;br/&gt;important applications to nonlinear filtering and to rare event
&lt;br/&gt;simulation in communication networks and risk management. Gene
&lt;br/&gt;mapping provides an important tool in the study of human diseases,
&lt;br/&gt;and in agriculture and animal husbandry. The broader implications
&lt;br/&gt;of the proposed research include (i) direct implications in genetics,
&lt;br/&gt;engineering, finance, insurance, risk management and surveillance,
&lt;br/&gt;and (ii) training of the next generation of scientists in academia,
&lt;br/&gt;industry, and government by developing new advanced courses and
&lt;br/&gt;involving graduate students in all phases of the research.