* 1106472
* Software to Empower Learning and Reseach in Speech (STELARIS):  A Workshop for Developers and Teachers
* SBE,BCS
* 01/15/2011,12/31/2011
* Suzanne Boyce, University of Cincinnati Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Betty Tuller
* 12/31/2011
* USD 19,995.00

In the past, speech research training was only available to students and
researchers associated with major research universities and large centers where
dedicated software development was joined with mentoring and expert technical
support. In the current environment, inexpensive computers, electronic distance
communication, and specialist freeware, have expanded the opportunities for
dissemination of research and knowledge outside of such large centers. On the
one hand, this is an exciting development, because it reduces barriers to entry
for a wider and more diverse set of students and researchers. On the other,
hand, the laboratory software for visualizing and manipulating acoustic signals
is either prohibitively expensive for institutions to buy, or else
discouragingly inefficient for students at introductory levels. Other software
is easy to use but doesn't teach the fundamental scientific principles that
underlie the manipulations allowed.

In order to meet this opportunity for expanded access, this award supports a
conference workshop, "Software To Empower Learning And Research In Speech
(STELARIS)," for scientists, students and software developers. The theme of the
workshop is to identify the best existing platforms and develop standards for
future developments that minimize technical barriers to data exchange, while
maximizing use as a teaching and research tool.