* 1106962
* Feature Extraction Involving Multichannel Time Series
* MPS,DMS
* 10/01/2011,09/30/2015
* Kinh Truong, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 09/30/2015
* USD 310,000.00

The investigator derives a logspline procedure to estimate the density and
conditional density (for regression type of applications) functions for response
variable subject to random truncation. In addition to bias adjustment due to
random truncation, the estimators will be shown to possess optimal rates of
convergence and important issues related to high-dimensional explanatory
variables will be addressed via ANOVA type of decomposition. For functional
magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) data, the PI and his collaborators estimate
the hemodynamic response function(HRF) via deconvolution and develop statistical
inference for brain region activation. They also consider the problem of
spatial-temporal feature extraction using independent component analysis (ICA).
Under appropriate conditions, both parametric and non-parametric statistical
inference for the mixing matrix and the latent temporal signals will be derived.
Finally, for data involving simultaneous recording of an ensemble of neurons,
the problem of feature extraction in identify a group of neurons that interact
with the target neuron is examined by using a logspline methodology to estimate
the conditional intensity function. The PI studies the statistical inference for
firing probability by establishing optimal rates of convergence and the
asymptotic distribution of the estimator. Software for all the projects will be
developed and disseminated for public use.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Advance in
computer technology has provided a fertile ground for many exciting research
opportunities. A profound example is how scientists now use genomic data to
study diseases that affect our health. Another is biomedical imaging in brain
disease and cognitive studies. In order to conduct valid statistical inferences
based on these types of data, it is important to account for the under-sampling
issue during the data acquisition stage. The Principle Investigator (PI)
develops a flexible statistical framework to address this problem and
investigates the modelling validity in real world applications. In particular,
the PI and his colleagues investigate how their statistical modelling of blood
flow information can help scientists interpret the functional magnetic resonant
imaging data for medical applications. They also construct brain images that
capture the neural physiological activity or circuitry of a specific task, as a
pathway to understand how the brain functions. Finally, the PI uses efficient
and effective statistical methods to study the dynamics of the brain at a much
higher temporal resolution by modelling the electro-potential or neuro-firing
probability of a task-specific ensemble of neurons. These results help medical
researchers advance their knowledge in their related fields so that treatments
to various genetic or central nervous system diseases that affect our health can
be developed.