* 1106358
* Correlated Electronic Phenomena in Ultra-Clean Carbon Nanotubes and Bilayer Graphene Devices
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2011,06/30/2014
* Marc Bockrath, University of California-Riverside
* Continuing Grant
* Paul Sokol
* 06/30/2014
* USD 435,000.00

****Technical abstract****&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal aims at using low
temperature transport measurements to study correlated electron physics in
graphene and nanotubes, which have emerged as nearly ideal one- or two-
dimensional electron systems. The first program focus is the study of electron
liquids and solids, such as Wigner crystal states in nanotubes and bilayer
graphene, and fractional quantum Hall states in the latter. The second focus is
novel interaction-driven insulating states, such as the Mott insulating state in
carbon nanotubes, with neutral low-energy excitations and unconventionally
charged excitations, and the rich spectrum of insulating phases predicted for
bilayer graphene, which are expected to exhibit magnetic ordering or spontaneous
layer polarization. In addition to deeper understanding of correlated phenomena
in nanostructures, the broader impact of this project includes graduate students
mentoring, integrating undergraduate education with physics research, e.g. by
contributing to the "UCR Undergraduate Research Journal", and mentoring students
from under-represented groups. Via participation in UCR's Nanotechnology
Outreach Program, the yearly "Summer Physics Academy" at UCR for high school
teachers, and supervising local high school interns, this program is expected to
positively impact the science and engineering education in local
communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;****Non-technical
abstract****&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Compared to bulk materials, nanostructured
materials often exhibit emergent new properties. For instance, electronic
interactions are mostly negligible in bulk materials, but often dominate in one-
or two-dimensional (1D or 2D) systems, where electrons' movements become
correlated, so much so that the electrons themselves can solidify to form a
crystal. Understanding these novel phenomena is not only crucial to the
continued miniaturization of electronics, but may also enable new
functionalities and devices. This project investigates such novel liquid and
solid phases of electrons and interaction-driven insulating states in two
archetypal nanostructured systems: graphene, which is a one-atom thick 2D layer
of carbon, and carbon nanotubes, which are essentially 1D rolled up tubes of
graphene. In addition to deeper understanding of electron behavior in
nanostructures and the potential for the development of electronics with novel
functionalities, this project's broader impact includes graduate student
mentoring, integrating undergraduate education and research, and engaging
students from under-represented groups. Via participation in UCR's
Nanotechnology Outreach Program, the yearly "Summer Physics Academy" for high
school teachers, and supervising local high school interns, this program is
expected to positively impact the science and engineering education in local
communities.