* 1106850
* Large scale phenomena in models of statistical mechanics
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2011,06/30/2014
* Marek Biskup, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 06/30/2014
* USD 127,617.00

The project addresses a variety of mathematical problems at the borderline of
probability theory and statistical mechanics. The common feature of these is a
relatively simple formulation, intriguing underlying phenomena and deep
connections to physical disciplines. The first round of problems pertains to the
Random Conductance Model. These include derivation of scaling limits of random
walks in disordered media, study of spectral properties of random Laplacians,
analysis of fluctuations of effective conductivity, detailed control of heat-
kernel decay, etc. The second area proposed to investigate is that of Gradient
Fields. These problems are ubiquitous in physical and applied sciences but their
mathematical understanding is currently stalled because of the inability to
overcome non-convexity of the underlying interaction. We offer specific methods
and approaches how this obstacle may technically be overcome. The third class of
problems addresses the area of Disordered Systems. The specific subjects of
interest are random-field spin models and the dynamics governed by the parabolic
Anderson model. Precise mathematical approaches are outlined that could lead to
significant improvements in the mathematical understanding of these problems. A
good many of listed problems are devised with the intention to provide training,
and inclusion in research, of graduate students and postdocs who have interest
in Probability Theory and Mathematical Physics.

The tremendous success of hard sciences in accurate description, modeling and
even forecasting complex natural phenomena derives, in large part, from their
foundation in rigorous mathematics. In the context of solid-state physics and
material sciences, the mathematical methods most commonly used are those of
probability and/or statistics. This comes as no surprise as these disciplines
have been designed precisely to deal with systems involving large numbers of
individual constituents. The present project studies three specific classes of
problems in probability theory of large systems whose origin is rooted in
physics of materials. The most pertinent general question we ask is how the
structural details of materials, and their various inherent irregularities,
exactly express themselves in their macroscopic properties. As a rule, we seek
an enveloping principle, or a "physical law", that extracts, in quantitative or
qualitative form, the essential features from the specifics. It is hoped that
developing the theoretical foundations of such systems will eventually lead to
significant advances in engineering applications. There is also an immediate
impact for mathematics itself: analysis of complex phenomena inevitably involves
a number of separate sub-disciplines of mathematics and will thus lead to
fruitful exchange of ideas among them. The project naturally offers an
opportunity to include graduate students and postdocs into the research
environment at a top research US university.