* 1106435
* Recurrent Events, Dynamic Reliability Systems, and Multiple Decision-Making with High-Dimensional Data
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2014
* Edsel Pena, University South Carolina Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 08/31/2014
* USD 267,498.00

Project deals with the development of statistical theory and methodology for
dealing with recurrent events occurring in many scientific fields; with complex
systems characterized by dynamic changes incurred by the history of the
component failures comprising the systems, such as load-sharing systems and
networks; with the analysis of high-dimensional (HD) data sets such as
microarray data sets in biology and medicine; and classification and prediction
problems with HD predictors and many model classes. The development of the
theory and methodology will use modern survival analysis techniques; coherent
structure theory from reliability and engineering; Markov random fields and
Gibbs measure; Neyman-Pearson paradigm, decision theory, and the Bayesian
paradigm. Project goals are to obtain asymptotic properties of semiparametric
estimators in the general class of dynamic recurrent event models of Pena and
Hollander; to develop probabilistic models for complex systems incorporating
component dependencies due to the load-sharing structure of the system; to
devise and implement optimal decision-theoretic and Bayesian methodologies in
multiple decision-making, classification, and prediction with HD data; and to
provide training to students and junior faculty in performing statistical
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Project results will be of high importance and
impact since the class of dynamic recurrent events models considered is more
realistic for complex systems, while those dealing with HD data will provide
more efficient methodology for discovering relevant `genes.' Consequently,
researchers and practitioners dealing with highly complex engineering systems
will better predict system or component failures, thus leading to improved
maintenance policies and decreased risk of catastrophic system failures; while
those involved with HD data will improve discovery of important genes, with
positive implications in chronic disease management and control. Finally, the
training of graduate students and junior faculty in statistical research will
benefit science since they are society's future researchers.