* 1106928
* 2011 ALPhA Immersion Program
* EDU,DUE
* 03/15/2011,02/28/2014
* Beth Cunningham, American Association of Physics Teachers
* Standard Grant
* R. Corby Hovis
* 02/28/2014
* USD 49,687.00

This project supports a prototype offering of a new program for developing
faculty expertise in teaching upper-level undergraduate physics laboratories.
The ALPhA Immersions Program provides in-depth faculty-staff professional
development, in which instructors spend three full days apprenticing with expert
mentors, learning a single instructional-physics experiment in order to teach it
confidently themselves. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Six geographically diverse
Immersion workshop sites are being offered in the summer of 2011, with 18
different experiments and 12 mentors. Approximately 58 faculty and staff are
participating in the program. These instructors often need to teach laboratory
experiments that are outside of their own fields of expertise.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: Participants in the Immersions explore
all aspects of a single advanced undergraduate laboratory experiment in a
setting similar to their students' experience. The participants may be learning
an experiment that is far from their field of specialization, but after the
Immersion, they can teach that experiment at their own institution. This allows
an expanded pool of students to experience contemporary instructional labs that
do much more than repeat classic experiments, introducing students to modern
instrumentation and increasing the breadth of experience for students who will
be engaged in independent research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; Broader
Impacts: This program's focus is on developing faculty and instructional staff
expertise in physics departments across the entire country. It does so in a very
direct way, bringing small groups together to learn contemporary instructional
labs that they want to implement at their own institutions, but do not have the
expertise to develop on their own. Moreover, at each immersion site the
collected cadre engages in broader discussions of how these labs can be
integrated into their curricula, which is a conversation explicitly aimed at
eliciting discussion of curricular tactics, strategies, and models. Reports on
these discussions are being shared at national meetings. The impact of this
program is widespread. In addition, some financial support is available to
encourage participation by instructors at institutions serving under-represented
populations.