* 1106444
* EAGER: Novel Highly Sensitive Detectors using Nanostructure Arrays for Advanced Electronics Systems
* ENG,ECCS
* 01/01/2011,12/31/2012
* Michael Shur, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Usha Varshney
* 12/31/2012
* USD 160,441.00

The project will explore the feasibility of novel highly sensitive detectors for
advanced THz electronic systems using 2D and 3D gratings with nanometer feature
sizes and implemented using deep submicron silicon technology. For the first
time, a new configuration of plasma wave detector array elements with
symmetrical sources and two symmetrical gate fingers will be implemented and a
multi scale approach ensuring a plasmonic resonance with each element of the
array and an electromagnetic resonance within the entire array will be used. If
successful, this feasibility study will develop and validate a new pathway for
the subwavelength coupling of THz radiation with the two dimensional electron
gas or fluid in solid-state systems and will enable a new generation of THz
electronics systems with revolutionary impact on the US airport security systems
and biomedical applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Principal Investigator will
fabricate and characterize the FINFET detector prototypes and develop software
tools for design and optimization of electronics systems using such detectors to
prove the feasibility of this new approach. The project will explore the
feasibility of new nanoscale FIN FET elements to form the THz detection units
with optimum boundary conditions that have never been achieved before. These
will be done by using opposing current flows in these four terminal detector
units. The project will include investigation of the THz interaction with and
coupling to these elements, study their sensitivity, noise, temperature
dependencies, and Noise Equivalent Power. This will be done using three
dimensional electromagnetic simulation and nanoscale THz imaging. The silicon
FIN FET elements will be combined into nanostructured arrays to capture the
entire THz beam to prove the feasibility of silicon based plasmonic THz
technology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of the proposed project
will be in proving feasibility of multi scale nonlinear active nanostructure
arrays with elements of new, previously unexplored type for solving fundamental
scientific problems of THz radiation interaction with solid and biological
matter at femtosecond time intervals and nanometer and atomic
scales.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact of the project will be in
gaining understanding new fundamental physics of active nonlinear multi scale
nanostructures enabling the development of THz electronics with orders of
magnitude better performance at a fraction of the cost of existing systems; in
seeding the development of new multibillion dollar THz electronics industry with
applications in medicine, home land security, industrial controls, space
exploration, and defense; in creating hundreds of thousands of new high-tech
American jobs and in training the next generation of scientists and engineers
through THz related new curriculum and outreach at all levels - from K to 12 to
post graduate education. Principal Investigator will engage the REU
undergraduate students and will give lectures and demonstrations in local high
schools.