* 1106205
* Collaborative Research: Development of a Millimeter-wave Phased Focal Plane Array
* MPS,AST
* 07/01/2011,06/30/2016
* Karen ONeil, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Continuing Grant
* Peter Kurczynski
* 06/30/2016
* USD 855,978.00

Presently, a typical large mm-wave radio telescope costs more than $100M but
state-of-the-art arrays of focal-plane heterodyne receivers cover less than 10%
of the useful field of view with large gaps between sensitive areas. Moreover,
individual components are not efficiently coupled to the energy concentrated by
the antenna, reducing the telescope's resolution on the sky by 20% and typically
losing about half of the available signal. The key new development proposed by
collaborators Drs. N. Erickson and B. Jeffs of the University of Massachusetts
and Brigham Young University, respectively, is the construction of focal-plane
arrays utilizing phased array feed techniques. This approach differs from
traditional feed horns by using a cluster of small antenna feeds to synthesize a
single feed for the main antenna. Such an array collects all of the energy in
the focal plane. Phased combination of the elements of this focal plane array
allows one to synthesize horns of optimal size and amplitude/phase distribution
to enhance the telescope resolution and compensate for telescope surface errors.
At the same time they produce nearly as many beams on the sky as elements in the
array.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;While phased focal-plane arrays hold great promise
for revolutionizing the field of radio astronomy, successful deployment of large
two-dimensional arrays is still several years off, for it requires hurdles to be
overcome in manufacturing, processing, as well as packaging. Drs. Erickson and
Jeffs plan to test concepts for producing receiver front-ends with very small
element spacings, demonstrate the utility of modern digital signal processors to
do the vector combination of beams, and develop computational algorithms for
combining the beams, calibrating the array, and processing the final data
stream. The goal of this 3-yr project is an 8 x 8 array covering the frequency
range 70 - 95 GHz with 100 MHz bandwidth, cryogenically cooled and installed on
the 100-m Green Bank Telescope of the National Radio Astronomy
Observatory.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In addition to paving the way for future
large, efficient, two-dimensional mm-wave receiver arrays, the Erickson/Jeffs
project will involve engineering and astronomy graduate students at the two
collaborative institutions and provide advanced research topics for talented
undergraduate students in the Five College Astronomy Undergraduates Internship
Program. It will thereby educate members of a new generation of researcher in
the complex art of mm-wave array instrumentation. Funding for this work is being
provided by NSF's Division of Astronomical Sciences through its Advanced
Technologies and Instrumentation program.