* 1106460
* Asymptotic Inference for Locally Stationary Processes
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2011,06/30/2015
* Michael Nussbaum, Cornell University
* Continuing Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 06/30/2015
* USD 368,974.00

Stationarity is a crucial assumption in classical time series analysis. The
theory of oscillatory spectra (Priestley, 1965) represents an attempt to
overcome the resulting limitations for modeling nonstationary time series.
However, it is the more flexible concept of locally stationary processes
(Dahlhaus, 1993) which, by extending the theory of oscillatory spectra, provides
a suitable framework for a general asymptotic theory of nonstationary processes.
A fundamental characteristic of these processes is the time varying spectral
density. While the literature on these models is already well developed, several
questions of asymptotic inference remain open. Among them, two seem to stand out
as most interesting: the possible asymptotic equivalence to a Gaussian white
noise model, and the question of optimal exponential rates of large deviation
type in testing and estimation problems. Since Le Cam developed the comparison
of statistical experiments via their risk functions, many statistical models
have been proved to be locally asymptotically normal, with the aim of
establishing benchmarks for optimal procedures. For a parametric model of a time
varying spectral density, local asymptotic normality has been established in the
literature. However, for a better conceptual understanding of asymptotic
inference, it is of interest to study the stronger property of asymptotic
equivalence to a Gaussian white noise model, valid globally and over
nonparametric function classes. As regards large deviation theory for locally
stationary processes, some fragments are already available in the literature. A
more fully developed theory can be envisaged, yielding not only testing results
such as Stein's lemma and the Chernoff bound as special cases, but possibly also
insights into the information geometry of these models based on the asymptotic
Kullback-Leibler information.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Practitioners of statistics
and data analysis very often assume that data show more or less similar behavior
over different time periods, even when there is clear evidence to the contrary.
For instance, this phenomenon can be observed in records of atmospheric
turbulence, seismic signals from earthquakes, or speech signals analyzed in
biological research. There is a need to develop more refined statistical methods
for these cases. An ingenious theoretical solution to this problem has been
proposed in the literature, based on the assumption that if data change over
time, they often do not do so abruptly, but in a smooth way. This phenomenon is
called local stationarity. If the series exhibits these "smooth changes",
existing statistical methods can be adapted to smoothly change over time as
well, considerably extending the scope of data analysis. The current proposal
aims at a more thorough mathematical-statistical investigation of these locally
stationary models. It also has a major educational component, as it is intended
to accompany the collaboration between the principal investigator and a
promising young scientist who has previously been supported with full tuition
and stipend from the government of Mexico.