* 1106437
* Making More Realistic Galaxy Clusters:  Confronting AMR Cosmological Simulations of Thermal and Nonthermal Processes with Observations
* MPS,AST
* 07/01/2011,06/30/2015
* Jack Burns, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* Richard Barvainis
* 06/30/2015
* USD 382,692.00

Clusters of galaxies can be used to constrain cosmological parameters such as
the cosmological constant and are an important probe of dark matter and dark
energy. However, their use in these roles is limited by their remaining
systematic uncertainties in such nonlinear thermal and nonthermal processes,
such as cosmic rays and magnetic fields. This project is focused on using
advanced adaptive mesh refinement (AMR) cosmological magnetohydrodynamic (MHD)
N-body computer simulations with physics constrained by multiwavelength
observations. The principal investigator used previous NSF funding to develop
the framework to support these investigations using the Enzo computer code. In
the proposed project, Cloudy, a new radiative cooling computer software module,
will be combined with three different models for distributed heating---star
particles, massive galaxy constructs, and active galactic nuclei. These
additions to the simulations will help provide more realistic modeling of
cluster evolution that will improve our general understanding of cluster
properties, such as biases in current mass estimation and limitations of using
clusters as probes of precision cosmology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project
builds on previous NSF-funded work on developing code to simulate cluster
evolution. The proposed more advanced simulations will lay important and timely
groundwork for interpreting upcoming Sunyaev-Zeldovich Effect, weak lensing,
radio, and X-ray surveys. The proposed work will do an excellent job of closely
matching simulations with observations in the radio, X-ray, and gamma-ray
portions of the spectrum. This work is at the forefront of such
investigations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The principal investigator offers several
ways to extend the impact of this project. Educationally, (1) a postdoctoral
fellow and a graduate student will participate and be mentored in the project,
and (2) modules will be integrated into undergraduate and graduate coursework to
teach such physical principles as large scale structure formation and turbulence
in the Universe. For public outreach, cosmological simulations will be
incorporated into public planetarium programs locally and freely distributed
nationally to other planetariums. Finally, the principal investigator will make
the developed software modules publicly available to the benefit of the entire
scientific community.