* 1106254
* Collaborative Research:  Engineering Approaches to Cancer Metabolism to Interpret and Develop Improved Treatment Modalities
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2014
* Michael Betenbaugh, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Friedrich Srienc
* 08/31/2014
* USD 177,745.00

Intellectual Merit: It has been well established since the work of Warburg that
cancer cells exhibit changes in their cellular metabolism. In the years since
the Warburg hypothesis, a great deal has been learned about how these metabolic
changes can be activated. Two of the most common genetic alterations that can
cause changes in cancer metabolism are transformations that lead to activation
of the C-Myc (Myc) and hypoxia inducible factor 1 (HIF-1) transcription factors.
These transcription factors alter many genes involved in cellular metabolism to
facilitate the expansion of cancer cells at the expense of normal cells in
tumorigenic environments. One approach for therapeutic intervention is to target
these changes in order to limit a cancer cell?s expansion and survival potential
relative to normal cells. The hypothesis of the enclosed proposal is that
engineering methodologies will help provide a more quantitative understanding of
the metabolic transformations that can be used to identify strategies to target
for inhibiting the growth and survival of cancer cells. These engineering goals
will be accomplished through the following three aims: The first step will be to
build and adapt a kinetic model of cancer metabolism including Myc and HIF-1
transformations in order to identify potential targets for cancer treatment.
Such a kinetic modeling approach will be advantageous since it can be used to
predict changes in enzyme activity and metabolic rates that accompany the
changes triggered by Myc and HIF-1 in cancer cells. Furthermore, such a kinetic
model will be helpful in identifying useful treatment scenarios that alter
metabolism since potential cancer drugs often act on an enzyme in the metabolic
pathway. The kinetic model will enable users to examine many different treatment
scenarios that would be impossible to reproduce experimentally. The second aim
will be to modify cancer cell systems using the predictions of these
mathematical models in order to determine the capacity of the model to predict
potential cancer therapy capabilities. This approach will be applied to a model
cancer cell line, P493, representing Burkitt?s lymphoma. This cell line will be
particularly appropriate since it offers the ability to control expression of
Myc and HIF-1. Other cancer cell lines are available if appropriate to see if
the methodologies are generally applicable. The final aim will be to evaluate
the metabolite profiles and metabolic flux of model cancer cells with and
without treatment. Metabolite labeling will be applied to generate a metabolic
flux framework elucidating changes resulting from cancer and treatments. The
goal of this step is to determine if the alterations predicted by the model and
evaluated experimentally are observed in an overall flux map of cancer metabolic
physiology. This quantitative evaluation will help to better characterize cancer
metabolism and treatment approaches and will also help to inform and improve
kinetic models of cancer metabolism. Broader Impacts: Cancer represents the
second leading cause of death in the US and thus rational approaches to prevent
its lethality are a major health goal. Alterations in cancer metabolism are
present in many cancers ranging from B-cell lymphomas, leukemias, gliomas,
breast cancer, to renal carcinomas among others. By applying engineering
approaches, this study will provide a quantitative understanding of how
metabolism is changed in cancer cells. This knowledge will be useful in
developing better treatment strategies that inhibit tumor growth and perhaps
activate cell death. The project will also develop a metabolism modeling module
that will be used to stimulate and excite middle school students about science
and engineering related to human health. Students educated in this project
through research, education and outreach initiatives will be important
contributors to society by understanding mammalian metabolism and applying this
knowledge to alter performance of mammalian cells in topics ranging from
biotechnology to biomedicine.