* 1106195
* En-Gen: Mutation in Genomes of Obligate Symbionts and Impacts on the Ecological Tolerances and Distributions of Hosts: Buchnera and Pea Aphids
* BIO,EF
* 08/07/2010,12/31/2012
* Nancy Moran, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* George Gilchrist
* 12/31/2012
* USD 502,238.00

The health and survival of most animals and plants depends on specialized
symbiotic microorganisms, mostly bacteria. Symbionts can affect the tolerances
of hosts to environmental factors such as heat, parasites or nutritional stress.
In many cases, symbionts are transferred from mother to offspring before birth,
with maternal transmission especially common in insects. This project focuses on
mutations affecting symbiont genomes and on how these mutations impact the
functioning and environmental tolerances of hosts. Full genome resequencing will
be carried out for Buchnera, the bacterial symbionts of aphids and one of the
best studied examples of symbiosis. These data will reveal the overall frequency
of mutations in the symbiont genome and the frequency of mutations that affect
functions important to hosts, such as production of essential nutrients or
tolerance to heat. To quantify the effects of these mutations on hosts, lab
experiments with live insects containing different symbiont genotypes will be
conducted. Preliminary evidence indicates that even a single change in the
symbiont DNA sequence can have a massive effect on the aphid's ability to
survive heat exposure. The new results will show the extent of such mutations
across the entire symbiont genome. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The results will add to
understanding of fundamental processes determining the distribution of a major
group of crop pests (aphids) and will have implications for similar symbiotic
systems found in many other insect pests. The study has direct implications for
predicting how organisms respond to climate change. Educational components, from
the high school to graduate level, are integrated into the research. Graduate
and undergraduate students will conduct significant portions of the primary
research. In addition, high school students will participate through a sustained
collaboration between the main investigator and a biology teacher at a large
urban high school with a majority of students from groups underrepresented in
science and in the university. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;