* 1106434
* EAGER: Unified categories for describing and quantifying scientific research
* SBE,SMA
* 02/15/2011,01/31/2013
* David Newman, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Joshua Rosenbloom
* 01/31/2013
* USD 162,774.00

This project develops state-of-the-art machine learning methods to describe and
quantify scientific research. The particular approach taken is to develop new
topic models that can learn underlying research categories across a wide variety
of text data sources including NSF and NIH grant awards, scientific
publications, and US patents. The important innovation is the building of the
technology to permit feedback from domain experts and end users. The approach is
potentially transformative in that it can potentially overcomes some of the
known limitations of current topic modeling approaches by improving the quality
and utility of topics across diverse data sources.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The web-based tool displays and manipulates
learned topics so that users can apply it to create comprehensive overviews of
scientific funding, research, and production, including the answers to questions
like:&lt;br/&gt;- What types of science are funded by NSF, NIH and other
agencies?&lt;br/&gt;- What types of science are produced by funded
investigators?&lt;br/&gt;- What types of science are described in US
patents?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The tool also provide users with answers to more
complex questions about the science of science and the relationship between
funding and scientific achievements, tracking trends, describing funding
programs, and identifying funding overlap (across agencies, or even within
agencies).&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: The proposed
research advances techniques and methods for tracking
scientific&lt;br/&gt;research in several ways. First, it advances the
development of unsupervised statistical topic models to categorize, describe,
and measure scientific research. Second, it addresses known problems with topic
modeling for this type of application, such as improving the coherence of all
topics, and making topics transcend different types of document collections
(grants, publications, patents). Users can more directly measure impacts of
funding as a result of being able to make use of unified topics from grants,
publications, and patents. Third, the research develops evaluation frameworks
that shift the focus from machine learning metrics to the needs of domain
experts and end users. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: This work has an
array of broader impacts. It creates useful data for funding agency staff,
researchers, interested public, government bodies, media and other stakeholders.
The web based tool allows users to create custom-based data sets, tailored to
their particular needs. Such data sets allow users to answer an array of science
of science policy questions. The knowledge created in this work supports
initiatives such as STAR METRICS to document the value of investments in
scientific research.