* 1106509
* Workshop Support for the International Phosphorus Sustainability Summit at Arizona State University, February 2011
* BIO,DEB
* 02/01/2011,01/31/2014
* Daniel Childers, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Henry L. Gholz
* 01/31/2014
* USD 49,801.00

This project is supporting the International Sustainable Phosphorus Summit
?Closing the Human Phosphorus Cycle: Phosphorus, Food, and our Future? being
held on the campus of Arizona State University February, 2011. Central goals of
The Summit include defining the scale and scope of P sustainability problem,
developing and communicating possible solutions for achieving sustainable P use,
and raising awareness about the issue, locally and globally. The Summit will
enable researchers and practitioners from an interdisciplinary range of fields
and professions (e.g. ecology, biogeochemistry, agronomy, sociology,
engineering, economics, human health, mining, public policy, law, and science
communication) to actively engage with the sustainability challenges faced by
dependence on this resource. U.S. and international experts from multiple
backgrounds will address global P supply in the face of increased demand using a
systems approach. Additionally, The Summit will be a forum for students
(undergraduate and graduate) and postdoctoral associates to collaborate with
experts from different disciplinary backgrounds to develop next-generation
sustainability strategies. The Summit will address human influences on the
biogeochemical cycling of a critical, non-renewable macronutrient; 2) the
implications of phosphorus as a water pollutant on aquatic ecosystems, and; 3)
sustainable solutions to the problems of an 'open' human P
cycle.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The International Sustainable Phosphorus Summit will
enable researchers and practitioners from an interdisciplinary range of fields
and professions to actively engage with the sustainability challenges faced by
dependence on this resource. Additionally, The Summit will be a forum for
students and postdoctoral associates to collaborate with experts from different
disciplinary backgrounds to develop next-generation sustainability strategies
for P. Notably, the Summit is being organized by graduate students and
postdoctoral associates from a range of disciplinary units. Transdisciplinary
Summit workshops will each produce one or more publications or outcomes,
including chapters for a conference-organized book that will address a full
range of the P sustainability issues, challenges, and possible solutions. This
book (12-18 chapters) will be published in print and electronically to
facilitate access by all interested stakeholders. Additionally, Summit working
groups may choose other relevant publication outcomes, including overview
articles that target specific stakeholder groups. Finally, a main goal of this
conference is to raise public awareness of the sustainability challenges society
may face with phosphorus in the coming decades. The public will be engaged
through a collaborative science-art competition and exhibit, in which artists
are encouraged to collaborate with conference participants to create art focused
on P sustainability. Additionally, the science panel discussions and banquet
dinner at the Desert Botanical Garden will be open to the public.