* 1106536
* Upscale Feedback of Tropical Atmospheric Synoptic-Scale Variabilities to Intraseasonal Oscillations
* GEO,AGS
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2015
* Tim Li, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* Anjuli Bamzai
* 08/31/2015
* USD 370,034.00

The Madden-Julian Oscillation (MJO) is the most significant tropical variability
between day-to-day weather and El Niño/La Niña-Southern Oscillation (ENSO).
Recent theoretical and modeling studies suggested that the upscale feedback of
synoptic-scale (3-10-day) variability (SSV) to MJO is important but our current
knowledge in understanding this upscale feedback is very limited. This project
articulates an endeavor to investigate the upscale feedback of the tropical SSV
to MJO. Specific scientific questions to be addressed are: Through what internal
atmospheric and ocean nonlinear processes and surface flux processes does the
SSV feed back to the MJO? How do the barotropic/baroclinic energy conversions
depend on the MJO phases? What are the phase relationships between MJO
convection and nonlinearly rectified surface heat fluxes/apparent heat
sources/eddy momentum transport? These questions will be addressed through the
analysis of new-generation reanalysis products such as National Centers for
Environmental Prediction (NCEP) Climate Forecast System Reanalysis (CFSR), Earth
System Research Laboratory (ESRL) 100-year Historical Reanalysis, National
Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA) Modern Era Retrospective-analysis
for Research and Applications (MERRA), and European Centre for Medium-Range
Weather Forecasts (ECMWF) high-resolution YOTC (Year of Tropical Convection)
datasets and through numerical modeling experiments. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project consists of the following three major research components. Firstly, a
newly developed eddy kinetic energy (EKE) budget diagnostics will be applied to
investigate the role of synoptic eddy interactions with the slowly varying
background mean state and the MJO flow in affecting barotropic and baroclinic
energy conversions at various phases of MJO. Secondly, the investigator will
examine the characteristics of nonlinearly rectified intraseasonal surface
latent heat flux (LHF) and its temporal and spatial phase relationships with MJO
convection. Thirdly, the investigator will examine to what extend SSV modulates
intraseasonal apparent heat and moisture sources and how the nonlinear eddy
momentum transport (including the effect of 2-day waves and mesoscale convective
systems) exerts an upscale feedback to MJO. The ocean "reddening" process
through which high-frequency atmospheric variability affects the intraseasonal
SST will be also investigated through a series of ocean general circulation
model experiments. The following two nonlinear rectification processes, the
nonlinear rectification of the surface wind stress/heat flux and the ocean
nonlinear advection process, will be particularly
examined.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts of the research include the
contribution to improved representation of the structure and variability of
tropical convection from synoptic to intraseasonal timescales in the current
state-of-art global climate/weather models, which may further lead to improved
skills of extended-range weather and climate forecasts both in the tropics and
extratropics, facilitating the forecast potential at the sub-seasonal scale.