* 1106619
* Probabilistic Analysis of Large Complex Geometric Structures
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/2011,07/31/2014
* Joseph Yukich, Lehigh University
* Continuing Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 07/31/2014
* USD 195,000.00

Many questions arising in stochastic geometry and applied probability, as well
as questions arising in networks, spatial statistics, and statistical mechanics,
may be understood in terms of the behavior of large random geometric structures,
where `large' means that the randomness involves a growing number of random
variables. `Geometric' means that the problems depend heavily on the geometry of
the underlying space. Problems involving these complex structures involve
understanding the behavior of sums of spatially dependent terms having short
range interactions, but complicated long range dependence. Problems of interest
in discrete stochastic geometry involve functionals of convex hulls of i.i.d.
samples, asymptotic quantization error, the limit behavior of maximal points,
and the limit behavior of generalized tessellations in Euclidean space. Problems
of interest involving spatial data include dimension estimation of non-linear
data clouds embedded in a high dimensional Euclidean space, estimation of
entropy, estimation of surface and volume integrals, as well as establishing
minimal cost networks for data transmission and energy scaling laws. In each
case, one seeks to quantify the `mean' or average behavior of functionals
arising in these problems. A chief goal is to show that sums of spatially
dependent terms behave as though they were sums of independent identically
distributed random variables. One thus wants to show that such sums satisfy laws
of large numbers, that they have asymptotically a normal distribution, and that
the random point measures defined by these sums satisfy functional central limit
theorems, that is to say show their scaling behavior is understood in terms of
Brownian sheets.

This project aims to solve problems in geometric probability which are of
interest to researchers in both industry and academia. Examples include the
following: (i) given an unknown object or body (such as an infarction in the
human body or an underground deposit of oil) how can we use effectively use
random probes of the object to find reliable estimators of its surface area and
volume? (ii) given a huge amount of spatial data, how do we use only the
interpoint distances of the data to determine intrinsic properties of the data,
including its intrinsic dimension? (iii) given a network such as the world wide
web, how does one best find ways to efficiently transmit and route information
through it, minimizing cost and travel time? Similarly, given a communication
network, how does one optimally place transmitters to maximize coverage? (iv)
given any complex network, including airline and other transportation networks,
how does one efficiently route vehicles to maximize revenue? The goal of this
project is to develop theoretical tools to solve these and related problems and
to develop efficient algorithms of use in industry.