* 1106609
* Hierarchical models for Large  Geostatistical Datasets with Application
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2011,05/31/2014
* Sudipto Banerjee, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 05/31/2014
* USD 303,478.00

This proposal lays down a comprehensive framework for carrying out statistical
inference on point-referenced high-dimensional spatial data available from a
large number of locations. The focus of the proposal is methodological rather
than purely theoretical or purely applied. Thus, statistical theory is used to
develop mathematically formal but computationally feasible methods that can have
a broad range of applications. Theoretical derivations and new results that will
enhance current methods (including findings by the PI in prior NSF-funded
research) will be explored, but always keeping in mind the practicing spatial
analyst. The basic framework is to use a low-rank spatial process obtained by
projecting the original process onto a lower-dimensional subspace. The PI
intends to explore approximation properties of the low rank spatial process with
regard to different metrics. The long-term goal of the PI is to develop a full
suite of statistical methods that estimate spatial models in a wide variety of
experiments in forestry, ecology and the broader environmental sciences. A
recurrent underlying theme of the proposed methods that makes it different from
existing methods is that the modeler does not need to sacrifice richness in
modeling as a compromise for the large datasets. This resolves the statistical
irony that large datasets are precisely where complex relationships can be
detected effectively.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Modern spatial technologies such as
Geographical Information Systems (GIS) and Global Positioning Systems (GPS)
routinely identify geographical coordinates with a simple hand-held device.
Consequently, scientists and researchers in a variety of disciplines today have
access to geocoded data as never before. With data becoming increasingly high-
dimensional both in terms of number of observed locations and the number of
observations per location, scientists are seeking to hypothesize complex
relationships. These, in turn, yield rather complex hierarchical models that are
computationally expensive even for moderately sized datasets. This team
recognises a need for statistical modeling of large multivariate spatial data
and proposes a model-based setup to tackle a wide variety of large
geostatistical datasets. Although some of the more serious statistical modeling
will require multi-processor capabilities, the emphasis on this project is on
methodology implementable with moderately powerful computing tools. The proposed
methodologies would, therefore, be accessible to a large number of researchers.
The broader impact of the proposed methods is best assessed by connecting the
outcome of this research with the widely recognized impact of GIS on human
society. From identifying spatial disparities in health standards to more
precise weather predictions, GIS technology is used today in almost every sphere
of society and the proposed methods can have far reaching beneficial effects in
environmental research that potentially touch unexpected corners of society.