* 1106132
* Renewal: Simple Molecular Systems at Ultrahigh Pressures
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2011,07/31/2015
* Ho-kwang Mao, Carnegie Institution of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Paul Sokol
* 07/31/2015
* USD 389,999.00

****TECHNICAL ABSTRACT****&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Experimental studies of simple
molecular systems to pressures of 400 GPa (4 megabars) over a broad range of
temperatures will be carried out in this project. The research takes advantage
of numerous developments in diamond-anvil cell techniques, including advances in
analytical methods that utilize synchrotron x-radiation, spallation neutron
scattering, laser spectroscopies, and transport probes. Dense hydrogen and
hydrogen-dominant simple molecular solids, alloys, and selected elements will be
examined to search for theoretically predicted novel metallization and
superconductivity. The crystal structures of newly discovered high-pressure
phases, particularly archetypal elemental systems, will be determined using
synchrotron x-ray and neutron diffraction techniques, and the electronic
structures will be explored using new x-ray inelastic scattering methods. By
improving our understanding of fundamental interactions in condensed matter, the
project will impact areas such as nanoscience, planetary science, and energy.
The project will advance technology necessary for studying matter under more
extreme conditions. The research will seek to enhance capabilities major
national facilities, and will train post-doctoral fellows as well as high school
students, undergraduates, graduate students, and visiting
investigators.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;****NON-TECHNICAL
ABSTRACT****&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will explore the nature of matter
through experimental studies of simple molecular substances subjected to
pressures reaching 4 megabars (4 million times atmospheric pressure) over a
broad range of temperatures from near absolute zero to many thousands of
degrees. The project takes advantage of numerous recent developments in the
ability both to subject materials to these extreme conditions and to probe
samples under those conditions with synchrotron x-ray, advanced neutron, laser,
and magnetic and electrical methods. Hydrogen-rich molecules will be transformed
into new kinds of metals and superconductors, and the nature of metallic
hydrogen, a predicted entirely new state of matter, will be explored. The
dramatic changes in crystal structure and chemical bonding expected for
materials under extreme conditions will be determined using a variety of x-ray
and neutron methods. The results impact materials science, nanoscience,
planetary science, and astrophysics. The work will lead to development of new
energetic materials, novel superconductors, gas storage materials, and superhard
materials. The research will enhance capabilities at major national facilities,
and will train high school students, undergraduates, graduate students,
postdoctoral associates, and senior scientists. Impacts on both science and
society broadly are therefore expected.