* 1106113
* Cubature rules and Approximation on Regular Domains
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2014
* Yuan Xu, University of Oregon Eugene
* Standard Grant
* Eugene Gartland
* 08/31/2014
* USD 149,475.00

Xu DMS-1106113

The principal investigator studies cubature rules, which are numerical
integration formulas for higher dimensional integrals, and approximation of
functions on regular domains such as cubes, balls, spheres and simplexes. The
project combines several topics: numerical analysis, discrete Fourier analysis,
orthogonal polynomials, and approximation theory. Two approaches are emphasized.
The first approach is based on a connection between cubature rules and discrete
Fourier analysis with translation tiling. The approach allows one to study, in
several stages, cubature rules and interpolation by exponential functions on the
fundamental domain of the translation tiling, by trigonometric functions on the
fundamental simplex of the domain, and by algebraic polynomials on corresponding
domains, and it yields results on cubature rules, interpolation, orthogonal
polynomials and approximation. The second approach starts with a
characterization of best approximation by polynomials on the sphere and on the
ball in terms of the smoothness of the functions being approximated, while the
smoothness is measured by the differences of the function values in Euler
angles. This line of work is based on recent results of the investigator and his
collaborators that for some problems it is necessary to work with these angles,
even though their number is much larger than the dimension.

Cubature rules, which are multidimensional numerical integration formulas, and
approximation on regular domains in higher dimensional spaces are fundamental
tools in a variety of applications, because most integrals can only be evaluated
numerically and very few problems can be evaluated exactly. At the current
stage, in contrast to the situation in one dimension, many fundamental problems
in these two areas have not been resolved, despite increasing need for them in
applications. The project aims at finding new methods to construct numerically
efficient algorithms, such as accurate cubature rules with fewer nodes, fast
discrete Fourier transforms, and approximation operators on regular domains such
as cubes, balls, spheres and simplexes. The algorithms have applications in
scientific computing, imaging, statistics, and geosciences.