* 1106695
* Spatio-Temporal Dependence and Extremes with Applications to Networking and the Environment
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2011,01/31/2015
* George Michailidis, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 01/31/2015
* USD 330,090.00

The goal of the project is to develop models and statistical inference
techniques in the context of space-time computer network traffic and
environmental data. The PIs propose to extend their joint work on global network
traffic modeling via multivariate spatio-temporal processes and to address the
network kriging, prediction, and optimal monitoring design problems. New
problems involving extremal dependence in computer network traffic as well as
environmental data will be also addressed. To do so, the PIs propose to use
established techniques as well as to develop new tools involving max-stable
processes, multivariate, functional, and hidden regular
variation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;One of the main themes of the proposal is to
understand and model the statistical aspects of traffic propagation in computer
networks. This research would help predict, detect, monitor, and manage computer
network traffic in a more principled way. The proposed methodology focuses on
characterizing the global statistical behavior in both space and time, which
would provide a more comprehensive picture of the entire network, namely the
traffic loads on all links, routes, at concurrent as well as different points of
time. This could enable the practitioners to predict the traffic load on an
unobserved link or route by monitoring a select set of links or routes. Another
aspect of the proposed research involves applying the Extreme Value Theory to
understand and model the statistical dependence of extreme delays and traffic
loads in computer networks. This could help identify bottlenecks and ?weak
links? when unusually extreme traffic volumes arise. Related important problems
arise in environmental applications, where extremes play a critical role. For
example, the adequate modeling of the probability of extreme precipitation
events to occur at the same time over different spatial locations is essential
to be able to quantify the risk of floods. The proposed research would help
model and estimate such probabilities of concurrent extremes and evaluate
important environmental risks such as pollutions, floods, droughts, hot-spells,
etc.