* 1107515
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Aligning ant diversity with conservation priorities in a biodiversity hotspot: Systematics and biogeography of the arboreal ant Crematogaster in Madagascar
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2011,09/30/2012
* Philip Ward, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Michael Whiting
* 09/30/2012
* USD 13,794.00

The goal of this project is to investigate species diversity and relationships
in a group of ants, Crematogaster, on the island of Madagascar. These are
diverse and dominant arboreal ants with a worldwide distribution for which
accurate estimates of the number of species are much-needed but notoriously
problematic. This study uses morphological and genetic methods to identify
species and to describe any new species of these ants in Madagascar and to
investigate their relatedness to other members of the group that are found in
different geographical regions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Madagascar is one of the
world?s biodiversity hotspots, harboring a unique flora and fauna, including the
charismatic lemurs and plants such as the Madagascar periwinkle, valued both as
an ornamental and a source of anti-cancer drugs. This research contributes
significantly to understanding the unique evolutionary history of Malagasy
plants and animals and delivers complete distribution records and species
estimates that are needed as a basis for all further ecological and conservation
measures. Broad dissemination of data is achieved through the development of
web-based species identification tools, and through the education of local
students and resource management authorities in Madagascar. This study thereby
supports ongoing efforts to define areas for the expansion of the protected area
network in Madagascar, and further enhances the local research capacity through
educational activities.