* 1107606
* Materials World Network: Spin Entanglement Using Transient Electrons in C and Si-Based Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2015
* Alexei Tyryshkin, Princeton University
* Continuing Grant
* Paul Sokol
* 08/31/2015
* USD 520,000.00

This award supports a multidisciplinary international collaboration for research
and education addressing the challenge of producing, controlling, and measuring
quantum entanglement. Entanglement is one of the most profound concepts to
emerge from quantum mechanics, giving rise to correlations between the states of
physical systems, even widely separated ones. Entanglement and its preservation
underlie new technologies such as quantum sensing, quantum repeaters, and
quantum computation. This collaboration includes both experimental and
theoretical work, with researchers at Oxford University and Heriot-Watt
University in the United Kingdom, and Princeton University. The long-term goal
of the project is to understand how transient electron spins can be used to
mediate quantum entanglement between multiple nuclear spins. The work addresses
long-standing questions related to spin decoherence in various condensed matter
systems, and explores new uncharted territory concerning the evolution and
destruction of entangled states. Both carbon- and silicon-based materials and
devices will be studied, using Electron Paramagnetic Resonance (EPR), Electron-
Nuclear Double Resonance (ENDOR), and Electrically Detected Magnetic Resonance
(EDMR) techniques. After electron spins are entangled with nuclear spins in
their immediate vicinity, the electrons will be moved to where they can interact
with a new set of nuclei. It may be possible to entangle widely separated
nuclear spins with these methods. Questions concerning the loss of coherence
associated with the removal and reintroduction of the electrons will be
addressed, as well as the possible loss of coherence during the electrons'
motion. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project builds upon a highly successful
though largely informal collaboration amongst the senior researchers which has
existed for several years. The work directly addresses key questions at the
interface between fundamental and applied science, with important immediate
applications in the emerging field of quantum information. The students
associated with this project will benefit from the seamless flow of ideas,
information, and people between the partner institutions in the network.
Frequent exchange of students and postdocs between the groups at Oxford and
Heriot-Watt with the Princeton group are planned. These exchanges will allow the
researchers to take advantage of complementary experimental equipment and
theoretical expertise at the partner institutions. It is this kind of cross-
disciplinary international training which will be important for a new generation
of device engineers and scientists.