* 1107705
* Hazards TEAMS: Teacher Education &amp; Activities for Minority Students in the Meteorological, Geologic and Hydrologic Hazards. TRACK 1
* GEO,GEO
* 08/15/2011,07/31/2015
* Karen McNeal, Mississippi State University
* Standard Grant
* Jill L. Karsten
* 07/31/2015
* USD 199,787.00

The Mississippi State University Geosciences and Civil and Environmental
Engineering programs are collaborating to provide learning experiences for both
K-12 teachers and students in geology, meteorology and hydrology under the
common theme of natural hazards. The Hazards TEAMS project has 4 goals: 1) to
increase K-12 teachers' Earth Science content knowledge, 2) to increase
students' knowledge of geoscience careers and the path needed to obtain them, 3)
to increase student interest in geosciences through engaging lessons in the
classroom and fun hands-on activities at Mississippi State University (MSU), and
4) to better enable guidance counselors to direct students into geoscience
majors and career paths. The project team is providing a hazards-related
workshop for 8-10 "Partner Teachers" from high-minority Mississippi school
districts, as well as the Mississippi Migrant Student Education Center. During
the following year, these partner teachers lead a similar workshop for a second
group of teachers. Middle and junior high school students are gaining knowledge
about the geosciences through activity days and a summer camp on the MSU campus
as well as through materials and lessons the teachers are able to bring into the
classroom. The activity days and summer camp are increasing student interest in
the geosciences as well as exposing middle or junior high school students to a
college campus and laboratories. They are also exposing younger students to
individuals currently enrolled in majors leading to careers in the geosciences
who may serve as role models. The focus on increasing students' knowledge of
careers and college majors available in the geosciences is also addressed
through designed brochures that are mailed to guidance counselors throughout the
state. Prior to the creation of the brochure, guidance counselors are surveyed
to determine their awareness of the careers and education pathways available in
the geosciences, as well the coursework and activities students can take
advantage of to increase their chance of success in entering and completing a
geoscience major.