* 1107015
* TRANSFORM:   Teaching Research Advancement Network to Secure Female Faculty For Organizational Retention and Management
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2017
* Elisa Konieczko, Gannon University
* Standard Grant
* Jessie Dearo
* 08/31/2017
* USD 385,919.00

Gannon University is a private, Roman Catholic, primarily undergraduate
institution. The institution, through an ADVANCE PAID award proposes to
implement strategies toward developing a teaching-research-advancement network
to promote the retention and advancement of women faculty in the STEM
disciplines. This approach is recognized by the institution as being essential
since there exists a current shift in focus from teaching centeredness to
research and scholarly productivity. It is envisaged that the proposed ADVANCE
interventions will serve to prevent the marginalization of women faculty from
the research enterprise at a critical time in the institution?s history. There
are four objectives associated with this goal that include: recruiting and
retaining women faculty, advancing women faculty through the professorial ranks,
preparing women faculty for leadership positions and providing training for
institutional leaders about gender equity issues. To achieve these objectives,
the Gannon ADVANCE PAID project will utilize dual career services, initiate
research awards and institutionalize leadership development programs.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit &lt;br/&gt;The proposed project at
Gannon University adapts several successful best practices from other ADVANCE
institutions in a meaningful way. As such, the expected outcomes of this project
are poised to serve as a model for other institutions of similar type and with
similar goals of research accomplishment. Specifically, this project presents
strategies for leadership, dual career hiring and research initiation for women
faculty at a moderately sized institution. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact
&lt;br/&gt;The Gannon University ADVANCE PAID project will use traditional means
of disseminating project outcomes and successes as well as innovative means,
which include, but are not limited to conference manuscripts and newsletter
articles to national organizations with interests in promoting gender equity in
the STEM disciplines, and a postcard campaign summarizing grant activities and
outcomes. Thus, this project will not only serve to ensure the broad
participation of women faculty in the STEM disciplines, but also address the
needs of a cadre of institutions that remain underrepresented in the ADVANCE
award portfolio.