* 1107390
* Harvesting ALFALFA: Tracking the Gas-Rich Halos at z=0
* MPS,AST
* 06/15/2011,05/31/2016
* Martha Haynes, Cornell University
* Continuing Grant
* Richard Barvainis
* 05/31/2016
* USD 711,008.00

Precisely how galaxies initially form and how they change throughout their
lifetime are among the least understood problems in astrophysics. Many projects
are centered on unraveling these mysteries. This project aims to provide the
first robust census of gas-rich halos over a cosmologically significant volume
and intends to provide important insight into how some massive galaxies maintain
huge gas reservoirs without converting their gas into stars and how isolated low
mass halos are able to retain some atomic hydrogen gas despite their fragile
thermal state and shallow potential wells. This proposal is intended to conclude
the already initiated survey, previously funded by NSF. The conclusion of the
survey was understandably delayed primarily by telescope downtime but should
conclude by the fall of 2012.

The survey is conducted at the Arecibo radio telescope and uses the Arecibo
L-band Feed Array (ALFA), the Arecibo Legacy Fast ALFA (ALFALFA). The survey has
already produced results far exceeding the previous survey in this field, and
the survey results will help to characterize the mass function of such halos and
allow direct comparison with theoretical simulations of Universe in the current
Lambda-CDM paradigm. ALFALFA, an extragalactic HI 21 cm line survey, will
identify HI-bearing objects found over 7000 square degrees of the high galactic
latitude sky out to z < 0.06. The public ALFALFA database includes HI line
spectra and catalogues of HI line positions, redshifts, velocity widths, and
flux densities as well as coordinates and cross-identifications in other digital
data sets of the most probable optical counterparts.

This project has educational broader impacts as well. Graduate students will be
intimately involved in all phases of the project, helping to plan and execute
the observing program, developing software for data processing and analysis,
producing public data products and interfacing with the Virtual Observatory, as
well as undertaking their own science projects. Educational materials that are
developed as part of this project will be made available through the existing
ALFALFA public web site.