* 1107744
* Collaborative Research: Ice Core Studies Reconstructing Greenland Climate During the Eemian and Beyond
* GEO,OPP
* 01/01/2012,12/31/2014
* Edward Brook, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Henrietta Edmonds
* 12/31/2014
* USD 85,397.00

The primary goal of this collaborative project between three institutions is to
understand the extent and evolution of the Greenland Ice Sheet (GIS) during the
Eemian period (roughly 130,000 to 115,000 years ago, the last major interglacial
period in Earth's history) and the deglaciation immediately preceding it
("Termination 2"). The GIS is an important agent influencing sea level, and
Arctic and global climate, on multiple timescales. Its dynamics need to be
understood in the context of past climate changes, but there is little
information available about the footprint, volume, and elevation of the GIS
prior to the last ice age due to the absence of continuous ice core records
prior to 123,000 years ago. During the Eemian, the GIS was perhaps half its
present size, contributing on the order of 3 m to "excess" sea level rise.
Characterizing the evolution of the GIS during glacial termination 2 and the
Eemian would improve our understanding of its dynamics, and enhance our ability
to make projections of sea level rise during the coming centuries. Older ice
does exist at the bottoms of previously drilled ice cores, but the extraction of
age and climate information from this older ice is hampered by the fact that it
is stratigraphically disturbed and, in many cases, contaminated with soil or
bedrock material. These investigators propose several novel methods to date this
disturbed and/or "dirty" ice and to extract information on climate and ice sheet
extent. The investigators will combine their new measurements and other
available data to develop a more complete history of the GIS during termination
2 and the Eemian. They will work with ice sheet modelers to investigate the
constraints that the Eemian data provide for the models and improve their
predictive capability. These efforts have the potential to improve our ability
to predict the contribution of the GIS to sea-level rise in the coming decades
to centuries. Educational and outreach activities include the training of two
graduate students, inclusion of this research in summer teacher enrichment
programs, a lecture series for graduate students and postdocs, and communication
of the results through the news media.