* 1107285
* North American Carbon Program (NACP) and Ocean Carbon and Biogeochemistry (OCB) Interim Coastal Carbon Synthesis
* GEO,OCE
* 02/15/2011,01/31/2015
* Heather Benway, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* Donald L. Rice
* 01/31/2015
* USD 48,000.00

The contribution of coastal margins to regional and global carbon budgets
is&lt;br/&gt;not well understood, largely due to limited information about the
magnitude, spatial distribution,&lt;br/&gt;and interannual variability of carbon
sources and sinks in coastal waters. The Ocean Carbon
&amp;&lt;br/&gt;Biogeochemistry (OCB) Program has been collaborating with the
North American Carbon&lt;br/&gt;Program (NACP) over the past two years to
develop a Coastal Interim Synthesis Activity as part&lt;br/&gt;of the NACP
Interim Synthesis activities, the goals of which are to bring together
relevant&lt;br/&gt;observations, data, and modeling efforts in an effort to
identify and quantify key sources, sinks,&lt;br/&gt;stocks, fluxes, and
associated processes in the North American carbon budget. The objective
of&lt;br/&gt;the Coastal Interim Synthesis Activity is to synthesize individual,
small-scale observational and&lt;br/&gt;modeling studies from different regions
of the North American continental margin across&lt;br/&gt;broader spatial and
temporal scales to improve quantitative assessments of the North
American&lt;br/&gt;coastal carbon budget. Because the coastal oceans have
important and complex linkages with&lt;br/&gt;terrestrial, atmospheric, and open
ocean biogeochemical cycles, it is important to provide for the
&lt;br/&gt;participation of researchers focused on both organic and inorganic
carbon, as well as nitrogen&lt;br/&gt;and phosphorus cycle topics related to
carbon balance and related issues such as hypoxia&lt;br/&gt;impacts on
continental margins.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With support through this award to the
Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution (WHOI), OCB &lt;br/&gt;scientists from
WHOI, the University of Alaska - Fairbanks, and the University of South Florida
&lt;br/&gt;will convene two workshops to facilitate data gathering and synthesis
efforts related to coastal &lt;br/&gt;carbon budgets in five regions?East Coast
(including Gulf of Maine), West Coast (including Gulf &lt;br/&gt;of Alaska),
Gulf of Mexico, Arctic (including marginal seas such as the Bering, Chukchi,
Beaufort, &lt;br/&gt;and Baffin-Labrador), and Great Lakes. Additional funding
to support these efforts will be provided &lt;br/&gt;by NASA and
NOAA.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: Coastal margins represent a
significant unknown in the North American&lt;br/&gt;carbon budget. By leveraging
the shared community expertise of two leading U.S. carbon
cycle&lt;br/&gt;science programs (NACP and OCB), this project will improve
coastal carbon sink/source&lt;br/&gt;estimates and facilitate the community
interaction needed to ensure a seamless transition&lt;br/&gt;between land and
sea in our understanding of the most important processes driving the
North&lt;br/&gt;American carbon cycle. The proposed approach convenes scientists
with specialized&lt;br/&gt;knowledge of regionally important physical and
biogeochemical processes to develop robust&lt;br/&gt;regional coastal carbon
budgets that more effectively account for some of the inherent
spatial&lt;br/&gt;and temporal variability of coastal systems. Another key
outcome of this project will be a&lt;br/&gt;tremendously valuable historic
dataset that will improve our understanding of the carbon cycle&lt;br/&gt;and
inform public discussion and policy making on issues related to climate change,
human&lt;br/&gt;health, and fisheries, all of which are intimately linked to
carbon cycling. Recovery of these data&lt;br/&gt;and their incorporation into a
publicly accessible data base will enhance the development
of&lt;br/&gt;predictive models for coastal regions and also enable more
comprehensive linkage of land,&lt;br/&gt;atmosphere, and ocean modeling of
carbon dioxide and the carbon cycle. There are currently&lt;br/&gt;&gt;50 years
of observations in most U.S. coastal regions, providing much-needed
historical&lt;br/&gt;context to monitor the health of coastal ocean ecosystems,
which are becoming increasingly&lt;br/&gt;vulnerable to threats of ocean
acidification, eutrophication, and hypoxia.