* 1107899
* Analysis of Stability and Instability for Elastic Materials
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2015
* Scott Spector, Southern Illinois University at Carbondale
* Standard Grant
* Victor Roytburd
* 08/31/2015
* USD 166,155.00

Spector&lt;br/&gt;DMS-1107899&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; The analysis of mathematical
models for elastomers, soft adhesives, and glassy polymers yields singular
deformations that can be used to predict the failure of such materials under the
application of external forces. The failures of interest are those due to the
formation of creases on the surface and also the creation and growth of
microscopic holes, both on the surface and in the interior. When external forces
are applied these holes become visible, grow in size, and then combine to break
the material. Particular problems that are addressed in this project are: the
creation of holes in thin films of soft adhesives; the initiation and growth of
a solitary hole; and the formation of surface creases in elastomers that are
subject to severe compressions. The mathematical analysis of such phenomena
involves: the existence and uniqueness of minimizers with and without
singularities for problems in the calculus of variations; regularity and fine
properties of singular minimizers; the physical relevance of multiple solutions
to the corresponding Euler-Lagrange equations; whether or not radial minimizers,
which have been constructed in numerous places in the literature, are indeed the
global minimizers of the energy, especially when nonradial perturbations are
considered; and, the determination of whether known singular solutions to
quasilinear elliptic systems are indeed minimizers of the corresponding problem
in the calculus of variations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; The focus of this project
is the mathematical analysis of equations that arise in Materials Science.
Experiments on modern technologically sophisticated materials have uncovered
alternative mechanisms of material failure, i.e., the way such materials break
may not follow the usual expectations that engineers have developed for
classical materials. For example, while the metals used to make a traditional
aircraft slowly fatigue, the composites used to construct a modern plane
occasionally exhibit a more rapid degradation. The goal of this project is to
obtain a better understanding of two particular destructive mechanisms: the
formation of defects (creases) on the surface of a material and the creation and
growth of holes both on the surface and in the interior of a material. The
particular materials that are analyzed are thin films of adhesives and certain
rubbery polymers that are known as elastomers.