* 1107108
* Statistical Inference for Random Recursive Equations
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2011,07/31/2014
* Guoqing Diao, George Mason University
* Standard Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 07/31/2014
* USD 100,002.00

This proposal is concerned with asymptotic and small sample inference related to
random recursive equations and associated large deviation problems. Random
recursive equations, also referred to as stochastic fixed point equations
(SFPE), arise in several areas of contemporary science, including: (i) cell-
biology, (ii) analysis of algorithms, (iii) financial time-series modeling, (iv)
study of perpetuities, (v) actuarial science, (vi) risk management, (vii)
ranking of web-pages, and (viii) processes on complex networks. This proposal is
concerned with developing new statistical methods that integrate, refine, and
sharpen ideas from large deviation theory, semi-parametric and non-parametric
inference, efficient importance sampling. It addresses the following basic
questions: (1) How to obtain confidence and prediction intervals for the tail
probability in risk models that integrate complex financial and insurance
processes? (2) How to efficiently estimate the page-ranks of web-pages and
understand the factors that influence them? (3) How to provide statistical
comparisons between running times of random recursive algorithms? The answer to
question (1) is of significant interest to researchers in actuarial science and
risk management. The answer to question (2) will enable the development of
policies for better utilization of resources. The answer to (3) will yield
quantitative methods for developing and comparing recursive algorithms which are
used, for example, in computer science.

Random recursive equations allow one to unify a wide class of problems that
arise in scientific investigations. In a range of applications, scientists are
often interested in understanding the probabilities of occurrence of very rare
event, which could nevertheless have catastrophic consequences. These rare
events could be rare types of cancer whose prevalence rate is small, or the
probability of bankruptcy of a financial institution, or beginning stages of
resistance to a drug. A key issue is that, while extensive amounts of data are
available to model and analyze the frequently occurring events, the amount of
data available to study these rare events is perennially low, making the
inferential problem challenging. This proposal is concerned with mathematical,
statistical, and computational methods to address these challenging issues and
provide concrete answers to some of the problems concerning probabilities of
rare events.