* 1107278
* EAGER: Collaborative Research: Dye-anchored nanocatalysts for improved solar energy conversion efficiency
* ENG,CBET
* 04/01/2011,03/31/2013
* Elena Galoppini, Rutgers University Newark
* Standard Grant
* George J. Antos
* 03/31/2013
* USD 51,226.00

Dye-sensitized solar cells (DSSC) are a very promising technology for low-cost
conversion of solar energy to electricity. The device has three essential
components: a wide-bandgap semiconductor (nanocrystalline TiO2) film deposited
on a transparent conducting glass electrode and coated with a dye; a platinized
counterelectrode; and an electrolyte solution containing the iodide/triiodide
redox couple. However, cell efficiencies have been limited due largely to the
high electrochemical overpotential (about 0.5 V) needed to drive the critical
dye regeneration reaction, where iodide reduces an oxidized dye molecule bound
to a TiO2 nanoparticle, yielding triiodide and the uncharged dye as products.
The PIs, Professors Alex Agrios of the University of Connecticut, Storrs, CT,
and Elena Galoppini of Rutgers University, Newark, NJ, propose to attach
catalytic Pt nanoparticles to the dye molecules anchored to the TiO2 surfaces.
They hypothesize that Pt bound to the dye molecule can catalyze dye
regeneration, routing the reaction through less energetic intermediates and
greatly reducing the overpotential required between oxidized dye and iodide.
This work will employ catalysis to remove a longstanding limitation on the
energy conversion efficiency of low-cost dye-sensitized solar cells.

This collaborative EAGER proposal covers experiments to carry out the initial
syntheses and experiments to test the main hypothesis to demonstrate the
possibility of nanocatalysts to improve DSSC solar energy conversion efficiency.
About half of the electrochemical energy of each electron hole pair is lost due
to energy losses in the electrochemical processes driving the cell. It is
generally acknowledged that the next breakthrough in DSSC research will be the
recovery of this lost energy. The significance of this work will be both
practical and fundamental, with the concept of molecularly anchored
nanocatalysts having potential implications in diverse fields.