* 1107117
* Materials World Network: Understanding the Microstructural Evolution and Deformation Behavior in Mg-Mn-RE Alloys
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2011,01/31/2016
* Carl Boehlert, Michigan State University
* Continuing Grant
* Diana Farkas
* 01/31/2016
* USD 486,820.00

This collaborative research between the Universidad Politecnica de Madrid (UPM,
Spain), IMDEA Materials Institute (Madrid, Spain), and Michigan State University
(MSU) combines an experimental and computational plan to study the
microstructural evolution during processing and the damage nucleation and
progression that occurs due to mechanical deformation in magnesium-manganese-
rare earth (Mg-Mn-RE) alloys. Microstructural characterization is performed in
order to develop a crystallographically-based understanding of how details of
the deformation behavior correlate with grain nucleation and grain growth during
processing and damage nucleation during ambient and elevated-temperature tension
and creep experiments. In-situ tensile and tensile-creep experiments performed
inside a scanning electron microscope allow for the identification of the
initial damage events and deformation progression as well as the deformation
evolution. Simulations of experimentally-characterized microstructures provide a
means to interpret and analyze the quantitative experimental data. The details
of deformation processes that cause damage are quantitatively identified. Such
details provide the framework for introducing damage nucleation and deformation
evolution information into microstructural models. The methodology developed
integrates material and component design by developing predictive capabilities
that link microstructural response with macrostructure
performance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This work seeks to overcome one of the most
challenging aspects of structural alloys, increasing ambient and elevated-
temperature strength and creep resistance while maintaining ductility. Other
aspects of the work entail producing educational modules on processing and
characterization of Mg alloys, expanding an established K-12 outreach program at
MSU so that it can reach more K-12 students in the USA and Spain through remote
operation of a SEM, providing research opportunities for undergraduate students
involved in existing MSU programs as well as those to be involved in the study
abroad program between MSU and the UPM. The educational modules are intended to
promote materials education of Mg alloys. They are appropriate for inclusion in
K-12 curriculum, and are created both in English and Spanish, the latter of
which can be used not only in Spain but also in Spanish-speaking communities in
the USA. Overall, the proposed international effort is intended to make a
lasting effect by understanding processing-microstructure-property relationships
of novel Mg-Mn-RE alloys, while also educating young scientists.