* 1107258
* Second Conference on Graduate Education in Physics; January 30-February 1, 2013 at the American Center for Physics in College Park, MD.
* MPS,PHY
* 11/15/2012,10/31/2014
* Theodore Hodapp, American Physical Society
* Standard Grant
* Kathleen McCloud
* 10/31/2014
* USD 60,000.00

This award supports a two-day conference to focus national attention on current
issues in graduate education in physics. The conference is organized jointly by
the American Physical Society and the American Association of Physics Teachers.
The conference will take place at the American Center for Physics in College
Park, MD in January 2013, and will bring together about 100 participants
including those in a position to implement changes and those in a position to
provide informed recommendations for change. The conference is motivated partly
by the success of the first conference on graduate education in physics in
January 2008. The topics to be discussed at the conference include curriculum;
exam/exam structure; climate and diversity; admissions; advising and mentoring;
non-academic careers; developing "soft" skills including oral and written
communication; team building and leadership; multi-disciplinary coursework and
degrees; outcome assessment of graduate programs; and shaping a holistic and
effective graduate education experience. The conference will continue the
conversation started four years ago and give the physics community an
opportunity to brainstorm ideas about graduate education so that graduate
programs in physics can continuously improve to maintain their world class
excellence. In addition, the conference will provide a forum to learn about the
progress made in various graduate programs since the first conference and find
ways to identify, adapt, and implement best practices within local constraints.