* 1107106
* Integrating Passive Acoustic Monitoring in long-term oceanographic observations of the Bering Strait
* GEO,OPP
* 08/01/2011,07/31/2016
* Kathleen Stafford, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Neil R. Swanberg
* 07/31/2016
* USD 452,342.00

Funds are provided to establish a base program for year-round acoustic
monitoring of marine mammals in Bering Strait. Instrumentation will be added
onto an existing high resolution physical and biological mooring program
(National Science Foundation-Arctic Observing Network (AON) and RUSsian American
Long-term Census of the Arctic), also supported by annual survey data. The
combination of these data sets will provide urgently required, base-line
information on how species presence varies seasonally with changes in sea ice,
currents, ocean water temperatures and freshwater flow. Building on
opportunistic proof-of-concept deployments in the strait in the last 2 years,
the proposed effort will also provide critical, consistent data on interannual
variability, and allow for the testing of cutting edge scientific hypotheses
such as: how do oceanographic conditions dictate the residency of different
marine mammal species? Are temperate species ?invading? the Arctic? What is the
correlation between ice cover and marine mammal sound
production?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Bering Strait is the only oceanic
connection between the Pacific and the Arctic oceans. It is through this narrow
(~85 km) passageway that the entire population of Bering-Chukchi-Beaufort
bowhead whales passes twice yearly and that herds of beluga whales access Arctic
waters. It is thought to be year-round habitat for ice seals and walrus . The
Bering Strait is also the path by which Pacific sub-Arctic marine species are
invading the Arctic. As the Northwest Passage becomes a viable Pacific-Atlantic
shipping route, every ship along this route will pass through Bering Strait. It
is, therefore, the region where climate change and changing anthropogenic
utilization may have sizeable impacts on local marine fauna, and where changing
fluxes of marine mammals to the Arctic can be well observed. Passive acoustic
monitoring is the only method currently available to identify year-round, and in
all weather conditions, the presence of marine mammals and other physical (ice
movement) or anthropogenic (ships, oil and gas seismic exploration) sounds.