* 1107848
* Complex Porous Media Flows in Materials, Environmental and Biological Applications
* MPS,DMS
* 06/15/2011,05/31/2015
* Daniel Anderson, George Mason University
* Continuing Grant
* Henry Warchall
* 05/31/2015
* USD 152,872.00

This project involves an investigation of complex flows in heterogenous,
reactive and/or deformable porous materials. First, the solidification of a
ternary alloy involves the formation of a porous mushy layer made up of
dendritic crystals surrounded by fluid. In this mushy layer the motion of fluid
is coupled to the growth or dissolution of the solid. Novel interactions between
the dynamics of the fluid motion and the evolution of the solid material will be
examined. Second, fluid flows in heterogeneous porous materials, such as
geological subsurface systems, will be examined using homogenization techniques.
Third, mathematical models of tear films for wearers of porous contact lenses
will be explored. These models couple thin fluid film models of the tear films
above and below the contact lens to fluid flow and evaporation through the
contact lens.

This research explores the motion of fluid through porous materials that are
present in a broad range of natural, industrial, environmental and biomedical
settings. Mathematical models are used to describe these complex systems.
Computational tools are used to probe features of these models. Results of
simulations and analyses are combined to provide new insights and broaden our
understanding of physical and biological phenomena. Three main focus areas are
motivated by (1) phenomena occurring in materials science observed during the
casting of alloys, (2) the remediation of contaminated ground water systems, and
(3) dry eye conditions and specifically how wearers of porous contact lenses may
be affected. These broad topics are linked by the common presence of fluid
motion through porous materials. This project will involve undergraduate and
graduate students that will receive interdisciplinary training through research.