* 1107498
* Understanding the Wave-Driven Circulation and Variability of the Polar Atmosphere through Coordinated Observation, Analysis, and Modeling
* GEO,OPP
* 09/15/2011,08/31/2015
* Richard Collins, University of Alaska Fairbanks Campus
* Standard Grant
* Neil R. Swanberg
* 08/31/2015
* USD 783,887.00

The goal of this investigation is to understand the wave-driven circulation and
variability of the polar atmosphere through an integrated study that combines
satellite measurements, lidar measurements, meteorological analyses, and model
simulations will be conducted. This study is an international collaboration
between investigators at six institutions in Germany, Japan and the United
States. An international network of four Rayleigh lidars located in
observatories at Andoya, Norway (69°N, 16°E), Chatanika, Alaska (65°N, 147°W),
Kangarlussuaq, Greenland (67°N, 51°W) and Kühlungsborn, Germany (54°N, 12°E)
provide a chain of measurements from the eastern Arctic to the western Arctic
under distinct synoptic regimes (i.e., the Arctic stratospheric vortex, the
Aleutian anticyclone, the stratospheric surf-zone). The lidars will yield high-
resolution temperature and density measurements that allow characterization of
the planetary waves, tides, and gravity waves. The satellite observations yield
synoptic-scale temperature measurements of the mesosphere and upper stratosphere
while the meteorological soundings and analyses provide synoptic-scale
measurements of the troposphere and lower stratosphere. We have three specific
goals; i) to extend the scope of current Rayleigh lidar measurements to
characterize a wider range of waves than previously measured ii) to combine
lower-resolution global data from satellite observations and meteorological
analyses with higher-resolution data from Arctic Rayleigh lidar systems to
document both the synoptic conditions and wave activity. iii) to investigate the
observed wave behavior using a comprehensive general circulation model to
understand the wave mean-flow interactions. The proposed activity will provide a
comprehensive analysis of the circulation of the Arctic atmosphere that will
directly address the following specific studies; coupling and feedbacks between
waves and large-scale circulation; the structure; evolution, and variability of
polar vortices and anticyclones; links between the middle and lower atmosphere;
and atmospheric tele-connections. The study will advance our understanding of
wave mean-flow interactions both regionally and globally that is critical for
understanding dynamical driving of the circulation and the evolution of the
climate. This study will provide data and analyses in support of studies of
ozone depletion, stratospheric climate, and long-range horizontal and vertical
transport in the Arctic. The observations, analyses and results of this activity
will contribute to the CAWSES, CEDAR, SEARCH, and SPARC programs.