* 1107707
* Collaborative Research on Carbon, Water, and Energy Balance of the Arctic Landscape  at Flagship Observatories in Alaska and Siberia
* GEO,OPP
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2016
* Gaius Shaver, Marine Biological Laboratory
* Standard Grant
* William Ambrose
* 08/31/2016
* USD 1,004,920.00

Collaborative Research on Carbon, Water, and Energy Balance of the Arctic
Landscape&lt;br/&gt;at Flagship Observatories in Alaska and
Siberia&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The arctic landscape
interacts with the global and regional climate by exchanging carbon dioxide,
methane, water, and energy with the atmosphere. Understanding how these
exchanges are regulated and how they change is a key goal of the US Study of
Environmental Arctic Change and the NSF Arctic Observatory Network. The first
goal of this work is year round monitoring of carbon, water, and energy balance
at two arctic sites, Imnavait Creek in Alaska and Cherskii in Siberia. The work
will be a collaboration among researchers from the Marine Biological Laboratory,
the University of Alaska Fairbanks, Northeast Science Station, Russia, and the
University of Michigan. The second goal is the development of these two sites as
?Flagship? observatories for research on arctic lands and freshwaters. The main
task here is to integrate the new carbon, water, and energy balance data with
the already large, diverse, and growing data bases from other research done at
these sites. A third aim is to promote PanArctic comparisons and development of
PanArctic data bases.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt; Broader impacts include
contributions to education, including underrepresented groups, through
participation in the Logan Science Journalism program, the Arctic Long-Term
Ecological Research Schoolyard program, and outreach to Native Alaskan
communities. Research and education infrastructure will be enhanced by making
the data bases available online. Benefits to society include improved
understanding of the impacts of climate change, especially in Alaska where the
local residents are closely tied to the land through traditional, subsistence
lifestyles.