* 1107084
* Distribution of Patterns and Statistics in Random Sequences
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2011,09/30/2015
* Donald Martin, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 09/30/2015
* USD 100,000.00

This project targets the development and application of tools for efficient
computation of distributions associated with patterns and statistics in random
sequences, both realizations of observation sequences as well as hidden state
sequences conditional on observed data. Due to the massive size of data sets
that are available, computational methods that are not only accurate but also
efficient are important. The proposed research seeks to contribute in this area.
Minimal deterministic finite automata, probability generating functions, the
sum-product algorithm and matrix-vector updates are the primary tools used to
form algorithms for efficiently computing distributions of patterns and
statistics. The goals of this research are threefold: (i) to further develop
efficient methods for quantifying uncertainty in statistics of hidden state
sequences of probabilistic graphical models; (ii) to efficiently compute exact
probability distributions of complex patterns that have not previously been
computed; (iii) to apply the probabilistic tools of (i) and (ii) to statistical
tests and data analysis. The quantification of uncertainty in statistics of
hidden states is frequently dealt with by determining the state sequence that is
optimal for a particular criterion, with the statistic then evaluated from the
optimal state sequence in a deterministic fashion. However, that approach does
not account for uncertainty in the states. An alternate approach is to sample
from the conditional distribution of states given the observed data, and then
approximate the distribution of the statistic empirically. However, many samples
are needed so that the approximation is accurate, leading to problems with
scalability. We give a way to compute exact distributions in an efficient
manner. The goals of the project are integrated, in that distributions of
patterns and statistics are needed for statistical inference in applications,
and in turn those applications drive the need for computing distributions in
increasingly complex situations. Objectives of the work include computing a
model-based distribution of prediction error rates for protein-protein
interactions, computing exact distributions of coverage of spaced seeds for
homology searches in DNA sequences, and computing the exact distribution of the
one-dimensional scan statistic for multi-state higher-order Markovian trials.
&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The need for distributional properties associated with
patterns and statistics in random sequences arises in many practical fields of
study with massive data sets, such as bioinformatics, time series, information
theory, economics, data mining, and quality control. In this research
computational tools are developed for computing such distributions. Results for
distributions of patterns and statistics may be applied to many practical
problems, such as detecting genes, promoters, or other functionally significant
patterns in DNA sequences, determining probabilities related to classifications
of observations in health-related studies, change points that indicate new
regimes in economic data, patterns that indicate an intrusion in a computer
system, or patterns associated with surveillance work. The theory will be used
to compute distributions of statistics that are intractable by combinatorial or
other means, and to provide exact probabilities in an efficient manner in
situations that are typically handled by simulation of many data sets. Thus this
research facilitates new scientific studies that rely on results for
distributions associated with patterns or statistics that have not been computed
to date.