* 1107668
* Increasing Minorities in Atmospheric Science through Research, Application and Partnership (IMAS-RAP) Track 1
* GEO,GEO
* 09/15/2011,08/31/2013
* Remata Reddy, Jackson State University
* Standard Grant
* Jill L. Karsten
* 08/31/2013
* USD 162,751.00

The Jackson State University (JSU) Geosciences Department, in partnership with
the Mississippi Regional Science Fair, the greater Jackson Metropolitan area
schools, and the Jackson, MS National Weather Service (NWS), is working to
increase the participation of underrepresented minorities in atmospheric
science, through research, application and partnership (IMAS-RAP). The project
targets future STEM leaders at the 6th-12th grade levels, and provides them with
opportunities to engage in multi-disciplinary, inquiry-based activities that
increases their engagement with the atmospheric sciences and related STEM
disciplines and improves their knowledge about geoscience careers. It also
prepares freshmen to senior geoscience undergraduates to become stewards and act
as mentors, group leaders and community-based researchers. The project utilizes
geoscience, community-based research and informal hands-on science to attract
and retain students. The 2-year project directly affects forty 6th-12th grade
students and at least 4 undergraduates at varies stages of matriculation. The
overall goal of the project is to establish a sustainable, minority geoscience
pipeline for students in middle school and high school, and to increase
enrollment of students in JSU STEM disciplines, primarily in the geoscience
department. To achieve these outcomes, the project utilizes both an informal
after-school program and summer science camp based on hands-on activities in
physical science, meteorology, engineering, and mathematics.