* 1107225
* Short Memory in Long Memory Time Series
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2014
* Jaechoul Lee, Boise State University
* Standard Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 08/31/2014
* USD 100,000.00

Asymptotic properties and inference procedures for long memory processes have
been extensively studied in the last 30 years. However, when a long memory
process involves short memory components, statistical inference methods are
insufficient and need to be substantially enhanced. Specifically, if a
fractionally integrated autoregressive moving-average (ARFIMA) process contains
autoregressive moving-average (ARMA) components, currently applied statistical
methods frequently produce biases that result in significant inaccuracies.
Accordingly, there is a need for a more accurate investigation of short memory
components pertinent in the ARFIMA process. This project considers several
statistical problems in time series settings where the data has both long memory
and short memory characteristics. The statistical problems considered include:
(1) testing to determine if a long memory time series has short memory
characteristics; (2) developing stochastic parameter regression models of long
memory and short memory characteristics with a simpler autocorrelation
structure; and (3) assessing biases in the sample autocorrelations and cross-
correlations for long memory time series with short memory characteristics.

Studying long memory time series with short memory components is very important,
as they are frequently observed in real-world contexts, such as stock returns
and volatilities, inflation rates, temperatures, and river levels. The project
aims to develop accurate statistical models and inference methods to analyze
such time series. The development of this research will: (1) advance the theory
and methods of long memory processes; (2) help the public better understand
global warming issues with the proposed models and methods; and (3) benefit
practitioners to use the research outcomes in their disciplines. In addition,
the investigator will contribute to the launch of Boise State's mathematical and
statistical consulting center. The center will be a hub of applied mathematics
and statistics fused with other sciences, serving Boise and the State of Idaho
where no such facility is currently available.