* 1107214
* Enhancing the Culture for Recruiting, Retaining and Advancing Women in STEM
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2017
* Rosemary Hays-Thomas, University of West Florida
* Standard Grant
* Jessie Dearo
* 08/31/2017
* USD 598,354.00

The University of West Florida proposes an ADVANCE PAID project that focuses on
diversifying the faculty. Recognizing that for the first time in the
institution's history, the proportion of students of color has exceeded the
proportion of faculty of color, the institution seeks to build a program for
enhancing a supporting and inclusive culture for recruiting, retaining and
advancing women faculty in the STEM disciplines. Central to this goal are
several specific objectives that include: promoting a more diverse applicant
pool, increasing the number of women hired and retained, providing professional
development for women faculty and leadership opportunity, and educating current
institution administrators on the value of diversity. These objectives are
indicated within the proposal and the project to have special attention and
relevancy to women of color. Also germane to the goal of this project is a
conceptual framework that is rooted in positive psychological capital. As such,
the project focuses on both the individual member of faculty and the entire
institution the employs these faculty.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit
&lt;br/&gt;This project blends two social science theories, positive
psychological capital and social/ecological systems theory, that focus on
enhancing understanding of gender equity at the individual and organizational
levels. Specific activities are adapted from successful ADVANCE models and
applied in a unique way to a comprehensive institution. As a result of this
project, important information detailing paths to gender equity at non research
intensive institutions will be gained and disseminated across the country.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact &lt;br/&gt;Because of the focus of this
project on comprehensive, non research intensive institutions, the University of
West Florida ADVANCE PAID project will have a dramatic impact on promoting
gender equity at all institutions of similar type in the US. This is
particularly significant given the disproportionately high number of women
faculty who are employed at these institution types.