* 1107373
* Mapping the Past in the Future: Science Enabled by High-Resolution Spectroscopic Stellar Surveys
* MPS,AST
* 08/15/2011,07/31/2014
* Kathryn Johnston, Columbia University
* Continuing Grant
* James Neff
* 07/31/2014
* USD 324,207.00

Dr. Johnston and her team investigate the formation and evolution of dwarf
galaxies, the most common type of galaxies in our local universe, and the
formation of the Milky Way galaxy through detailed hydrodynamic and N-body
simulations. The observed chemical composition of stars and their distribution
today together with simulations is used to learn about ancient accretion events
in the stellar halo, and to recover the properties of progenitor objects (e.g.
dwarf galaxies and star clusters) that contributed to our galaxy's formation.
The research aims to reconstruct the galaxy's past through comparing simulations
to the observed distribution of the abundances of the chemical elements in large
samples of stellar populations in all components of our Galaxy, which will
become available from ongoing and planned surveys (e.g. with the Apache Point
Observatory Galactic Evolution Experiment (APOGEE) and the HERMES spectrometer
on the Anglo-Australian telescope). The chemo-dynamical formation models of the
Milky Way's halo that are produced here also provide guidance on the
interpretation of large data sets from stellar surveys. The models include
physics on star formation, feedback and mixing, and take into account the
recurrent cycle of star formation and the chemical enrichment of new star-
forming regions through ejecta from dying stars. The predicted abundance
distributions of the chemical elements in different stellar populations might be
detected in the spectroscopic surveys of stars. The plans for the semi-analytic
chemo-dynamic models include the development of multi-zoned descriptions of the
galaxy with collisionless stellar orbits allowing for star formation and
enrichment of gas in chemical elements. In order to derive a more complete
picture about the formation and evolution of the Galactic halo, results are
combined from the semi-analytic chemo-dynamical models of galaxies, the fully
self-consistent cosmological N-body and hydrodynamic simulations; and the
statistical analyses of structures in high dimensional spaces. The self-
consistent simulations will be used to refine the descriptions of internal
baryonic physics and external environmental influences that are implemented in
the simpler chemo-dynamical models. This research program provides research
topics for two graduate students.