* 1107637
* Materials World Network: Half Metallic Transport in Chemically Complex Systems
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2011,07/31/2015
* Fengyuan Yang, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Tomasz Durakiewicz
* 07/31/2015
* USD 540,000.00

This award supports an international collaborative research team from the Ohio
State University and the Leibniz Institute (IFW) in Dresden, Germany to realize
and understand half-metallicity (i.e. 100% spin polarization of conduction
electrons) in Heusler compounds and double perovskites. These two families of
complex materials contain the vast majority of half-metallic compounds with high
Curie temperatures that hold the promise of highly spin polarized transport at
room temperature. To advance both our fundamental understanding as well as the
technological promise of spin-polarized transport in these two families, this
partnership brings together complementary expertise in high-quality epitaxial
film deposition of complex materials and spin polarization measurements at the
Ohio State University and single-crystal growth of these materials using the
state-of-the-art facilities at the Leibniz Institute in Germany. Despite their
promise, their chemical complexity and sensitivity to defects and antisite
disorder has limited studies of Heusler compounds and double perovskites in
prototype and real devices. Progress is also hindered by the fact that many
aspects of the fundamental physics are still not well understood. This project
has two aims: (1) deposit high quality, half-metallic epitaxial films and
magnetic tunnel junctions of Heusler compounds with high Curie temperatures
using off-axis ultrahigh vacuum sputtering, coupled with characterization of
their structural, chemical, magnetic, electronic, spin polarization, and
element-specific magnetic moments; (2) grow single crystals of half-metallic
double perovskites. Availability of such crystals will enable investigations of
their intrinsic spin polarization and magnetotransport properties. The true
promise of these materials can only be assessed by separating intrinsic
properties from extrinsic contributions originating from structural and chemical
inhomogeneity. The goal of this project is to establish the scientific and
technical foundations needed to incorporate half metallic materials in
spintronic devices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This international collaboration
combines the collective and complementary expertise needed to realize the
promise of half-metallic ferromagnets for use in spintronics. The availability
of highly spin-polarized ferromagnets for room temperature applications will
establish a groundwork that has the potential to revolutionize computing. In
addition, this effort will strengthen the ties between US and German communities
that will enhance the research infrastructure of both partner institutions.
Finally, the scientific challenges, as well as the interdisciplinary and
international nature of the research program will provide excellent training for
the student researchers and junior scientists.