* 1107675
* The interplay between massive black holes and their hosts during galaxy mergers
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2011,12/31/2014
* Kayhan Gultekin, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Patricia Knezek
* 12/31/2014
* USD 330,737.00

This project is a comprehensive theoretical study that will provide a picture of
how massive black holes (MBHs) in galaxy centers evolved from early cosmic times
to the present day. In the first two parts of the three-part study, coupled
gravitational N-body and smooth-particle hydrodynamics simulations will be used
by the Principal Investigator and a graduate student to study the growth of MBHs
in mergers of galaxies. The first part is aimed at understanding when MBHs form
bound pairs following galaxy mergers, and when they light up as single or double
active galactic nuclei (AGN). Simulations will explore a range of mass ratios
and galaxy morphologies. The second part addresses the dynamical, thermodynamic,
and accretion evolution of a MBH pair in a merger remnant. The MBH evolution
will be simulated at high resolution, self-consistently following the interplay
between accretion and dynamics. The third part of the project will use the
simulation results to calculate the evolution of MBH populations along cosmic
time, predicting how many MBH mergers are expected in the Universe, and how
often AGN occur in merging galaxies. The predicted observables will be: (i)
frequency of MBHs in galaxies as a function of galaxy mass and cosmic time, (ii)
statistics on double AGNs, and on the luminosity functions of AGN at different
redshifts and wavelengths, and (iii) potentially detectable gravitational wave
event rates from mergers. The proposed research will constrain the dynamics and
mass growth of MBHs during mergers and their frequency in galaxies, key
information for models of galaxy evolution. The project will contribute to
training the next generation of scientists through support of a doctoral
student. In an outreach component, undergraduate students will develop critical
thinking by designing a museum exhibit dealing with common misconceptions on
black holes.