* 1107034
* Advancing the Careers of Women in STEM at Predominantly Undergraduate Institutions through Professional Networks
* EHR,HRD
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2017
* Roberta Sabin, Gonzaga University
* Standard Grant
* Jessie Dearo
* 08/31/2017
* USD 598,611.00

The goal of the project is to create a sustainable network of women STEM faculty
who work in small predominantly undergraduate institutions (PUIs) where
isolation is particularly pronounced. This project proposes to create both
horizontal and vertical mentoring for women STEM faculty at 12 PUIs across four
STEM areas (i.e., Biology, Chemistry, Computer Science/ Engineering/physics, and
Mathematics) The mentoring will target women early in their careers, mid-career,
and at the senior level.

INTELLECTUAL MERIT

The proposers have done a very nice job of documenting the need for the
mentoring program and leadership development among STEM women faculty at PUIs.
They have done an excellent job of setting up a highly sustainable program
thorough the cooperation of three national organizations. Each of the 12
participating institutions as well as the three organizations has submitted
letters of support and commitment. Overall, this proposal is extremely well
constructed. The PIs are well qualified to carry out the duties of this project.

BROADER IMPACTS

Through the mentoring and leadership activities 70 STEM women academics will be
directly affected. In addition the proposers make a compelling case that the
retention and increased job satisfaction of these faculty will have the
potential to influence about 25,660 female undergraduate students who are in
their classes. Additionally, the outcomes of this project, through traditional
dissemination activities, conference activities, and the social networking
components are positioned to impact broadly women STEM faculty at PUIs.