* 1107176
* EAGER: Protein-Metallic Nanoparticles for Biosensing and Targeted Cell Ablation
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2011,11/30/2013
* Anthony Spano, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Rajakkannu Mutharasan
* 11/30/2013
* USD 165,000.00

1107176 &lt;br/&gt;Spano&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goals of this project are: 1)
to construct an innovative proteinbased&lt;br/&gt;nanometer-sized self-
assembling delivery system ("adaptosome") containing&lt;br/&gt;metal particles
that will be used for specific cell targeting and 2) to characterize
and&lt;br/&gt;refine these structures by Raman spectroscopy. The Localized
Surface Plasmon (LSP)&lt;br/&gt;and Surface enhanced Raman Scattering (SERS)
properties of these metal-protein&lt;br/&gt;hybrid nanoparticles will be
exploited for their inherent signal amplification and&lt;br/&gt;transduction
properties. These properties have direct application for molecule and
cell&lt;br/&gt;identification and for non-destructive sensing. The adaptosome
will be a superior&lt;br/&gt;molecular probe capable of precise target cell
identification in tissues. The adaptosome&lt;br/&gt;can be used for local
inactivation and degradation of targeted molecules and cells.
To&lt;br/&gt;achieve these goals a new protein shell based on in vitro self-
assembling gene transfer&lt;br/&gt;agent (GTA) prohead system will be
constructed and modified with the peptides&lt;br/&gt;designed to mediate
specific attachment to, uptake into, and movement across
cell&lt;br/&gt;membranes. Highly sensitive molecule identification will be
accomplished by monitoring&lt;br/&gt;the vibrational signatures in the local
tissue/cellular environment of the particles when&lt;br/&gt;bound to the target.
Inactivation of target cells by visible and near IR light when it
is&lt;br/&gt;needed will be possible.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Experimental analyses
of the formation and propagation of local electromagnetic&lt;br/&gt;fields in
specific biological environments will allow for rational construction of protein
shells&lt;br/&gt;and precise selection of nanoparticle size and structure.
Spectroscopic testing of the&lt;br/&gt;constructed adaptosomes will be performed
both in vitro and in situ to optimize the&lt;br/&gt;structure of the protein
shell in the generation of an LSP and, more specifically, to&lt;br/&gt;elucidate
the effect of the internal structural organization and pattern of the protein on
the&lt;br/&gt;metal nanoparticles. Information gathered from modeling and
spectroscopic analysis will&lt;br/&gt;substantially accelerate the proposed
research by a priori elimination of non-working&lt;br/&gt;structures and will be
used to refine the design principles during construction of
the&lt;br/&gt;particles.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: The members of
this team bring to bear expertise in separate&lt;br/&gt;disciplines and will
interact in a direct, cohesive way. This team has
collaborated&lt;br/&gt;successfully for several years on the generation of bio-
inspired devices for energy&lt;br/&gt;generation. The work described in this
proposal will lead to the construction of an&lt;br/&gt;innovative biosensor and
drug delivery system based on protein encapsulated
metallic&lt;br/&gt;nanoparticles. The product of the work itself will have its
most direct application in the&lt;br/&gt;development of chemical and biological
sensors and cancer therapy, through cellspecific&lt;br/&gt;targeting. It will
also impact areas of modeling of bio-inorganic
interfaces,&lt;br/&gt;mathematical optimization theory, and in the physical
chemistry of protein-nanoparticle&lt;br/&gt;assembly and
interaction.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: This proposal is
focused on a major unsolved problem in the current&lt;br/&gt;field of chemical
and biological defense and in medicine, namely how to
target&lt;br/&gt;biosensors or therapeutic agents to tissues and specific cells.
Construction of this cell&lt;br/&gt;target-specific probe capable of delivery of
a therapeutic agent will open the door to&lt;br/&gt;practical application of
innovative principles of chemical and biological sensing and
will&lt;br/&gt;facilitate exploration of new avenues in patient-addressed
personalized medicine. The&lt;br/&gt;strategy of the utilization of metallic
nanoparticles and their inherent SERS diagnostics&lt;br/&gt;that accompanies
them will lead to the development of a sub-cellular labeling
system&lt;br/&gt;with greatly increased sensitivity and versatility. The
proposed system will allow for&lt;br/&gt;simultaneous identification of a non-
predefined unlimited number of molecules (including&lt;br/&gt;previously unknown
targets) based on their Raman signature. The knowledge that will&lt;br/&gt;be
gained from developing the ideas presented in this project will contribute
broadly to&lt;br/&gt;several areas in the emerging fields of nanomedicine,
protein-metal interactions,&lt;br/&gt;nanoplasmonics, and nanobiology.