* 1107074
* Divergent trajectories:  A longitudinal study of organizational and departmental factors leading to gender and race differences in STEM faculty advancement, pay, and persistence
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2017
* Jeanne Ferrante, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Jessie Dearo
* 08/31/2017
* USD 554,231.00

The University of California-San Diego is a premier research university with a
focus on the STEM disciplines. In the current proposed project, the institution
seeks to implement a multi-pronged approach toward a longitudinal social science
study that will identify and analyze mechanism of cumulative disadvantage for
women, minorities and LGBT faculty in the STEM fields. The two primary research
questions include a focus on the disproportionate cumulative disadvantage of
special populations of STEM faculty and on means by which disadvantages at the
discipline, department and individual levels lead to disparities in career
outcomes. Specific methodological tools that will be used to facilitate this
project are longitudinal panel surveys, longitudinal salary analyses, salary and
productivity analyses and interviews with various faculty from underrepresented
groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit &lt;br/&gt;The proposed project
will study the specific mechanisms of cumulative disadvantage for women, URM,
and LGBT faculty across a four-year period with the goal of identifying
individual, departmental, and disciplinary factors that influence a host of
outcome variables (e.g., pay, productivity, advancement). The concept of
cumulative disadvantage has been studied with computer simulations and
qualitatively, but this proposed project represents the first, primarily
quantitative investigation of an issue central to understanding the
circumstances of various faculty groups. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact
&lt;br/&gt;The University of California-San Diego project proposes to examine
the impact of cumulative disadvantage for women, underrepresented minorities and
LGBT faculty in the academic STEM disciplines that results in disparities in
career outcomes. As such, the project will have a broad impact on special
populations of women faculty who have been largely underserved by the ADVANCE
community. This study represents the first of its kind and, if successful will
contribute tremendously to advancing current knowledge regarding the
underrepresentation of women faculty from a broad range of perspectives.