* 1107072
* Partnership for Adaptation, Implementation, and Dissemination (PAID):  Women in Science and Engineering at Oakland University (WISE@OU)
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2016
* Fatma Mili, Oakland University
* Standard Grant
* sharon bird
* 08/31/2016
* USD 518,894.00

The proposed project includes a very large variety of activities designed to
recruit and retain women STEM faculty at Oakland University (OU) with a four-
pronged approach. The first prong involves a thorough campus analysis and
planning based on the analysis. The second prong will focus on recruitment and
hiring practices at OU with training for all search and department chairs,
implicit bias training for Deans, increased transparency of applicant pools, the
dissemination of family-friendly information, and the development of a dual
career hiring policy. The third prong of the project involves faculty retention
and professional development initiatives including new faculty orientation, a
mentoring program, and professional development workshops. The fourth and final
prong of the proposal includes initiatives surrounding dissemination, especially
to the region?s 4-year and 2-year institutions.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;INTELLECTUAL MERIT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed
initiatives are based on highly successful ADVANCE programs and tailored to the
environment at OU. The first-year information gathering will provide a strong
foundation for the activities that will follow. The scope of the activities is
sweeping and the PI team is well qualified and well positioned to carry out the
plans. In addition they have enthusiastic letters of support from stakeholders
across the campus including the Provost, Deans, Chairs, potential mentors,
advisory board members, and the Union. The proposal is well written and
organized. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;BROADER
IMPACTS&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The sweeping scope of the proposed initiatives
suggests a path to institutional transformation at a smaller, highly-motivated,
primarily undergraduate institution. The proposed dissemination to the regional
2 and 4 year institutions is also an innovative way to have broader impacts.
Although not a major focus of the project, the application and tailoring of
programming to women of color adds some broader impact.