* 1107017
* Spline-based Empirical Likelihood and Qausi-likelihood Estimation
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/2011,07/31/2014
* Jing Wang, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 07/31/2014
* USD 80,448.00

Spline smoothing method contains substantial advantages for its simple
implementation and fast computation. The method becomes one of the most
prominent techniques in the area of semi-parametric and nonparametric regression
modeling. The main objective of this proposal is to investigate the inferential
aspects of two spline-based methods. One is the quasi-likelihood estimation for
categorized response data in generalized regression, and the other the empirical
likelihood estimation which brings efficiency properties analogous to parametric
likelihood and retains distribution-free character of nonparametric procedures.
Specifically, the PI proposes to i) develop robust estimation and testing
procedures for generalized spline regression models; ii) employ the equivalence
between linear mixed models and penalized splines for linearity tests in
generalized additive models; iii) extend free-knots spline to generalized
regression in order to improve the empirical behavior of polynomial spline
estimators; and iv) investigate spline confidence region of linear coefficients
in partially linear models via empirical likelihood by considering the number of
constraints growing with the sample sizes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed
projects are expected to be of broad interest to researchers from a wide range
of applied and social science fields including biochemistry, biostatistics,
epidemiology, and economics. For example, the research findings are applicable
to a cancer research study for a dose-response relationship between ethanol and
risk of cancer with binary outcomes, and a fauna study for relationship between
the number of species on sea bed and the spatial coordinates where error
distribution is not fully specified. The proposed procedures serve as new highly
usable tools for curve estimation and model diagnosis in general regression
model-related data analysis. For educational purpose, the PI plans to develop a
new advanced topic course related with the proposed topics to mentor
undergraduate or graduate students, and therefore involve them in proposed
research and related projects.