* 1107524
* Past, Present and Fuuture States and Variations of the late Quarternary Permafrost Subsystem
* GEO,OPP
* 07/01/2011,06/30/2015
* Nancy Bigelow, University of Alaska Fairbanks Campus
* Standard Grant
* Neil R. Swanberg
* 06/30/2015
* USD 337,759.00

Permafrost and seasonally frozen ground comprise a critically important
component of the dynamic arctic terrestrial system, constituting a closely tied
subsystem interacting with snow cover, vegetation, and the overlying atmosphere.
This permafrost subsystem regulates the local exchange of energy, water, and
materials (including carbon and nitrogen), and its influence extends beyond the
arctic land to the hydrosphere and the extra-tropical climate. Furthermore, the
long timescale of permafrost dynamics requires evaluation of the evolution and
impacts of the subsystem on the glacial-interglacial time frame. While some
recent numerical projections show rapid and widespread degradation of permafrost
in response to climate change during this century, global climate system models
with physically based snow and permafrost dynamics have not been fully tested,
using new observationally-based evidence, for spatial and temporal variability
of the subsystem under different climate conditions such as the Holocene optimum
or the Last Glacial Maximum (LGM). Evaluation of the climate sensitivity to the
permafrost will provide vital insight to future scenarios, especially in the
Northern Hemisphere. The focus will be on three late Quaternary eras for which
numerical simulations are widely performed by the collaborative efforts of the
Paleoclimate Model Intercomparison Project (PMIP: i.e., the preindustrial
present (0 ka, where ka = thousand years before present), mid-Holocene (6 ka),
and the LGM (21ka). This project will focus on evaluating the structure and
function of the permafrost subsystem under different climate conditions.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary questions to be addressed are: &lt;br/&gt;1.
How well do the permafrost distributions simulated by global climate models
agree with reconstructions from the proxy data? &lt;br/&gt;2. How widely did the
permafrost distribution change under different climate conditions? Will
permafrost change have serious consequences in nature, life, and societies in
the Arctic? Correspondingly, by which processes and interactions does the
permafrost subsystem impact the climate of the past and present? How important
are the vegetation and soil types? &lt;br/&gt;3. What can we learn from the
permafrost subsystem simulations under different climatic conditions to mitigate
or adapt to future changes? &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual merits: The
reconstructed vegetation map currently available for the climate model inputs
will be updated by combining recent results from paleobotanic research,
providing a basis for our surface boundary conditions. The simulated results
(permafrost distribution) from multiple models as well as the forcing data from
the PMIP2 outputs (surface temperature, precipitation [or wetness], and surface
wind) will be compared and evaluated with other updated proxy-derived maps. A
series of organized numerical sensitivity experiments with different levels of
complexity in snow-permafrost dynamics will delineate the essential processes
within the permafrost subsystem. Hierarchical experiments of coupled and
uncoupled simulations with the atmosphere will quantify the interactions between
the atmosphere and the subsurface, and the function of the subsystem as a whole
in arctic and global climate. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts: broader
impact activities will focus on delivering information about direct implications
for future climate change projection, and for adaptation planning. Improved
scientific understanding of the permafrost subsystem will enhance assessments of
the risks of climate change to infrastructure and society, especially on life
and culture in the Arctic. This project will also contribute to emerging efforts
in earth system modeling, which requires realistic subsurface simulations in
order to study the biogeochemical processes that are important for surface
exchanges of water vapor and other radiatively active gases. Maps of past
permafrost distribution, vegetation and other simulated results in Beringia
provide materials to the social and anthropogenic sciences, particularly in such
topics as the history of human migration into North America, and the early
history of Alaska Natives. It will also facilitate outreach to secondary
schools, universities, museums and the general public. Underrepresented student
populations such as Alaska Natives, those geographically isolated and
economically disadvantaged are among the target audiences.