* 1107418
* Track 1 Solaris Program (Student Opportunities in Learning Advanced Research in the Geosciences)
* GEO,GEO
* 09/01/2011,12/31/2014
* Kathleen Devaney, El Paso County Community College
* Standard Grant
* Jill L. Karsten
* 12/31/2014
* USD 213,862.00

SOLARIS (Student Opportunity for Learning Advanced Research In geoScience) is a
Track-one, multi-faceted program working to increase participation, particularly
of underrepresented minority students, in the geosciences at El Paso Community
College (EPCC) and encourage their completion of 4-year degree programs in this
field. The project is strengthening local geoscience education activities and
recruiting high school and current EPCC undergraduate students into the young
EPCC geoscience Associates Degree program. A workshop for local high school
instructors and EPCC faculty provides strategies to engage students with
innovative lab activities, as well as information on careers in the geosciences
and degree plans offered by EPCC and University of Texas at El Paso (UTEP).
Participants are provided with laboratory kits to implement activities in their
own classroom following the workshop. The second key facet is a bridge program
that provides funding for 10 EPCC geological science majors to conduct
geological research. Students are mentored by EPCC and UTEP instructors and use
facilities and equipment at both institutions. This facet of the SOLARIS project
allows EPCC students to develop research skills while obtaining their AS degree,
and introduces them to the faculty and facilities at the UTEP Geoscience
Department.