* 1107379
* Collaborative Research:  Nonlinear Water Waves
* MPS,DMS
* 06/15/2011,05/31/2015
* Diane Henderson, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Victor Roytburd
* 05/31/2015
* USD 108,601.00

Many physical systems admit nonlinear waves. These systems often exhibit
dissipation that is considered to be negligible or weak. However, recent work by
the investigators and recently published observations of dissipation rates of
ocean swell, show that the models using weak dissipation provide an inadequate
description of some aspects of the evolution of nonlinear surface water waves.
Thus, a main emphasis of this research is to develop a theory from first
principles for the propagation and evolution of nonlinear surface water waves on
a viscous fluid, with no approximation on the size of dissipation. The research
addresses several projects that build on this notion and/or are intended to
apply the mathematical results to ocean applications. The projects fall into two
categories: A) surface waves propagating on a viscous fluid and B) waves in
shallow or finite-depth water. The investigators will approach these problems by
combining their individual strengths in modeling and analysis, numerical
simulations, and physical experiments to obtain a fundamental mathematical
description of the physical phenomena. They will then use publicly available
data from ocean observations to apply their results to ocean
settings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary goal of this research is to
understand at a fundamental, mathematical level the propagation of waves on a
surface of water, and to apply this understanding to observations of waves
measured in the laboratory and in the oceans. Particular applications include
the effects of dissipation on the generation of waves by wind, the subsequent
propagation of ocean swell, and the development of rogue waves in shallow and
deep water; predicting dangerous versus benign tsunamis given the Richter-scale
measure of the magnitude of the responsible earthquake and some readily
available information about the geology of its location; and modeling large-
amplitude waves on beaches with variable bathymetry using the new mathematical
approaches investigated here. In addition, the mathematical results are expected
to describe nonlinear waves in several settings, including light waves in an
optical fiber, spin waves in a thin magnetic film and others. Graduate and
undergraduate students will be mentored and involved in experimental studies and
theoretical analysis; through this project they will receive training in
interdisciplinary research.