* 1107968
* AMS Climate Studies: Fostering Climate Science Literacy and Promoting Minority Participation in the Geosciences (Track 2)
* GEO,RISE
* 09/01/2011,02/28/2019
* Ira Geer, American Meteorological Society
* Continuing Grant
* Brandon Jones
* 02/28/2019
* USD 1,312,554.00

The American Meteorological Society (AMS) Education Program is partnering with
Second Nature, administrator of the American College and University President's
Climate Commitment (ACUPCC), to implement the AMS Climate Studies course at 100
minority-serving institutions (MSIs) over a five-year period. This project
focuses on introducing and enhancing geoscience components of MSIs that are
ACUPCC signatories and/or members of the Louis Stokes Alliances for Minority
Participation (LSAMP). During the first four years of the project, AMS is
conducting a weeklong AMS Climate Studies course implementation workshop for
about 25 MSI faculty members per year. This workshop leverages the climate
expertise of scientists from NOAA, NASA Goddard Space Flight Center, University
of Maryland, Howard University, George Mason University and other local climate
educational and research institutions. Faculty participants are immersed in the
course materials, receive presentations from high-level speakers, and are
trained as change agents for their local institutions. Following the workshop,
the faculty will work on their local campuses to expand geoscience curricula,
thereby bringing change from within. They will offer AMS Climate Studies as an
introductory geoscience course in the year following workshop attendance, and be
encouraged to implement the AMS Weather Studies and AMS Ocean Studies courses.
AMS is conducting follow-up meetings with faculty as they work toward
institutional geoscience curricula change. The major outcomes of this project
will be a large network of faculty trained to be change agents in their
institutions, sustained offering of AMS undergraduate courses within MSIs, and
the introduction of thousands of MSI students to the geosciences.