* 1107491
* The role of tributaries in glacier surges
* GEO,OPP
* 11/01/2011,10/31/2016
* Martin Truffer, University of Alaska Fairbanks Campus
* Standard Grant
* William J. Wiseman, Jr.
* 10/31/2016
* USD 544,825.00

A glacier surge is characterized by a sudden increase in speed by one to two
orders of magnitude and often leads to a significant movement of the terminus of
the glacier. While the role of subglacial hydraulics during the surge has been
well documented, the issue of surge initiation has remained unsolved. Also, the
related question of why some glaciers surge and others do not remains open. This
proposal will investigate whether the special geometry of many Alaska Range
glaciers allows particularly large shear stresses to develop that eventually
allow a surge to occur. The proposed work would focus on the Black Rapids
Glacier on the Denali Fault in the eastern Alaska Range. The investigators
contend that understanding glacier surges can also make a fundamental
contribution to understanding of the basal boundary condition, which remains a
major question in glaciology. As numerical models of ice flow are becoming more
sophisticated, the issue of the basal boundary condition will have to be
revisited and it is important to understand the strong non-linear aspects that
lead to the switch from quiescence to surge. Lessons learned from surge
initiation can also be applied to other situations where ice flows fast under
high stress conditions, such as at fast outlet glaciers. The fieldwork would
include radar to accurately map the base of the glacier, airborne lidar to
generate a full digital elevation model of the surface of the glacier, GPS
measurements of ice velocity, meteorological stations for climate data and ice
ablation, and cameras to monitor the marginal lakes for drainage. These
observations will be fully integrated with and complemented by a three-
dimensional flow model of the glacier. The proposed work would form the core of
a PhD thesis with training in field methods, data analysis, and numerical
modeling. Scientific results will be presented at national and international
meetings and in the peer-reviewed literature. Because glacier research tends to
attract great interest among the general public, and Black Rapids is familiar to
many Alaskans, this project is well-suited to public outreach. Outreach efforts
will be coordinated through the institute's Information Office, which regularly
schedules well-attended public talks and provides news columns about the
institute's science activities.