* 1107395
* CAREER:  Scalability Limits of Wireless Networks
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2010,12/31/2012
* Petar Momcilovic, University of Florida
* Continuing Grant
* Min Song
* 12/31/2012
* USD 52,685.00

Large-scale wireless networks are projected to dominate the information
technology sector in the future, giving rise to a new set of research problems
on scalability. The main goal of this project is to develop an essential
understanding of the impact of large scales on the performance of wireless
networks. In particular, the project examines how the finiteness of resources
(memory, computational power, etc.) at individual nodes affects the overall
network performance. The developed understanding is then used to design a set of
algorithms that support efficient operation of large-scale networks of nodes
with very limited resources. The algorithmic aspect is particularly important
given that some of widely considered algorithms require excessive resources at
individual nodes and, hence, are not scalable. However, the project demonstrates
the existence of algorithms that require only negligible resources but achieve
comparable performance. Furthermore, the study reveals that completely new
protocols are needed to support operation of large-scales wireless networks.

In contrast to the majority of earlier studies that examined either large
networks with unlimited node resources or small networks with limited node
resources, the focus of this project is on relationship between the network size
and node resources. Most of the considered problems are impractical to be
addressed experimentally due to a considerable cost of building large-scale
prototypes. Moreover, even simulating such systems is often very difficult
because of computational limitations. Thus, a comprehensive research agenda is
based on an analytical framework that overcomes the difficulties imposed by
large scales.