* 1107651
* Collaborative Research: The Arctic Springtime Transition: Dynamics, Impacts, and Future Changes
* GEO,OPP
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2016
* Walter Robinson, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Neil R. Swanberg
* 08/31/2016
* USD 267,274.00

In the Arctic, the arrival of spring is sudden. The abrupt onset of Arctic
spring comes with the development of high pressure over Baffin Bay and the
Labrador Sea and shifts in the jet stream and storm tracks. These changes are
important for the Arctic climate and environment and have critical influences on
Arctic peoples and ecosystems. This project will test the hypothesis that the
spring Arctic transition is a dynamical phenomenon, driven by the downward
influence of the springtime stratospheric final warming, abrupt changes in the
flow over and around Greenland and in atmospheric waves over the North Atlantic,
and shifts in the frequency and tracks of storms entering the Arctic. The spring
transition effects the surface climate and is likely modified by feedbacks from
surface processes. The implications of the dynamical onset of Arctic spring for
future changes in the Arctic will be explored, through analyses of atmospheric
and Arctic surface data, experiments with a global atmospheric model, and
analyses of 20th Century and future climate simulations. This project will
develop a dynamical understanding of the Arctic spring transition and its
interactions with the Arctic environment. It will use this understanding to
evaluate climate models based on their ability to simulate the spring
transition, and it will examine model projections of future changes in the
Arctic environment resulting from changes in the timing, strength, and structure
of the spring transition.