* 1107961
* Alaska EPSCoR RII C2: Cyberconnectivity and Data Visualization
* O/D,EPS
* 08/15/2011,07/31/2013
* Karl Kowalski, University of Alaska Fairbanks Campus
* Standard Grant
* Uma Venkateswaran
* 07/31/2013
* USD 1,000,000.00

The Alaska Research Infrastructure Improvement Inter-Campus and Intra-Campus
Cyber Connectivity project will enhance cyber connectivity, data storage, and
visualization capabilities at the University of Alaska Fairbanks (UAF) and
Anchorage (UAA) campuses. At UAF, the core network will be upgraded from 1 Gbps
to 10 Gbps Ethernet and a new, centralized data portal and managed
infrastructure will be developed at the Arctic Region Supercomputing Center
(ARSC). At UAA, the campus network will be upgraded from 1 Gbps to 10 Gbps and
the real-time visualization capabilities will be upgraded at the Planetarium and
Visualization Theater (PVT). The project also includes Development of cyber
educational content for rural schools and communities through UAF's Office of
Information Technology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit&lt;br/&gt;The
cyber upgrades are aimed at strengthening connectivity and providing support for
data-intensive high bandwidth computing at UAF and UAA. The ARSC data portal
will greatly facilitate access to data, improve research efficiency, and
initiate collaborations that transcend disciplines, campuses, and organizations
across and beyond Alaska. Increased visualization capabilities at UAA's PVT will
support generation of agent-based maps and related policy decisions that portray
different possibilities of current and future scenarios of climatic and socio-
economic changes. Visualization capabilities and multi-scenario simulations that
are currently limited by connectivity problems will be addressed by this
project. The cyber-enabled research will focus on studies that enable better
understanding of the dynamics of changes in the arctic ecosystem and climate
caused by interactions between human and natural systems.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts&lt;br/&gt;The proposed cyber upgrades will
improve reliability and provide redundancy for communication and data sharing
among researchers and students at UAF and UAA and with their external
collaborators. The ARSC data portal will be accessible not only to a large
number of researchers but also to the general public with instructional elements
for all skill levels. The cyberinfrastructure upgrades to the PVT at UAA will
facilitate informed policy decisions by public resource managers through
visualization of different scenarios as well as public outreach presentations.
Remote rural Alaska campuses and communities will also benefit through distance
education programs.