* 1107725
* Precision, Accuracy, and Aliasing of Sea Ice Thickness from Multiple Observing Platforms
* GEO,OPP
* 09/15/2011,08/31/2015
* Cathleen Geiger, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* Henrietta Edmonds
* 08/31/2015
* USD 419,636.00

Much attention on the extent, and changes therein, of Arctic sea ice focuses on
areal coverage. Equally if not more important to consider is the thickness of
the ice, which varies with age and also due to movement of the ice. Thickness is
geometrically rough with ridges, rubble fields, and open-water leads. These
features are asymmetrically shaped from centimeters to meters in one horizontal
direction and meters to kilometers along the other. Instruments used to sense
ice thickness typically have wide footprints that alias these rough features
into smoother flatter features. Accurate thickness distribution of these
deformed areas is needed to reduce uncertainties in global thickness data
archives. Such results lead to higher accuracy in regional and global sea ice
volume estimates. High precision and consistency from a single instrument cannot
quantify the impact of aliasing. The sea ice community currently seeks an
integrated- instrument approach to measure sea ice thickness from its components
of draft, freeboard, and surface elevation (including snow loads) and thickness
archives are being developed. This project would address the central question,
"What is the impact of spatial aliasing when measuring sea ice thickness, its
distribution, and resulting volume?" The approach is to work with datasets that
include measurements made by two or more instruments with different footprints
in the same location, based on a recently discovered relationship between the
roughness of 5m and 40m footprints stemming from one field experiment. Using
this dataset a valid correction (to better than 10 cm) was found using the
roughness ratio between the two measurements. The investigator proposes that
this type of relationship can be generalized for all types of sea ice thickness
measurements. The investigator will organize and archive climate data records
containing coincident sea ice thickness measurements from instruments of
different footprints and incorporate these data with existing sea ice thickness
archives. The main scientific contribution will be an improved metadata
relationship to characterize properties that contribute to thickness
uncertainties in climate data archive records. A Ph.D. thesis will advance the
aliasing hypothesis using airborne electromagnetic (EM) measurements to devise a
correction by leveraging the accompanying high-resolution laser altimeter
already integrated into the EM technology. The broader impacts of the work
include the improved thickness archive and the training of a Ph.D. student.