* 1107398
* Long-term measurements of nitrogen oxides at the GEOSummit station, Greenland
* GEO,OPP
* 08/15/2011,07/31/2015
* Louisa Kramer, Michigan Technological University
* Standard Grant
* William Ambrose
* 07/31/2015
* USD 265,303.00

Long-term measurements of nitrogen oxides at the GEOSummit station: Non-
technical abstract &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Pollution from fossil fuel combustion
is often transported to the Arctic region from nearby continents resulting in an
increase in greenhouse gases. The Arctic climate is particularly sensitive to
the effects of greenhouse gases. The initial rise in temperature reduces ice
cover, exposing the darker oceans below which absorb more radiation leading to
further warming. Monitoring these pollutants in the Arctic is important to
understand the changes that have occurred and the impact on the future climate.
This project will provide long-term measurements of nitrogen oxides at the
GEOSummit Station, Greenland. Polluted air from human activities and forest
fires can contain relatively high levels of nitrogen oxides. When transported to
the Arctic, these nitrogen oxides can foster the production of ozone, a
significant greenhouse gas. &lt;br/&gt;The measurements will provide important
information on the concentrations of nitrogen oxides transported to the Arctic,
which vary both seasonally and annually and the resulting impact on Arctic ozone
levels. The project will contribute to the Arctic Observing Network (AON) and
the Study of Environmental Arctic Change (SEARCH). The data will be made
available to researchers for studies to improve understanding of current impacts
of transported pollution on greenhouse gas levels and estimates of climate
change feedbacks within the Arctic. The data will also be utilized by educators
for classroom teaching and support the training of new graduate students by
providing a unique opportunity to further their research interests and
educational growth in the field of atmospheric sciences, using state of the art
technology.