* 1107795
* Physical Relations Governing the Response of the Global Sea Ice Cover to Climate Change
* GEO,OPP
* 07/01/2011,06/30/2015
* Tapio Schneider, California Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* William J. Wiseman, Jr.
* 06/30/2015
* USD 589,272.00

Schneider 1107795&lt;br/&gt;California Institute of
Technology&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PIs will use a systematic approach to
elucidate the processes that control sea ice thickness and areal extent on
seasonal and longer timescales. First, they will identify responses that are
robust among current comprehensive global climate models (GCMs). Next, they will
develop fundamental theories to explain these responses, beginning with the
consideration of physical first principles, continuing through simulations with
a hierarchy of models with increasing levels of complexity, and culminating in
tests of the theories with satellite-derived observations. A principal tool will
be an idealized atmosphere?sea ice GCM, which helps bridge the gap between
understanding of fundamental processes and simulations with comprehensive GCMs.
Using this and other models, they will test the theories developed for Arctic
sea ice retreat in the broader context of sea ice changes in a continuum of
climates spanning the full range from a completely ice-covered to a completely
ice-free planet. These theories will be used to interpret observed sea ice
changes and to evaluate the aspects of current GCM projections that differ among
the models, such as the rate of 21st-century Arctic sea ice retreat. Specific
questions to be addressed include:&lt;br/&gt;? How do interactions between sea
ice and other components of the climate system determine the seasonal cycle of
hemispheric sea ice cover?&lt;br/&gt;? What physical principles govern the
sensitivity of sea ice to climate changes?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed
research will elucidate some of the most fundamental questions about the
dynamics of sea ice and climate. It will bridge the gap between state-of-the-art
GCM simulations and fundamental physical understanding, thereby providing
metrics for model assessment, suggesting ways for model improvement, and
reducing the uncertainty in the prediction of future sea ice retreat. By
exploring sea ice retreat in a wide range of climates, it will place past and
possible future Arctic sea ice changes in a broader context.