* 1107753
* Collaborative Research: A New Radiostratigraphic Database for the Greenland Ice Sheet and Critical Boundary Conditions for  the Next Generation of Ice-Sheet Models
* GEO,OPP
* 08/01/2011,07/31/2012
* Mark Fahnestock, University of New Hampshire
* Standard Grant
* William J. Wiseman, Jr.
* 07/31/2012
* USD 112,926.00

Predictive ice-sheet models are our best tools for understanding the cumulative
effects of forcings and feedbacks upon the Greenland Ice Sheet (GIS). However,
these models lack detail concerning the GIS basal boundary condition, which is a
critical control upon ice flow. They also do not take advantage of the wealth of
information contained in its internal radiostratigraphy, but that could become a
key component of their validation and application as predictive
tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To address this need for new constraints on ice-
sheet models, funds are provided to develop, validate, and analyze a new
radiostratigraphic database of the GIS. The database will be derived from past
(e.g., PARCA, CReSIS) and ongoing (e.g., IceBridge) airborne radar-sounding
campaigns. The research objectives are three-fold:&lt;br/&gt;1. Development of
novel automated layer-picking techniques. Picking widespread layers in radar
data is often a time-intensive process. Recent advances permit dramatic
improvements in automated layer picking, which will yield both insights into the
nature of ice-sheet radiostratigraphy and accelerate a more precise study of
ice-flow history from it.&lt;br/&gt;2. Holocene surface and basal mass balance
of the GIS. The picked radiostratigraphy will be combined with strain-rate
modeling to map both Holocene surface-accumulation and basal melt rates across
the GIS. This proven method will be extended beyond its previous application to
northern Greenland, with uncertainties quantified using their knowledge of past
ice-flow conditions. This study will both inform understanding of Greenland?s
subglacial geology and provide key boundary conditions for ice-flow models of
the GIS.&lt;br/&gt;3. LAYERMAP: A dated radiostratigraphic model of the GIS. The
radiostratigraphic database will be gridded in a manner similar to that for bed
elevation underneath ice sheets. LAYERMAP will contribute to the advancement of
IPCC-level ice-sheet models of the GIS, whose projections of its future
evolution will hinge on data validation of its modern state. In addition,
LAYERMAP will provide a means of mapping basal conditions and englacial drainage
features across the GIS.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Observations suggest a recent
acceleration of the contribution of a degrading Greenland Ice Sheet to global
sea level rise. Present projections of the rate of sea level rise are bounded by
broad error bars, preventing accurate assessment of the response necessary to
mitigate the impact of sea level rise. This project will develop data sets
needed to validate and constrain models of the Greenland Ice Sheets contribution
to future sea level.