* 1107495
* Collaborative Proposal: Embracing Science - From the Field to the Fair
* GEO,GEO
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2015
* Kathryn Alley, South Dakota School of Mines and Technology
* Standard Grant
* Jill L. Karsten
* 08/31/2015
* USD 99,289.00

"Field to the Fair" is a collaboration between Oglala Lakota College (OLC) and
South Dakota School of Mines and Technology (SDSM&T) to establish and strengthen
the geosciences learning path for middle and high school Native American
students. Fifteen Native Americans from the Pine Ridge Reservation, fifteen
Native Americans from the Rapid City area, and science teachers from both
locations participate in a common field-camp experience designed to expose them
to a variety of research and career opportunities in Earth and atmospheric
sciences and to trigger their interest in the same. An adjunct goal is to
increase community awareness about the need to encourage Native American youth
to plan for their careers and education.

The camp experience leads into the development of a science fair project.
Throughout the school year following the summer field camp, the 30 Native
American participants are mentored by undergraduate and graduate students from
OLC and SDSM&T as they prepare for the Pine Ridge Science Fair and High Plains
Regional Science and Engineering Fair. Projects are presented at the Lakota
Nation Invitational in December to reach a broader audience of Native Americans.
The expected outcomes include: 1) Educate American Indian students and members
of their extended families about the available opportunities for Native American
students on the OLC and SDSM&T campuses through summer-camp, followed by the
preparation of science fair projects; 2) Solidify and sustain mentoring
experiences for the Native American students on the SDSM&T and OLC campuses in
the preparation of the science fair projects; 3) Create for South Dakota a
replicable model for collaboration between local school districts and higher
education for the purpose of fielding teams of mentors to serve middle/high
school students; 4) Engage participants in learning and using the Lakota
language in their science projects, to enhance their understanding of
traditional knowledge of the Earth and environment; and 5) Improve access for
American Indians to the geosciences by connecting research to the immediate and
tangible world.