* 1107986
* Materials World Network: Annealing Twin Formation for Grain Boundary Engineering
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2015
* Anthony Rollett, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Continuing Grant
* Diana Farkas
* 08/31/2015
* USD 390,000.00

A team of investigators from the Materials Science &amp; Engineering Department
at Carnegie Mellon University (CMU) and the Centre for Material Forming (CEMEF)
at the Paris School of Mines in Sophia Antipolis, France, examines the
mechanisms of annealing twin formation that enable Grain Boundary Engineering
(GBE) of materials to be accomplished. GBE is being applied increasingly as a
process that seeks to improve a wide range of properties such as corrosion
resistance and fatigue life through control of the grain boundary content of the
material. GBE typically involves repeated cycles of deformation and annealing
but little research has been done on how these steps result in optimized
microstructures. This research focuses on detailed characterization of the early
stages of the recrystallization process as a function of initial grain size,
annealing temperature, particle content and prior strain level in order to
determine the mechanisms that give rise to high fractions of desirable
boundaries but most especially the break-up of the network of general high angle
boundaries by annealing twins. There is also good evidence that the desired
increases in the twin fraction are easiest to obtain at low to moderate strains,
which is strongly associated with the Strain Induced Boundary Migration (SIBM)
mechanism. This research offers the opportunity to test the hypothesis that the
GBE process depends on a combination of SIBM with twinning, and that the spatial
and textural distributions of the locations where it takes place are key to
understanding the process. CMU has the capability to zoom in on particular
regions of interest and characterize them with in-situ serial sectioning by
using a dual-beam FIB-SEM equipment. CMU will also partner with Integran USA to
investigate microstructural evolution in both nanocrystalline nickel and pure
Ni. The CEMEF group, supported by the French National Research Agency (ANR), has
hot stage microscopy and advanced simulation tools for the entire deformation
plus annealing process. Key new information to be gained includes data on twin
formation during annealing and the topology of grain boundary networks, as
opposed to only measuring fractions of "special
boundaries".&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The hypothesis-based approach addresses the
underlying mechanisms of twin formation that enable GBE to be accomplished. Most
work so far has focused on before-and-after characterization, which has
optimized properties but offers no understanding or control of the GBE process.
The hypothesis, if verified, will also explain why large deformations do not
promote GBE because other recrystallization mechanisms arise, such as abnormal
coarsening of sub-grain networks. Successful delineation of the key mechanisms
for GBE has the potential to expand the range of application of the process.
Several parts of the industrial sector in the US make use of superalloys and
will therefore be likely to be interested in the outcome of the work, such as
Integran, Pratt &amp; Whitney, and General Electric.