* 1107000
* Sparse and structured networks: Statistical theory and algorithms
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2011,06/30/2015
* Bin Yu, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 06/30/2015
* USD 420,000.00

The proposal focuses on Markov random fields and directed
graphical&lt;br/&gt;models, classes of statistical models that are based on a
marriage&lt;br/&gt;between graph theory and probability theory, and allow for
flexible&lt;br/&gt;modeling of network-structured data. The core of the
proposal&lt;br/&gt;consists of multiple research thrusts, all centered around
the goal of&lt;br/&gt;developing practical algorithms and theory for statistical
estimation&lt;br/&gt;with network-structured data. One research thrust concerns
various&lt;br/&gt;issues associated with model selection in undirected graphical
models,&lt;br/&gt;also known as Gibbs distributions or Markov random fields.
Problems&lt;br/&gt;include determining the information-theoretic limitations of
graphical&lt;br/&gt;model selection in high dimensions (where the number of
vertices may&lt;br/&gt;be larger than the sample size), not only for i.i.d. data
but also&lt;br/&gt;dependent data; developing methods for tracking sequences of
networks&lt;br/&gt;that evolve over time; and developing methods for data with
hidden&lt;br/&gt;variables. Another research thrust concerns various
statistical&lt;br/&gt;problems associated with directed acyclic graphical
structures (DAGs),&lt;br/&gt;including estimating equivalence classes of DAGs in
the&lt;br/&gt;high-dimensional setting; estimating causal relationships via
designed&lt;br/&gt;interventions; and efficient computational methods for DAG
selection&lt;br/&gt;using the Lasso and related methods. Overall, the proposed
research&lt;br/&gt;is inter-disciplinary in nature, drawing on techniques
from&lt;br/&gt;mathematical statistics, convex optimization, information
theory,&lt;br/&gt;concentration of measure, and graph
theory.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Science and engineering abounds with different
types of networks.&lt;br/&gt;Examples include social networks such as FaceBook
and Twitter,&lt;br/&gt;networks of genes and proteins in molecular biology,
network models&lt;br/&gt;for economic and market dynamics, neural networks in
brain imaging,&lt;br/&gt;networks of disease transmission in epidemiology, and
information&lt;br/&gt;networks in law enforcement. In the real-world, the
structure of the&lt;br/&gt;underlying network is not known, but instead one
observes samples of&lt;br/&gt;the network behavior (e.g., packet counts in a
computer network;&lt;br/&gt;instances of infection at given time instances of an
epidemic; emails&lt;br/&gt;or text messages sent among a group of people), and
the goal is to&lt;br/&gt;infer the network structure. Methods for solving this
network&lt;br/&gt;inference problem have a broad range of applications.
Examples&lt;br/&gt;include inferring brain connectivity and disease etiology
in&lt;br/&gt;neuroimaging studies, detecting terrorist cells in social
networks,&lt;br/&gt;monitoring intrusions in computer networks, and
understanding the&lt;br/&gt;basis of gene-protein interactions in systems
biology.