* 1107667
* EAGER:  Preparation of Free Standing Quasicrystalline Nanoparticles
* MPS,DMR
* 09/15/2011,08/31/2012
* NONE NONE, NONE
* Standard Grant
* Eric Taleff
* 08/31/2012
* USD 62,569.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY: This EAGER project is aimed at obtaining free standing
quasicrystalline nanoparticles from properly annealed Zirconium-based amorphous
alloys through chemical and electrochemical approaches. It is known that
metastable quasicrystalline nanoparticles precipitate during the initial
crystallization of some Zr-based amorphous alloys. These particles are embedded
in the amorphous matrix and transform to stable crystalline phases upon further
annealing. The size of the precipitated particles ranges from several to a 100
nanometers. The separation of these nanoparticles from the amorphous matrix will
be carried out by chemical and electrochemical approaches. A Zr-based amorphous
alloy, in which the precipitation of quasicrystalline nanoparticles has been
confirmed, will be either etched chemically or electrochemically. The amorphous
matrix will be removed preferentially, enabling the nanoparticles to fall into
the solution, after which they will be recovered through filtering. The
experimental conditions will be optimized. Due to their reduced sizes and unique
atomic configurations, the Zr-rich particles are expected to exhibit novel
properties.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY: The particles
synthesized in the present project represent a new class of material and are of
interest for both fundamental studies and potential medicinal applications or as
hydrogen storage materials. The properties of these nanoparticles are expected
to differ from their normal crystalline and/or amorphous counterparts because of
their nanometer size. The success of the present project could stimulate the
demand for such particles for commercial exploitation or for the initiation of
joint projects with researchers in other fields. The present project will have a
significant impact on the teaching and research activities at Clarion University
and will stimulate interest in nanotechnology in nearby institutions. Four
undergraduate students will be involved in this project at different stages,
providing valuable opportunities to work on real-world problems within the
environment of a predominantly teaching university. In addition to publications
in peer-reviewed journals and presentations at professional meetings, the
results will be introduced in a nanotechnology course and in a campus-wide
seminar series. Clarion University has a very close relationship with local
middle and high schools. The results of this project will be introduced to
teachers and students in these schools. The principal investigator of the
present project is an active member of the National Science Foundation's
Nanotechnology Application and Career Knowledge (NACK) Center at Pennsylvania
State University. The results of this project will also be communicated to the
NACK Center.