* 1107788
* Collaborative Research: Towards advanced understanding and improved decadal/centennial prediction of Arctic sea ice state and climate change
* GEO,OPP
* 10/01/2011,09/30/2015
* John Cassano, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Neil R. Swanberg
* 09/30/2015
* USD 182,192.00

The overarching goal of the project is to advance understanding of Arctic
climate system operation and variability to improve model prediction of Arctic
climate change at decadal to centennial scales. A set of specific objectives is
proposed centered on the following main science hypothesis:&lt;br/&gt;Given the
projections of continued global warming and its northern high-latitude
amplification, the Arctic will become nearly ice-free during summer in the near
future, resulting in altered physical state of and interconnections within the
Arctic climate system.&lt;br/&gt;To confirm or disprove the above hypothesis,
our approach is to use subsets of model components and fully coupled RACM to
address the following specific objectives:&lt;br/&gt;- Identify potential
improvements in the simulated sea ice thickness distribution and deformation due
to increasing model resolution and representation of fine-scale ice-ocean
interactions&lt;br/&gt;- Investigate effects of shrinking and thinning sea ice
on ice kinematics and its consequences on changing air-ice and ice-ocean
interactions&lt;br/&gt;- Examine and quantify consequences of melting sea ice on
the increased upper ocean heat content and its potential for increased ice melt
due to a positive ice-ocean feedback loop&lt;br/&gt;- Assess the influence of
excess oceanic heat release, especially in fall and winter, on potentially
enhancing cyclonic tendency in the atmosphere&lt;br/&gt;- Explore the importance
of increased sea ice melt and runoff to the Arctic hydrological cycle and its
acceleration in the context of first-year ice growth and survival&lt;br/&gt;-
Integrate positive and negative feedback processes into model simulations of
warming climate scenario to determine their net impact on the long-term state of
Arctic ice cover&lt;br/&gt;- Identify physical and numerical requirements of
future GCMs to significantly improve model skill in representing past and
present and in predicting future Arctic climate change.&lt;br/&gt;A hierarchy of
well designed one-way and fully coupled regional climate system model
experiments will focus on the above objectives. Such experiments will provide
advanced insight into the behavior of the Arctic climate system that is not
currently attainable using either individual regional component models or GCMs.
The proposed project helps to lay the foundation for a community regional Arctic
System Model as recommended in the recently published report to NSF. This
research will also address or facilitate other studies related to potential
implications of Arctic sea ice melt and warming climate, including consequences
for the global ocean thermohaline circulation, Greenland ice sheet, ecosystem,
shipping, natural resource development, policymaking and defense. Output from
the baseline simulations will be made available to the community through either
the ARCSS Data Coordination Center or a Live Access Server at the Naval
Postgraduate School, to be developed in support of this project.