* 1107838
* Materials World Network: Nanoscale Studies of Fundamental Mechanisms of Deformation in Amorphous Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 09/15/2011,08/31/2015
* Todd Hufnagel, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Michael J. Scott
* 08/31/2015
* USD 600,000.00

The strength, ductility, and forming ability of metallic alloys are all related
to plastic deformation, which arises from the motion of dislocations. While
dislocation processes are well understood, many important materials (including
oxide glasses, metallic glasses, many polymers, and some semiconductors) are
non-crystalline and undergo plastic deformation by mechanisms that do not
involve dislocations. A better understanding of these mechanisms would aid the
development of new materials with high strength and improved resistance to
fracture and fatigue. This collaborative international research effort uses
advanced experimental and computational techniques to characterize, quantify,
and predict fundamental mechanisms of plastic deformation in amorphous
materials. The experimental and computational portions of the programs are
linked by a continuum non-equilibrium thermodynamic framework based on the shear
transformation zone (STZ) theory of deformation of amorphous materials. To
accomplish this, the effort brings together international experts in electron
microscopy (W. Chen, Tohoku University, Japan), x-ray scattering (T. Hufnagel,
Johns Hopkins U.), micromechanical testing (L. Greer, Cambridge U., UK), and
computational materials science (M. Falk, Johns Hopkins U.). Structural
characterization efforts focus on quantifying the effects of deformation on the
nanoscale structure of amorphous materials; these include aberration-corrected
transmission electron microscopy, fluctuation electron microscopy, and coherent
x-ray scattering. The nanoscale mechanical properties are measured by
instrumented nanoindentation and micropillar compression over a range of
temperatures. In order to place the work in the broadest possible context,
materials at two extremes of structure and behavior are studied: metallic
glasses, with largely non-directional bonding and substantial ability to support
plastic deformation; and amorphous silicon, with highly directional covalent
bonding and limited plastic deformation. The experimental efforts are
complemented by atomistic simulations and continuum modeling. The atomistic
simulations allow detailed investigation of fundamental mechanisms of
deformation and the accompanying structural evolution, and are critical for
interpreting the experimental results. Continuum numerical solutions of well-
posed boundary value problems are compared to carefully chosen experiments to
test the validity of the STZ theory and place the experimental observations in
the context of a predictive constitutive theory.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The effort
advances the education and training of graduate students, undergraduate
students, and post-doctoral scholars by integrating them into an international
research team that includes researchers from the United States, United Kingdom,
and&lt;br/&gt;Japan. A central feature of the effort is the opportunity for the
junior members of the team to make extended visits to the other institutions to
foster the collaboration and benefit from extended exposure to different
cultures. The collaboration is also fostered by regular web conferences and
annual meetings of the entire team. Another focus is the use of peer instruction
techniques in undergraduate materials science and engineering education. Content
appropriate for a sophomore-level Structure of Materials course is developed and
the effectiveness of this teaching methodology is being evaluated. Results of
the assessments will be disseminated via journal articles and conference
presentations, and the teaching content produced will be made freely available
for other instructors to use.