* 1107720
* Collaborative Research: BEST Synthesis: Integration and modeling of spatial-temporal variation in vital rates for euphausiids in eastern Bering Sea: Implications for demographics
* GEO,OPP
* 10/01/2011,09/30/2015
* Hongsheng Bi, University of Maryland Center for Environmental Sciences
* Standard Grant
* William J. Wiseman, Jr.
* 09/30/2015
* USD 293,229.00

Euphausiids (krill) are a critical link connecting lower trophic levels to fish
in the eastern Bering Sea, yet knowledge of euphausiid growth and vital rates is
very limited. Fundamental information to address these gaps has been an
important focus of the BEST-BSIERP field program, which has collected spatially
explicit information on individual growth rates and grazing for several
euphausiid species. Related activities are addressing broad scale age structure
using new biochemical approaches for euphausiids. To make the best use of these
multiple data sets, funds are provided for a focused effort to integrate and
synthesize these data to estimate growth and vital rates for different regions
(inner, middle, and outer shelf), and model euphausiid population dynamics to
understand their demographic structure. The PIs will &lt;br/&gt;(1) describe
spatial variations in the distribution of euphausiids in relation to different
hydrographic conditions, &lt;br/&gt;(2) synthesize spatial variations in their
demographic structure, including age and length frequency, &lt;br/&gt;(3) model
euphausiid population dynamics and secondary production, &lt;br/&gt;(4) examine
how predation may impact vital rates using spatial-structured statistical
models, and &lt;br/&gt;(5) produce a comparison of life history and population
dynamics of two important species: a species with broader distribution,
Thysanoessa raschii, and a species primarily resident over the outer shelf, T.
longipes. &lt;br/&gt;Results will be synthesized in the context of how the
varying hydrographic conditions may impact the demographic structures of
euphausiid populations by changing their growth and vital rates. Understanding
how varying hydrographic conditions influence their growth and vital rates and
demographic structure will lead to better understanding of how large scale
changes in these conditions would influence euphausiid populations and potential
impacts on higher trophic levels.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Bering Sea ecosystem
provides roughly half the commercial seafood landings in the United States, as
well as significant resources for subsistence fishermen. Major fluctuations in
these stocks have occurred in the past and been associated with variations in
the observed hydrographic conditions of the Bering Sea. The results of this
project will indicate mechanisms by which the food web of the Bering Sea may be
modified by such hydrographic variations.