* 1107481
* Collaborative Research: Toward a Circumarctic Lakes Observation Network (CALON): Multiscale Observations of Lacustrine Systems
* GEO,OPP
* 09/15/2011,08/31/2016
* Guido Grosse, University of Alaska Fairbanks Campus
* Standard Grant
* William Ambrose
* 08/31/2016
* USD 491,414.00

The scientific goals and methods that address the intellectual merits of the
research are: (1) Expand on existing lake monitoring sites in northern Alaska by
developing a network of regionally representative lakes along environmental
gradients from which we will collect baseline data to assess current physical,
chemical, and biological lake characteristics. This will allow the project
scientists to make spatial and temporal comparisons to determine the impact of
warmer temperatures, changing cloud cover and precipitation patterns, permafrost
degradation, and direct human impacts on lakes; (2) Implement a multiscale
(hierarchical) lake instrumentation scheme such that basic data is collected
from 51 lakes, while a subset of lakes are more intensively instrumented; (3)
Provide regional scaling and extrapolation of key metrics through calibration
and validation of satellite imagery with ground measurements; and (4) Develop
and implement standardized protocols to enable inter-site comparison and to
prepare for expansion towards a pan-Arctic network. The education/outreach goals
that address the broader impacts of the research outlined above are: (1)
Incorporate indigenous observations of lake physical and biological
characteristics and changes. Innovative interactive methods of sharing
information will be developed and made available through native and local
organizations. Scientific and technical training will be provided to IÃ±upiat
students for monitoring lake and drinking water quality; (2) Develop a
demonstration monitoring network based on the Delay Tolerant Network (DTN)
architecture and link this network to research centers, indigenous communities,
and other power- and connectivity-challenged environments; (3) Develop and
refine data management, visualization, and archiving activities with A-CADIS;
and (4) Provide an introduction to Arctic science for several beginning
investigators.