* 1107339
* Materials World Network:  Quantum Size Effects in Semiconducting V2VI3 and IV-VI- based Thin Film and Bulk Structures and Control of their Thermoelectric Properties
* MPS,DMR
* 07/15/2011,06/30/2014
* Mildred Dresselhaus, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Paul Sokol
* 06/30/2014
* USD 150,000.00

This collaborative research with Karkhov Polytechnic Institute in Ukraine
focuses on an experimental and theoretical investigation of the influence of
size quantization of the energy spectra on the thermoelectric transport in V2VI3
and IV-VI semiconductors which are two categories of prospective materials for
thermoelectric generators and cooling devices. The research includes: 1) a
detailed systematic investigation of the thermoelectric properties of V2VI3
quantum wells (QWs) as a function of the QW width, charge carrier concentration
and temperature; 2) an analogous investigation of the IV-VI QWs grown on
(111)BaF2 substrates; 3) an investigation of the thermoelectric properties of
bulk IV-VI-based composites with nanometer-scale inclusions as a function of the
size of the inclusions and the distance between inclusions; and 4) the
development of new theoretical models for electron and phonon transport in
mesoscopic systems and nanosystems. The experimental and theoretical results
thus obtained are of interest for understanding a wide range of effects where
electron and phonon transfer phenomena play a major role. Effects connected with
size quantization of the electron and phonon spectra will be studied in detail,
the role of surface states and the classical size effect will be established,
and recommendations will be made for applying these effects to control and
optimize the thermoelectric properties of V2VI3- and IV-VI-based bulk and thin
film structures and to create new high-efficiency thermoelectric materials.

In modern power engineering, special attention is given to the development of
methods of direct energy conversion, as they relate to global energy
sustainability. The work emphasizes the constantly increasing role of
nanotechnologies in direct energy conversion, particularly in thermoelectric
materials science. The active participation of students in the project promotes
their learning the many basic experimental and theoretical methods used in
nanomaterials science