* 1107082
* PA STEM University Partnership for the Advancement of Academic Women (PA STEMUP)
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/2011,01/31/2016
* Robin McCann, Shippensburg University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Dana Britton
* 01/31/2016
* USD 749,506.00

Shippensburg University is a teaching institution that will partner with
regional campuses in the central Pennsylvania area to promote the recruitment,
retention and advancement of women in the academic STEM disciplines. The
proposed ADVANCE PAID institutional partners are Elizabethtown College and
Harrisburg University of Science and Technology. The primary goals of this
project are to assess the climate among central Pennsylvania institutions and
develop a web based resource to support gender equity strategies. This project
seeks to link all partner institutions in a professional network through the
statewide Innovation Transfer Network (ITN), a shared entity that creates
opportunities for technology transfer in the central Pennsylvania region.
Additionally, the ITN serves nine other regional institutions, including a
community college. Collectively, the ITN represents over 3,000 faculty, thus,
the Shippensburg University PAID project consists of a broad base for
transformation and relevant outcomes assessment of gender equity activity.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit &lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of
this project lies in the focus on analysis, modification and adoption of proven
ADVANCE best practices for promoting and supporting the advancement of women
faculty at non research intensive institutions. The highly developed and
synergistic partnership is a strong asset to the project and will, ultimately,
impact thousands of faculty across the central Pennsylvania region and serve as
a model for the remainder of the state's higher education
system.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact &lt;br/&gt;Because of the focus of
this project on teaching, non research intensive institutions, the Shippensburg
ADVANCE PAID project will have a dramatic impact on promoting gender equity at
all institutions of similar type in the US. This is particularly significant
given the disproportionately high number of women faculty who are employed at
these institution types.