* 1107155
* Track 1 Proposal to OEDG Program: A Career Path for African-American Students from HBCUs to National Laboratories
* GEO,RISE
* 09/15/2011,08/31/2016
* Robert Liebermann, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Brandon Jones
* 08/31/2016
* USD 198,339.00

This new initiative is developing a pilot program to recruit undergraduate
physical science and engineering students from underrepresented groups into the
graduate program in the Department of Geosciences at Stony Brook University,
educate them via formal courses and research projects to the M. S. degree in
geosciences, and position them for employment as science associates in national
user facilities of the U. S. Department of Energy [DOE], including the National
Synchrotron Light Source [NSLS] at the Brookhaven National Laboratory [BNL].
This new program builds on the evolving relationship between professors from
Historical Black Colleges and Universities [HBCUs] and the NSLS at BNL. An
outcome of this relationship has been the creation of an Interdisciplinary
Consortium for Research and Educational Access in Science and Engineering
[INCREASE], an organization to promote research in HBCUs and other minority-
serving institutions [MSIs], involving utilization of national user facilities
such as the NSLS at BNL. This award, when combined with matching funds from
NSLS, is supporting 3 students per year in this program. This program is
addressing well-recognized low levels of participation by African-American
students in the geosciences and is fostering development and training of the
diverse scientific and technical workshop required for 21st century geoscience
careers. In addition to INCREASE and the NSLS, partners in this new initiative
include: the Center for Inclusive Education at Stony Brook University and the
Office of Educational Programs at the Brookhaven National Laboratory.