* 1107132
* Scaling limits for measure-valued processes with applications to stochastic networks
* MPS,DMS
* 09/15/2011,08/31/2015
* Hans Gromoll, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 08/31/2015
* USD 226,518.00

The project is in probability, and revolves around a primary goal: develop a
single framework for proving scaling limit theorems for certain types of
measure-valued processes. The immediate application is to the theory of queueing
networks, but other applications will be demonstrated. Measure-valued processes
are finding increasing use in the modern study of stochastic systems. In
particular for the study of queueing networks in the last several years, they
are changing the way problems are approached. The project will develop a novel
way to unify the treatment of an important class of scaling limit results that
must currently be proved one at a time using ad hoc arguments. In the process,
interesting connections to functional analysis and differential equations will
be made. Several ancillary problems will be investigated as well; each of these
supports the main focus of the project by providing special cases, possible
avenues for generalization, or alternative areas of application. These
supporting problems are: (a) prove a diffusion limit theorem for bandwidth-
sharing networks; (b) obtain fluid and diffusion limits for Least Attained
Service queues; (c) study a model of social news aggregators.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to improve the theoretical
tools available for analysis of complex random systems, such as computer and
telecommunication networks, social networks, and biological processes. For
example, the project will produce theorems that enable a practitioner to
understand the variability of congestion in a proposed computer network design.
Such work has tangible benefits to society. The designs of many components of
the internet for example -- switches, routing protocols, load balancing systems
-- have been informed by theoretical work of this kind. In our ever more
networked world, we continue to create new structures and interactions, such as
the models under study in this project. There is a clear benefit to deepening
our understanding of these complex systems. The project also integrates research
training activities for both graduate and undergraduate students, enhancing
research infrastructure for the future.