* 1107147
* William &amp; Mary Women In Scientific Education (WISE) Initiative
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2015
* Pamela Hunt, College of William and Mary
* Standard Grant
* Jessie Dearo
* 08/31/2015
* USD 580,274.00

The College of William and Mary is proposing a host of activities to advance
women in academic STEM at their own institution as well as two nearby
institutions, Richard Bland College and Thomas Nelson Community College. The
project has three primary goals and a variety of initiatives to accomplish their
goals. The main goal involves career development and mentoring. Initiatives
surrounding this goal include an ambitious slate of workshops to promote
scholarly writing and professional development. Also a leadership forum and a
visiting female scientist program will be initiated. Organic mentoring will be
encouraged through one-day annual retreats for all STEM female faculty across
the three campuses. The project also includes a variety of research grant
opportunities for the STEM women across the campuses. The second goal of the
proposal combines efforts to evaluate the effectiveness of the programming
described above with research based in the social science literature surrounding
the reduction of implicit gender bias. The third goal of the proposal is to
increase inter-institutional collaborations among the three participating
institutions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;INTELLECTUAL MERIT&lt;br/&gt;This proposal
is well written and developed. The initiatives focused on promoting the research
agendas of the STEM women are particularly strong and well suited to the needs
of less research-intensive institutions. The social science research component
of the proposal is very well grounded in the literature and represents a robust,
real-life test of possible mechanisms to change implicit bias. The PIs have
taken some of the strongest and most successful ADVANCE programming and adapted
it appropriately to their context. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;BROADER
IMPACTS&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The collaborative nature of the programming
presents a nice opportunity for broader impacts by including STEM faculty at two
primarily undergraduate institutions and a community college. The three campuses
have over 100 STEM, women, full-time faculty. The social science research is
positioned to contribute importantly to the scientific literature on the
reduction of implicit bias. The success of these programs, combined with
empirical support for a reduction in implicit bias can lead to a replicable
model among similar institutions.