* 1107010
* Workshop:  Frontiers of Real-World Multi-Robot Systems: Challenges and Opportunities; Duke University, Durham, North Carolina; Spring 2011
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2011,06/30/2012
* Manish Kumar, University of Cincinnati Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* George Chiu
* 06/30/2012
* USD 15,000.00

The purpose of this project is to organize a two-day workshop on multi-robot
systems that addresses the practical aspects and issues involved in real-world
implementation of these systems. The field of multi-robot systems has seen a
tremendous analytical progress that has included development of mathematical and
algorithmic tools to enable information processing, control, and communication.
These systems have tremendous potential for applications in dynamic and
uncertain conditions that characterize a wide range of civilian and military
applications such as disaster management, large-scale monitoring and
surveillance, and space exploration. Before these systems can be operational in
real-world environments, not only a number of research issues have to be
resolved but also the theories generated from research have to be verified,
validated, and tested by extensive experimentation and field implementation. The
workshop focuses on five issues central to the experimental and real-world
implementation aspects of multi-agent robotics that includes: i) multi-robot
hardware; ii) software integration; iii) communication; iv) sensing; and v)
simulation environments. The main objectives of the workshop include determining
strategic research directions, developing action plans, and foment
interdisciplinary collaborations to help overcome the shortcomings prevalent in
the current systems.

The workshop brings together researchers working on the multi-disciplinary
aspects of the swarm robotics such as systems and controls, communication,
sensor data processing and fusion, and development of sensors. In addition to
researchers working in the engineering disciplines, researchers from several
other disciplines such as biology, physics, and mathematics will be invited to
discuss various aspects of this research. Such a forum enables the cross-
fertilization of ideas from multiple scientific domains and promotes
interdisciplinary research. This project enables and supports participation of
students, especially those at undergraduate levels and from underrepresented
groups. Elaborate arrangements are made to widely disseminate the presentations,
discussions, and findings from this workshop to broader research community.