* 1107070
* Statistical Inference for Stochastic Processes, Analysis of MCMC Algorithms and Applications to Climate Science
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2011,06/30/2014
* Natesh Pillai, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 06/30/2014
* USD 145,000.00

This proposal consists of three complementary themes with a particular research
focus on statistical inference for data arising from dynamical systems, partial
differential equations (often representing physical phenomena) and diffusions.
The research questions in the proposal are motivated by the genuine need for
novel statistical inference in these areas where the data is naturally high
dimensional. A highlight of this proposal is the interdisciplinary nature of the
problems which requires the integration of techniques from a wide spectrum of
fields in applied mathematics, probability and statistics. The main themes are
1) stability of Markov Chain Monte Carlo algorithms in high dimensions, 2)
statistical inference for inverse problems from diffusions and dynamical
systems, and 3) applications to climate science and temperature prediction. The
first two themes aim at developing methods and improving the theoretical
understanding of statistical inference procedures whilst the third will directly
implement the insights gained from the first two to answer a few concrete
relevant and open problems in climate science. The main thread connecting the
above three themes of the research is the development and theoretical analysis
of novel and efficient Markov Chain Monte Carlo
techniques.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Advances in technology and computing power have
made many historically intractable problems in statistics amenable to routine
implementation using certain probabilistic algorithms. Despite two decades of
intense research, our theoretical understanding of the behavior of these complex
algorithms in high dimensions is still primitive. The PI proposes to study these
algorithms and quantify their behavior in high dimensions, and apply them to
solve concrete problems in climate science.