* 1107695
* Studies of the Production of Molecular Halogens in Arctic Snowpacks and on Sea Ice Surfaces
* GEO,OPP
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2014
* Paul Shepson, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Henrietta Edmonds
* 08/31/2014
* USD 526,971.00

This project would involve field experiments at Barrow, AK, aimed at improving
understanding of the oxidation of the sea salt halides, chloride and bromide,
into the molecular halogens, Cl2, BrCl, and Br2. In the Arctic at spring time
there is a dramatic phenomenon characterized by the complete loss of ozone from
the lowest layer of the atmosphere, along with near-complete loss of atmospheric
elemental mercury. The elemental mercury is oxidized to short-lived products
that then deposit to the surface, where it can enter and damage sensitive
ecosystems. These ozone depletion episodes (ODEs) and mercury depletion episodes
(MDEs) are known to occur as a result of halogen atom chemistry. However, the
details of the halogen reactions that lead to the ODEs and MDEs are still
unknown, limiting the ability to develop models that describe these processes,
and how they might change in the future. It is thought that the processes that
release molecular halogens are related to the presence of seasonal, or first-
year (relatively thin and relatively saline), sea ice. The Arctic is currently
experiencing a rapid decrease in the extent of multi-year sea ice, with
associated increases in the extent of first-year sea ice. Thus the investigator
hypothesizes that this halogen chemistry, and the associated potential impacts
on atmospheric composition and deposition of mercury, will increase to the
extent that the current trend in sea ice loss continues. To improve
understanding of the fundamental processes associated with the production of
molecular halogens in the Arctic, the investigator proposes an experiment
involving exposures of natural snow samples and excised sea-ice samples in a
snow chamber to potentially important atmospheric oxidants and measurement of
the product molecular halogens. The investigator would also simultaneously
conduct measurements of the concentrations of these compounds within the natural
snowpack. He would then construct a detailed photochemical model of the
chemistry involved with ODEs and MDEs, that could then be incorporated into
larger scale Earth System climate and chemistry models to help enable reliable
simulations of the future state of the Arctic atmosphere. The project would
support a postdoctoral researcher and a graduate student. Numerous outreach
activities would be supported through the Purdue Climate Change Research Center,
interactions with the local community in Barrow, visits to schools, and through
collaboration with adventure and children's book writer Peter Lourie on the web
site arcticstories.net.