* 1107444
* Collaborative Research: RNMS: Kinetic description of emerging challenges in multiscale problems of natural sciences
* MPS,DMS
* 03/01/2012,02/29/2020
* Eitan Tadmor, University of Maryland, College Park
* Continuing Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 02/29/2020
* USD 3,000,001.00

This award supports a Research Network in Mathematical Sciences: ?Kinetic
description of emerging challenges in multiscale problems of natural sciences?
(KI-net). Kinetic descriptions have traditionally played a central role in many
areas of mathematical physics. In the last two decades, however, kinetic
descriptions have emerged as an indispensable tool for a quantitative
description of diverse phenomena, ranging from semi-conductors, polymers and
plasma, to cell migrations, swarming, and neuron networks, as well as traffic,
social and economic networking. It is in this context that the KI-net will
foster cross-fertilization between mathematics and other scientific disciplines,
with particular focus on the following three areas:&lt;br/&gt;* Quantum dynamics
with applications to chemistry;&lt;br/&gt;* Network dynamics with applications
to social sciences; and&lt;br/&gt;* Kinetic models of biological
processes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The principal objectives are to foster new
kinetic-based national and international collaborations; to train a future
generation of researchers to address new challenges, and to sustain the United-
States? leading role on the international stage in this field. The proposed KI-
net will bring the full range of mathematical techniques to bear on important
scientific challenges in kinetic descriptions of new phenomena in physical,
biological and social sciences. The ultimate goal is the development, analysis
and computation of novel kinetic descriptions with various applications in these
disciplines. KI-net will offer a unique platform to carry out these objectives.
It will be centered around three hubs: the Center for Scientific Computation
&amp; Math Modeling (CSCAMM) in the University of Maryland, the Institute for
Computational and Engineering Science (ICES) at UT Austin, and the Department of
Mathematics at the University of Wisconsin-Madison. At the initial stage, they
will inter-connect 12 nodes through a series of edges, involving 25 core
participants. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;KI-net Research Network home page:
http://www2.cscamm.umd.edu/ki-net/.