* 1107748
* Cyberconnectivity: Enhancing North Dakota Tribal College Research and Education
* O/D,EPS
* 08/15/2011,12/31/2014
* Philip Boudjouk, North Dakota State University Fargo
* Standard Grant
* Timothy VanReken
* 12/31/2014
* USD 1,000,000.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number:
EPS-1107748&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Title: Cyberconnectivity: Enhancing
North Dakota Tribal College Research and
Education&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Institution: North Dakota State University
Fargo&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Project Director: Philip
Boudjouk&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Project
Description&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This RII C2 proposal from North Dakota (ND)
EPSCoR is focused on updating the network backbone links to four Tribal Colleges
(TCs) in rural ND. The proposed upgrades will support over 2,000 students with
an emphasis on video conferencing and extended workforce development
opportunities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed CI improvements
include:&lt;br/&gt;- Upgrades from 10 or 50 Mbps to 100 Mpbs for Cankdeska
Cikana Community College (CCCC), Fort Berthold Community College (FBCC), Turtle
Mountain Community College (TMCC), and the United Tribes Technical College
(UTTC).&lt;br/&gt;- Deployment of video conferencing systems at the 4 tribal
colleges.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit &lt;br/&gt;The proposed
upgrades in network connections will greatly improve the networking capacity
available to the TCs. This enhanced access has the strong potential to enable
additional research collaborations and teaching opportunities at the TCs.
Research programs across the state will benefit from greater connectivity and
opportunity to access and contribute to geophysical, environmental, and
biodiversity databases. Links to the National Ecological Observatory Network
(NEON) project will be pursued, as will Geographic Information System (GIS)
mapping work in the region. Studying the regional environment will lead to new
insights into the current biodistribution of different species of plans and
animals, and how the environment is being affected by anthropogenic activities.
Another research project will investigate digitally archiving Native American
cultural artifacts and language preservation approaches. Distance learning
methods will be studied to understand and share best practices in this context
so other schools can leverage limited resources in a similar
fashion.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts &lt;br/&gt;The proposed activity
will promote teaching, training, and workforce development through investments
in upgraded networking to rural regions and TCs. The improvements will have a
significant impact on the Native American populations, and is envisioned to
strongly encourage students to pursue careers in STEM as well as
cyberinfrastructure (CI) related workforce training. The cultural aspects of the
work are significant and far-reaching.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The TCs are the hubs
for technology on the reservations, and as such, this investment will
significantly affect a large community well beyond the researchers and educators
involved in the project. Enabling tribal CI will help contribute to workforce
development by preparing students and other members of the community to advance
their job skills.