* 1107897
* Increasing Diversity and Enhancing Academia (IDEA):  Leveraging Resources to Increase Participation of Underrepresented Minority Students in Geosciences
* GEO,RISE
* 09/15/2011,05/31/2017
* Kathleen Gray, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Continuing Grant
* Brandon Jones
* 05/31/2017
* USD 926,999.00

The UNC Institute for the Environment (IE), in partnership with the North
Carolina Alliance to Create Opportunity Through Education (OPT-ED), is engaged
in a multi-pronged, five-year effort to increase substantially the participation
of underrepresented minority (URM) students in geoscience research and education
in North Carolina. The Increasing Diversity and Enhancing Academia (IDEA)
partnership is expanding the existing NC OPT-ED network by adding a geoscience
research focus and extending the program to Elizabeth City State University
(ECSU), an Historically Black College and University (HBCU) in eastern North
Carolina. The NSF-funded OPT-ED program is a formal alliance of the University
of North Carolina at Chapel Hill (UNC-CH), North Carolina State University
(NCSU), and North Carolina Agricultural &amp; Technical University (NC A&amp;T)
that encourages URM students to pursue doctorates and supports other education
programming for URM students. The proposed project is using place-based
approaches to engage minority students from eastern North Carolina in
understanding and solving geoscience problems facing their region, with an
emphasis on the linkages between watershed hydrology, coastal marine processes,
land use change and developing climate change. The IDEA project objectives are
to: implement hands-on and minds-on geosciences activities for URM high school
students to encourage their education to the next level; recruit and prepare
undergraduates to pursue MS and PhD degrees in the geosciences; and, provide
high quality geosciences research experiences for undergraduate students in the
summer and academic year. These goals are being achieved through a combination
of project activities that include summer science enrichment programs for high
school students; a Saturday pre-college academy for secondary school students;
an alliance day for secondary and post-secondary students that provides
professional development workshops; academic year and summer research
experiences for undergraduates; and other professional development and
networking events for undergraduate students. The project includes resources to
support students financially, develops critical skills that help students be
better prepared for pursuing advanced degrees, and provides significant
mentoring by university faculty and administrators at the partner institutions.