* 1107645
* Collaborative Research:  Pacific-Arctic Carbon Synthesis - Transformations, Fluxes, and Budgets
* GEO,OPP
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2015
* Karen Frey, Clark University
* Standard Grant
* Henrietta Edmonds
* 08/31/2015
* USD 102,573.00

Predicting future conditions of the Arctic Ocean system requires scientific
knowledge of its present status as well as a process-based understanding of the
mechanisms of change. This research effort will synthesize a number of recent,
upcoming, and historical datasets to create three regional carbon budgets for
the Chukchi/western Beaufort Sea, the Bering Sea, and the northern Gulf of
Alaska. As waters from the North Pacific make their way through these regions a
number of transformations occur that modify them before they enter the central
Arctic Ocean. In general, the waters exiting these shelf seas are fresher,
colder, and have lower pH due to the uptake of CO2 and the remineralization of
organic matter. Because of the importance that biogeochemical transformations
have in preconditioning the waters of the central Arctic and ultimately parts of
the North Atlantic it is important to gain a better understanding of how these
processes impact the carbon biogeochemistry of the region. The investigators
propose to address this issue by better constraining the carbon budgets for
three zones in the Pacific sector of the Arctic Ocean including coastal fluxes,
rates of primary production and air-sea exchange of CO2 as well as developing
algorithms with predictive capabilities for carbonate mineral saturation states.
The aim of this effort is to determine how physical forcing and biological
responses control the marine carbon cycle including the rates of air-sea CO2
exchange and net community production as well as ocean acidification effects in
the contrasting shelf environments, and to better constrain the present stocks
and fluxes of carbon and determine how climate change will affect the regional
carbon cycle. The project will support four early career investigators, a
postdoctoral scientist, and a Ph.D. student.