* 1107945
* Improving Connectivity  between the University of Vermont and the Vermont State Colleges for STEM Research and Education
* O/D,EPS
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2014
* Judith Van Houten, University of Vermont & State Agricultural College
* Standard Grant
* Sean Kennan
* 08/31/2014
* USD 1,000,000.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number:
EPS-1107945&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Title: Improving Connectivity between
the University of Vermont and the Vermont State Colleges for STEM Research and
Education&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Institution: University of Vermont &amp; State
Agricultural College&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Project Director: Judith Van
Houten&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Project
Description&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This RII Inter-Campus and Intra-Campus Cyber
Connectivity (RII C2) proposal from Vermont (VT) EPSCoR is focused on improving
the inter-campus connections from the University of Vermont (UVM) to the Vermont
State College (VSC) network at their Waterbury headquarters in order to support
research and cyber-enabled science education and collaboration. This work
strongly complements the previously funded RII Track-2 networking support, which
has enabled a 6x10 Gbps connection between UVM and Internet2?s network
backbone.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed improvements include:&lt;br/&gt;- A
10-year Indefeasible Right of Use (IRU) for 10Gbps service between UVM and the
VSC Waterbury hub, through which the schools that are connected include 12
campuses of the Community College of Vermont (CCV), 4 campuses of the Vermont
Technical College, and 3 colleges that are part of the State College system,
collectively referred to as the VSC. This upgrade will enable VSC students and
faculty to more fully participate in collaborative research with UVM scientists
and educators.&lt;br/&gt;- An upgrade for the VT EPSCoR Research Center adjacent
to the campus from a 2 Mbps connection to Internet2 to a direct 1Gbps to the UVM
main campus. This will support the RII Track-1 and Track-2 researchers and the
Center for Workforce Development and Diversity
(CWDD).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit &lt;br/&gt;The proposed upgrades
in network connections will greatly improve the capacity of VSC faculty to carry
out research. At Lyndon State College (LSC), the meteorologists will be able to
reach research sites in real time, which currently is not possible. At Johnson
State College (JSC), researchers carrying out a funded metagenomic project of
microorganisms at an asbestos superfund site will be able to transfer data by
the Internet instead of mailing hard drives to UVM. Metagenomics researchers at
JSC and bioinformaticians and water specialists at UVM will be able to more
successfully collaborate through better video conferencing. Video conferencing
will also be used by other VT EPSCoR researchers working with JSC faculty
members who provide RII Track-1 watershed research data on bacterial ribotypes
and water analyses. The proposed connection will also allow the EPSCoR Research
Center RII Track-1 and Track-2 personnel to use UVM?s compute services and
better access networked data resources throughout the country. The described
approach is strongly complementary to the State Science and Technology (S&amp;T)
plan and leverages other funded networking projects, including those from NSF,
the Rural Utilities Service (RUS), USDA, and the Gates
Foundation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact &lt;br/&gt;The proposed activity
will promote teaching, training, and learning through investments in
cyberinfrastructure and staff to assist in the use of the upgraded
infrastructure. The proposed project will support a cyber-knowledgeable Campus
Champion, similar to those funded through the NSF TeraGrid project, who will
assist in the data-intensive applied bioinformatics course to be organized at
JSC and offered VSC-wide. The networking is also being upgraded to the EPSCoR
Research Center, which houses RII Track-1 and Track-2 researchers as well as the
CWDD. The CWDD is a new VT EPSCoR entity that oversees the Streams Project and
coordinates overall integration of research with workforce development and
diversity efforts as part of the RII Track-1 project, which focuses on the Lake
Champlain basin. The project proposal includes a plan to use kiosks for external
outreach to schools and museums. The diversity plan focuses on attracting
underrepresented minorities to STEM through the VSC schools as well as work with
the Abenaki Indian Nation.