* 1107623
* COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH: Observing and characterizing submesoscale dynamics in the Arctic Ocean
* GEO,OPP
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2015
* Mary-Louise Timmermans, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* William J. Wiseman, Jr.
* 08/31/2015
* USD 244,209.00

Preliminary analysis reveals that the Arctic Ocean mixed layer displays a
complicated submesoscale structure with significant horizontal density gradients
(fronts) and small eddies a few kilometers, or less, in diameter - features that
are not resolved&lt;br/&gt;by large-scale numerical models of the Arctic Ocean.
Funds are provided to explore the role of submesoscale processes in regulating
the climatically-important interactions among the Arctic atmosphere, sea-ice,
ocean surface mixed layer and the underlying deeper ocean; a set of essential
scientific questions will be addressed: What are the dominant characteristics of
submesoscale horizontal density variability in the Arctic Ocean mixed layer? How
do submesoscale dynamics in the mixed layer relate to mixed-layer depth and
stratification? What mechanisms are responsible for the horizontal density
variability in the mixed layer? What vertical motions are associated with
submesoscale processes and how do they impact exchanges across the mixed layer?
The PIs intend to investigate these aspects of the surface ocean dynamics and
thermodynamics by a targeted field experiment accompanied by analysis of recent
ocean (temperature, salinity and velocity) and sea-ice measurements, and
directed dynamic process studies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Because submesoscale
processes occur on spatial scales that are not explicitly resolved by existing
models of the Arctic Ocean, their effects must be parameterized in order to
accurately predict the dynamics and mixing environment of the ocean. In order to
appropriately parameterize these processes, it is first necessary to understand
how they are related to the large scale structure and dynamics of the ocean.
This work will provide that basic knowledge, thus allowing future improvements
to the models.