* 1107934
* Track 1: Increasing Diversity In Geosciences: The Urban Community College/Research University Partnership
* GEO,RISE
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2016
* John Wickham, University of Texas at Arlington
* Standard Grant
* Brandon Jones
* 08/31/2016
* USD 248,754.00

This program is addressing the necessity of attracting under-represented
students to the geosciences in order to maintain a robust national workforce for
the future. Through collaboration between Tarrant County College District
(TCCD), a community college, and the University of Texas at Arlington (UTA), a
research university, 20 under-represented students are being recruited and
prepared for successful transition from a community college to a research
university in order to complete a B.S. degree in the Geosciences. The students
are being placed in a mentoring program with faculty and peer mentors who meet
with the students regularly to review progress. Students are expected to
successfully take introductory courses in geology, chemistry, biology, math and
physics during their first two years, and take part in a summer program that
consists of a field trip experience at the end of their first year and research
experience with UTA faculty at the end of their second year. A course in
Professional Development and Critical Thinking is included as part of the
research experience. The project is being overseen by a PI-chaired Executive
Committee that consists of faculty mentors, the Co-PI's, and representatives
from the professional geoscience community in the Dallas-Fort Worth area.
Project evaluation is based on: 1) the ability to recruit at least 20 under-
represented students, 2) the percentage retained while taking demanding courses,
3) the percentage at TCCD receiving an Associates of Science Degree, and 4) the
percentage of students transferring to a research university in a geoscience
B.S. program. If shown to be successful, this partnership can serve as a model
for collaborating community colleges and research universities in other urban
areas.