* 1107642
* Materials World Network: Mechanics and Durability of Diamond-Like Nanocomposites (MADDiLiN): An International Collaboration to Understand Tribo-Mechanical Multiphysical Phenomena
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2018
* Robert Carpick, University of Pennsylvania
* Continuing Grant
* Robert Opila
* 08/31/2018
* USD 659,575.00

The goal of this effort, a collaboration between researchers the University of
Pennsylvania and the Laboratory of Tribology and Dynamics of Systems (LTDS;
Lyon, France), is to develop a physically-based understanding of the
tribomechanical functional behavior of an important class of thin film materials
known as diamond-like nanocomposites (DLNs). DLNs are fully amorphous films
consisting of an interpenetrating, interbonded network of silica glass and
hydrogenated amorphous carbon. They exhibit impressive durability, meaning
mechanical (stability, strength) and tribological (low friction and low wear)
performance, even under harsh conditions (elevated temperatures, high contact
stresses, and ultrahigh vacuum, humid, and oxidizing environments). The team
pursues a closely integrated, interdisciplinary, multi-scale, multi-technique
program to determine how the tribo-mechanical functionality of DLNs depends on
the bulk and surface material properties, and how these properties are
determined by the structure and composition. The collaboration brings together
complementary expertise needed because of the interdependency of the material
properties, and because of the multiple techniques required to execute the work.
The integrated research approach is applied to DLN films with systematically
varied compositions to explore the structure-property-functional behavior
relationships directly. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The outcome of the research can
aid in the design of new and further improved classes of DLNs specifically, and
amorphous materials more generally. This is important since diamond-like
materials are currently in demand for use as coatings in the harsh operating
conditions found in applications ranging from advanced energy systems to the
manufacturing, aerospace, automotive, and information storage sectors, and also
in nanomanufacturing and nanomechanical device applications. Amorphous materials
in general are ubiquitous and have broad applications, and so new scientific
insights into how their functional behavior is determined by their composition,
structure, and material properties is desirable. From an education perspective,
this research provides international exchange experiences for Ph.D. as well as
for undergraduate students, exposing them to unique and complementary
capabilities at each location. The project will also bring LTDS into ongoing
collaborations between the University of Pennsylvania and Sandia National
Laboratories, the U.S. Naval Academy, and Hunter College-City University of New
York.