* 1107428
* Surface Energy Budgets at Arctic Terrestrial Sites: Quantifying Energy and Momentum Fluxes and their Associated Physical Processes
* GEO,OPP
* 09/15/2011,08/31/2015
* Jeffrey Hare, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Neil R. Swanberg
* 08/31/2015
* USD 436,800.00

This project will perform diagnostic analyses of the processes modulating the
surface radiative, turbulent, and conductive fluxes at several Study of
Environmental Arctic Change (SEARCH) climate observatories located around the
Arctic Ocean in Canada, Alaska, and Siberia to investigate the annual cycle of
the surface energy budget (SEB) and its coupling to atmospheric and surface
processes. Where necessary, existing observations will be augmented to complete
the suite of SEB measurements. Data exist or will be obtained to focus on the
following scientific questions: &lt;br/&gt;(i) What processes govern the SEB at
Arctic terrestrial sites? What role do local effects such as terrain or
coastlines play? How large is the local spatial SEB heterogeneity? How do the
physical processes affecting the SEB differ among the various sites? How do
these SEB climatologies compare with a sea-ice regime as represented by the
SHEBA site, or with that of Greenland? Which SEB terms might be impacted by
climate change and how? &lt;br/&gt;(ii) What is the relative contribution from
classical Monin-Obukhov similarity (MOS) and non-MOS processes to heat and
momentum fluxes at Arctic terrestrial sites? Are existing bulk algorithms for
surface turbulent fluxes in models applicable at Arctic sites or is the
development of new ones necessary? &lt;br/&gt;(iii) Which SEB terms determine
the soil temperatures and the active layer depth? What mechanisms force
variability in those terms? How does the annual cycle of snow cover at each site
influence the SEB and thus temperature regimes?&lt;br/&gt;Comparisons of key
processes at these terrestrial sites will be made to those done by other
researchers over Arctic sea ice and on Greenland. &lt;br/&gt;These coordinated
observations and analyses, which provide process understanding of atmospheric-
soil interactions in the Arctic, are rare and will be of interest to a broad
spectrum of the scientific community, including the remote sensing and modeling
communities. The resulting data and analyses will likely be key data sources for
future model studies in a variety of disciplines. Physical understanding of the
modulation of energy fluxes to permafrost should provide enhanced understanding
of the potential for the greenhouse gas release process in climate-change
scenarios. The project takes advantage of interagency and international
collaborations with investigators located around the Arctic (USA, Canada, and
Russia) and will contribute to education on Arctic climate systems through
partnership with the CIRES Education and Outreach group, leading to teacher
development and classroom implementation of new climate topics.