* 1107842
* Collaborative Research: Linking sea-ice retreat to plankton community structure and function in the Bering Sea: Data synthesis, biophysical modeling, and multi-decadal projection
* GEO,OPP
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2014
* Robert Campbell, University of Rhode Island
* Standard Grant
* William J. Wiseman, Jr.
* 08/31/2014
* USD 69,998.00

Funds are provided to use the diverse and comprehensive dataset collected during
the BEST/BSIERP field program of 2007-2010 to carefully structure and
parameterize a new, system- and life-stage specific biophysical model. The PIs?
approach differs from traditional NPZ type ecosystem modeling because of the
inclusion of life-stage specific zooplankton components and will permit them to
better understand the impact of the changing environment on plankton phenologies
and on carbon cycling. They will focus on spring conditions, when sea ice is
present or retreating, to understand the linkages and functional relationships
between different components of the plankton ecosystem and to understand the
interaction of zooplankton life histories with the timing and extent of sea ice
and stratification of the water column. Syntheses of biological rate processes
measured at sparsely distributed process stations with standing stocks and
physical and chemical data from the broadly distributed survey stations will
identify which components and processes are most important in controlling the
structure and function of the system and will independently derive a data-based
mechanistic synthesis against which the model's internal pathways can be tested.
They will use model-based scenario testing to examine how projected future
change in environmental conditions, especially sea ice, may impact planktonic
ecosystem structure and function, and to identify the key trophic and
physiological mechanisms to which this ecosystem response is most
sensitive.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The timing and extent of sea ice cover in the
eastern Bering Sea influence the timing of plankton production, the composition
and abundance of the zooplankton, and ultimately the availability of food for
upper trophic levels including commercially important fish species such as
pollock. The PIs propose to gain a greater understanding of the potential impact
of ongoing climate change on this planktonic ecosystem. Specifically, they ask:
How will climate change, and the anticipated earlier retreat in seasonal sea
ice, warmer water temperatures, and reduced sea ice extent alter the structure
and function of the planktonic food web during spring, and thus the ultimate
fate of algal production in the Bering Sea, the utilization and cycling of
carbon, and the production and availability of zooplankton as prey for upper
trophic levels, including commercially important fish species?