* 1107786
* Materials World Network:  Switchable Polymer Interfaces for Bottom-up Stimulation of Mammalian Cells
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2011,07/31/2015
* Yohei Yokobayashi, Clemson University
* Continuing Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 07/31/2015
* USD 510,000.00

TECHNICAL ABSTRACT:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project focuses on design and
characterization of a responsive thin polymer film platform comprised of
functionalized mixed polymer brushes for the stimuli-triggered exposure of
functional molecules to interfaces. The project supports an international US-
German research team from Clemson University, Clarkson University, University of
California in Davis, Dresden Technical University, Leibniz-Institute for Polymer
Research Dresden, University of Göttingen, and Leibniz-Institute for Analytical
Sciences (in Berlin) consisting of experts in polymer/surface/materials science
and bioengineering. Financial support for the German participants is provided by
the German Science Foundation (DFG). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Responsive polymer
materials with dynamically changing interfacial properties are receiving
increased interest, thanks to their great potential for biomedical applications.
One of the important properties of such materials is the capability to present,
to release, to hide, or to capture different functional groups upon receiving
external signals. Therefore, it is proposed to develop and study the responsive
mixed brush platform for stimuli-triggered, programmable interfacial exposure of
functional molecules (e.g., growth factors) that are important for the survival
and differentiation of stem cells. Specifically, the focus of the experimental
work is on: (a) precise design and synthesis of functional mixed polymer
brushes; (b) comprehensive study of the microstructure and stimuli-triggered
dynamical changes in the functionalized mixed brushes; (c) study of the dynamic
interactions of the functionalized mixed brush system with functionalized
probes; and (e) development of multifunctional dynamic biointerfaces. It is also
expected to determine how different stimuli such as temperature, magnetic field,
and electrical signals can be used to introduce local changes in the mixed brush
biointerface and result in exposure of the functional molecules. The
experimental studies will be paralleled by a coarse-grained theoretical modeling
using three complementary techniques: (a) self-consistent field (SCF)
calculations, (b) single-chain-in-mean-field simulations and molecular dynamics,
and (c) phenomenological scaling considerations. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;NON-
TECHNICAL ABSTRACT:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This interdisciplinary project is aimed
to impact the field of polymeric materials for cell biology and biotechnology
through the use of novel stimuli-responsive polymeric substrates. The project
provides extensive opportunities to integrate research and education through
cross-disciplinary student training and introduction of new educational modules
in the curriculum. The investigators plan to involve both undergraduate and
graduate students in the proposed research and to train them to gain (i)
expertise in nanofabrication techniques, (ii) familiarity with modern concepts
in materials chemistry, (iii) the ability to synthesize and characterize
nanostructured polymeric materials and biointerfaces, (iv) the ability to run
experiments, gather data, and make discoveries, and (v) the ability to write
scientific papers and make effective technical presentations. Students also will
greatly benefit from their extensive collaborations among the participating US
and German research institutions.