* 1107036
* Improving Models of Molecular Clouds and Planetary Atmospheres: Dissociative Recombination Measurements for Molecular Ions of Astronomical Interest
* MPS,AST
* 07/01/2011,06/30/2015
* Daniel Wolf Savin, Columbia University
* Continuing Grant
* Glen Langston
* 06/30/2015
* USD 557,361.00

The PI and his team will measure dissociative recombination branching ratios and
rate coefficients for important chemical molecular ion reactions in cold
interstellar clouds. This work on dissociated recombination reaction rates and
cross-sections is needed to understand the molecular inventory and cooling of
the interstellar medium, and to put astrochemical models onto a firm base.
Molecules are key components of diffuse, translucent and dense molecular clouds,
hot cores, photon dominated regions, protostellar disks, protoplanetary disks,
planetary and satellite ionospheres, cometary comae, and circumstellar envelopes
around dying stars Models and interpretations of the chemical composition,
charge balance, emission and/or absorption spectra, and thermal structure in the
various astronomical environments depend on reliable knowledge of the underlying
molecular collisions which control these properties. Among the dissociative
recombination reactions the primary neutralizing reactions for molecules in
cosmic plasmas are particularly important. Dissociative recombination involving
ion-molecule reactions is often the terminating step for particular synthesis
pathways in chemical networks. One needs to know rates and branching ratios for
final products in order to understand reaction pathways, and to understand
whether a compound can be produced in the gas phase or if grain surface
chemistry must be invoked. If the end products of dissociative recombination are
energetic, they can collisionally heat the plasma; if they are in excited
states, they can cool the gas through radiative relaxation. The experiments are
done at the unique heavy-ion Test Storage Ring (TSR) facility at the Max-Planck
Institute in Heidelberg, Germany. The ions to be studied are HF+, H2F+, CF+,
16O16O+, 18O16O+, HSiO+, CH2O+, and CH3O+. They are selected based on their
importance for ground-based spectroscopic observations combined with
astrochemical modeling studies. The selected molecules can be stored long enough
in TSR to cool to their lowest electronic and vibrational levels, except for
16O16O+ which will electronically relax but lacks a dipole moment and will not
vibrationally radiatively relax. The PI and his team will generate total
dissociative recombination rate coefficients versus temperature for the lowest
vibrational level of each molecule as well as branching ratios for the various
possible outgoing final channels. Such and related data will also find
applications in other areas of astronomy such as planetary sciences, e.g., for
16O16O+, they may be able to generate these data as a function of vibrational
level, which is needed for martian atmosphere studies. This project has an
ongoing international collaboration and strong commitment to education and
involves offers a research experience to high school teachers in Staten Island
in collaboration with the Columbia Summer Research Program for Science Teachers.