* 1107869
* A Postdoctoral Scientist to Synthesize Proxy Records of Arctic Holocene Climate
* GEO,OPP
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2014
* Darrell Kaufman, Northern Arizona University
* Standard Grant
* Neil R. Swanberg
* 08/31/2014
* USD 201,002.00

This grant will support a post-doctoral investigator to develop a major new
synthesis of proxy climate records of Holocene climate variability from across
the Arctic, and compare the climate reconstruction with climate model
simulations. The synthesis will build on proxy climate records currently being
developed by teams of researchers looking at the past 8000 years of records. The
data-model comparison will draw from newly available transient climate
simulations by NCAR?s Community Climate System Model (CCSM3), and from the
output of new model experiments planned for 2012. The Arctic climate
reconstructions generated by this project will be integrated into similar
syntheses from across the globe, as envisioned by two on-going international
efforts led by the IGBP-Past Global Changes (PAGES) program ? the ?Two
Millennia? and the ?SynTraCE? projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit.
Depending on her/his background and career goals, the postdoctoral scientist
will choose among the following research questions: (1) Was the climate
transition from the Holocene thermal maximum (HTM) to the Neoglacial (5000 to
3000 years ago) uniform across the Arctic? Describing the spatial-temporal
pattern of this major climate transition is necessary to assess the extent to
which the climatic shift was the result of a dynamical redistribution of
temperature by ocean-atmosphere circulation versus a shift in the mean state of
climate across the Arctic. (2) Was Neoglacial cooling amplified in the Arctic
compared with elsewhere around the world? Assessing the magnitude of cooling in
the Arctic is necessary to understand the feedbacks associated with arctic
amplification. (3) How does the latitudinal gradient of cooling from the HTM to
the Neoglacial compare with the gradient of cooling driven by precessional
forcing as simulated by CCSM3 in the SynTraCE experiment? Quantifying this
gradient provides a straightforward target for a data-model comparison. (4) Are
the magnitude and pattern of climate variability that are reconstructed from
proxy records on timescales of decades to centuries from across the Arctic
consistent with the variability simulated in CCSM3 SynTraCE experiment?
Analyzing the principal modes of variability in both the proxy data and the
model simulation is necessary to determine the extent to which climatic changes
can reasonably be attributed to natural variability of known modes of
atmospheric-ocean circulation. (5) In what ways can the output of available
climate system simulations be used as boundary conditions in mechanistic models
of environmental change that approximate the processes that drive the proxy
indictors? Developing new ?inverse-proxy models? to predict how climate change
drives proxy indicators such as glacier extent, oxygen-isotope values of
precipitation, and primary productivity of Arctic lakes is necessary to avoid
major assumptions that underlie classical regression-based approaches to climate
reconstructions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact. This project will
contribute to understanding climatic variability, a key challenge facing
society. The results will provide benchmarks for validating climate models and
for improving their ability to accurately simulate nonlinear change. Improving
models for future climate projections will contribute to the ?Climate
Variability and Change? major program element of the US Climate Change Science
Program. The entire funding request for this proposal is to support a
postdoctoral scientist (PS). This early-career scientist will receive first-
hand training as part of an international, interdisciplinary team of climate
scientists. S/he will learn about a broad range of both data and model-based
approaches to studying Arctic and global climate change. During the fall/winter
of 2011, the PS will work at the PAGES International Project Office in Bern
Switzerland, where the PI is scheduled as a Guest Scientist and where they will
be well situated to engage an international group in a synthesis of proxy
records. The PS will also work with climate modelers at NCAR in Boulder,
Colorado where s/he will learn to analyze the output of climate model
simulations. At NAU, the PS will be integrated into the full breadth of the PI?s
research program, which includes an active analytical laboratory and field
research program. The PS also will be encouraged to help regularly teach
undergraduate and graduate courses to improve his/her teaching skills.