* 1107894
* Materials World Network: Semiconductor Photonic Materials Inside Microstructured Optical Fibers
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2011,07/31/2015
* John Badding, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Z.  Ying
* 07/31/2015
* USD 540,000.00

This project, based on collaboration with the University of Southampton in the
United Kingdom, seeks to improve the materials quality of compound semiconductor
and amorphous hydrogenated group IV semiconductor optical fibers such that they
become useful for a wide range of applications, including non-linear optical
processing, subwavelength imaging, and fiber lasers. Current semiconductor
optical fibers have losses in excess of 1 dB/cm, which is often considered to be
the threshold loss for practical application in many semiconductor photonic
devices. The grain boundary scattering that is the primary loss mechanism in
compound semiconductor fibers will be reduced by improving in-fiber materials
deposition techniques that the US/UK groups have pioneered. The loss in
hydrogenated silicon and germanium fibers will also be reduced by eliminating
voids that lead to light scattering in fiber cores and improving materials
deposition techniques to allow for better passivation of defects that give rise
to loss. The second and third order non-linear optical properties of these
improved low loss compound semiconductor and amorphous hydrogenated group IV
semiconductor fibers will be characterized with a view toward non-linear optical
devices. Core cladding fiber structures composed of these materials will also be
fabricated for sub-wavelength, high resolution infrared imaging. New compound
semiconductor fibers with different compositions will also be deposited to
extend the range of materials properties that can be exploited in the fiber
geometry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project brings together the complementary
expertise in materials synthesis and structural and optical characterization of
the Penn State team and with the expertise in guided wave devices of the
Southampton team. Students will travel in both directions across the Atlantic
for visits of a few weeks to a month to maintain the strong collaborative ties
between the two groups. These visits will supplement ongoing collaborative
interactions via web-based discussions and presentations as well as computer-
based video conferencing. US students will be exposed to the world class fiber
fabrication and characterization facilities at the Southampton Optoelectronics
Research Centre. UK students will learn about materials synthesis and
characterization at Penn State. This natural partnership is anticipated to move
the field of crystalline semiconductor and amorphous hydrogenated semiconductor
fibers towards practical application through the proposed materials research.
Outreach efforts include visits to local schools, hosting undergraduate students
in the Penn State Laboratories, and participation by the PI's and students in
hands-on science camps hosted at Penn State for students from grades 2-12. These
camps have substantial participation by underrepresented groups and provide high
quality, highly engaging science instruction for all attendees.