* 1107440
* Collaborative Research: Climate-mediated coupling of hydrology and biogeochemistry in arctic hillslopes
* GEO,OPP
* 08/15/2011,10/31/2012
* Michael Gooseff, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* William J. Wiseman, Jr.
* 10/31/2012
* USD 246,088.00

This research will evaluate how climate-induced changes in water and nutrient
cycles on land are propagated to stream networks. Increased export of water and
the nutrients nitrogen and phosphorus from river networks to the Arctic Ocean
reflects shifts in patterns of water and nutrient movement in the arctic.
Changing climate may contribute to such shifts by causing release of nutrients
from thawing permafrost, altering precipitation patterns, increasing rates of
biogeochemical reactions, or expanding storage capacity in thawed soils. These
changes may have far-reaching effects because flowing water connects land to
downstream aquatic ecosystems, but the flowpaths connecting terrestrial
ecosystems to stream networks remain poorly understood. This research will focus
on transport and reaction of water and solutes within water tracks, which are
linear regions of surface and subsurface flow that connect hillslopes to streams
and account for up to 35% of watershed area in arctic tundra. Specific
objectives are to: 1) quantify sources of water and dissolved nutrients to water
tracks, 2) identify effects of snow accumulation, thaw depth, and storm
characteristics on storage and transport of water and solutes, and 3) estimate
the effects of hydrology on rates of nutrient cycling in water tracks.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research will have significance for predicting
responses of the arctic to continued climate change through links between
hydrologic and nutrient cycles. Further, research will increase understanding of
the role of hillslopes in connecting terrestrial ecosystems to stream networks,
contributing to filling a research gap in hydrology and biogeochemistry. In
addition, this project will train young scientists (grade school through post-
graduate) in the skills and methods used to study responses of water and
nutrient cycles to climate change. Arctic tundra is inaccessible to most
students, yet one of the environments most susceptible to climate-induced
changes. This project will include opportunities for undergraduate and graduate
students to conduct research in the arctic, development of online instructional
materials that bring cutting-edge topics and research methods to undergraduate
courses in hydrology, and science lessons for K-6 students that incorporate
real-time field data.