* 1108830
* COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH: Spectral Diagnostics of Heavy Elements At High Redshift
* MPS,AST
* 09/15/2011,08/31/2016
* Varsha Kulkarni, University South Carolina Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Nigel Sharp
* 08/31/2016
* USD 258,697.00

AST-1109061/1108830&lt;br/&gt;Ferland/Kulkarni&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Heavy
elements are produced by stellar evolution and then distributed into
interstellar space. Understanding the enrichment history of galaxies is
therefore crucial to understanding the star formation and feedback processes
that are central to galaxy evolution. Absorption lines of damped Lyman-alpha
(DLA) and sub-DLA absorbers in the spectra of background quasars or gamma-ray
burst afterglows provide the most sensitive tools to measure the heavy element
content of distant galaxies. High-resolution spectroscopy has revealed some
interesting puzzles, especially relating to variations in metallicities and
enrichment. Current and proposed large telescopes will greatly expand the
observational database, especially at high redshift, but unfortunately essential
atomic data - both oscillator strengths and recombination coefficients - are
highly uncertain or unknown for most elements beyond Magnesium in the periodic
table. These gaps in the existing atomic database are the greatest weakness in
deriving abundances from spectra and realizing the scientific potential of the
observations. This project will improve that situation by carrying out the
following steps: 1) calculate more accurate oscillator strengths for transitions
of all relevant ions from Aluminum to Zinc using state-of-the-art quantal codes;
2) calculate dielectronic recombination coefficients for all relevant ions of
key elements; 3) incorporate these data into the widely used photoionization
code 'Cloudy'; 4) apply the new 'Cloudy' models to existing and new spectral
data; and 5) provide feedback to the atomic theory from the observational and
modeling results (the last and most crucial step).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
study will help to determine whether the current picture of chemical evolution
of galaxies is accurate, while providing a much-needed improvement in atomic
data and photoionization modeling. Because the team combines expertise in atomic
physics, plasma simulations, and observational spectroscopy, they are uniquely
qualified to carry out this work.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The improvements to the
widely available modeling tool 'Cloudy' will be of immediate benefit to other
areas of astrophysics ranging from star-forming clouds to active galactic
nuclei, because that utility is used extensively and cited in over 200
publications each year. The work includes significant educational benefits at
both institutions and a strong outreach involvement, and continues a strong
international collaboration, to which the junior researchers will be extensively
exposed. Due to the make-up of the team, it also enhances the quality and
diversity of the scientific workforce in a geographical region with few
astronomers, and especially very few minority or women astronomers.