* 1108494
* Dual-Credit Physical Geology Classes: A Strategy for Improving the "Pipeline" from High Schools into University Geology Programs
* GEO,GEO
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2015
* Dirk Baron, California State University-Bakersfield
* Standard Grant
* Jill L. Karsten
* 08/31/2015
* USD 197,555.00

To address the lack of rigorous geoscience classes in high schools and
geoscience career awareness among students, California State University,
Bakersfield (CSUB) has been supporting dual-credit physical geology classes at
two schools in the Kern High School District (KHSD) for many years. Students
completing the classes receive transferable university credit. With this award,
CSUB is enhancing existing dual-credit KHSD physical geology classes through
augmentation of school geoscience teaching materials, field experiences, guest
speakers from professional geoscientists, and stipends and scholarships aimed
specifically at recruiting students into CSUB and area community college geology
programs. CSUB is also implementing a rigorous assessment program that will
collect evidence on the effectiveness of the dual-credit classes in improving
the pipeline from high schools to college geoscience programs, particularly with
regard to the participation of Hispanic students. Funds are also being used to
help propagate the model program through creation of similar classes at other
schools in the region. The overarching goal of this project is to document the
effectiveness of dual-credit classes in recruiting students into geoscience
majors and identify the most effective elements and strategies of these classes,
with a focus on minority students. The findings will be used to guide others
interested in developing similar classes and strengthen the case to school
districts, principals, and university faculty and administrators for offering
them.