* 1108906
* Infrared Beacons in the Universe - J Band Spectroscopy of Red Supergiants and the Chemical Composition of Star Forming Galaxies
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2016
* Rolf-Peter Kudritzki, University of Hawaii
* Continuing Grant
* Richard Barvainis
* 08/31/2016
* USD 229,931.00

Determining the chemical composition of galaxies is crucial for understanding
their formation and evolution. Standard techniques, utilizing emission line
spectra of the diffuse interstellar gas (specifically HII regions), is plagued
by large and poorly understood systematic uncertainties. This project will
develop a new, and potentially transformative, approach based on near-infrared
spectroscopy of individual red supergiant stars. The output of these stars peaks
in the J-band, where the spectra are rich in atomic lines. New multi-object
infrared spectrographs on 10-meter-class telescopes will be able to obtain
sufficient resolution to derive accurate abundances to distances of 10
megaparsecs. The purpose of this project is to develop, validate and exploit
this new technique, in several steps: (1) The technique will be tested in the
Milky Way and the Magellanic Clouds, against complementary techniques using HII
region and blue supergiant star spectra; (2) Local Group galaxies of extremely
low metallicity (NGC 3109, WLM, IC 1613) and the spirals M31 and M33 will be
studied and compared with results from blue supergiants; (3) the technique will
be applied to spiral galaxies beyond the Local Group out to a few megaparsecs
(NGC 300, NGC 2403, M81). Accurate abundances and abundance gradients will be
obtained, allowing constraints on the evolutionary states and histories of star
forming galaxies, as well as an assessment of the reliability of H II region
techniques. The method will also be extended to super-star clusters, which
contain many dozens of red supergiants dominating the J-band flux, and which may
be useful as cosmological abundance indicators at even larger distances.
Eventually, this technique may be best exploited by the next generation of large
telescopes, achieving abundance measurements out to 100 megaparsecs, a
substantial volume of the local universe. The project will support the work of
one graduate student, who will participate in international collaborations.
Results will be incorporated into education and public outreach activities
conducted by the Principal Investigator.