* 1108636
* Fullerene and Endohedral Fullerene Structures for Applications in Molecular Electronics and MRI
* MPS,DMR
* 10/22/2010,05/31/2012
* Jorge Gardea-Torresdey, University of Texas at El Paso
* Continuing Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 05/31/2012
* USD 147,280.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;With support from the Chemistry Division of the
NSF, this research group will develop two distinct but related projects
involving fullerenes; one designed to synthesize a family of C60 derivatives
containing multiple adducts in a regioselective manner, later to be tested as
potential single molecule transistors, and another project that involves the
preparation of novel trimetallic nitride endohedral fullerenes that are
potentially useful as MRI and X-Ray contrast agents. The C60 compounds are
designed to exhibit unique electronic properties and self-assembling abilities
for potential applications in molecular electronics, specifically as molecular
transistors. Specifically, regioselective multiple N-aryl-pyrrolidine adducts of
C60 will be synthesized in order to use these groups to selectively connect the
compounds to electrode surfaces in order to study their electronic properties.
The trimetallic nitride endohedral project involves the preparation of novel
compounds containing lanthanide nitrides that have only been recently reported
by this group, which possess unique electronic and structural properties of
potential value in MRI and X-Ray contrast applications. Of particular interest
is the preparation of larger carbon cages than C80, which so far has been the
dominant structure with trimetallic nitrides. C88 and C96 cages are targeted for
preparation and structural and electronic characterization. The electronic and
magnetic properties of the new cages containing the new lanthanide clusters (Nd,
Pr, Ce and La nitrides) will be studied and the potential uses of these
compounds as MRI and X-Ray contrast agents will be assessed. The overall thrust
of the grant is the preparation of new and interesting molecules that will have
important real-world applications to benefit society and expand the body of
chemical knowledge. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;With
support from the Chemistry Division of the NSF, new fullerenes (also known as
?buckyballs?) and their derivatives will be prepared. Fullerenes are closed
three dimensional cage compounds, some possessing spherical symmetry, made
exclusively of carbon atoms. The new compounds that will be prepared and
characterized will be evaluated as potential single molecule electronic devices
(transistors and switches) and as potential MRI and X-Ray contrast agents. The
group will train and mentor underrepresented minorities, especially Hispanics,
at the undergraduate, graduate and postdoctoral levels. The group will also
interact and collaborate with groups both within and outside of the USA. The
Project Director has a long and fruitful history in both of these broader impact
areas. &lt;br/&gt;