* 1108524
* OEDG Track 2: A residential summer institute in Earth System Science for American Indian high school students
* GEO,RISE
* 09/15/2011,08/31/2017
* Justin Richland, University of California-Irvine
* Continuing Grant
* Brandon Jones
* 08/31/2017
* USD 1,272,589.00

In order to address the critical need for Earth and environmental science
professionals within Tribal communities, where American Indians remain severely
underrepresented in the geosciences, the University of California, Irvine is
organizing two-week residential American Indian Summer Institutes in Earth
System Science (AISESS) for high-school students (grades 9-12) from throughout
the nation. The specific objectives of the AISESS program are: 1) to encourage
and empower American Indian high school students to pursue higher education; 2)
to increase the number of American Indian students who pursue degrees in or
related to the geosciences; 3) to increase retention and graduation rates of
American Indian college students in the geosciences; 4) to encourage American
Indian college graduates to pursue geoscience careers, in particular those
available in Tribal communities; and 5) to enhance public literacy of Earth
System Science, especially within American Indian Tribal communities. The first
week of the AISESS program is spent camping and conducting field projects on the
reservation of the La Jolla Band of Luiseño Indians and the second week is spent
on the University of California, Irvine campus learning about Earth System
Science through lectures, discussions, and laboratory activities. The scientific
curriculum is designed by faculty members from the UCI Department of Earth
System Science in partnership with the Institute for Tribal Environmental
Professionals at Northern Arizona University, the La Jolla Band of Luiseño
Indians, and the Acjachemen Nation. The science curriculum is closely woven
together with appropriate cultural activities, Native studies, and communication
skills coordinated through the UCI American Indian Resource Center. The program
culminates with a closing ceremony in which students present poster projects on
Earth and environmental science issues that are particularly relevant to Tribal
communities. Through key partnerships with the Louis Stokes California Alliance
for Minority Participation, the UCI Center for Educational Partnerships, and
Santa Ana College, the project is conducting extensive follow-up and mentorship
activities that will increase the likelihood of recruitment and retention of
Native students to the geosciences.