* 1108916
* 40 Years and Counting: AWM's Celebration of Women in Mathematics
* MPS,DMS
* 05/01/2011,04/30/2012
* Georgia Benkart, Association for Women in Mathematics, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Pearl
* 04/30/2012
* USD 47,590.00

With support from National Science Foundation Grant #DMS-1108916, the
Association for Women in Mathematics (AWM) will hold a two-day meeting, 40 Years
and Counting: AWM's Celebration of Women in Mathematics at Brown University in
Providence, Rhode Island, September 17-18, 2011. The principal investigators on
this grant are the organizers of the meeting, Georgia Benkart, Kristin Lauter,
and Jill Pipher.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Since 1971, the Association for Women in
Mathematics has been at the forefront of efforts to encourage women and girls to
study and to have active careers in the mathematical sciences. The meeting 40
Years and Counting: AWM's Celebration of Women in Mathematics, which will be
open to the public, celebrates the 40th anniversary of the organization, its
accomplishments in promoting women in mathematics, and the many significant
contributions of women in mathematics over the last forty years. There will be
four plenary lectures by distinguished women in pure and applied mathematics,
over 15 special sessions on a wide range of topics in the mathematical sciences,
poster sessions for recent PhD recipients and graduate students, a panel, a
banquet, and time for mentoring and discussion. This event comes at a critical
time when the percentage of women among the first-year graduate students in
mathematics has declined from 35% in 2001 to 29% in 2009. Many early-career
female mathematicians, especially those at smaller schools, and also many
graduate students, often have little or no contact with leading women
researchers, with the exception of a few in their own research area. The long-
term benefits of the meeting will be a heightened awareness of the
accomplishments of female mathematicians, an increase in the participation of
women in research activities, an expanded research network of potential
collaborators, and visibility and connectivity for younger researchers.