* 1108071
* Materials World Network: Science of Polar Homo- and Heterointerfaces
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2011,04/30/2016
* Zlatko Sitar, North Carolina State University
* Continuing Grant
* Miriam Deutsch
* 04/30/2016
* USD 600,000.00

A focused international research collaboration linking North Carolina State
University, the Technical University Berlin (TUB) and the Leibniz-Institut für
Kristallzüchtung (IKZ) in Berlin, Germany, explores the fundamental science of
epitaxial interfaces that define a discontinuity in electrical polarization in
nitride-nitride and nitride-oxide systems. The aim is to understand the
structural, chemical, and electronic features that regulate the interfacial
electronic properties. The effort is based on a hypothesis that vertical and
lateral heteropolar interfaces that approach 'semiconductor-grade' quality can
be prepared, and that their study will lead to exciting opportunities for
fundamental advances in interface physics and optic/electronic functionality.
Each member of the international team brings a unique and leading edge technical
capability that collectively enables this research. The Sitar group (NC State)
brings a metalorganic chemical vapor deposition technology that can control
polarity in thin films of nitride semiconductors both laterally and vertically;
the Maria group (NC State) developed a surfactant-assisted molecular beam
epitaxy technique that can for the first time prepare cubic oxides on GaN
surfaces with a 2-D growth mode and dramatically reduced defect concentrations;
the Hoffmann group (TUB) brings in optical characterization of polar materials
and heterostructures; and the Albrecht group (IKZ) brings aberration-corrected
transmission electron microscopy characterization with sub-Å spatial resolution
and sub-eV energy resolution. The research refines synthesis techniques that
enable hybrid thin film structures that seamlessly merge oxides and nitrides
with heretofore unachievable material quality. By combining synthesis and
characterization the investigators are able to identify and understand the
structural and chemical features that enable, interfere, or enhance heteropolar
interface coupling.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Achieving an understanding of
heteropolar interface-property relationships will propel research in hybrid
systems that lead to new physics, new functionality, an expanded set of low
dimension optoelectronic devices, and a pathway to smart structures that utilize
in a new way the non-linear dielectric response of ferroelectrics. Through this
collaboration, students and faculty from NCSU, TUB, and IKZ have access to
mentoring expertise and world-class laboratory facilities in technical areas
that are absent from the home institutions. U.S. and German students participate
in a 6-month graduate sabbatical in program year three to ensure substantive
international experience. During their first two years, U.S. students are
encouraged take two semesters of German to acquire basic communication skills.
The work of the German participants is supported by the German Research
Foundation (DFG).