* 1108238
* SkyWatchers Track 1: Bringing New Students to GeoScience Through Observing the Sky
* GEO,GEO
* 09/01/2011,02/28/2014
* Timothy Slater, University of Wyoming
* Standard Grant
* Jill L. Karsten
* 02/28/2014
* USD 80,000.00

This planning grant at the University of Wyoming is being used to pilot
activities associated with the SkyWatcher project, which is envisioned as a
program to use remotely-controlled telescopes for astronomical observing as
strategy to intellectually engage a diverse and collaborative group of 13-18
year old Native American and Polynesian students on supported pathways to
geoscience careers. In this planning phase, the project team is working with
cultural leaders and educators within the Wind River Reservation (Wyoming) and
the Hilo Laupahohoe Waiakea School district complex (Hawai'i) to establish
products and infrastructure to support cohorts of students engaged in high-tech
astronomical research, leveraging more than 100 robotic and remotely controlled
telescopes around the world. This first phase is focused on building stronger
relationships with the target communities and getting their input on project
design details. A leadership team consisting of scientists, educators, local
teachers, targeted students, and cultural elders is meeting virtually and face-
to-face to develop a plan that is fully reflective of local needs and emphasizes
local priorities and mores. Developing scaffolded, inquiry- and social
networking-based activities and materials that incorprate sufficient geoscience
content within the context of astronomical reserach are being designed.
Community-based programs that include star parties and classroom visits are
being provided.