* 1108365
* Promoting Initiatives for Diversity in the Geosciences
* GEO,GEO
* 10/01/2011,09/30/2014
* Christopher Andronicos, Society for Advancement of Chicanos & Native Americans in Sci
* Continuing Grant
* Jill L. Karsten
* 09/30/2014
* USD 728,178.00

Funding from this award is being used to enhance participation of geoscientists
in annual conferences and year-round activities of the Society for Advancement
of Chicanos and Native Americans in Science (SACNAS). Underrepresentation in the
geosciences is acute and SACNAS offers unique and unparalleled resources to
address this problem. The annual SACNAS National Conference incorporates a
wealth of mentorship and scientific resources for minority students that are
simply not found elsewhere. Conference attendees form a very diverse group
numbering in the thousands, with geoscientists numbering in the hundreds.
Increasing participation in geoscience research by underrepresented minority
(URM) undergraduates, graduates, and post docs is a critical step to providing a
diverse and effective workforce. It is therefore essential that trainees
currently involved in geoscience research be given the opportunity to present
their findings at national and regional conferences where they can establish
contacts with other students and postdoctoral scholars, as well as with graduate
program recruiters, faculty, and professionals who will become part of their
expanded network of mentors. The SACNAS National Conference provides a number of
unique opportunities for geoscience students and postdocs to attend and present
at a national meeting focused on high quality research and mentoring. SACNAS is
particularly important for URM students since it attracts large numbers of
minority STEM professionals, including a dedicated cadre of geoscientists, who
serve as mentors, speakers, and judges for student scientific presentations.
Specifically, these funds are being used to support student participation in the
SACNAS National Conference, and increase the number of professional
geoscientists from both academia and industry who participate in year-round
SACNAS programming, including the SACNAS Leadership Institute. Historically,
geoscience has always been a valued part of the SACNAS National Conference.
Besides offering students the opportunity to learn about current geosciences
research and strengthening the network of students and professionals in
geosciences, the organization is increasing the number of professional
geoscientists who participate in its yearly conference. This increasing
participation by geoscience professionals is crucial to SACNAS' ability to
provide effective mentoring and networking opportunities.