* 1108957
* The Co-evolution of Brightest Cluster Galaxies and Intracluster Light
* MPS,AST
* 08/01/2011,07/31/2015
* Anthony Gonzalez, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Richard Barvainis
* 07/31/2015
* USD 319,850.00

Clusters of galaxies are important probes of cosmology and are key players in
unraveling the mysteries behind galaxy formation and evolution and the
development of large scale structure in the Universe. This project aims to
investigate the co-evolution of brightest cluster galaxies (BCGs) and
intracluster light (ICL) over the past 8 billion years. The study's objectives
for understanding galaxy formation are to understand the physical origin of ICL
and to quantify the size and stellar mass growth of BCGs. The objectives driven
by cosmological considerations are to quantify the fraction of stellar baryons
in the BCG plus ICL as a function of cluster mass and redshift and the cluster-
to-cluster variation in this stellar baryon fraction and to conduct the
definitive census of total (gas plus stellar) baryon fraction as a function of
cluster mass.

Previous studies have had data limitations requiring several crude
approximations, such as assuming a constant mass-to-light ratio for all cluster
galaxies and using background subtraction rather than spectroscopic cluster
membership to determine the total cluster galaxy luminosity. Previous work has
also lacked the combination of gas and stellar baryon data for individual
clusters. The proposed work will serve as a definitive survey that includes deep
spectroscopy, X-ray data, and deep photometry for the galaxy population and ICL
for a statistical sample of clusters, thereby replacing the earlier crude
approximations with actual measurements governed by statistics---broadly
important to the scientific community.

Educationally, the proposed activities will promote teaching and training of a
graduate student and a postdoctoral associate. The principal investigator will
continue to co-lead an outreach program with local high schools, including a
workshop for roughly 30 high school students that targets underserved
communities.