* 1108223
* Track 2, Growing Community Roots for the Geosciences in Miami, Florida
* GEO,GEO
* 09/15/2012,08/31/2015
* Florentin Maurrasse, Florida International University
* Standard Grant
* Jill L. Karsten
* 08/31/2015
* USD 254,871.00

Growing Roots is a 2-year pilot project with the objectives of 1) attracting
under-represented students from the middle, high school, and community college
level into Geoscience degree programs at Florida International University (FIU),
2) promoting the success of those students at FIU, and 3) improving the quality
of Earth Science teaching at Miami's middle and high schools through education
of in-service teachers and teachers-in-training. The project has two main
components. One component is designed to inform 11-12th grade students and in-
service teachers about the Geosciences, Geoscience careers, and the Geosciences
degree programs offered at FIU, which are include a new BA in Earth Science
Education and a BS in Geosciences, with separate Geological and Atmospheric
Science tracks. A multi-pronged approach is being taken. 1) A one-week summer
workshop is being offered to middle and high school Earth Science teachers,
featuring Geoscience information, activities and teaching resources. 2) A two-
week summer Geoscience Experience for high school students is being offered,
featuring realistic hands-on activities and visits to Geoscience professionals
at work. 4) The PIs are also working with Geoscience-related student clubs to
embed Geoscience career-related discussion trains aimed at middle, high school
and community college students in their Facebook pages. Since the Miami-Dade
County Public School and community college system has a high proportion of
students from under-represented groups (62% Hispanic-American, 26% African
American for MDCPS), this project provides a system-wide approach to attracting
a diverse population; participation by other schools with significant minority
student populations is also being pursued.

The second component of the project is focused on articulating components within
FIU's Geoscience degree programs and ongoing science education projects. 1) An
introductory Geoscience Field Lab course is being developed to provide
advisement, orientation and support to freshman majors and transfer students in
their first year. 2) Students enrolled in the new Florida State-certified BA in
Earth Science Education, conducted by faculty from the FIU Earth & Environment
Department and FIU's College of Education, are observing and experiencing Earth
Science teaching as Learning Assistants in the Summer Teacher Workshop, the
Geoscience Experience and the Geoscience Field Lab. The Learning Assistant
concept has been developed in two ongoing FIU science education projects: GEMS
(Get Educators in Math and Science) funded by NSF/DUE to FIU's math and science
departments, and PhysTEC (Physics Teacher Education Coalition). Through GEMS,
promising minority Learning Assistants are eligible for Robert Noyce Fellowships
to complete their education degree. Minority students in the Geosciences BS
program will be able to compete for Louis Stokes Alliance (FGLSAMP)
undergraduate fellowships, which are administered through FIU's Engineering
College.