* 1108734
* RAPID: Workshop and Planning Report for GEOScan: a Geosciences Facility from Space
* GEO,AGS
* 02/01/2011,01/31/2012
* Lars Dyrud, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Therese Moretto Jorgensen
* 01/31/2012
* USD 81,165.00

This is a one-year effort to conduct a project design study for a proposed new
NSF research facility named GEOScan. Representatives from all relevant science
disciplines will be identified and involved in the study, which will result in a
conceptual design report for the proposed GEOScan project. Broad scientific
input to the study will also be sought through a planned community workshop.

The idea behind the proposed GEOScan project is to utilize the next generation
of Iridium satellites. Starting in 2014, Iridium will begin launching its next
generation of communication satellites. The new spacecraft will replace
Iridium's current constellation of 66 low-earth orbit satellites ? the world's
largest commercial satellite system. Known as Iridium NEXT, the new
constellation will offer a unique opportunity for hosting additional sensor
payloads on the communication satellites for a wide range of Earth observation
and other scientific or operational objectives. The constellation will provide
continuous, real-time visibility over the entire Earth's surface and its
atmosphere. The plan for GEOScan is to fly a small scientific payload, called a
sensorPOD, on each of the Iridium satellites. Each sensorPOD will consist of two
system sensors that are the same for all payloads plus an additional sensor that
will be supplied by an individual investigator. The set of additional (hosted)
sensors for GEOScan will be selected through a competitive process. The primary
goal of this study is to identify system sensors that provide global data for
the highest impact discoveries and yet are of interest to the broadest possible
range of geoscience disciplines.

In addition to the scientific objectives, the proposed GEOScan program will
pursue a number of broader impacts goals. First, the project will establish a
unique and unprecedented collaboration with industry to carry science payloads
on commercial satellites. It will also foster collaborations and strengthen ties
between university and international researchers across science disciplines, the
agencies that fund them and the American space industry. Secondly, the project
will provide real-time Earth observing data that enable policy makers with
actionable information. Finally, the project will provide front-line training
opportunities for the next generation of instrument engineers and Geoscientists
via the hosted sensor program.