* 1108076
* United States Virgin Islands EPSCoR RII Program:  Intercampus and Intra-campus Connectivity
* O/D,EPS
* 08/15/2011,01/31/2015
* Henry Smith, University of The Virgin Islands
* Standard Grant
* Sean Kennan
* 01/31/2015
* USD 1,000,000.00

Proposal Number: EPS-1108076&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Title: United States
Virgin Islands EPSCoR RII Program: Intercampus and Intra-campus
Connectivity&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Institution: University of The Virgin Islands
(UVI)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Research Infrastructure Improvement project
seeks to build on the Territory?s investments in cyberinfrastructure by
providing the broadband connectivity needed to accelerate discovery and learning
at the University of The Virgin Islands (UVI), an Historically Black University.
This connectivity will allow UVI?s faculty and staff to be more fully integrated
into nationwide interdisciplinary research collaborations though access to
Internet2 and the National Lambda Rail (NLR). Through proposed curricular
expansions, enhanced graduate research experiences, and high-performance
computing training, UVI?s students will be better positioned for graduate school
and life-long careers in marine science, mathematics, and computer
science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit &lt;br/&gt;By
providing a high-bandwidth network interconnection from the St. Croix submarine
landing station to UVI?s St. Croix campus, this project will connect UVI
researchers, collaborators, and mentors across the Territory to each other and
to others across the nation. The project aims to connect the St. Croix campus to
the AMPATH International Exchange Point which would provide access to networks
such as Internet2 and National Lambda Rail (NLR). The enhanced cyber-
infrastructure environment will support collaborative research projects underway
at UVI in the broad area of marine science. Specifically, these projects focus
on determination of factors that enhance or reduce a coral reef?s tolerance to
environmental stress and resistance to transitions to alternate ecological
states (ecological resilience). These projects also include robust field
experiments, utilizing sophisticated environmental analysis techniques and
developing high-resolution oceanographic models, to increase the understanding
of how ecological patterns and processes are influenced by natural and
anthropogenic disturbances. Understanding these complex relationships is of
paramount importance to managing them, especially considering that over the last
three to five years the corals within the USVI experienced 30% to 40% mortality
due to climate-induced stress (i.e. warm-water bleaching) and disease. The
proposed infrastructure enhancements will ensure that research and educational
activities have the collaborative bandwidth support needed for a reliable
research and engineering network connection to key national and international
collaborators.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts&lt;br/&gt;Through UVI?s
improved connection to AMPATH via the new fiber, underrepresented undergraduate
students will have access to enhanced research and educational opportunities,
which will better prepare them for success in graduate school and result in
improvements in the Territory?s workforce. The project team aims to leverage the
VI-EPSCoR marine science program at the University?s Center of Excellence in
Marine and Environmental Studies called the Integrated Caribbean Coastal
Ecosystems to develop scientific and technical services to support local
decision-makers in natural resources management and spatial planning. The
project will support training in science, technology, engineering, and
mathematics disciplines for students, who are underrepresented minorities and
women, at both the undergraduate and graduate levels. The enhancements in this
project will ensure continued broadband access and competitive options for the
Territory. Data and results from studies conducted on the islands will be made
far more accessible to distant collaborators and dissemination to stakeholders
will be significantly improved.