* 1108787
* WORKSHOP: ELECTRIC AND HYBRID ELECTRIC VEHICLE SYSTEMS SPONSORED BY INDIANA UNIVERSITY, PURDUE UNIVERSITY, INDIANAPOLIS (IUPUI) AND THE COLLEGE OF ARAB ACADEMY FOR ENGINEERING
* O/D,OISE
* 01/01/2011,12/31/2011
* Maher Rizkalla, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Osman Shinaishin
* 12/31/2011
* USD 15,000.00

1108787&lt;br/&gt;Rizkalla&lt;br/&gt;The project is to support a US-Egypt
workshop on research in recent technologies of electric and hybrid electric
(HEV) vehicles. The US PI is Dr. Maher Rizkalla, Purdue School of Engineering
and Technology, Indiana University Purdue University Indianapolis (IUPUI). The
foreign collaborator is Dr. Yasser Dessouky, Arab Academy for Science and
Technology and Maritime Transport. The workshop will bring together researchers
from USA and Egypt with a goal to develop collaborative projects in hybrid
electric vehicle (HEV). The expected outcomes of this workshop will include
recommendations for future collaboration in HEV research between the two
campuses (IUPUI and the Engineering Academy in
Egypt).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: The workshop will present
cutting edge research in hybrid vehicle technology, nanotechnology, sensors,
modeling, and power electronics. The agenda includes panel discussion to develop
plans for scientific collaborations in this field between the two countries. The
research to be discussed will include electric hybrid vehicles and renewable
energy programs. Four speakers from USA (2 from IUPUI and 2 from University of
Wisconsin at Madison) and 10 speakers from Egyptian Academy will participate in
the workshop. The theme ?Future Vehicle Technologies? covers important issues
such as modeling and simulation, challenging research issues and solving
approaches, dynamic systems, stability analysis, and device employment for
vehicle safety. Such topics will benefit electrical engineering and mechanical
engineering faculty members and graduate students in these disciplines from both
sides. The exchange of knowledge between the two campuses will have significant
impact on the HEV research in Egypt as well as in USA. The integration of
knowledge within these&lt;br/&gt;disciplines may lead to better understanding to
the challenging issues within the HEV system. Utilization of smart sensors will
enhance the reliability and safety of these vehicles.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: The workshop will reinforce the education
of students, and will also encourage collaboration among faculty members. The
workshop provides important opportunity to encourage research in hybrid electric
vehicle technology.