* 1108802
* Collaborative Research:  Understanding the Physics of Galaxy Clustering on Small Scales
* MPS,AST
* 08/15/2011,07/31/2014
* Andrew Zentner, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Patricia Knezek
* 07/31/2014
* USD 134,627.00

This project will measure, model, and interpret the clustering of galaxies on
scales of 10 kiloparsecs to 1 megaparsec -- small scales in the cosmological
context. The project consists of four main science goals. (1) Constrain the
spatial distribution of galaxies inside dark matter halos in the local universe.
Using redshift data from the Sloan Digital Sky Survey (SDSS), the proposing team
will measure the projected two-point correlation function, the angular
correlation function, and the surface density profile of galaxies in groups and
clusters. They will model these statistics to constrain the density profile of
galaxies in dark halos, using both analytic models and numerical models
constructed from cosmological N-body simulations. (2) Extend the above analysis
to higher redshift by using data from the new Baryon Oscillation Spectroscopic
Survey (BOSS). Modeling the correlation functions will reveal the recent
evolution in the spatial distribution of galaxies within halos. (3) Refine the
proposers' semi-analytic model for the evolution of dark matter subhalos under
the influence of merging, improving the analytic prescription for mass loss and
including the role of baryonic matter. (4) By comparing the improved halo model
to the clustering statistics, constrain the star formation and star stripping
efficiencies for galaxies merging with larger halos. The project will support
the work of several graduate and undergraduate students at the two collaborating
institutions. In addition, the project will provide funding for summer K-12
science camps so that minority students in the Nashville, TN area will be able
to attend without financial burden.