* 1108310
* Mini-Grant Opportunities in the Geosciences for American Indian Science and Engineering Society (AISES) Student Chapters
* GEO,GEO
* 09/15/2011,08/31/2014
* Cara Thunder, American Indian Science and Engineering Society (AISES)
* Standard Grant
* Jill L. Karsten
* 08/31/2014
* USD 150,000.00

The American Indian Science and Engineering Society (AISES) is implementing a
novel, micro-financing approach to broadening participation of Native American
students in the geosciences. Through a competitive mini-grant process, AISES
Student Chapters are developing and delivering community-based outreach and
learning opportunities on geoscience topics for Native American urban and rural
communities. There are currently 173 AISES Student Chapters nationwide and all
are eligible to apply for the mini-grants during this two-year proof-of-concept
award. Mini-grants in the amount of $3000-$7000 are being used by AISES Student
Chapters to: 1) increase awareness and recruitment in the geosciences among
Native American undergraduates and improve content knowledge in geoscience
disciplines; 2) prepare students for successful careers in the geosciences by
engaging then in professional development experiences requiring grantsmanship
and project management; and, 3) educate students on how to share the relevance
of geoscience knowledge with the public through Service Learning and Informal
Science Education projects. This project directly serves the NSF goal of
broadening participation in STEM disciplines and advancing the Directorate for
Geosciences' strategic priority of increasing public Earth System Science
literacy.