* 1108778
* Tracing and Linking Contextual and Psychological Factors to STEM Career Choice
* EDU,DRL
* 08/01/2011,07/31/2016
* Jacquelynne Eccles, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Gregg Solomon
* 07/31/2016
* USD 1,749,436.00

The goals of this proposal are to investigate the role that student in- and out-
of-school experiences play in the formation of STEM and non-STEM related
interests, task valuing, and self-efficacy; to relate motivational beliefs to
STEM related educational and occupational aspirations; to examine the
differences in the educational and career paths of those choosing STEM from
those who do not; and to look within STEM and chart the pathway between those
who enter engineering and physical sciences from those who enter the biological
and social sciences. This project will increase our knowledge of (a) whether
experiences with STEM related activities in- and out-of-school during the
elementary and secondary school years influence STEM-related
occupational/educational planning and choices during adolescence, and (b)
whether the associations between these experiences and educational/occupational
outcomes vary across gender, race/ethnicity, socioeconomic status, and across
different personality profiles.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research will create
statistical models and other analyses using the Childhood and Beyond Study (CAB)
and Alfred P. Sloan Study of Youth and Social Development (SSYSD). Both
longitudinal datasets include extensive measures of the experiences children and
adolescents have with STEM-related and non-STEM activities and courses, as well
as extensive measures of self-efficacy, affective experiences, interests,
educational and career aspirations, and educational course choices. The analysis
and modeling of the data will make use of such techniques as structural equation
modeling (SEM), hierarchical linear modeling (HLM), and person-centered
techniques, such as cluster analyses, latent class analyses, and life trees.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Much will be learned from this study. It is expected to
contribute new knowledge about the STEM education pipeline and the issues,
interests, and experiences of children and adolescents that affect entry and
retention into that pipeline. This information could, in principle, help shape
interventions designed to motivate and retain students in STEM. The project will
be monitored and evaluated by a team of outside experts. A series of
publications and a website will result from this award.