* 1108884
* Control of Stochastic Systems
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2015
* Tyrone Duncan, University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Lora Billings
* 08/31/2015
* USD 330,000.00

The control of stochastic systems is the focus of this research and it provides
a study that has wide applications to many areas of science and engineering as
well as applications within mathematics. Based on empirical data from a wide
variety of physical phenomena, the family of stochastic processes called
fractional Brownian motions is appropriate for stochastic models of physical
phenomena. However most of the members of this family of fractional Brownian
motions do not possess the Markovian property or the semimartingale property
that are usually assumed for stochastic models. Since most controlled stochastic
systems in continuous time have been described with a noise modeled by a
Brownian motion there is demand to study control problems for stochastic systems
with other fractional Brownian motions. These control problems require
significantly different methods for analysis than the well developed methods for
the control of systems with Brownian motions. These major differences have
resulted in having few results available for the optimal control of linear
systems driven by an arbitrary fractional Brownian motion. The investigators for
this grant have initiated a major study of these control problems for linear
systems. This study should not only provide results for an arbitrary fractional
Brownian motion but also provide results for the control of linear systems
driven by processes from a general family of square integrable continuous
stochastic processes. This work will develop further the investigators? initial
work on finite time horizon, quadratic cost control of linear stochastic
systems. It is planned to expand this study to other cost functionals and to
other types of systems, both finite and infinite dimensional. Specifically this
work is planned to determine explicit expressions for the optimal control and
the optimal cost for an infinite time horizon ergodic (or long run average)
quadratic cost functional. Furthermore it is planned to study the control of
linear stochastic partial differential equations for both finite and infinite
time horizon control problems with a quadratic cost functional. The noise
stochastic process and the control for these equations are allowed to be
restricted to the boundary of the domain. Typically the controlled stochastic
systems have unknown parameters so it is necessary to identify the parameters
and control the system simultaneously. This class of problems is called adaptive
control and the investigators plan to extend their initial work on adaptive
control for a scalar linear system to multidimensional linear systems with an
arbitrary fractional Brownian motion.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Many physical
systems are controlled so the question of the determination of a best or optimal
control arises. This area of research is called optimal control. Typically a
mathematical model of a physical phenomena must account for perturbations of the
system or unmodelled dynamics so a noise process is introduced in the model.
These models are called stochastic systems. Given a controlled stochastic system
and a cost for the use of control and the behavior of the system it is usually
very difficult to obtain an explicit optimal control and the associated optimal
cost. Furthermore the controlled stochastic systems in continuous time have been
restricted to using one specific stochastic process, Brownian motion (white
noise) as the noise. However empirical evidence from a wide variety of physical
phenomena demonstrates a need for other noise processes, particularly for the
family of fractional Brownian motions. The investigators for this grant have
recently initiated a study of the control of linear systems with cost
functionals that are quadratic in the system state and the control. They have
obtained some results for explicit optimal controls for linear systems with an
arbitrary fractional Brownian motion. These investigators plan to extend this
work to more general linear systems and to infinite time horizon control
problems with models that have an arbitrary fractional Brownian motion or a more
general stochastic process. The optimal controls for these models can be used
for control applications in many fields. The usefulness of fractional Brownian
motions has been demonstrated in hydrology, telecommunications, turbulence,
epilepsy and cognition as well as other areas. The optimal control results can
be important in the use of effective controls for these physical phenomena.
These results should have an important impact on many fields.