* 1108502
* Effects of Stratospheric Change on the Arctic Environment
* GEO,OPP
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2015
* Mark Baldwin, NorthWest Research Associates, Incorporated
* Standard Grant
* Neil R. Swanberg
* 08/31/2015
* USD 732,748.00

Stratospheric changes influence the climate of the Arctic, through both
meteorological effects and direct radiative forcing. The proposers will use a
wide variety of model results from chemistry-climate-models (which have good
representations of stratospheric dynamics and chemistry) and ocean-atmosphere
GCMs, together with observations, to improve understanding of the importance of
stratosphere-troposphere coupling, and of how Arctic weather and climate are
affected by stratospheric variability. A specific goal of this project is to
gain an understanding of the seasonal and regional changes in Arctic weather and
climate that can be expected from ozone depletion and recovery in the 21st
century with more realistically representation of stratospheric processes in
climate models. Mechanisms will be investigated of how stratospheric
disturbances penetrate downward to the troposphere and how these disturbances
can modify Arctic thermodynamic and dynamic surface processes and ultimately
Arctic sea ice concentration. This project will contribute to our understanding
of how stratospheric change will affect Arctic climate. Arctic climate impacts
not just people living at high latitudes, but delicate ecosystems, with
potential feedbacks to global-scale climate change (e.g., methane release from
permafrost and changes to the ocean circulation). The project activities are
designed to improve understanding of how the Arctic climate will change, using
existing model runs and observations. The main scientific impact will be to
vertically integrate interdisciplinary Arctic climate change science, from the
deep ocean, through surface processes, and up through the troposphere and
stratosphere. The project will also contribute to education, and scientific
infrastructure. The educational activities include mentoring of a postdoctoral
research scientist and providing research projects for undergraduate students
for an extended scholarship at NWRA.