* 1108674
* Conferences on Frontiers in Applied and Computational Mathematics: 2011-2013
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2011,05/31/2014
* Daljit Ahluwalia, New Jersey Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Henry Warchall
* 05/31/2014
* USD 111,525.00

The investigators organize an annual conference on Frontiers in Applied and
Computational Mathematics (FACM) on the campus of the New Jersey Institute of
Technology (NJIT) in Newark, New Jersey. The conferences include the significant
participation of undergraduate and graduate students, postdoctoral fellows, and
junior faculty. The FACM conference series has been organized over the past
seven years by the Department of Mathematical Sciences and the Center for
Applied Mathematics and Statistics at NJIT. The conference has become a leading
forum for the dissemination of research in applied and computational mathematics
and applied statistics. The three year conference plan for 2011-2013 is as
follows: FACM 2011 (250-300 participants expected) has a focus on wave
propagation in acoustics, electromagnetics, fluids and biology. FACM 2012 and
2013 (150-200 participants expected) will be meetings focused on applications in
fluid dynamics and biology/biostatistics, respectively.

This conference series brings together mathematicians, statisticians,
physicists, engineers, and biologists to share results of their research in
applied and computational mathematics and applied statistics. The broader
impacts are that significant cross-fertilization takes place during and after
the conferences between researchers in different disciplines who use the methods
of applied mathematics, statistics and numerical computation. For students and
postdocs, this is a major learning experience that helps them with future
presentations and research. This experience helps students emulate the quality
of these research activities. Past FACM conferences have an excellent record of
participation of women and underrepresented minorities, and the PIs are making
efforts to continue this trend.

The web link for the conference series is: http://m.njit.edu/Events/FACM11