* 1108780
* Collaborative Research: Mathematical and computational methods for stochastic systems in nonlinear optics
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2015
* Tobias Schaefer, CUNY College of Staten Island
* Standard Grant
* Victor Roytburd
* 08/31/2015
* USD 148,899.00

The objective of this collaborative research project is to develop methods for
analysis, modeling, and computation for stochastic partial differential
equations arising in nonlinear optics. The study of noise in these systems is
complicated by several factors. In particular:&lt;br/&gt;(i) the complexity due
to the interplay of many physical effects,&lt;br/&gt;(ii) the presence of
multiple length and time scales, and&lt;br/&gt;(iii) the fact that the critical
events that represent system failures are, by design, extremely rare. We will
address these challenges by (a) creating a set of analytical methods to obtain
reductions from the stochastic partial differential equations that govern the
system's behavior to a set of low-dimensional stochastic differential
equations;&lt;br/&gt;(b) developing efficient methods for the study of noise
across multiple time and space scales; and (c) implementing hybrid analytical-
computational methods that can efficiently target the rare events of interest
and ultimately estimate the reliability of these
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Lightwave systems have a wide range of
applications, in particular as lasers and optical communication lines, and their
emergence has had a dramatic impact on our lives over the last fifty years.
Lasers are used at low powers in applications related to scanning and
communications; at higher powers they are employed in surgical and industrial
applications. As noise is a major limiting factor in optical systems, further
technological progress will depend critically on understanding the impact of
noise and on being able to control noise-induced system failures. This research
will provide new analytical and computational tools that support the analysis
and design of the next generation of optical devices.