* 1108061
* Collaborative Project: Track 2: Collaborations for Building Michigan Geology Talent
* GEO,RISE
* 03/15/2012,03/31/2016
* Stephen Mattox, Grand Valley State University
* Standard Grant
* Brandon Jones
* 03/31/2016
* USD 53,797.00

This grant is supporting efforts to increase the number and quality of high
school geoscience courses in the state of Michigan that provide students with
dual credit at major institutions of higher education in the state, through a
credit by exam process. This strategy provides a new opportunity to elevate the
stature of the geosciences among talented high school students and potentially
reach a new generation of students, increase the number of students selecting
geoscience careers, and add diversity within the geoscience workforce. This
Track 1 project, which is a collaboration between Eastern Michigan University,
Grand Valley State University, and the University of Wisconsin - Madison, has
three main goals: (1) to train teachers from throughout Michigan to teach the
High School Advanced Geology (HSAG) course developed by Mattox and Bolhuis at
the 12th grade level; (2) to demonstrate that completing a high quality HSAG
course can attract diverse students to geoscience programs; and, (3) to expand
the existing consortium of eight colleges and universities that award college
credit to students who pass the HSAG Exam. Up to 15 high schools, including
several that serve large populations of diverse students, are being prepared to
teach the AP-like HSAG class in their own school and have it count for credit at
most universities in Michigan. Teachers are being supported with content
knowledge, guidance on pedagogy, and the equipment needed to properly teach the
class. By the end of the three-year project, it is expected that about 750
students will have taken the HSAG Exam and the number of students taking the
course will be greater than 375 students per year. The success rate of a pilot
study at Hudsonville High School (80% pass rate with 14% selecting geosciences
programs) suggests that this project may have substantial broader impact and
ultimately yield around 50 students per year to the geosciences workforce
pipeline, with many of these students coming from underrepresented groups. The
project has the potential to establish a replicable national model for engaging
diverse high school student populations in the geosciences.