* 1108285
* Materials World Network - Collaborative Research: Symmetry, Local-Environment and Time-Dependent Effects in Nanoscale Systems: A Synergistic Approach
* MPS,DMR
* 09/15/2011,08/31/2015
* Sergio Ulloa, Ohio University
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 08/31/2015
* USD 522,998.00

This Materials World Network (MWN)/Inter-American Materials Collaboration
project expands and deepens current understanding of correlated electron
behavior in a variety of low-dimensional systems, including atoms and molecules
on surfaces, electrons and spins in carbon nanotubes and graphene, and excitons
in semiconductor quantum dots. Efforts focus on elucidating the roles of local
and global symmetries, as well as interactions with thermal baths or radiation
fields, in determining properties of interest for potential applications in
nanomagnetism and spintronics, in new carbon-based devices, and in quantum
information. A central goal is to guide and interpret experiments involving
techniques that probe local interactions with high spatial and temporal
resolution. This research is carried out by combining the complementary
theoretical and numerical expertise of groups at Ohio University, the University
of Florida, and Oakland University in the U.S., at the Pontificia Universidade
Catolica do Rio de Janeiro and the Universidad Federal Fluminense in Brazil, at
the Universidad Nacional de Rosario in Argentina, and at the Universidad de
Antofagasta in Chile, with the non-US participants receiving support from their
respective national funding agencies for their contribution. In addition to
applying existing state-of-the-art methods, the team develops new techniques for
the description of non-equilibrium phenomena.

The project immerses young scientists in cooperative international research
activities through extended visits to MWN partner institutions and participation
in a mini-workshop to be held in the second year of the award. Webcasts of
technical lectures across institutions will advance technical training and
foster collaborations among MWN participants. The project also seeks to engage a
broader audience through the development of pedagogical materials related to
nanoscience. Some of this development is carried out in collaboration with
students from writing and visual design programs.