* 1108205
* Collaborative Research: POISE (Petermann Ocean Ice Shelf Experiment)-Modeling Ocean Ice Interactions
* GEO,OPP
* 01/01/2012,12/31/2014
* Laurence Padman, Earth and Space Research
* Standard Grant
* William J. Wiseman, Jr.
* 12/31/2014
* USD 70,091.00

Funds are provided for a numerical modeling study of ocean circulation and
ocean-ice interaction in Nares Strait, a 500-km long channel that separates
northwest Greenland from Ellesmere Island at the northern end of Baffin Bay. The
research addresses both Arctic/sub-Arctic sea-ice and freshwater exchange
through Nares Strait. The project is motivated by the observation that Nares
Strait is a major conduit of freshwater and sea-ice exchange between the Arctic
and sub-Arctic oceans. The PIs will combine a high-resolution regional numerical
ocean circulation and sea-ice model, forced by output from a high-resolution
regional atmospheric model, to study the ocean and sea-ice dynamics and
circulation in Nares Strait. A key element of this study is the availability of
a high-quality, multi-year observational data set for model evaluation and for
inverse modeling that will allow development of an optimized circulation
estimate for the entire strait. With this model they will test the sensitivity
of Nares Strait throughflow (freshwater, sea ice, and Atlantic Intermediate
Water) to projected changes in larger-scale climate factors.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Although Fram Strait, the opening between Greenland and
Svalbard, is often assumed to provide the dominant exchange pathway between the
Arctic and Atlantic Oceans, the narrower passages through the Canadian
Archipelago provide a second pathway for flow from the Arctic to the Atlantic
Ocean. This study will provide insight on the processes controlling the
magnitude of these exchanges, which are believed to influence the formation of
dense water in the Labrador Sea that then enters the Atlantic Ocean, contributes
to the large scale circulation, and modulates climate.