* 1108687
* Revealed by Their Own Dust: Identifying the Missing Links in Massive Star Evolution
* MPS,AST
* 07/01/2011,06/30/2015
* Krzysztof Stanek, Ohio State University
* Continuing Grant
* James Neff
* 06/30/2015
* USD 314,142.00

The PI and his team will conduct a survey of luminous dusty massive stars in
nearby galaxies in order to answer many questions of stellar evolution. The
stars of interest are in the late stages of massive stellar evolution and are
losing mass to their environment. They include objects known as luminous blue
variables (LBV), supergiant B[e], some Wolf-Rayet stars and red supergiants. The
main goal of this work is to better understand how massive stars lose mass,
especially episodically, is one of the outstanding open problems in stellar
evolution theory. The researchers will use archived images from the Spitzer
Space Telescope and new ground-based spectroscopy and imaging at optical and
near-infrared wavelengths to compile color-magnitude diagrams for relevant stars
in at least 20 galaxies. The measurements will be used to answer many questions,
including: is a mid-infrared excess is a good marker of an LBV; is mass loss
from LBV?s mostly episodic; what is the frequency of major mass ejection events;
and do all massive stars undergo such outbursts?

Beyond the main science goals outlined above, the project will have broad
impacts by involving a postdoctoral scholar, and graduate and undergraduate
students who are already involved in the research. Also, the PI will release
data to the public, and has a public outreach component that supports monthly
public lectures at the Perkins Observatory. Results from this project will be of
significant complementary value for astronomers once James Webb Space Telescope
(JWST) is operational.