* 1108643
* Kinetic Monte Carlo Modeling and Simulation of Phase Boundaries and Polycrystals
* MPS,DMS
* 10/01/2011,09/30/2015
* Timothy Schulze, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* Victor Roytburd
* 09/30/2015
* USD 211,763.00

Schulze DMS-1108643

This project concerns kinetic Monte Carlo (KMC) models for the evolution of
crystals with phase and grain boundaries. KMC is especially useful for exploring
the dynamics of atomistic scale crystal growth problems, many of which have a
significant bearing on nanotechnology. The essence of the idea is to coarse-
grain a molecular dynamics (MD) simulation. While MD is conceptually simple,
robust, and faithful to the underlying physics, it is hopelessly slow in many
instances. This problem is particularly apparent when simulating the evolution
of crystalline solids, where individual atoms hover for long periods of time in
basins of attraction before making occasional transitions to neighboring
configurations. When the crystal is well defined, an alternative model that
replaces the Newtonian dynamics with a Markov chain readily suggests itself: One
replaces the original configuration space with an occupation array for a crystal
lattice that idealizes the arrangement of the basins of attraction, and
introduces transition probabilities based on transition state theory. Clearly,
such a scheme works best when the crystal is uniform -- free of dislocations,
grain boundaries, impurities and surface structures. Unlike MD, KMC models have
to be carefully adapted to handle these sorts of irregularities. While this is
complicated and requires specialized simulation software in each case, the
payoff is the ability to perform simulations on the scale of nano-devices --
something that is essentially impossible with MD. In this project, the principal
investigator addresses two specific challenges to KMC modeling of crystal
growth. The first is modeling of crystal-melt interfaces, melt-vapor interfaces
and tri-junctions, with the aim of applying the model to the growth of
nanowires. The second is the motion of grain boundaries within a polycrystal.

Technology, particularly within the micro-electronic industries, is
increasingly focused on smaller and smaller devices. As a result, it is now
important to be able to simulate device manufacturing and performance on atomic
length scales. There are relatively few computational tools that can resolve the
atomic scale behavior of a complicated system containing, say, a few thousand
atoms. One of the more promising approaches is kinetic Monte Carlo -- a model
that approximates the atomic scale motion of atoms that have perfect stacking
arrangements, i.e., that form perfect crystals. Crystals are, however,
idealizations, and they feature many defects that require special consideration.
Any atomic scale devices attached to crystals would similarly require special
treatment. This project is aimed at extending kinetic Monte Carlo models so that
they can handle such irregularities. The project is funded by the Division of
Mathematical Sciences and the Division of Materials Research.