* 1108675
* Collaborative Research: The Effects of Watershed Urbanization on In-Stream Transformation of Organic Nutrients within Running Waters
* BIO,EF
* 10/01/2010,04/30/2013
* Sujay Kaushal, University of Maryland, College Park
* Continuing Grant
* Elizabeth Blood
* 04/30/2013
* USD 197,999.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Urbanization has become a critical component of
global change, given its current extent and magnitude. Streams in urbanizing
areas are shifting from watershed nutrient transporters that reflect the
anthropogenic changes in the landscape and atmospheric deposition to nutrient
transformers that actively change the forms and ecological effects of N and P
delivered further downstream. Insufficient information exists regarding the
potential importance of coastal streams in transforming nutrients and consequent
effects on foodwebs. Through field studies, watershed assessments, and mesocosm
studies, the research will link changes in watershed urbanization to rates of in
stream processing of organic forms of nutrients. Innovative, state-of-the-art
analytical methods will be used to construct mass balances, assess changes in
bioavailability, fingerprint the watershed source, assess transformation rates,
and estimate the potential for in-stream generation of different fractions of
organic N&amp;P. Collaboration with the ongoing Baltimore LTER program and
habitat mapping will be used to relate the nutrient transformations to watershed
characteristics. Results will have broad relevance to eutrophocation problems in
coastal ecosystems and help determine when streams and rivers have the potential
to discriminate between streams that generate internal organic N&amp;P from
external subsidies of inorganic N&amp;P as a result of increasing urbanization.
Minority students from the ESA SEEDS project will participate in the
research.&lt;br/&gt;