* 1108977
* Evolution of disk galaxies
* MPS,AST
* 07/01/2011,12/31/2015
* Jerry Sellwood, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Continuing Grant
* Richard Barvainis
* 12/31/2015
* USD 422,046.00

Spiral patterns are one of the most important agents of dynamical evolution in
disk galaxies. They redistribute angular momentum, cause the random speeds of
stars to rise over time, cause radial mixing and large-scale turbulence, add
stars to the thick disk, and flatten rotation curves. This project is a
computational study of the effects of spiral patterns on disk evolution. The
Prinicpal Investigator (PI) has several well-developed gravitational N-body
codes that he will use with supported graduate students in two projects: (1) The
Milky Way's thick disk is composed of old stars, in conflict with the "spiral
churning" model for the formation of this component. The PI hypothesizes that
the appearance of a bar in the inner Milky Way may have shut off thick disk
growth by "churning." He plans simulations to test this idea, comparing the
evolution of similar disks in which bars are or are not formed. (2) It is still
ambiguous how spiral galaxies manage the so-called "disk-halo conspiracy," in
which the different contributions of the disk and dark halo gravitational fields
produce a flat observed rotation curve in the observable stars and gas. Simple
models by the PI and collaborators showed that spiral waves could cause the mass
distribution in a disk to rearrange itself until the rotation curve became flat;
he plans further simulations including "live" halos to verify the generality of
this behavior. Finally, the PI will continue work on recurring spiral patterns
and their observable consequences in local stellar population. The PI plans
careful N-body simulations of unprecedented quality for an in-depth study that
will uncover the details of the recurrence mechanism in simplified models.
Graduate students will assist with projects to show that the behavior persists
when simplifying assumptions are relaxed. The PI will disseminate results of
this work to the broader community through public lectures. He will involve
undergraduate and graduate students, and postdocs, in the research, providing
them with experience and training in the research process.