* 1108911
* Diffuse Ionized Gas in Galactic Halos: Multiwavelength Studies of the Milky Way and Magellanic System with WHAM-South
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2017
* Lawrence Haffner, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Glen Langston
* 08/31/2017
* USD 2,243,529.00

This renewal project is for the completion of the first comprehensive view of
the distribution and kinematics of the Milky Way's ionized gas regions in the
local universe using the Wisconsin H-Alpha Mapper (WHAM), a remotely controlled
Fabry-Perot astronomical facility. WHAM collects high-resolution optical
emission-line spectra from faint, diffuse sources, and its focused design is
sensitive to detect emission nearly a 100 million times fainter than the Orion
Nebula. With the instrument's new location on Cerro Tololo in Chile, the
investigators can target regions to determine the distribution and physical
properties of diffuse ionized gas over the southern sky of the Milky Way. The
investigators completed the first systematic spectral survey of the Milky Way in
the Balmer-alpha (H-alpha) emission line of hydrogen. This all sky survey
provides a sensitive view of ionized gas, and found a mix of bright, discrete H
II regions intertwined with large filaments, bubbles, and shells and revealed a
faint, pervasive background detected over the whole sky known as the warm
ionized medium (WIM). WHAM's new view includes one of the brightest, extended
regions of emission above star-forming regions in the inner Galaxy as well as
one of the largest diffuse H II regions in our sky. Spectra are used to study
the distribution of ionization and temperature of the gas within locally ionized
regions and across large regions of the Milky Way. The velocity of emitting
regions and the relationship of ionized gas to nearby hot stars and neutral gas
in large-scale structures can be influenced by past and present generation of
relatively short-lived massive stars. The study of complex regions provides
insights to energy transport processes in the Galactic disk and halo and traces
active star formation in the Galactic spiral arms, which is challenging to map
accurately. WHAM's kinematic resolution and multi-wavelength capability can
isolate specific large-scale emission features, which will provide a better
understanding how these features depend on environment, metallicity, and local
star formation rate. This study will complete several comprehensive, multiline
studies of large-scale emission in the Galaxy. The strengths of optical emission
from nitrogen, sulfur, oxygen, and helium relative to that of hydrogen depend on
the composition, temperature, heating, and ionization of the gas. The derived
properties of the warm ionized medium (WIM) in the inner Galaxy will be compared
to those in the outer Galaxy. Another goal is to study the ionized component of
the extended gaseous structures such as the Magellanic Stream, Bridge, and
Leading Arm of the Magellanic System, where elemental abundances, dust content,
and radiation fields differ significantly from those in our Galaxy. This helps
to understand how such ionized regions can be maintained so far from active star
formation and whether the ionized component contains a significant amount of
mass that not yet been detected. The WHAM project provides excellent
opportunities for undergraduate and graduate students to participate and
interact with a research-grade astronomical observatory. It contributes to
technological advances in remote observing techniques to improve the quality and
efficiency of data collection. The high-quality datasets will be of use by the
entire astronomical community. The observations provide essential direction for
new, large-scale MHD simulations of a multiphase interstellar medium where ISM
matter and energy are transferred to and from stars. WHAM contributes to the
fields of aeronomy, solar system astronomy, extragalactic astronomy, and
cosmology. Its deep sensitivity and velocity resolution enable studies of the
Earth's atmosphere, comets, and zodiacal dust. The full characterization of the
faint but pervasive ionized gas in the Galaxy needs to be understood for the
analysis of extragalactic and cosmic backgrounds.