* 1108086
* Track 1: GEOPATH: Geoscience Educational Opportunities Promoting Advancement to Higher Education
* GEO,GEO
* 08/15/2011,07/31/2014
* Roman Zajac, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Jill L. Karsten
* 07/31/2014
* USD 189,872.00

GeoPATH is a collaboration between the Yale Peabody Museum's after school
program EVOLUTIONS and Yale geoscience faculty together with the New Haven
Public Schools, the LSAMP program at the University of Connecticut, the
Department of Earth Sciences at Southern Connecticut State University, and the
Department of Biology &amp; Environmental Science at the University of New
Haven. The program has two major goals: (a) To promote interest in and knowledge
of the geosciences, science more generally, and related careers; and (b) To
create experiences that facilitate students' understanding of the importance of
college preparation and their eventual transition to the college environment.
GeoPATH provides career and college-focused opportunities in the geosciences for
50 New Haven high school students from traditionally underrepresented
communities. Students spend approximately 90 hours over the course of an
academic year at the Peabody Museum. The program provides students with exposure
to the world of geoscience research, internships, the experience of developing a
Museum exhibition that will be seen by thousands of visitors, field trips,
opportunities for paid work interpreting geoscience exhibits, and mentoring by
successful college students. Students receive academic credit for their
participation. Detailed program evaluation include longitutional student
tracking. GeoPATH robustly supports several objectives of the NSF GEO Education
and Diversity Strategic Plan 2010 -- 2015. Anticipated outcomes for the students
include increased understanding of and interest in the geosciences and
geoscience careers, improved knowledge to facilitate college preparation, career
awareness, and the development of transferable skills.