* 1108893
* Realizing the Promise of LSST Combined Probes of Dark Energy
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2015
* J. Anthony Tyson, University of California-Davis
* Continuing Grant
* Richard Barvainis
* 08/31/2015
* USD 699,646.00

Among the most important projects planned for the Large Synoptic Survey
Telescope (LSST) will be the measurement of the cosmological effects of dark
energy. These effects will be detected through their influence on the growth of
structure in the early universe and on weak gravitational lensing by galaxies
and galaxy clusters. In order for these efforts to succeed, studies of the
potential sources of error should begin now. The LSST survey, expected to
comprise of order 1 billion galaxies, will have such small statistical errors
that systematic errors - the most important being in the measurement of
photometric redshift and weak gravitational lens shear - may dominate. In this
project, the proposing team will carry out a comprehensive study of the origin
and impact of these systematic effects in dark energy measurements, and develop
algorithms, analysis tools and observing techniques to minimize their impact.
They will use the improved understanding of the residual systematics to simulate
the performance of LSST, as a precursor to construction. They have previously
found that dark energy constraints are sensitive to systematics in ways that
depend strongly on how separate techniques (such as weak lensing, cosmic shear,
and baryon acoustic oscillations) are combined. The team intends to exploit this
sensitivity and investigate new methods for controlling systematic error by
combining several observational probes in an optimal way. They will use end-to-
end simulations of LSST to develop and test these algorithms, and apply them to
the current data from the Deep Lens Survey (DLS) to produce science in the near
term. The team intends to make its techniques, data, and open-source software
publicly available with no proprietary period, with the expectation that their
photometric redshift algorithm will be widely used. In addition to contributing
to education through the mentoring of a postdoctoral researcher, the project
will also engage in public outreach and informal education by partnering in the
development of new tools to visualize the dark and luminous structure of the
Universe.