* 1108450
* Materials World Network: Nano-Structured InGaN Solar Cells Program
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2014
* Fernando Ponce, Arizona State University
* Continuing Grant
* Z.  Ying
* 08/31/2014
* USD 420,000.00

There is a worldwide effort to increase power generation through solar cells, to
meet targets in reducing greenhouse gases. One requirement is for high
efficiency multijunction solar cells (MJSCs) to extract power from concentrated
solar power (CSP) plants, which are expected to become central to the delivery
of solar power to national and super-grid systems. At present, such MJSCs must
combine different materials systems and are usually limited by the requirement
to lattice-match the individual cells to avoid efficiency losses due to defects.
This effort aims to circumvent these problems by investigating solar cells based
on InxGa1-xN, which has a direct band gap of 0.7-3.4 eV, spanning most of the
visible spectrum, thus promising MJSCs from a single materials system. To avoid
the problems of lattice mismatch and of material quality, which limit prototype
solar cells based on InxGa1-xN epilayers to low x (x&lt;0.3), the investigators
grow the InxGa1-xN in nanorod form, merging the nanorods using methods already
developed to provide a solar cell template. The team assembled, which combines
complementary expertise in growth and device fabrication (U. Nottingham),
structural characterization (U. Bristol), and nanoscale optical and electrical
characterization (Arizona State U.) and solar cell design and characterization
(in collaboration with NREL), aims to explore the properties of InxGa1-xN single
junction cells over the full composition range (0&lt;x&lt;1), with the UK
participants receiving support from the Engineering and Physical Sciences
Council of the UK. The team examines key fundamental properties of InxGa1-xN
nanorods, using transmission and scanning electron microscopy to determine the
materials requirements for growing defect-free InxGa1-xN nanorod arrays, and
overcoming the problem of lattice mismatch. The work also examines the
electronic properties of InxGa1-xN nanorods using novel cathodoluminescence and
electron holography studies, and time-resolved photoluminescence. Single
junction solar cells will be fabricated and characterized for InxGa1-xN nanorods
with low and high In content, and exploratory work will be carried out into a
novel two-junction nanorod cell including a tunnel junction, thus establishing
the requirements for the future development of InxGa1-xN MJSC devices.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The work aims to establish InGaN as a basis for (a)
photovoltaics across the entire visible spectrum and (b) high efficiency MJSCs
needed for CSP plants, by using a novel nanorod geometry to overcome the
materials limitations that affect continuous InGaN epilayers. The team assembled
brings together leading groups with a unique combination of expertise and
techniques designed to clarify the key materials issues, including the
fundamental properties of the nanorods and of prototype solar cells. As public
science literacy is critical to the development of sound policy, project
education/outreach efforts include contributions to the Arizona State
University's "Science is Fun" program to develop a 45-60 minute lesson suitable
for students in grades 4th through 12th. The objective is to (i) increase
student interest in science and engineering and encourage the pursuit of
advanced education in related technical fields, and (ii) elucidate how
intellectual innovations can impact future efficient use of renewable energy,
and help develop human infrastructure for the high-technology industry in
Arizona. A new course on materials for nano-structured photovoltaic devices is
also developed at Arizona State University to be included in the curriculum of
the newly established Science Master's in Nanoscience program.