* 1108211
* Materials World Network: Characterization and Modeling of the Interplay between Grain Boundaries and Heterogeneous Plasticity in Titanium
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2015
* Martin Crimp, Michigan State University
* Continuing Grant
* Diana Farkas
* 08/31/2015
* USD 480,000.00

The strengthening effect of grain boundaries is one of the key components in the
development of modern structural materials which is responsible for beneficial
effects arising from ultra fine grained and nanostructured materials, and grain
boundary engineering. The precise nature of the often beneficial effects of
grain boundaries, however, has not been understood to a level which would allow
for theory-guided optimization of microstructures and accelerated alloy
development. In this research, based on collaboration between Michigan State
University (MSU) and the Max Planck Institut für Eisenforschung (MPIE) in
Düsseldorf, Germany, the investigators combine, improve, and apply recently
developed approaches to examine and quantify the micromechanical behavior of
grain boundaries using techniques based upon microscopy and conical indentation
tests. Combined use of electron backscattered electron pattern mapping, atomic
force microscopy, 3-D x-ray characterization, and focused ion beam/electron
imaging methods provide quantified measures of activated slip behavior. These
methods are used to assess deformation caused by conical indentation to relate
detailed indentation topographies to the plastic anisotropy of single crystals.
The methods provide an efficiency advantage over traditional single and bi-
crystal experiments. Initially, ?single crystal? characterization will occur
using indents in grain interiors, and as modeling fidelity is developed using
dislocation density based constitutive models implemented in crystal plasticity
finite element analyses, indentations near and on grain boundaries will be used
to assess the grain boundary transmissivity of slip and mechanical twinning
behavior. From observed transmissivity behavior, models for grain boundary
transmissivity will be implemented into the constitutive
models.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The implemented approach, combined with state of
the art characterization and simulation methods, can lead to a quantitative
understanding of the interplay between grain boundaries and heterogeneous
plasticity in titanium polycrystals. Complementary skills in characterization
(MSU) and simulation (MPIE) are available to reach the stated goals. Extensive
exchanges between the two laboratories occur principally during summers in order
to integrate experimental and analytical outcomes.