* 1108776
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant: The Archaeology of Angel Mounds
* SBE,BCS
* 04/15/2011,12/31/2012
* Dru McGill, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 12/31/2012
* USD 8,365.00

Under the supervision of Dr. K. Anne Pyburn, Dru McGill will analyze data
collected from ceramic ceramics previously excavated from the Mississippian-era
archaeological site of Angel Mounds. Angel Mounds State Historic Site, located
on the Ohio River in southwest Indiana, is a civic-ceremonial center dating
between A.D. 1000-1450, which includes large platform mounds and hundreds of
structures surrounded by a fortification wall. Recent research has suggested the
existence of "neighborhoods" at Angel Mounds, organized by kinship
relationships. During Works Progress Administration-era, and subsequent Indiana
University field-programs, archaeologists removed over two million artifacts
from Angel Mounds, many of which have been minimally studied. McGill will focus
his analysis on approximately 4,000 ceramic sherds to help understand the
functions of residential groups and the organization of craft production at
Angel Mounds and other Mississippian archaeological sites. The research is
significant because it will shed new light on America's past. It will also help
scientists to understand the basic processes which led to the development and
maintenance of complex societies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Research on craft
production and social organization provides insight into cultural features which
are thought to influence a number of other theories and practices in
archaeology, including: subsistence, ethnicity, ideology, identity, political
economy, socio-political complexity, and kin and gender relations. A majority of
previous research on craft production has focused on highly decorated "prestige-
goods," which, while likely important to the political and economic strategies
of Mississippian elites, constitute a small percentage of pottery found at
Mississippian sites (approximately 1% at Angel Mounds). This study complements
earlier work by focusing on plain utilitarian pottery likely made in domestic
contexts. Utilitarian pottery will be analyzed by measuring various aspects of
the "recipes" and formation techniques used by potters to process clay and shape
pottery vessels, with the goal of determining if signatures exist for different
pottery-making neighborhoods, or if pottery was made according to other
standards (e.g. technological efficiency). By examining differences in pottery
production techniques between neighborhoods or kin groups in Angel Mounds, this
study has the potential to demonstrate intra-site diversity at Mississippian
sites and support the idea that "commoners" were active agents in the creation
of diverse Mississippian identities. Additionally, this research may contribute
to our understanding of the extent of elite control over craft production, and
the roles of women in households and kin groups in prehistoric
societies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will also have broader impacts for
public audiences. McGill will utilize his public education contacts at
elementary and secondary schools, libraries, and state parks in Indiana
(developed over five years of archaeology outreach experiences) to offer public
lectures, classroom visits, and informative pamphlets and posters. Through these
media, McGill will increase public knowledge about archaeology, the lives of
prehistoric peoples, and science generally. Project data and conclusions will
also be disseminated to the scientific community through publications and
presentations at professional conferences. Finally, the broader impacts of this
project include graduate student training for the author, and undergraduate
student training for project research assistants, who will gain insight into
collection management practices, ceramic analysis, and archaeology education.