* 1108391
* Atmospheric Hydrocarbons at GEOSummit, Greenland, as Tracers for Climate Change, Air Pollution Transport, and Oxidation Chemistry in the Arctic
* GEO,OPP
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2017
* Detlev Helmig, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Mercer
* 08/31/2017
* USD 462,251.00

This study is a contribution to the Arctic Observing Network (AON). It will
undertake 4 years of continuous measurements of atmospheric methane, and non-
methane hydrocarbons (NMHC; ethane, ethyne, propane, iso-butane, n-butane, iso-
pentane, n-pentane, benzene, toluene) at the Greenland Environmental Observatory
at Summit (GEOSummit). An existing monitoring system that has previously been
operated at Summit for two seasons will be deployed. This gas chromatography
instrument is specifically tailored towards operation at this remote arctic
site, as it is fully automated and remotely controllable. This instrument uses a
minimal amount of power and does not require cryogen and compressed gas
supplies, which make it highly favorable and cost efficient for Summit
conditions. A second analytical channel will be added to include monitoring of
the important climate gas methane with the same instrument. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merits: This project will deliver 4 years of continuous
atmospheric concentration data of methane, with approximately 2 hour time
resolution, and nine C2-C7 NMHC at low parts per trillion sensitivity (for NMHC)
at Summit. These data will expand upon the previous 2008-2010 NMHC measurements
from Summit, and will provide an overall 8 year (with a 2 year gap) record for
these gases. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: These measurements will be
highly complementary to the NMHC monitoring within the NOAA-INSTAAR global flask
sampling program, which, for the past 7 years, has provided bi-weekly NMHC data
for five arctic sites. The much higher resolution in-situ data from this study
will add value to the interpretation of the NMHC flask records. By applying
chemical transport modeling, the in-situ data will allow researchers to decipher
air pollution transport into the Arctic and contributions from different
emission source region contributions at lower latitudes. The methane and NMHC
monitoring will make a pivotal contribution to the World Meteorological
Organization (WMO) Global Atmospheric Watch (GAW) Volatile Organic Compound
(VOC) program, as it will provide the only high time resolution in-situ NMHC
site in the Arctic. This observational activity will also be presented in class
room teaching and seminars and be incorporated in INSTAAR?s outreach program,
i.e. on the ?Ozone and Snow? educational website. This project will promote a
new collaboration between INSTAAR at the University of Colorado and atmospheric
researchers at EMPA, Switzerland.