* 1108614
* Biomedical Engineering Society and Society for Physical Regulation in Biology and Medicine Conference on Cellular and Molecular Bioengineering; Miami, Florida; 4-8 January 2011
* ENG,CMMI
* 01/01/2011,12/31/2011
* Xiang-Dong Guo, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Dennis Robert Carter
* 12/31/2011
* USD 4,500.00

This grant provides funds to support nine graduate students and postdoctoral
fellows to attend the inaugural joint Biomedical Engineering Society (BMES) and
the Society for Physical Regulation in Biology and Medicine (SPRBM) Conference
on Cellular and Molecular Bioengineering (CMBE) (29th SPRBM Annual Scientific
Conference). The specific theme of 2011 joint conference will be: Molecular
Imaging and Mechanotransduction. Both the BMES and the SPRBM realized the
importance of Cellular and Molecular Bioengineering. In 2008, the BMES formed a
new society journal, Cellular and Molecular Bioengineering. Now, the inaugural
joint BMES-SPRBM Conference on CBME is the beginning of a new focus of the
promising subfield in biomedical engineering and much needed forum for this
exciting field and the new CMBE journal.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The specific
objectives of this grant are two-fold. The first is to provide funding support
to postdoctoral fellows and graduate students whose submitted papers have been
selected for podium presentation on the basis of scientific merits. The meeting
will provide a platform for the development of long-term interdisciplinary
interactions, and expose researchers in bioengineering, biology, and medicine to
the latest ideas and opportunities at the confluence of molecular imaging and
mechanotransduction. The second objective is to foster the emergence and growth
of the exciting sub-filed of CMBE. The specific aims of this meeting are: (1)
Delineate the current status of molecular imaging and mechanobiology. Leaders
from the molecular/cellular/tissue biomechanics with interests and applications
in molecular imaging and mechanotransduction fields will give an overview of
molecular imaging concepts and review the current state of mechanobiology, as
well as their research in molecular/cellular/tissue/ functions and tissue/organ
regeneration; and (2) Brainstorm the emerging field of cellular and molecular
bioengineering with a focus on molecular imaging and mechanotransduction.
Formulate a whitepaper regarding the field of cellular and molecular
bioengineering and provide guidelines and blueprints for the cellular and
molecular bioengineering field to BMES and SPRBM societies as well as the broad
CMBE communities. The whitepaper will be published in the CMBE as the outcome of
this joint conference.