* 1108153
* Maine EPSCoR End-to-End Connectivity for Sustainability Science Collaboration
* O/D,EPS
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2013
* Bruce Segee, University of Maine
* Standard Grant
* Sian Mooney
* 08/31/2013
* USD 1,000,000.00

Abstract

Proposal Number: EPS-1108153

Proposal Title: Maine EPSCoR End-to-End Connectivity for Sustainability Science
Collaboration

Institution: University of Maine

Project Director: Michael Eckardt

Project Description

This RII C2 proposal from Maine (ME) EPSCoR is focused on addressing last-mile
bottlenecks at seven campuses of the University of Maine System. Maine's
Research and Education Network, MaineREN, delivers high performance inter-campus
fiber connectivity to public and private institutions across the state, but the
intra-campus networking has lacked the same investment by the state.

The proposed improvements include: - Rewiring eight buildings at the University
of Maine Orono Campus (UMaine) with Cat-6 cable, increasing end-to-end
performance to 10 Gbps. - Upgrading the fiber backbone between the two
University of Southern Maine (USM) campuses, one in Portland and one in Gorham,
12 miles apart. In addition, upgrades will be done for the buildings housing the
ME RII Track-1 researchers, including the Law Building, Library, Bailey Hall,
and the buildings that make up the fiber core for the Portland campus. -
Upgrades to edge routers to connect to the MaineREN backbone for UMaine Augusta
(UMA), UMaine Farmington (UMF), UMaine Fort Kent (UMFK), UMaine Machias (UMM),
and UMaine Presque Isle (UMPI).

Intellectual Merit The proposed upgrades in network connections will greatly
improve the networking capacity available to the University of Maine system and
enable researchers to take advantage of state-wide upgrades with improved end-
to-end performance. The proposed RII C2 connectivity improvements will support
the Maine RII Track-1 Sustainability Science Initiative (SSI) by increasing
bandwidth availability for the SSI data management and visualization approaches.
SSI is advancing the emerging field of sustainability science in three
integrative ways: 1) examining interactions between social and ecological
systems (SES) as landscapes change in response to urbanization, forest
management, and climate variability; 2) investigating how much SES knowledge
affects, and is influenced by, the actions and decision of stakeholders, with a
goal of strengthening connections between knowledge and actions; 3) evaluating
the factors that facilitate and impede interdisciplinary collaboration, with a
goal of identifying and implementing individual and institutional best practices
that are needed to support successful interdisciplinary research programs in
sustainability science.

Broader Impacts By filling in relatively small gaps in the infrastructure, Maine
will be able to make very large gains in the effectiveness of the state's
cyberinfrastructure (CI) that will allow researchers to fully utilize
investments to improve research effectiveness, promote collaboration, improve
K-12 interaction, and develop the future workforce of the state. The networking
upgrades will support the 300 researchers, students, and stakeholders that are
part of the SSI collaboration over 17 different disciplinary fields. The SSI
activities have the potential to increase Maine's research capacity and
competitiveness and grow Maine's green innovation economy. The proposed project
will leverage the RII Track-1 programs for broader impacts.