* 1108964
* Imaging the Outskirts of Nearby Disk Galaxies
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2016
* Chris Mihos, Case Western Reserve University
* Continuing Grant
* Richard Barvainis
* 08/31/2016
* USD 353,574.00

Precisely how galaxies initially form and how they change throughout their
lifetime are among the least understood problems in astrophysics. Many projects
are centered on unraveling these mysteries. This project relies on the outskirts
of galaxy disks to provide clues about the dynamical evolution of their host
galaxy. In galaxy outskirts are preserved the dynamical signatures of past
accretions and evolutionary processes such as radial migration, accretion, star
formation thresholds, and low level in situ star formation. The principal
investigator plans to obtain deep, wide-field images of nearby disk galaxies
within 4--10 Mpc to study the structure, stellar populations, and star forming
properties of their outer disks. The combination of the investigators'
experience with deep, very low surface brightness measurements and the unique
telescope/detector instrumentation are ideally suited toward this project. The
primary scientific motivations are (1) to determine the structure of extended
galaxy disks, (2) to determine how much star formation has contributed to the
growth of outer disks, (3) to determine how accretion shaped nearby galaxies,
and (4) to determine how surface photometry and discrete star counts compare in
their ability to probe the outskirts of galaxies.

Educationally, this project will provide opportunities for beginning students to
get hands-on research observatory experience---as an observer and as an
instrumentalist. Such training is critical for students and for an astronomical
community that needs technically-trained scientists. The principal investigator
will continue his excellent history of providing his imaging and simulations to
planetarium shows and to public outreach web sites, and he will give public
talks at local astronomy clubs and the Cleveland Museum of Natural History.