* 1108833
* Collaborative Research: Learning About New Demands in Schools: Considering Algebra Policy Environments [LANDSCAPE]
* EDU,DRL
* 08/01/2011,07/31/2016
* Beth Herbel-Eisenmann, Michigan State University
* Continuing Grant
* Finbarr Sloane
* 07/31/2016
* USD 781,458.00

The main purpose of the proposed study is to investigate and report on how
school districts are responding to the universal early algebra demand. This is
in response to the pressures on school districts to have all students complete
Algebra I, or its equivalent, by grade 9. A survey will be administered to a
national sample of school districts to gather information on what policies the
district has on students taking Algebra I and how these policies are being
implemented. Case studies will be performed for 12 of the school districts
surveyed to produce more detailed information on the policy, what decisions are
made for placing students in different formats of the Algebra I course, and how
teachers are selected to teach these courses. The work will be done by
researchers at Michigan State University in collaboration with researchers at
the University of Pennsylvania. Information generated from this project will
inform policy (district as well as national) related to STEM education and for
influencing students' opportunities to learn particularly relevant to
underrepresented students who are most frequently affected by policies related
to algebra. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A survey will be constructed and administered
to one knowledgeable person at each of the 1365 selected school districts. The
districts will be selected from clusters defined by existing state graduation
requirements for mathematics. Questions on the survey will seek responses to
what pressures district leadership have for universal early algebra and ways the
district is responding to these pressures. Case studies will be conducted at 12
school districts to gather more specific information on curricular, human
resources, organizational, and assessment strategies that are being employed.
The project will be supported by two mathematics education consultants and an
advisory board. An evaluator will examine the procedures and will provide both
formative and summative feedback along with an independent report on the
progress of the project. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Findings from the study will be
disseminated to a broad array of audiences through presentations, research
journal articles, and policy briefs that will be widely available. The findings
are likely to be of great interests at the national, state, and district levels
and inform policy as the nation struggles to increase the rigor and proportion
of students who graduate from high school and are college and career ready.