* 1108210
* Increasing Participation of Underrepresented Minorities in the Geosciences by Supporting the Faculty Who Teach Them
* GEO,GEO
* 09/15/2011,08/31/2013
* Heather Houlton, American Geological Institute
* Standard Grant
* Jill L. Karsten
* 08/31/2013
* USD 182,637.00

The American Geological Institute is working to increase the number of highly
successful geoscience faculty members from underrepresented communities, with a
longer term goal of increasing the diversity of the student population engaged
in geoscience education and career paths. This project is addressing the key
issue of supporting faculty members who are able to serve effectively as role
models and mentors to underrepresented minority students, while also maximizing
their own professional success. The project is engaging underrepresented
minority geoscience faculty at all institutions and all geoscience faculty at
minority serving institutions (MSIs). Thirty (30) early career faculty and
future faculty graduate students are participating in a 2.5 day workshop pilot
focused on enhancing research productivity, instructional excellence, and
service to the profession. The workshop pilot, which is based on a successful
model implemented by the National Academy of Engineering, includes research and
grant-writing advice, networking, career opportunities from professional
societies, and teaching resources, as well as targeted interactions to evaluate
the unique challenges faced by underrepresented minorities in the geoscience
community. Participants are nominated by their departments or invited by the
conveners to become leaders in the community working towards improving diversity
in the geosciences. Follow-on interactions to measure the longitudinal impact of
the workshop on participant success and to evaluate changes in their perception
and/or experience regarding what were identified as unique issues facing
underrepresented minority faculty are included. As a persistent resource
following the workshop, the National Academy of Engineering (NAE) is
incorporating video segments from the presentations and discussions into its "PI
Guide" website, which serves as a virtual community for current and aspiring PIs
to share resources and best practices in developing and managing an academic
career. Workshop conveners will maintain support for the participants through
follow-up meetings at two professional society annual meetings.