* 1108847
* Non-Convex Homogenization and Applications to (Ferromagnetic) Shape-Memory Polycrystals
* MPS,DMS
* 10/01/2011,09/30/2015
* Pedro Ponte Castaneda, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Eugene Gartland
* 09/30/2015
* USD 232,474.00

Ponte Castaneda DMS-1108847

The main objective of this proposal is the development of mathematical tools
for modeling the shape-memory effect and pseudo-elasticity in shape-memory
polycrystals. For this purpose, the investigator makes use of suitable
generalizations of the linear comparison homogenization methods for these
material systems, incorporating the effects both of crystallographic texture and
of morphological texture (as determined by the two-point correlations of the
microstructures). The main mathematical challenge arises as a consequence of the
lack of convexity (or, more precisely, quasi-convexity) of the relevant energy
functions. It is known that this breakdown of convexity leads to the development
of additional microstructures at the single crystal level, which lies at the
heart of the shape-memory effect. Because of this, linear comparison estimates
are also developed for the "relaxation" (or quasi-convexification) of single-
crystal shape-memory alloys (SMAs), exploiting a recently uncovered connection
between homogenization at the polycrystal level and relaxation at the single-
crystal level. The project results in novel and highly efficient multi-scale
modeling techniques capable of handling complex microstructures, coupled
strongly nonlinear response, microstructure evolution, and the possible
development of instabilities. The mathematical techniques developed in this work
are of broad application to large classes of polymeric, metallic, biological,
and geological material systems, including multi-functional materials, and lend
themselves to numerical implementation in constitutive subroutines for use with
standard numerical packages.

The shape-memory effect is the ability of certain materials to recover, upon
heating, apparently permanent deformation sustained below a certain critical
temperature. This effect is usually accompanied by pseudo-elasticity whereby
single-crystal samples of these materials are observed to undergo fairly large
strains (in the order of 10%) at nearly constant stress, which is fully
recovered upon unloading. These two properties make shape-memory alloys (SMAs)
very attractive as low-frequency, robust actuators and sensing devices for a
variety of novel technological applications. However, SMAs are normally used in
polycrystalline form, typically as wires, or thin strips and films, where the
shape-memory effect is much reduced. For this reason, it is essential to
understand and model the relations between the single-crystal behavior, the
microstructure, and the macroscopic behavior of the polycrystals. Improvements
in the modeling of SMA polycrystals should result in improved performance for
these materials, which are being used extensively in industry, as actuators,
sensors, couplings, and electrical connectors, as well as in an ever increasing
number of medical and robotics applications.