* 1108902
* WAVES 2011:  International Conference on Linear and Nonlinear Wave Phenomena
* MPS,DMS
* 02/15/2011,01/31/2012
* Jose Nathan Kutz, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Henry Warchall
* 01/31/2012
* USD 21,000.00

This award supports travel for US participants in the "Tenth International
Conference on Mathematical and Numerical Aspects of Waves (Waves 2011)," held
25-29 July 2011 at the Simon Fraser University Vancouver campus, BC, Canada. The
meeting focuses on mathematical developments in the theory of wave propagation
and its applications. Themes for the meeting include forward and inverse
scattering, fast computational techniques, approximate boundary conditions,
domain decomposition, nonlinear wave phenomena, water waves and coastal
modeling, guided waves and random media, and medical and seismic
imaging.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The meeting is a satellite conference of the
International Congress on Industrial and Applied Mathematics (ICIAM 2011), held
in Vancouver the preceding week.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In addition to invited
talks, the meeting includes invited minisymposia, a poster session to showcase
student achievements, tutorial lectures for graduate students, and an "Industry
Meet-and-Greet" to enhance interactions between academic researchers and
representatives from interested companies. The conference encourages and
supports participation by graduate students, junior researchers, and members of
under-represented groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Conference web site:
http://www.sfu.ca/WAVES/