* 1108176
* Materials World Network: III-nitride Nanomaterials Growth and Control for Solid-State Cavity Quantum Electrodynamics
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2011,07/31/2014
* Chee Wei Wong, Columbia University
* Continuing Grant
* Z.  Ying
* 07/31/2014
* USD 318,000.00

The strongly quantum-confined III-nitride material system fundamentally offers
the distinct opportunity to operate at high temperatures (200K or more) for
scalable semiconductor cavity quantum electrodynamics. Supported by advances in
materials growth, optical spectroscopy, and first-principles modeling, this
research examines the combination of InGaN quantum dots with mesoscopic optical
cavities for solid-state cavity quantum electrodynamics. Optimization of the
materials growth and device nanofabrication is performed, to examine low defect
density growth. Single quantum dots are targeted for light emission and its
modification, as well as nonclassical optics. This research combines the
expertise of two groups: III-nitrides materials growth at the Institute of
Materials Research and Engineering (IMRE) in Singapore, and optical
characterization and photonic crystals at Columbia University. The devices will
be optically probed for the exciton characteristics. Microcavities such as
whispering gallery modes and photonic band gap cavities will be examined.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Materials World Network project enables critical
complementary efforts between scientists in the United States and Singapore,
providing invaluable experience to the graduate students and senior scientists
in different working environments. This collaboration also seeds future efforts
in the area of solid-state physics and quantum information processing. This
research is complemented with international education and exchange efforts,
involving iterated feedback and interactions between the two institutions on
materials growth and optical spectroscopy, co-supervision of PhD students,
participation of the US personnel internationally, and exchange of senior
research staff. Furthermore, high-school teacher and undergraduate student
exchanges are supported. To support this international activity, video
teleconference reviews are also held. The research developed in this
collaborative program will be disseminated on the web as well as through
international conferences and publications.