* 1108788
* RUI: Stability and Interaction of Coherent Structures in Lattice Differential Equations
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2011,07/31/2015
* Aaron Hoffman, Franklin W. Olin College of Engineering
* Standard Grant
* Victor Roytburd
* 07/31/2015
* USD 94,800.00

Much effort in the theory of spatially extended dynamical systems has been
devoted to the mechanisms, such as traveling waves, by which activity (or energy
or mass) is transported from one region of the spatial domain to another.
Professor Hoffman will study the stability and interaction of coherent
structures, i.e. exponentially localized traveling waves and pulses, in lattice
differential equations (LDE). This includes (i) multidimensional stability and
interaction of planar fronts in discrete reaction diffusion equations; (ii)
collision properties of solitary waves in Hamiltonian lattices such as the
Fermi-Pasta-Ulam lattice; (iii) strong interaction of coherent structures in
dissipative systems such as annihilation of pulses in the discrete Fitzhugh-
Nagumo equation; (iv) Stability of pushed fronts in unidirectional lattice
differential equations such as those obtained from upwind discretization of
advection-reaction equations or in cellular neural network models. One advantage
of working in the lattice setting is that existence and uniqueness is well-
known, hence one can immediately turn to more detailed questions concerning the
dynamics. At the same time, the interaction between the continuous temporal
dynamics and the discrete spatial structure can give rise to interesting and
subtle phenomenon, such as fronts facing rational directions behaving
differently from fronts facing irrational
directions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Nonlinear lattice differential equations are
typically too complex to solve explicitly in the sense of writing down a formula
in terms of known functions. However, the methods of dynamical systems can be
used to obtain less detailed information and this is often sufficient for the
purposes of scientific inquiry. For example, consider the following questions:
As a crystal grows, what shape will it approach? As an alloy cools, how will its
phase boundaries evolve? Given two signals propagating along the same fiber, how
will they interact? At what rate will an invasive species encroach upon native
habitat? The Principal Investigator is concerned with developing mathematical
techniques to answer these and similar questions for idealized physical models
that admit spatially discrete coherent structures. Undergraduate students will
participate in this research.