* 1108864
* A new approach to problems of global regularity for the 3D Navier-Stokes equations and other dissipative PDEs: the use of Kolmogorov's dissipation range and intermittency
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/2011,07/31/2015
* Alexey Cheskidov, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Henry Warchall
* 07/31/2015
* USD 154,130.00

The problems of blow-up for the Navier-Stokes and Euler equations have been
extensively studied for decades using different techniques. This research is
aimed at developing a new unified approach to the blow-up problem for the
equations of incompressible fluid motion. Motivated by Kolmogorov's theory of
turbulence, the project introduces a time-dependent dissipation wavenumber that
separates low modes where the Euler dynamics is predominant from the high modes
where the viscous forces take over. This frequency separation will be used to
obtain new regularity criteria, uniqueness conditions, local wellposedness
results, conditions preventing type I blow-up. The developed technique will also
be applied to related equations. The methods to be used will combine harmonic
analysis tools and classical techniques for the Navier-Stokes and Euler
equations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research is devoted to several fundamental
open questions concerning the equations of fluid motion. The equations were
introduced almost two centuries ago but are still not well understood
mathematically. Even though the equations are broadly used by physicists and
engineers for real-life applications, and are widely believed to be an accurate
representation of the physical phenomena involved, the existence and uniqueness
of solutions is still not known. A mathematical proof of existence of solutions
would justify the equations definitively. The proposed research is also expected
to shed light on certain fundamental issues related to turbulence. Turbulence,
often referred to as the last unsolved problem in classical physics, is a
crucial phenomenon occurring in fluid flows around airplane bodies, vehicles,
ships, and blades of turbines. A better mathematical understanding of turbulence
will lead to improvements in the design of these objects.