* 1108624
* Anomalous diffusion in pattern-forming systems, and applications
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2011,07/31/2014
* Vladimir Volpert, Northwestern University
* Continuing Grant
* Henry Warchall
* 07/31/2014
* USD 356,000.00

This project is devoted to development of a theory of pattern formation,
nonlinear dynamics and transport in systems with anomalous diffusion.
Applications to a number of significant problems, such as pattern-forming
reaction-diffusion problems and drug delivery problems, will be investigated.
Unlike regular diffusion, in anomalous diffusion the mean square displacement
behaves as a power function of time. If the exponent is less than one the
diffusion process is slower than normal diffusion (subdiffusion), and if the
exponent is greater than one it is faster than normal (superdiffusion).
Mathematical description of anomalous diffusion involves integro-differential
operators which have to be derived from appropriate continuous time random walk
models and leads to novel mathematical problems. Specifically, the investigators
study&lt;br/&gt;(i) Pattern formation in growing domains, both for normal
diffusion and anomalous diffusion, focusing on the singular perturbation case
when some of the diffusion coefficients are asymptotically small;&lt;br/&gt;(ii)
Turing pattern selection in reaction - anomalous diffusion systems, in
particular, the stripes-spots selection;&lt;br/&gt;(iii) Drug delivery problems
which include development of an approximate analytic theory of subdiffusive
problems with moving free boundaries; study of models of bioerodible controlled
drug delivery devices governed by subdiffusive transport of the chemicals,
transdermal drug release in the presence of an electric field i.e. accompanied
by iontophoresis and others.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Controlled drug delivery has
been attracting a great deal of attention in the medical community for years as
an efficient way of providing treatment for a wide class of diseases. Various
drug delivery devices are based on mass transfer of the given drug towards
particular organs, in which either the mass transfer rate, or place, or both are
prescribed according to certain medical protocols. Much progress has been
achieved in the design and development of various controlled drug delivery
systems, and many people routinely take medicine designed for controlled
release. Mathematical modeling of drug delivery systems is very important since
it can provide a better understanding and a quantitative description of the
physical, chemical and biological processes governing the performance of the
systems. On the basis of this description, better controlled drug delivery
systems can be designed. There exists experimental evidence that drug diffusion
toward the biological target is not normal but rather slow, so-called sub-
diffusion, as the drug molecule has to diffuse through a very crowded
environment. The investigators will study drug transport governed by sub-
diffusion in order to obtain better understanding of drug delivery processes. In
addition, the investigators will study problems of pattern formation in
reaction-diffusion systems where subdiffusion, as well as superdiffusion are
important. The latter is typical of some processes in plasmas, semiconductors,
surface reactions and many others. Training of a PhD student through this
research is an integral part of the project.