* 1108427
* Continuous Spatial and Radiative Measurements of Arctic Clouds Leading to a Network of Compact Infrared Cloud Imagers
* GEO,OPP
* 09/15/2011,08/31/2015
* Joseph Shaw, Montana State University
* Standard Grant
* William Ambrose
* 08/31/2015
* USD 570,590.00

Understanding the changing Arctic climate requires detailed knowledge of the
spatial and radiative properties of Arctic clouds. However, quantifying the
relationships between cloud temporal and spatial distribution and radiative
impacts requires more continuous and accurate measurements. Important gaps in
the capabilities of current satellite- and ground-based cloud sensors can be
filled with an Arctic network of ground-based long-wave infrared cloud imagers.
This project will deploy an Infrared Cloud Imager (ICI) to measure the spatial
and temporal distribution and optical properties of Arctic clouds continuously
(day and night) for a full annual cycle at Barrow, Alaska, while also developing
a new, compact version of this unique instrument that will enable future
operation of a network of autonomous cloud sensors throughout the non-coastal
Arctic. ICI data will enable many studies on relationships such as cloud
spatial-temporal variability and cloud radiative forcing. Broader impacts will
include providing an immediately valuable data stream in a cross-agency
cooperation between the NSF and the Department of Energy (DOE), helping to
establish the long-needed capability of diurnal cloud amount measurements at the
North Slope of Alaska facility in Barrow, Alaska, and providing unique cross-
disciplinary training of graduate and undergraduate students in engineering and
science.