* 1108856
* Conference: CSHL Conference on Yeast Cell Biology; August 16-20, 2011; Cold Spring Harbor, New York
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2011,07/31/2012
* David Stewart, Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory
* Standard Grant
* Gregory W. Warr
* 07/31/2012
* USD 10,528.00

Research in the past decade has spurred tremendous progress in our understanding
of molecular mechanisms that underlie cell function. Advances have come from
multiple cell types and organisms. Notably, yeast systems often have been at the
forefront in the discovery of new proteins, pathways, structures, and in
mechanistic insights. Despite its existence as a unicellular organism, yeast
research has also revealed unexpected insights into the physiology of
multicellular organisms and the functions of specialized tissues. Yeast cell
biology continues to be a vibrant field of research, and yeast systems are
critically important to the larger research community by serving as the test bed
for new concepts and technologies. The intellectual merit of the meeting series
on Yeast Cell Biology (2011, 2013 and 2015) is that it will create a premier
forum for the discussion and exchange of cutting-edge discoveries about the
internal functions of eukaryotic cells. The program will include eight sessions
covering a wide range of topics in cell biology including membrane trafficking,
cytoskeleton, the cell cycle, polarity, chromosomes, nuclear organization, and
signaling, with a focus on higher order regulation that integrates these diverse
events. Each session will be led by two outstanding and well-known investigators
in the relevant area. With the exception of short talks presented by the session
chairs, all of the talks and posters to be presented will be selected from
submitted abstracts, and most of the talks will be given by students,
postdoctoral fellows and other junior investigators. It is expected that more
than 275 scientists will attend. Of these, over half are likely to be graduate
students and postdoctoral fellows. The meeting will serve to provide a
stimulating environment for the free flowing discussion of some of the most
exciting data and concepts at the frontiers of knowledge in cell biology. Given
the rapid pace of developments in the field, this meeting presents an exciting
opportunity for participants to learn about recent breakthroughs that will be
relevant to their own research both in yeast and in other systems. The broader
impacts of the proposed activity are manifold. First, they include the
scientific implications for other fields beyond yeast cell biology, as
discoveries in this field will continue to foster a rapid pace of fundamental
discoveries and insights that impact the physiologies of all life forms. Second,
they also include elements of education, training, resource sharing, and
opportunities for interaction and collaboration. In particular, the meeting will
provide: (i) training opportunities for junior scientists that will promote the
development of presentation skills as well as overall scientific quality and
analytical rigor; (ii) an intimate setting that will foster meaningful
scientific interactions among scientists at all career levels; (iii) the
dissemination of knowledge among multiple strata of research and educational
institutions; (iv) sharing of resources, both material and informational; and
(v) opportunities for the initiation of collaborations, which can benefit
scientists from smaller labs and/or from primarily undergraduate (teaching)
institutions who may have fewer resources and more limited access to cutting-
edge technologies than do scientists from major research institutions.