* 1108877
* Support for the 2011 SnowPAC Workshop in Particle Astrophysics and Cosmology.  Jan. 31- Feb.4, 2011 in Salt Lake City, Utah.
* MPS,PHY
* 03/01/2011,02/29/2012
* David Kieda, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Jonathan Whitmore
* 02/29/2012
* USD 8,000.00

This award will provide participant support for the 2011 Snowbird Particle
Astrophysics, Astronomy, and Cosmology workshop (SnowPAC 2011, January 31 to
February 4, 2011 in Salt Lake City, Utah). The SnowPAC conference is an
international conference that seeks to review the current status of recent
developments in particle astrophysics, dark matter, dark energy and cosmology,
to establish new cross-connections between these disciplines, and to establish
new collaborative ties between individuals working in these research
areas.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The funds will be used for increasing participation
in the conference by young scientists, including graduate students, postdocs,
and young faculty members. These funds will be used to provide travel and local
accommodation expenses of these individuals in order to enable their
participation in the conference. Improving the participation by under-
represented minorities is a high priority for use of these
funds.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Broader Impact of this proposal derives through
the following elements:&lt;br/&gt;1) Development of new, cross-disciplinary
research ties between young scientists;&lt;br/&gt;2) Establishment of a yearly
conference series in particle astrophysics, astronomy and cosmology that can
result in a long term effort to provide a forum to integrate research ideas
between particle astrophysics, astronomy and cosmology; and&lt;br/&gt;3)
Providing increased national visibility and research connections for the growing
astronomy and astrophysics community in the Intermountain West.