* 1108466
* Materials World Network: 2-D Ion Conducting Bismuth Vanadates for Electrochemical Devices
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2015
* Paul Fuierer, New Mexico Institute of Mining and Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Lynnette Madsen
* 08/31/2015
* USD 330,000.00

This project, based on a research collaboration between participants at New
Mexico Tech (NMT) and the University of Bayreuth (UBT), Germany, seeks to
develop synthesis techniques, electrochemical property measurements and device
designs that enable exploitation of a family of ceramics, known as BIMEVOX, with
signs of very high oxygen ion conductivity but challenging complex layered
structures responsible for two-dimensional transport behavior. A main objective
is to build detailed defect chemistry and direction dependent oxygen transport
models for the most promising member of this family, Bi4(CuyV1-y)O11-d. Enabled
by this fundamental understanding, the successful manipulation of BIMEVOX
ceramics could lead to a new class of low-temperature operation (&lt;400 C)
electrochemical materials and devices, such as direct ionic thermoelectric O2
sensors, mixed potential gas sensors, de-NOx catalysts, and single chamber fuel
cells, all with significant impact on global issues of energy and environment.
The project draws upon the respective strengths of the collaborators. Prof. Paul
Fuierer at NMT oversees students in the synthesis and structural
characterization of textured BIMEVOX ceramics. A unique hot-forging process
provides bulk specimens which are idealized with respect to grain orientation
and are used to determine the matrices of fundamental second rank tensor
properties according to cylindrical symmetry. Hot-forging also provides
idealized near theoretical density specimens for electrochemical measurements
(pO2-dependent conductivity and thermoelectric power). New powder and thick film
techniques can yield larger surface area coatings and membranes with high
preferred orientation adaptable to device applications. Prof.-Eng. Ralf Moos,
chair of the Functional Materials Dept. at UBT, and supported by the German
Science Foundation (Deutsche Forschungsgemeinshaft) provides expertise in the
interpretation of thermoelectric and thermo-chemical data, as well as gas-sensor
design, construction and testing. His laboratory test benches with precise
atmosphere control and conductivity/impedance measurements enable the full range
of characterization necessary. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Student appreciation for
and mastering of both crystalline structure and defect chemistry in ionic
ceramics is an educational goal of the project. Graduate students involved in
this project are trained in both fundamental materials characterization and
thermo-electro-chemical property measurements using state-of-the-art equipment.
The collaboration enhances the scientific and cultural experiences of US
students, most notably through semester-long PhD student exchanges and European
conferences and workshops. NMT is an EPSCoR participant and has Title III and
Title V designation as a Hispanic-serving research institution, so the project
contributes to diversity in the science and engineering professions.