* 1108127
* OEDG Track 1: Expanding Geoscience Diversity through Simulated Field Environments for Students with Physical Disabilities
* GEO,GEO
* 08/15/2011,01/31/2015
* Donald Stredney, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Jill L. Karsten
* 01/31/2015
* USD 238,874.00

This collaboration between Ohio State University and Georgia State University is
addressing the problem of limited inclusion of students with mobility
impairments as participants in field experiences required in the geoscience
curriculum. This underrepresented community has been previously excluded due to
limiting physical conditions that are generally required for field study, which
provides critical insights for developing geoscience expertise. The project is
using integration of emerging simulation technologies and techniques to provide
a rich virtual environment of a real cave and karst geological field site for
students with mobility impairments. Through the development of a synthetic
field-based module that employs a virtual environment for presenting an
alternative to the field experience, this project is assessing the effectiveness
of engaging the student community and its efficacy in the curriculum when used
as an alternative representation of field experiences. The expected outcome is
that the emulation would preclude the need for physical "presence" of
traditional field studies, and provide adequate representations for pedagogic
needs. Additionally, creating such an environment provides supplemental
resources for both current formal and informal educational settings. Expansion
of the virtual environment to incorporate other types of geologically-
significant field settings is a longer-term goal of the project.