* 1108631
* Union of Subspaces and Manifold Data Modeling: Theory, Algorithms, Testing, and Applications
* MPS,DMS
* 10/01/2011,09/30/2015
* Akram Aldroubi, Vanderbilt University
* Standard Grant
* Michael Steuerwalt
* 09/30/2015
* USD 268,368.00

Aldroubi&lt;br/&gt;DMS-1108631&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; There is a growing interest
in computer science, engineering, and mathematics for modeling signals in terms
of union of subspaces and manifolds. Subspace segmentation and clustering of
high-dimensional data drawn from a union of subspaces are especially important
with many practical applications in computer vision, image and signal
processing, communications, and information theory. For example, recent
paradigms for reconstructing signals assume models that consist of union of
subspaces, e.g., the reconstruction of signals with finite rates of innovation.
Another example is in compressed sampling where signals are assumed to be sparse
in some basis or in some dictionary. This assumption implies that the signals
live in a union of subspaces. The subspace clustering problem in computer vision
is yet another important example in which data are drawn from a union of low-
dimensional subspaces. Thus, a mathematical framework for finding such models
from observed data is fundamental. In this project the investigator develops a
mathematical framework together with algorithms for data modeling in terms of
union of subspaces and manifolds. The mathematical theory is connected to the
geometry of Hilbert and Banach spaces, topology, nonlinear approximation,
optimization, and probability.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; The investigator develops a
mathematical framework and algorithms for describing data by representing them
as composed of components that live in restricted sets of the data space, for
instance, in subspaces or manifolds. The theory and methods developed by the
investigator unify, extend, and complement some of the techniques used in
sampling theory, subspace clustering, and the dictionary design problem. The
applications are fundamental to many problems in engineering and biomedicine,
including motion tracking in videos, data classification and segmentation such
as face recognition, and brain morphology. The project is supported by the
Division of Mathematical Sciences and the Division of Computing and
Communication Foundations.