* 1108451
* Development of the Autonomous Arctic Infrared Observer (AAIRO)
* GEO,OPP
* 09/15/2011,02/28/2015
* Penny Rowe, Regents of the University of Idaho
* Standard Grant
* William Ambrose
* 02/28/2015
* USD 199,999.00

The project will be a ?proof of concept? for a new instrument platform called
the Autonomous Arctic Infrared Observer (AAIRO). The primary goal is to assess
the value of data products retrieved from simulated AAIRO measurements relative
to instruments that are currently deployed as part of the ICECAPS experiment.
[ICECAPS stands for Integrated Characterization of Energy, Clouds, Atmospheric
state, and Precipitation at Summit.] A computer model will be developed that
simulates the operation of the AAIRO by degrading the spectral resolution of
spectra from the Polar Atmospheric Emitted Radiance Interferometer (P-AERI)
deployed at Summit, Greenland. Algorithms will be used to retrieve atmospheric
properties from the simulated AAIRO spectra. Retrieved properties will include
near-surface temperature structure, trace gas amounts of water vapor, carbon
monoxide, and methane, and macrophysical (fraction, base height) and
microphysical properties (phase, effective particle radius, optical depth) of
clouds. Retrieved properties from the AAIRO simulator will be compared to those
retrieved from the suite of ICECAPS instruments. This project will prove the
usefulness of the AAIRO as a complementary instrument within the broader context
of NSF?s Arctic Observing Network and will set the stage for future development
of the actual AAIRO instrument. A graduate student and a postdoctoral fellow who
will have the opportunity to be involved in both infrared instrument design and
remote sensing retrievals. Proof of the AAIRO?s measurement capabilities could
potentially improve the polar research community?s ability to address the basic
science questions outlined in the SEARCH Implementation Plan. The potential
development of an instrument like that AAIRO complements other existing and
proposed sensors and could provide a more complete network of observations that
are critical for understanding the Arctic system.