* 1108382
* Materials World Network: Pan-American Network for Electron Microscopy and Spectroscopy of Nanomaterials
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2016
* David Smith, Arizona State University
* Continuing Grant
* Aleksandr Simonian
* 08/31/2016
* USD 240,000.00

This project establishes the framework for a Pan-American Network for Electron
Microscopy and Spectroscopy of Nanomaterials. The activity initially involves
several US universities, collaborating with counterparts at leading Brazilian
and Mexican universities, and an Argentinian research institute. Arizona State
University serves as the primary hub for the Network, with responsibility for
hosting the network website. Other US participating institutions include Harvard
University, Lehigh University and Stanford University. Access to advanced
instrumentation promotes trans-national networking, and facilitates cutting-edge
nanomaterials research, while generating better awareness of the capabilities
and benefits of specialized instruments. The host US institutions are well-
equipped with different types of highly sophisticated instruments for microscopy
and spectroscopy. Aberration-corrected electron microscopy and probe-corrected
microanalysis is used to determine microstructure and elemental composition,
off-axis electron holography is used to study nanoscale electrostatic and
magnetic fields, and in situ environmental transmission electron microscopy
(TEM) is used to observe synthesis processes at the atomic scale taking place in
real time. Students and postdoctoral workers from Mexico and Brazil travel to
the US to carry out microscopy observations and thereby gain invaluable
experience in advanced characterization methods. Participants from the US
institutions travel to their counterparts abroad to observe and participate in
nanomaterials synthesis efforts, and to conduct workshops on recent microscopy
developments and novel applications. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Developments in
growth and synthesis of nanostructured materials enable novel properties not
normally found in bulk materials to be discovered and exploited. Techniques for
locating and identifying atomic configurations are then essential in the quest
for realizing optimal physical behavior in these nanostructures. The
complementary expertise of the highly experienced teams of researchers involved
in this collaborative effort ensures that invaluable new insights into the
behavior of nanostructured materials will be obtained. The availability of
aberration-corrected electron microscopy, probe-corrected spectroscopy, electron
holography, helium-ion microscopy and environmental in situ TEM to the MWN
participants will assist greatly in elucidating growth mechanisms that are
likely to be essential in the future production of novel nanomaterials. The
Network strengthens links between materials scientists in the Pan-American
region, enabling closer collaborations and providing education and training in
advanced characterization techniques for the next generations of materials
scientists. This collaborative project thus promotes international exchange and
cooperation, and provides enhanced educational, training and networking
opportunities for the participating students and junior scientists, who will be
exposed to different scientific cultures and research environments, greatly
enriching their learning experience.