* 1108569
* Kahua A'o, A Learning Foundation: Using Hawaiian Language Newspaper Articles for Place and Culture-based Geoscience Teacher Education and Curriculum Development
* GEO,GEO
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2015
* Floyd McCoy, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* Jill L. Karsten
* 08/31/2015
* USD 199,948.00

Kahua A'o utilizes Hawaiian newspaper articles about Earth Science events
written between 1843 and 1948 as a foundation for Earth Science education. In
Hawai'i, a lack of qualified Earth Science teachers limits student awareness of
Earth Science as a part of daily life, a potential career path, and a link to
past events. This is particularly relevant to Native Hawaiians who are 28% of
students in Hawai'i's public schools but are underrepresented in STEM courses,
majors, and careers. Kahua A'o, a collaboration of the University of Hawai'i's
College of Education, School of Hawaiian Knowledge, School of Ocean and Earth
Science and Technology, and Windward Community College employs translations of
Hawaiian newspaper articles as a culturally responsive way to connect highly
descriptive writings to place and standards-based Earth Science curriculum
development and teacher training that includes science materials and fieldtrips
to familiar geologic features, e.g., the Honolulu Volcanic Series' Diamond Head,
Punchbowl, Koko Crater, and Hanauma Bay. &lt;br/&gt;Articles provide insights
about living on islands with limited resources exposed to natural hazards e.g.,
volcanic eruptions, earthquakes, tsunami, drought, and storms. Articles on Mauna
Loa's 1859 eruption contributed to a recent report on channelized lava flows
while others describe the land-based impact of storms recorded in shipping logs.
As over 95% of 1.5 million pages of text are still in Hawaiian, the project will
1) increase historical, place-based resources for science teachers, scientists,
and informal science educators and 2) convey the science underlying Hawaiian
cultural practices. Earth science modules and articles will be disseminated
through teacher education classes, workshops, symposia and the worldwide web for
K12 teachers to utilize as lessons bringing Native Hawaiian voices and
viewpoints into geoscience education.