* 1108783
* RUI: Nonlinear spectral problems in Hamiltonian systems
* MPS,DMS
* 05/15/2011,04/30/2015
* Todd Kapitula, Calvin University
* Standard Grant
* Henry Warchall
* 04/30/2015
* USD 138,310.00

Since the late 1980s, there has been a great deal of both theoretical and
applied work in the study of orbital stability of waves for Hamiltonian systems,
and in particular the relation of the energy spectrum to that of the linearized
spectrum. Some of the results have led to instability criteria, whereas other
results have led to index theorems relating the energy spectra to the
(potentially) unstable linearized spectra. A common feature in all of this work
is that the eigenvalue problems have been linear in the spectral parameter. This
project is devoted to a study of a novel class of problems, the self-adjoint
polynomial pencils, which are (a) a natural generalization of the self-adjoint
linear pencils previously studied, and (b) arise quite naturally in the study of
partial differential equations for which there are second-order or higher
temporal derivatives. In this research, index type theorems for these nonlinear
eigenvalue problems, as well as instability criteria will be developed. The
mathematical tools that the Principal Investigator will use and refine are the
analytic Evans function (e.g., the transmission coefficient in mathematical
physics) and the recently developed meromorphic Krein matrix. Both of these
tools have the property that eigenvalues for the linearized problem are realized
as zeros (for the Krein matrix it is the zeros of the determinant). The
successful conclusion of this project will shed light on how these tools relate
to each other, and show ways that they can be jointly used to solve problems of
interest to mathematicians, physicists, and engineers. Results of the research
will be disseminated broadly through journal publications, and conference and
seminar presentations.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The results of this funded research
will help both theoreticians and experimentalists better understand the dynamics
of nonlinear waves in Hamiltonian systems, i.e., systems which conserve energy.
Particular physical problems which are modeled by Hamiltonian systems include
(a) the dynamics of matter waves in Bose-Einstein condensates, (b) wave
propagation in fluids, and (c) light propagation in optical fibers. Much of the
work funded by this grant will be collaborative, and colleagues, e.g., at
Michigan State University, the University of Illinois, and the University of
Kansas, will play an active role in the research. The inclusion and training of
undergraduate students is an integral part of this project. With the financial
support provided via this grant more students will be introduced to the benefits
and excitement of collaborative research. The interplay of applications,
numerics, and formal and rigorous analysis at a level not seen in their class
work leads the participating students to becoming intrigued and excited about
the connections between the physical world and the mathematical world. These
students will be better prepared for graduate work in the mathematical sciences,
and will also have a better appreciation and understanding of the usefulness of
mathematics in the physical sciences. The projects are of such a nature that the
participating students can be expected to produce results which are publishable
in an appropriate journal. Calvin College, which is an Undergraduate
Institution, has a history of producing successful Ph.D. students in mathematics
and statistics. Approximately one-third of these students have been women, who
are significantly underrepresented in the field of mathematics. Furthermore,
Calvin has been very successful in the education and training of secondary
education teachers.