* 1108894
* Applications of Moving Frames
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/2011,07/31/2015
* Peter Olver, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Eugene Gartland
* 07/31/2015
* USD 341,628.00

Olver&lt;br/&gt;DMS-1108894&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; This project is centered on
the further development of the theoretical tools and extension of the range of
applications of the equivariant method of moving frames, that was first
introduced in the late 1990's by the principal investigator in collaboration
with a visiting postdoc, and since developed in many directions by a number of
research groups worldwide. Of particular note are: First, new directions in
image processing, object recognition and shape matching, involving combinations
and comparisons of moving frame-based signatures and joint invariant histograms.
Second, analysis and classification of invariant variational problems and
invariant curve and surface flows using moving frame techniques applied to the
invariant variational bicomplex, motivated by applications in geometric
(bio-)mechanics, image denoising and smoothing, interface dynamics, and
integrable soliton differential equations. Third, applications of the newly
completed moving frame-based structure theory for infinite-dimensional Lie
pseudo-groups that arise as symmetry groups of a wide variety of physical
systems, including fluid mechanics, gauge theories, and solitons. Fourth, a
detailed analysis of the ramifications of a new and surprising phenomenon of
"dispersive quantization" that has been recently shown to arise in very basic
linear models of dispersive wave equations on periodic domains, as well as,
previously, in quantum mechanical systems and optics, where it is known as the
Talbot effect. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; The project is based on the exploitation
of symmetry in a wide range of mathematics and its applications, through new,
powerful methods that were inspired by classical tools coming from pure
geometry. Besides further development of the underlying mathematical theory and
tools, the primary focus is on three interconnected areas of application: First,
object recognition in digital images from various sources, under various notions
of when two objects can be considered the same: e.g., under rigid motions; under
change in camera viewing angle; under deformations of a prescribed type, etc.
Second, analysis of dynamical equations incorporating intrinsic physical and
mathematical symmetries that arise in a wide range of applications in
biomechanics and materials, fluid mechanics, image processing, and interface
motions. Third, understanding and exploring a new, surprising and potentially
important phenomenon, in which, under the assumption of periodicity, solutions
are "fractalized" at irrational times and "quantized/localized" at rational
times, that was recently shown to arise in many basic linearly dispersive wave
models governing a very broad range of wave motions, including quantum
mechanical systems. &lt;br/&gt;