* 1108350
* Materials World Network: Chemical and BIological Approaches to Sequence Controlled Polymers
* MPS,DMR
* 09/15/2011,08/31/2016
* Michael Jewett, Northwestern University
* Continuing Grant
* Joseph A. Akkara
* 08/31/2016
* USD 372,000.00

Sequence-controlled polymers (SCPs) are linear macromolecules whose chemical and
physical properties can be programmed with atomic-scale resolution. The
development of synthetic routes toward these molecules promises technological
breakthroughs in novel materials, nanotechnology, and medicine. However, at this
time, synthetic polymerization methods lack efficiency and sequence control.
Moreover, they do not approach the accuracy, reproducibility, and control found
in nature. To address this grand challenge, this joint effort between
Northwestern University and the University of Warwick in the United Kingdom
develops chemical (e.g., ring opening polymerization) and biological (e.g.,
evolution of the translation apparatus) methods towards the cost-effective and
high-yielding synthesis of sequence-controlled vinyl polypeptides. Vinyl amino
acids will be synthesized and incorporated into natural polymers, endowing
biopolymers with new chemical functionality and serving as a model for the
synthesis of more complex template-directed SCPs. Specific aims include: (1)
synthesis of a library of vinyl amino acids; (2) linking vinyl amino acids to
transfer-RNA adapter molecules; (3) synthesis of vinyl polypeptides with
complementary chemical and biological approaches; and (4) characterization and
application of the properties of vinyl hybrid biomolecules. In the short term,
progress towards the production of vinyl SCPs using evolved biological catalysts
and chemical methods, as well as vinyl SCP characterization, will enable new
applications. By using vinyl functionality as a handle, polypeptides will be
tailored to display novel assembly, responsiveness, and catalytic activity.
Furthermore, the ability to tune and direct the assembly of vinyl SCPs will
allow for the development of a new class of functional biohybrid materials. In
the long term, new strategies for SCP synthesis will offer the potential of
self-organized materials with greater chemical diversity, tunability, and
technological possibilities than presently exist.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
possibilities of producing evolvable, structurally broad synthetic polymers that
meld the accuracy and reproducibility of biology with the complexity and
diversity of chemistry could ultimately enable the synthesis of new molecule
classes not readily attainable by current methods, as well as the exploitation
of genetically encoded evolution in the search for functional materials. Beyond
fundamental discovery and technology development, the US-UK team will establish
and maintain a valuable network that provides for competitive,
interdisciplinary, and globally engaged research. This network will train the
next cadre of "whole-brain" researchers who are comfortable operating between
scientific disciplines, laboratories, and continents. Moreover, by exploring
differences between outreach education programs and the use of interactive
visual experiences to describe science in the US and in the UK, this network
will be of great use in engaging public interest. The team places particular
emphasis on women in science and plan to use the transatlantic collaboration to
inspire and encourage women to pursue their goals at the interface of biology,
engineering, and materials science.