* 1108811
* Fossils of Reionization: The Search for the Most Metal-Poor Stars in the Local Group
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2016
* Joshua Simon, Carnegie Institution of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Glen Langston
* 08/31/2016
* USD 309,833.00

Dr. Simon and his team undertake a search of the Milky Way's four southern dwarf
spheroidal satellites to identify and characterize extremely metal-poor stars.
Many of the dwarf galaxies orbiting the Milky Way host stars formed in the early
universe. The elemental composition of these presumably ancient stars is very
metal-poor (relative to their hydrogen content and elemental abundances in our
sun). The chemical makeup of these stars holds clues how the earliest stars and
the proto-galaxies formed. Existing surveys of the Milky Way halo have largely
been mined but yielded only six stars with an iron abundance less than 1/10000
that of the Sun. It is known that nearby dwarf galaxies contain more extremely
metal-poor stars than the galactic halo, and therefore these are ideal targets
to search for and to learn more about extremely metal-poor stars. Highly
efficient observations of about 6000 stars in these galaxies are planned using
the Inamori Magellan Areal Camera and Spectrograph (IMACS) wide-field imager and
multi-object spectrograph at the Magellan telescope, comprising a nearly
complete, magnitude-limited sample. The Ca K line is used as a metallicity
indicator to identify the most metal-poor objects. These stars are then observed
at high spectral resolution to obtain new constraints on the elemental yields of
the first supernovae, the initial mass function of the first stars, the
nucleosynthesis sites responsible of producing of the heaviest elements, and the
formation of the stellar halo of the Milky Way.&lt;br/&gt;Dr. Simon is
partnering with Los Angeles-area teachers through the national outreach program
Project ASTRO, which is run by the Astronomical Society of the Pacific. The
program matches elementary through high school teachers with professional and
amateur astronomers to bring astronomy into their classrooms. Dr. Simon's new
Project ASTRO activity is directly related to the current research on the
production of chemical elements in stars through cosmic time, and their
dispersal by supernova explosions that allows them to be incorporated into new
stars, planets, and life.