* 1108948
* Measurement of Halo Substructure by RR Lyrae Star Surveys
* MPS,AST
* 08/15/2011,07/31/2016
* Robert Zinn, Yale University
* Continuing Grant
* Glen Langston
* 07/31/2016
* USD 263,224.00

Dr. Zinn and his team study the accretion history of the halo of the Milky Way
galaxy. This work tests the accretion paradigm and the dual halo picture. If the
halo was built up over billions of years through the accretion and tidal
disruption of many dwarf satellite galaxies, it will contain streams of stars
from disrupted galaxies that are detectable as regions of enhanced stellar
density (halo substructures) and as stars moving together through space. The
outer halo may consist primarily of stars from tidally destroyed satellite
galaxies, whereas the inner halo may have originated in situ from accreted gas
or within the very first objects that merged to form the Galaxy. It is
recognized that the halo has two major components that differ in stellar
kinematics, spatial distribution, and metallicity distribution. However only a
small fraction of the halo has been surveyed, and properties of some known halo
substructures are poorly determined. The different sub-structures and streams in
the halo are traceable with RR Lyrae stars. These pulsating stars are easily
recognized by their half-day periods and about one magnitude amplitudes. This
research will provide better distances and sizes of previously detected halo
substructures and look for new substructures in yet to be surveyed areas of the
sky. This work uses RR Lyrae stars found in the LaSilla-QUEST survey up to about
60 kpc from the Sun. Spectroscopic observations are used to identify if
suspected substructures are real groups of co-moving stars, as expected for
remains of accreted satellite galaxies. Radial velocities and metallicities are
measured for about 150 RR Lyrae stars in the inner halo to test whether RR Lyrae
stars separate into two components, or are instead concentrated in the accreted
halo. This project trains graduate and undergraduate students in the techniques
of optical photometry and spectroscopy. As part of the outreach activities, a
show on the evolution of the Milky Way galaxy will be created for Yale's Leitner
Family Observatory and Planetarium.