* 1108865
* Planning Visit for Numerical and Experimental Investigation of Geothermal Heat Pumps
* O/D,OISE
* 07/15/2011,06/30/2012
* Craig Foster, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Bonnie Thompson
* 06/30/2012
* USD 6,127.00

Geothermal heat pumps and heat piles are energy efficient means to heat and cool
buildings. Heat piles are embedded in existing foundation elements, which
generally store and conduct heat better than the surrounding soil. Geothermal
heat pumps, on the other hand, are embedded directly in the soil, can be
designed independently of the constraints existing foundation, and can take
advantage of groundwater flow to help maintain a more constant
temperature.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This planning visit to the Swiss Federal
Institute of Technology, Lausanne (EPFL) will explore opportunities to
collaborate on two important research questions regarding these technologies.
The first is the effect of the repeated heating and cooling cycles on soil
properties. Depending on the type and state of a given soil, these cycles may
strengthen or weaken the soil, and may cause expansion or contraction of the
soil, affecting the foundation and substructures of the buildings that use these
systems. The second question is the comparative efficiency and cost
effectiveness of these energy geostructures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A planned
outcome of the visit is competitive proposals on the US and Swiss sides for a
collaborative numerical and experimental program to study these questions. Using
an existing heat pile at the Swiss Federal Institute of Technology, Lausanne
(EPFL), and heat pumps planned at University of Illinois at Chicago, we will
monitor the performance and changes in soil properties over time. We will then
develop models to capture the observed behavior. The broader impacts of the
planning visit and follow-up research include: better understanding of the
behavior of soil and changing conditions, improved computer models for this
behavior, and tools to evaluate the efficiency and effects of different energy
geostructures. Ultimately, this research will lead to more economical and more
energy efficient ways to heat and cool buildings. In addition, the project will
support a junior faculty member and provide an American undergraduate student
with a first international research opportunity.