* 1108396
* Materials World Network: Microstructural Design for Enhanced Efficiency in Solid State Energy Conversion
* MPS,DMR
* 09/15/2011,01/31/2015
* Joseph Ross, Jr., Texas A&M University
* Continuing Grant
* Gary Shiflet
* 01/31/2015
* USD 426,000.00

A collaboration between Texas A&M University and Shanghai Jiao Tong University,
China, investigates the microstructural design of magnetic shape memory alloys
(MSMAs) tailored for highly efficient energy conversion. The thermoelastic
coupling inherent in these materials provides a route to considerable energy-
saving devices based on harvesting of otherwise wasted mechanical work. With the
addition of magnetic and electronic couplings, MSMAs as multicaloric materials
offer many possibilities for conversion into useful forms of energy. It has also
recently been shown that the thermo-elastic process can be harnessed for
refrigeration, with large theoretical efficiency gain as compared to current
technology. The researchers implement a comprehensive program to study the
magneto-thermo-mechanical coupling in MSMAs. The US team collaborates with the
Chinese group to fabricate materials with a wide range of controlled
microstructures and orientations (single crystals, bi-crystals, controlled
texture) and characterize the magneto-thermo-mechanical behavior as a function
of processing parameters and microstructural features related to grain size,
particle size, volume fraction, morphology, and texture. This is paired with a
detailed characterization of the magnetic structure and its coupling to the
microstructure. The overall goal is to overcome current material shortcomings,
e.g., reduce the transformation hysteresis, increase the toughness, and improve
the actuation stress. An important practical target is to achieve inexpensive
MSMAs based on controlled solidification and microstructure design, thus
providing a highly efficient platform for energy conversion applications.

The research not only advances the fundamental understanding of the multi-
functional alloys, but highly efficient MSMAs can potentially revolutionize the
field of solid-state cooling. Education benefits include the participation of US
students in the international research activities at Shanghai Jiao Tong
University, one of the leading materials research universities in China, as well
as the establishment of a joint degree program between Texas A&M and Shanghai
Jiao Tong universities. The work of the Chinese investigators is supported by
the National Natural Science Foundation of China.