* 1108343
* OEDG Track 1: Pathways for Inspiring, Educating, and Recruiting West Texans in the Geosciences (PIER)
* GEO,GEO
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2015
* Grady Blount, Angelo State University
* Standard Grant
* Jill L. Karsten
* 08/31/2015
* USD 164,839.00

With the "Pathways for Inspiring, Educating, and Recruiting West Texans in the
Geosciences" (PIER) program, Angelo State University (ASU) is working to
increase the participation of mostly Hispanic students in geoscience education
and career pathways, through aligned programs of student recruitment and teacher
professional development for grade 6-12 science teachers affiliated with the San
Angelo Independent School District (SAISD). PIER has two specific goals. The
first goal of introducing at least 500 students in grades 6-12 to careers in the
geosciences, and providing a pathway for students to study geoscience, is being
achieved through: creation of school-year geoscience outreach events; design and
implementation of geoscience content modules for presentation in middle school
and high school classrooms by ASU students, faculty, and informal educators;
and, recruitment of students from West Texas to major in geoscience or minor in
Earth Science at ASU and encourage their persistence to graduation. The second
goal of educating and inspiring at least 40 teachers in geoscience content areas
aligned with the grade-appropriate Texas Essential Knowledge and Skills (state
standards) is being achieved through: design, implementation, and evaluation of
project-based working sessions offered through summer teacher institutes; and,
sustaining professional development support throughout the academic year.