* 1108885
* Cosmological Simulations of the Formation of Dark Matter Cores and Bulgeless Galaxies
* MPS,AST
* 07/01/2011,06/30/2015
* Fabio Governato, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Nigel Sharp
* 06/30/2015
* USD 392,194.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;AST-
1108885&lt;br/&gt;Governato&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Understanding the physical
processes that shape the formation and evolution of galaxies is a fundamental
question in modern astrophysics. This project will run simulations with high
resolution and physical detail in a full Cold Dark Matter (CDM) cosmological
context, studying this problem with a strong emphasis on galaxy centers. The
work focuses on three closely interconnected discrepancies between predictions
of the CDM model and the observed evidence for i) dark matter cores at the
centers of small galaxies, ii) the large fraction of bulgeless dwarfs, and iii)
the existence of massive disk galaxies with very small (pseudo) bulges. The
simulations share three common features: i) a simple yet physically motivated
description of star formation, ii) gas outflows driven by energy feedback from
supernovae and supermassive black holes, and iii) star formation quenching by
ultraviolet photons. These simulations will resolve the inner structure of
galaxies down to fifty parsecs over the entire Hubble time. This approach will
relate directly the spatial distribution and physical properties of the
particles in the N-Body simulations to the quantities actually measured for real
galaxies, using software to "observe" the models, including physical effects as
well as the known properties of instruments, to create realistic artificial
datasets.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This team has already used this approach to
obtain seminal results on the formation of bulgeless galaxies with dark matter
cores, and to simulate a cosmological set of galaxies that simultaneously
reproduce the luminosity-size relation, the abundance of damped Lyman alpha
systems, and the HI Tully-Fisher relation. Specific goals of this new work
include understanding how gas outflows create dark matter cores at the centers
of galaxies and predicting their size over a range of galaxy masses and merging
and star formation histories, understanding the role of gas outflows, mergers
and various dynamical instabilities in the central region of galaxies on the
creation or suppression of stellar bulges and pseudo bulges, and predicting the
observable photometric and kinematic properties of the baryonic mass
distribution in galaxies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI will collaborate with his
institution's funded Pre-Major in Astronomy Program (Pre-MAP), which helps
underrepresented students in their transition to college and possibly to an
astronomy major, providing them with academic advising and one to one mentorship
while guiding them through research projects. The present study will provide
research projects for Pre-MAP students and tutoring and support for
undergraduates linked to the program.