* 1108992
* Investigations of Liquid Crystalline Mesophase Transitions via Landau-de Gennes Phenomenological Models
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/2011,07/31/2015
* Tiziana Giorgi, New Mexico State University
* Standard Grant
* Michael Steuerwalt
* 07/31/2015
* USD 158,640.00

Giorgi &lt;br/&gt;DMS-1108992 &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The principal investigator
considers analytical questions related to nonlinear problems describing liquid
crystalline phase transitions, with an emphasis on models based on complex order
parameters. The main focus is the study of magnetic- and electric-field-induced
phase transitions in smectic materials in general, and chiral tilted smectic
systems in particular. The approach is to study smectic liquid crystals as
described by generalized phenomenological Landau-de Gennes energies, which take
into account the complete electromechanical coupling, finite surface anchoring
and added interaction coupling terms. The investigator studies effects observed
in experiments: reentrant phases under electric fields, shrinkage of smectic
layers that lead to folding instabilities at smectic C* transitions, undulation
induced by applied fields, field-induced phase transformations, and the emergent
display of macroscopic chiral properties in liquid crystals that are composed of
achiral molecules. These effects arise in considering both the behavior of
liquid crystals and issues associated with manufacturing smectic liquid crystal
devices. The approach uses a diverse collection of mathematical tools coming
from nonlinear partial differential equations, including variational methods,
asymptotic analysis and partial differential equation regularity theory. Part of
the effort is to validate and refine the models that contain the essential
features of the examined phenomena. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Smectic liquid
crystals are less studied than nematic liquid crystals. As in nematic liquid
crystals, the long molecules in smectic liquid crystals point in approximately
the same direction, called the director; unlike nematic liquid crystals, the
long molecules of smectic liquid crystals also are arranged approximately in
planar layers. The tilt between the director and the normal to the layer, and
the rotation of this tilt as one moves between layers, are involved in the
switching properties of smectic liquid crystals. Liquid crystals are well-known
for their use in liquid crystal display technology, where devices at the moment
are mostly based on nematic mesophases and operate very close to physical
limits. The future of this important application resides in tilted chiral
smectic mesophases, which due to their ferroelectric or antiferroelectric
properties have superior operational speed and resolution. Commercial
applications of ferroelectric liquid crystals include spatial light modulators,
optical memory, optical computers and high-resolution microdisplays. Due to the
importance of current and future applications of smectic materials, there is a
need for validation and extension of the available theoretical models through
mathematical analysis. By theoretically studying the properties of the solutions
of the proposed models, and comparing them to experimental results, the project
adds to the understanding of the nature of the liquid crystalline phase
transitions, and the electrical and optical properties of soft condensed matter.
This in turn leads to better ways of building liquid crystal based devices.