* 1108790
* Collaborative Research: Cosmic Magnetic Fields; Origin, Evolution, and  Signatures
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2014
* Arthur Kosowsky, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Nigel Sharp
* 08/31/2014
* USD 60,000.00

AST-
1109180/1109275/1108790&lt;br/&gt;Kahniashvili/Ratra/Kosowsky&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&
gt;Observations show that galaxies have magnetic fields with a component that is
coherent over a large fraction of the galaxy, with defined field strength and
coherence scale. Understanding the origin of these fields is one of the more
challenging questions of modern astrophysics. There are currently two pictures:
a bottom-up (astrophysical) one, generating the seed field on smaller scales,
and a top-down (cosmological) version, generating the seed field prior to galaxy
formation on scales that are now large. This project aims to answer several
relevant questions: (i) How and when was the magnetic field generated? (ii) How
does it evolve during the expansion of the universe? (iii) Can the amplitude and
statistical properties of this seed magnetic field explain the properties of the
observed magnetic fields in large-scale structures? (iv) Is the seed magnetic
field detectable through cosmological observations? And if so, (v) what are the
observational constraints on such a primordial magnetic
field?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The interdisciplinary project divides into the
following related parts: (1) determining intergalactic magnetic field limits
from currently available data; (2) studying cosmological large-scale correlated
magnetic field generation mechanisms; (3) numerically studying the evolution of
the magnetic field during the expansion of the universe; (4) numerically
studying seed magnetic field amplification and dynamics during galaxy formation;
and (5) predicting observable signatures of a cosmological seed magnetic field.
This unique team of experts will significantly improve the current understanding
of the origin, evolution, observational limits, and predicted signatures, of a
cosmic magnetic field. The research includes important work in high energy
physics, data analysis and interpretation, numerical simulation of
magnetohydrodynamic processes, and galaxy and early structure formation. Perhaps
most importantly, there is a chance to establish that observations demand a
cosmological magnetic field that cannot be generated by any mechanism operating
within the confines of the Standard Model of particle
physics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The educational aspects include the training of
undergraduate and graduate students. A vigorous education and public outreach
program involves the North Central Kansas Astronomical Society, the KSU Center
for the Understanding of Origins, Theodore Roosevelt Elementary School
(Manhattan, Kansas), Allegheny Observatory at the University of Pittsburgh, the
Stanford University 'Splash!' events for high school students, and Pittsburg
State University outreach events. And, as part of an international
collaboration, the primary PI will conduct cosmology education sessions for
undergraduate students at Abastumani Astrophysical Observatory, Georgia.