* 1108725
* Collaborative Research: Topological Phases of Matter and their Application to Quantum Computing
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2015
* Eric Rowell, Texas A&M Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Henry Warchall
* 08/31/2015
* USD 193,326.00

In this collaborative project the Principal Investigators (PIs)
will&lt;br/&gt;investigate mathematical models for topological phases of matter
and their&lt;br/&gt;application to the nascent field of quantum information.
Examples of&lt;br/&gt;topological phases of matter include Fractional Quantum
Hall liquids and&lt;br/&gt;topological insulators: materials subjected to
extreme physical conditions&lt;br/&gt;(e.g. near zero Kelvin, under large
magnetic forces) which appear to&lt;br/&gt;exhibit topological behavior. The
main objectives of the project are to&lt;br/&gt;better understand the taxonomy
of these exotic states of matter through&lt;br/&gt;mathematical models, address
physically and computationally motivated&lt;br/&gt;mathematical problems, and
apply topological and algebraic methods to&lt;br/&gt;study them. For example,
the issue of quantum computational power&lt;br/&gt;(universality) may be
analyzed by finding the images of the braid groups&lt;br/&gt;under
representations associated to a particular model. Moreover, the&lt;br/&gt;extant
hypothesized models for topological states of matter do not
capture&lt;br/&gt;all of the subtleties (such as fermionic topological order) so
the PIs&lt;br/&gt;will develop new models.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The classical
states of matter of solid, liquid and gas have more
refined&lt;br/&gt;classifications: for example, solid crystals may be
differentiated by&lt;br/&gt;their symmetries. Newly discovered topological
materials have yet to be&lt;br/&gt;fully understood, but potentially can be used
to build (quantum)&lt;br/&gt;computational devices out-performing standard
micro-chip based computers.&lt;br/&gt;The most commonly encountered model for
quantum computation, the quantum&lt;br/&gt;circuit model, requires challenging,
if not impossible, accuracy on the&lt;br/&gt;hardware to be of practical value
due to local interactions of the system&lt;br/&gt;with the surrounding
environment. The topological model based on exotic&lt;br/&gt;states of matter,
while mathematically more complicated, has a built-in&lt;br/&gt;tolerance for
such interactions. The PIs will mathematically study these&lt;br/&gt;exotic
states of matter focusing on their application to new
computational&lt;br/&gt;paradigms with potentially significant benefit to
society.