* 1108907
* Submillimeter inteferometric studies of the fragmentation of high mass star forming regions
* MPS,AST
* 07/15/2011,06/30/2015
* Jonathan Williams, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* Glen Langston
* 06/30/2015
* USD 286,858.00

The PI and his team study how cold molecular material in high-mass star forming
regions develops from the earliest, fragmentation and pre-stellar phases to an
ionized region around massive stars. The recent surveys of the Galactic Plane at
infrared and millimeter wavelengths allow an unbiased identification and
classification of high mass star forming regions, including the infrared-dark,
compact molecular clumps that are likely precursors to massive
stars.&lt;br/&gt;A large systematic high-resolution study of the youngest phases
of massive star formation will be done for about 40 high mass star forming
regions over three years. Observations are done using the three submillimeter
telescopes on Mauna Kea, the Submillimeter Array (SMA), James Clerk Maxwell
Telescope (JCMT), and Caltech Submillimeter Observatory (CSO), through the share
of time apportioned to the University of Hawaii. This work lays a foundation for
early science observations with the NSF-funded Atacama Large Millimeter Array
(ALMA). &lt;br/&gt;The results will place constraints on competing theoretical
models for the formation of large stellar clusters and high-mass stars as the
mechanisms how embryonic molecular clumps break down into star-forming cores,
and the processes by which massive stars build up, are not yet well
understood.&lt;br/&gt;This project has broader implications for studies of
galaxy evolution and models of Solar System origins in a massive star
environment. This project contributes to the education and training of a
graduate student to the PhD level in observational and analytical techniques of
(sub-)millimeter astronomy and interferometry . An undergraduate astronomy major
from the minority-serving University of Hawaii at Hilo will also participate in
the project by assisting on Mauna Kea observing runs, and learn about data
reduction and analysis techniques.