* 1108250
* Prehistoric Native Copper Technology in Northwest North America: Innovation, Diffusion, and Heritage
* GEO,OPP
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2022
* Harold Cooper, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Erica Hill
* 08/31/2022
* USD 512,950.00

The existence of three distinct regions within northwest North America (central
Arctic, western Subarctic, and Northwest Coast) with sources of native copper
and evidence for its prehistoric use provides the opportunity for a comparative
study of technological change related to the innovation of a single material
among socio-politically diverse groups of hunter-gatherers. A collaborative
interdisciplinary team with backgrounds in northern archaeology and ethnography,
geology, and materials science will undertake a three-year program of research
investigating native copper innovation, and its relationship to emergent social
complexity (i.e., the development of hereditary rank), among northwest North
American hunter-gatherers. Naturally occurring pure native copper was used by
indigenous groups throughout the region for tools, weapons, and objects of
personal adornment. This latter use has been traditionally viewed by
archaeologists as attempts to display wealth using prestige goods (prestige
technology) and as a result, and similar to discussions of prehistoric
metallurgy in general, the use of native copper in these regions has been
associated with emergent social complexity. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intra- and
inter-regional spatial analysis of sources and artifacts, compositional analysis
of artifacts in museum collections, detailed experimental studies of copper-
working manufacturing, and oral history collected in collaboration with the
Ahtna community, will provide quantitative and qualitative data on native copper
innovation. These data will be integrated using a design theory framework that
will provide a holistic multi-scalar understanding of the benefits and
constraints associated with the adoption of this technology by hunter-gatherers
in different social and environmental contexts. Though focused on innovation
surrounding the use of a specific material among hunter-gatherers, this project
will contribute to more general anthropological discussions of innovation and
will generate data for use in developing models of technological innovation for
future testing. Additionally, the project includes significant opportunities for
interdisciplinary graduate and undergraduate education, training, and hands-on
research, and opportunities for multi-generational engagement with the Ahtna
community.