* 1108281
* Creating and Sustaining Diversity in the Geo-Sciences Among Students and Teachers in the Urban and Coastal Environment of New York City
* GEO,GEO
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2013
* Joseph Barba, CUNY New York City College of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Jill L. Karsten
* 08/31/2013
* USD 186,194.00

This project is addressing the shortage of undergraduate and graduate degrees
being earned in the geosciences, particularly by members of racial and ethnic
groups that are underrepresented in STEM fields. The New York City College of
Technology (City Tech) is simultaneously attacking this problem from two fronts
- the undergraduate level and the grade 6-12 level. For City Tech's
undergraduates, this project is introducing geoscience knowledge and
opportunities to its diverse undergraduate student population through creation
of two new courses in the geosciences, which is not currently taught at City
Tech, and research experiences. Creation of geoscience articulation agreements
with the City College of New York is also creating pathways for students at City
Tech to pursue Bachelor's and advanced degrees in the geosciences. For students
in grades 6-12, this project is: 1) providing inquiry-oriented geoscience
experiences (pedagogical and research) for students; 2) providing standards-
based professional development (pedagogical and research) in Earth science for
teachers from three separate middle and high schools of the New York City public
school system; 3) developing teachers' inquiry-oriented and place-based
instructional techniques; 4) assisting teachers with improving their existing
curricula to meet the specific needs of their school district; 5) increasing
teacher content knowledge and confidence in working with Earth science scholars;
6) improving teacher skills in synthesizing and transforming their knowledge to
be used in the classroom; 7) engaging students in the application of geoscience
activities through a virtual environment; 8) providing peer-assisted math
foundations that will underpin and elucidate geoscience concepts; and, 9)
creating community-based geoscience outreach activities. These objectives are
being accomplished through geoscience partnerships and activities between City
Tech, City College, MS 394 in Brooklyn, City Polytechnic High school, the Urban
Assembly Institute of Math &amp; Science for Young Women, NOAA-CREST, the New
York City Research Institute program at NASA/GISS Columbia University, and the
Brookhaven National Laboratory. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed activities
combine geoscience research experiences with focused, multidimensional/layered
mentoring, and a robust learning community that produce holistic and engaging
stimuli for the scientific and academic growth and development of undergraduates
and the grades 6-12 student and teacher participants. The diverse students
participating in this program and the educational pathways catalyzed through
this award will become the future geocientists of our nation. Even those
students who choose other careers will greatly benefit both themselves and our
society by having a deeper understanding and a broader awareness of the critical
nature of the geosciences. The proposed activities are also providing the grade
secondary school teachers with new perspectives and skills that can be used to
inspire the next generation of geoscience scholars.