* 1108727
* Categorification and Double Categorification of Quantum Topological Invariants of Links and 3-Manifolds
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2011,05/31/2015
* Lev Rozansky, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Joanna Kania-Bartoszynska
* 05/31/2015
* USD 156,609.00

An interpretation of quantum invariants of links in 3-manifolds within the
framework of classical topology presented a challenge for a long time. The most
convincing explanation of their nature came from Witten's work which related
these invariants to quantum Chern-Simons theory. However the reason why Jones
and HOMFLY-PT polynomials were polynomials in q rather than formal power series
in (q-1), as a Quantum Field Theory would suggest, and what is the meaning of
the coefficients of these polynomials remained a mystery. A breakthrough came
from Khovanov's categorification construction: it turned out that a quantum
polynomial is an Euler characteristic of a Z-graded homology associated by a
combinatorial construction to a link. An extension of this result to the Witten-
Reshetikhin-Turaev (WRT) invariant of links in 3-manifolds is a challenging
problem, in part because the WRT invariant is not exactly a polynomial of q and
is defined only for q being a root of 1. Recently Khovanov and Rozansky
categorified the "stable" polynomial part of the WRT invariant of links in the
product of a 2-sphere with a circle. Their construction uses the derived
categories of modules over Khovanov's algebras H_n. Rozansky will try to extend
this result further to general 3-manifolds. He conjectures that this might be
done by deforming the algebras H_n into A-infinity algebras, thus reducing their
Z-grading to a periodic Z_r grading which would correspond to the associated
parameter q being the root of 1. A similar trick worked to construct a
categorification of the SU(N) HOMFLY-PT polynomial from its 2-variable version.
In addition to categorifying combinatorially the WRT invariant, Rozansky will
try to categorify Khovanov's categorificaiton construction of the Jones
polynomial. This idea is based on a similarity between the objects used in the
Kamnitzer-Cautis version of Khovanov's categorification and the 2-category
associated to a holomorphic symplectic manifold in the joint work of Kapustin,
Rozansky and Saulina.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The discovery of quantum
invariants such as the Jones and HOMFLY-PT polynomials of links in a 3-sphere
and the Witten-Reshetikhin-Turaev invariant of colored links in a 3-manifold
opened a new chapter in 3-dimensional topology. In contrast to the Alexander
polynomial which was very efficient in establishing the topological properties
of links, the relation between these new invariants and classical topology is
indirect. It seems that the purpose of quantum invariants is to establish deep
links between 3-dimensional topology and other branches of Mathematics and
Quantum Field Theory (QFT). Khovanov's categorification of the Jones polynomial
was an important step in this direction: it showed that algebraic geometry could
be "married" to 3-dimensional topology. Witten suggests that a superstring-
inspired 6-dimensional QFT links together Khovanov homology and Langlands
duality. By using the methods of homological algebra, Rozansky will try to
extend Khovanov's categorification program from links in a 3-sphere to links in
general 3-manifolds. He will also try to raise categorification by one level
through associating a category rather than a homology to a link. If true, this
might suggest that the underlying QFT is 7-dimensional rather than
6-dimensional.