* 1109088
* Radiative Atomic Processes in Iron-Peak Elements For Non-LTE Astrophysical Models
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2015
* Sultana Nahar, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Nigel Sharp
* 08/31/2015
* USD 342,495.00

Dr. Nahar and her team compute large-scale, high precision transition and
recombination probabilities, oscillator strengths, and photoionization cross-
sections for the Fe-peak elements, Cr, Fe, Co, Ni and Zn in their first five
low-ionization stages. Improved parameters for these elements are necessary for
spectral line modeling in the non-thermodynamic equilibrium (NLTE) calculations
used in quantitative stellar spectroscopy. The self-consistent integration of
the radiation field with microscopic material properties in NLTE models is based
on explicit treatment of coupled physical processes in the source. This requires
an extensive set of atomic parameters for all levels contributing to spectral
line formation with adequate precision. The overall accuracy of stellar spectra
from NLTE calculations depends on approximations made in the NLTE formalism
itself. This work improves the physical framework for NLTE stellar models that
can use sufficiently large photon frequency grids now possible on supercomputing
platforms. The computations use relativistic R-matrix codes in combination with
a Breit-Pauli method and yield photoionization cross sections, radiative and
dielectronic recombination rates, electron impact excitation rates,
photoexcitation and radiative decay rates for the iron group atoms and ions.
These parameters will improve understanding models and observations such as
radiatively driven mass-loss, spectral "forests" or pseudo-continuum of millions
of lines, and chemical evolution of the relative proportion of Fe-peak elements.
This project trains a postdoctoral fellow in advanced theoretical and
computational methods in atomic physics, plasma physics and astrophysics, and
high-performance computing on massively parallel platforms.