* 1109513
* Empirical Research - Collaborative Research - A Bayesian Approach to Number Reasoning
* EHR,DRL
* 08/01/2011,07/31/2014
* Justin Halberda, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Finbarr Sloane
* 07/31/2014
* USD 159,164.00

The ultimate goal of this project is to provide a novel model of the cognitive
and neural basis of numerical cognition, and to use this knowledge to guide the
development of new training methods that could improve mathematical abilities in
children. The project is a collaboration among investigators at the University
of Rochester, Johns Hopkins University, and Cold Spring Harbor Laboratories.
Recent research suggests that acuity of numerosity judgments is predictive of
success in formal mathematics education, and that similar cognitive processes
can be trained by specific kinds of domain-general experience. The core idea is
that the firing of neurons encodes a probability distribution, thereby
representing simultaneously the most probable sample from the distribution and
the variance (i.e., confidence) of the estimate.

This project will develop and test a formal Bayesian model that has the unique
feature of naturally accounting for a number of metacognitive factors, a
critical but undertested factor in the acquisition of expertise. The primary
advantages of this Bayesian approach are its ability to provide a natural
description of: 1) how the confidence of a learner relates to the precision of
their number knowledge; 2) how a learner can combine information from multiple
sources of information about number; 3) how intuitive preferences (also known as
prior belief) predict learners' errors; and 4) how improvements in probabilistic
inference may benefit the precision of the number sense.