* 1109799
* Math Matters: Transition from High School to Postsecondary Education
* EDU,DRL
* 07/01/2011,06/30/2016
* Jacqueline Spears, Kansas State University
* Continuing Grant
* Jolene Jesse
* 06/30/2016
* USD 249,622.00

This study examines the capacity within the state of Kansas to use two state
data bases, Kansas Individual Data on Students (KIDS) for K-12 and Kansas State
Postsecondary Database (KSPSD), to inform a discussion between K-12 education
and postsecondary education faculty and policy makers about mathematics. Two
years of data 2007-2008 and 2008-2009 will be used to:&lt;br/&gt;1. Examine the
predictive validity of the K-12 state assessment for the placement of students
in postsecondary mathematics courses;&lt;br/&gt;2. Examine the extent to which
curricular expectations in a given school district match those required for
placement into and success in postsecondary education;&lt;br/&gt;3. Examine the
extent the analyses contribute to discussion about policy makers and
stateholders in K-12 and postsecondary education.&lt;br/&gt; In addition, a case
study will be used to examine the extent curricular expectations in one school
district match those required for placement and success in college level
mathematics. Findings from the study will be reported to state board members.
Researchers from Kansas State University and the University of Missouri-Kansas
City will do the analyses. Data will be analyzed from two cohorts of all of the
students who attended high schools in Kansas and continued to higher education
in the state. The study will produce information about the validity of the high
school state assessment to predict success in higher education mathematics and
what type of information is informative to policy makers. Results from the study
will increase the validity of the high school assessment with the intent of
increasing the proportion of students ready to take college-qualifying
mathematics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Data from the two aggregated databases will be
analyzed using Hierarchical Generalized Linear Modeling (HGLM). The data sets
will include student performance, demographic, high school context, teacher
preparation, and student degree of participation in postsecondary education. The
analysis will produce data on the relationship of grade 11 mathematics scores
and post secondary institution placement scores. The case study will analyze the
data for two graduating classes from one high school who enrolled immediately
into the community college. This analysis will look more closely at the
expectations of the high schools with what is required by higher education.
Information from all of the analysis will be given to policy boards to see what
is most meaningful to them and what is most useful to develop their capacity to
make decisions. Evaluation will be done by a panel review and the Office of
Educational Innovation and Evaluation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The opportunity to
examine the specific articulation (or not) between K-12 and higher education
could be influential for policy makers, the entire K-12, and higher education
systems. Results have the potential to reduce inefficiencies in students'
learning progression and extra monetary costs to students for these courses. The
study could potentially have a very broad impact. For example, the two
assessment consortia funded by Race to the Top grants are grappling with the
issue of college-readiness and how to assess it. A carefully done study of this
sort could affect policy decisions nation-wide.