* 1109561
* Inverse Boundary Value Problems with Incomplete Data
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/2011,07/31/2015
* Xiaosheng Li, Florida International University
* Standard Grant
* Lora Billings
* 07/31/2015
* USD 116,461.00

The objective of this proposal is to study the mathematical theory of recovering
the internal parameters of a medium and physical properties from the incomplete
measurements obtained on the boundary of the medium. The physical situation is
modeled by partial differential equations and the goal is to determine the
coefficients of the partial differential equations from some measurements of the
solutions on the boundary. The topics of this research include the inverse
problems for systems of partial differential equations (the Navier-Stokes
equations and Schroedinger equations with Yang-Mills potentials) and the inverse
problems on unbounded domains (an infinite slab and an infinite cylinder). The
proposer pursues three specific aims: (1) to prove unique determination results;
(2) to establish and improve stability estimates; (3) to develop analytical
reconstruction formulas. The main approach is the new strategies on the
construction, analyzing and control of the solutions. They are mathematically
challenging because less information about the solutions on the boundary is
available and a deep understanding of systems of differential operators and
domains is required. Inverse boundary value problems consist of recovering
internal parameters by boundary measurements. Such problems and their solutions
are critical to scientific endeavors, because in many instances it simply is not
possible or feasible to cut something open to see what is inside. One must use
indirect methods to "see" inside objects and measure vital phenomena without
harming the thing being analyzed, and the key to being able to that is inverse
problems. However, collecting data from the whole boundary is sometimes either
not possible or extremely expensive in practice. The proposed research provides
new insights to inverse problems when the data obtained by boundary measurements
is incomplete. The problems addressed in this proposal arise in medical imaging,
oil exploration, diagnosis of human blood fluid, among others. The proposed
research can potentially have long-term impacts in those application areas by
providing the fundamentally mathematical analysis. The proposer will incorporate
some of the ideas and techniques developed in this proposal into a graduate
level class, and mentor graduate and undergraduate (minority) students.