* 1109116
* Star Formation: From Nearby Clouds to Starburst Galaxies
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2015
* Neal Evans, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Glen Langston
* 08/31/2015
* USD 328,951.00

In this research, Dr. Evans and his team study star formation over wide scales.
The idea is to connect knowledge about star formation on small scales in dense
clumps of molecular clouds in our Galaxy to overall star formation processes in
other galaxies. Star formation occurs in dense cores and clumps of molecular gas
and dust which can be probed with observations at radio- and infrared
wavelengths. The study for nearby star formation and for more distant galactic
massive clumps uses recent and new observations with the McDonald Observatory
integral field unit, called VIRUS-P, the Caltech Submillimeter Observatory, and
ALMA as well as archival data from Spitzer. This and results from large-scale
surveys such as the Bolocam Galactic Plane Survey will connect local studies of
star formation to star formation in other galaxies on a large-scale.
Observations of other galaxies show that the star formation rate is related to
the overall gas surface density (Kennicutt-Schmidt relations) and these
relations are important for models of galaxy formation and evolution. The work
here will provide a better understanding of how large and small scale physics of
star formation is linked. Graduate and undergraduate students participate in
this fundamental research topic, and results are incorporated into teaching, and
outreach activities.