* 1109576
* Gravity in the crossfire: A weak lensing study of merging and relaxed galaxy clusters
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2015
* Douglas Clowe, Ohio University
* Continuing Grant
* Richard Barvainis
* 08/31/2015
* USD 317,049.00

Clusters of galaxies and gravitational lensing by clusters of galaxies have been
used as probes of baryonic and dark matter for several decades, and their use
continues to mature. However, their use in constraining cosmological parameters
in future surveys is currently limited by large systematics errors. Errors in
weak lensing shear measurements need to improve by an order of magnitude, and
masses determinations of clusters of galaxies need reliable corrections for non-
virialized structures. This project intends to combine observational
measurements of weak lensing in galaxy clusters with realistic simulations of
weakly lensed images with the goal of gaining sufficient understanding of the
above systematic errors to allow weak lensing and cluster mass studies to lead
to precise and reliable measurements of cosmological parameters.

Specifically, the investigators plan the following: (1) Building on previous
success from the Bullet Cluster study, to use known cluster mergers and search
for unknown ones to determine whether gravity at large distances really does
follow an inverse square force law. The intent is to rule out models of gravity
"mixed" with part classical and part alternative. (2) To use four different
techniques on a sample of clusters, chosen to be close to virial equilibrium, to
determine clusters masses and determine their consistency. This intent is to
provide correction factors and/or statistics to identify any biased or
problematic techniques and to identify and eliminate problem clusters from
existing catalogues for the entire scientific community. (3) To combine
observational measurements with simulations to what precision a point spread
function (PSF) can be determined in all parts of an image. This work is intended
to be part of larger international simulation program called "STeP" to provide
accurate simulations for future surveys.

Educationally, this project provides training for three undergraduate and three
graduate students through direct involvement in research and technical training
in modern research tools. In addition, this project includes an education and
public outreach program with the goal of increasing scientific literacy in the
historically underserved Appalachian regions of Ohio, West Virginia, and
Kentucky through a combination of public outreach events and the development of
a new laboratory component to an introductory astronomy class that makes use of
the data obtained in this project.