* 1109160
* Giant Planet Core Formation
* MPS,AST
* 09/15/2011,08/31/2014
* Katherine Kretke, Southwest Research Institute
* Standard Grant
* Maria Womack
* 08/31/2014
* USD 420,166.00

Jupiter and Saturn represent a challenge to theories of planet formation. Being
gas giants, they must have formed in less than 10 million years to be able to
accrete gas from the solar nebula before it dissipated. The current leading
theory for giant planet formation is the core accretion model, in which a large
planetary embryo forms first by accretion of solid planetesimals, and
subsequently accretes gas when it has grown to approximately 10 Earth masses.
However, this model has a weakness, in that the initial accretion of a large
embryo is hindered by a variety of physical processes. In this renewed project,
the Principal Investigator, a postdoctoral researcher, and collaborators will
continue to develop an extensive computer model of core accretion in order to
determine whether this theory is viable. The team will perform a series of
simulations of the evolution of a system of embryos and planetesimals embedded
in the solar nebula. The models will include: (i) direct gravitational
interaction of the planetesimals and embryos, (ii) aerodynamic drag on the
planetesimals, (iii) migration of the embryos through gravitational interaction
with the protoplanetary disk, (iv) embryo fragmentation, (v) the effects of
embryos' atmospheres, (vi) the buildup of solids at the snow-line, and (vii)
turbulence-driven migration of the embryos. The team's N-body code will be
coupled with state-of-the-art models of the solar nebula in order to determine
how (ii), (iii) and (vi) change with time. The project is broadly relevant to
the history of the Solar System and has implications for Earth?s acquisition of
water. The project will support the early career development of a woman
scientist. The Principal Investigator will continue his involvement with public
outreach and broadcast and print media.