* 1109506
* Spectral Methods for Optimal Stopping and First Passage Problems with Applications in Financial Mathematics
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2011,07/31/2015
* Vadim Linetsky, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Henry Warchall
* 07/31/2015
* USD 200,000.00

This project develops a novel class of analytical and computational methods
based on spectral analysis to solve first passage and optimal stopping problems
for a class of Markov processes. The objective of an optimal stopping problem is
to determine optimal decision timing to maximize reward in the face of
uncertainty modeled by a stochastic process. The objective of a first passage
problem is to determine the probability distribution of the first time a
stochastic process passes through a boundary. These mathematical problems arise
in a wide variety of applications in financial mathematics, including modeling
credit risk (the risk of default of a borrower on its debt, such as a corporate
bond), evaluating financial contracts with early exercise rights, such as
American-style options and callable and convertible bonds, and real options. The
class of Markov processes under study are jump-diffusion processes that can be
constructed by stochastic time changes of one-dimensional diffusions. The
methods developed in this project are based on representing conditional
expectation operators associated with Markov processes by eigenfunction
expansions. Efficient computational algorithms will be developed for Markov
processes whose eigenfunctions are expressed in terms of orthogonal polynomials.
Many of the most important stochastic processes in financial mathematics belong
to this category, including the Ornstein-Uhlenbeck, Cox-Ingersoll-Ross, and
constant elasticity of variance (CEV) diffusions, as well as pure jump and jump-
diffusion processes arising from time changing these
diffusions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The novel analytical methods and computational
algorithms developed in this project will be applied to a range of problems in
financial mathematics in the areas of modeling credit risk and evaluating
financial contracts with early exercise rights in a variety of markets,
including bond markets, equity markets, commodities and energy markets, and to
real options and irreversible investment decisions. The mathematical methods
developed in this project will help financial institutions to accurately
evaluate and manage the risk of a variety of financial transactions. They will
also help non-financial firms make better managerial decisions by facilitating
applications of real options analysis. The project is expected to have a broader
mathematical impact on research on optimal stopping and first passage problems.
The project will also have an impact on education and human resources
development. It is part of the long-term effort at Northwestern in financial
mathematics and engineering, including the Ph.D. concentration in this area. It
will train highly qualified researchers for academia and industry.