* 1109189
* Coanda Effect for Incompressible Flows in Moving Domains
* MPS,DMS
* 07/15/2011,09/30/2015
* Suncica Canic, University of Houston
* Standard Grant
* Henry Warchall
* 09/30/2015
* USD 303,577.00

Coanda effect is a phenomenon that has been described in scientific literature
as a tendency of a fluid jet to be attracted to a nearby surface. Recently,
Coanda effect has been used in cardiology to describe the wall-hugging jets in
mitral regurgitation: regurgitant blood flow through a leaky mitral valve
sometimes hugs the wall of the left atrium which makes it difficult to assess
the severity of mitral regurgitation using classical color Doppler imaging
techniques. Despite the large cardiovascular and biomedical literature reporting
on the Coanda effect in echocardiography, a connection with the fluid dynamics
studies that could help identify and understand the main features of the
corresponding flow conditions is lacking. This project makes this connection and
explores the fluid dynamics properties leading to the Coanda effect in a novel
environment: moving geometries and time periodic flow conditions, which will
include those encountered in patients with mitral regurgitation. The
corresponding fluid dynamics problem is associated with the behavior of flow
through an orifice at Reynolds numbers below turbulence. Coanda effect
corresponds to the breaking of symmetry (a bifurcation) in the solution of the
Navier-Stokes equations at certain Reynolds numbers and for certain orifice
shapes. While flows through orifices have been extensively studied (numerically
and experimentally) in the context of fixed orifices and fixed fluid domains,
there have been no results that shed light on the flow conditions leading to
Coanda effect in moving orifices under time-periodic pressure loads. This
project addresses this problem by combining sophisticated computational
methodology and analytical techniques associated with fluid-structure
interaction (FSI) between a viscous, incompressible fluid, and an elastic
structure. The methodology is based on a monolithic, semi-implicit algorithm to
solve an Arbitrary Lagrangian-Eulerian (ALE) formulation of the underlying FSI
problem, and on the corresponding energy estimates. Experimental validation of
the mathematical models and computer simulations will be performed with the
medical collaborators at the DeBakey Heart and Vascular Center in
Houston.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Although over 50% of the US population has some
degree of heart valve dysfunction, most cases do not require any medical
treatment. In the cases when valve regurgitation is severe, failure of treatment
can lead to arrhythmias, congestive heart failure and death. Doppler
echocardiography is routinely used by physicians to diagnose and assess the
severity of mitral valve regurgitation. The accurate assessment of valve
regurgitation using echocardiography is, however, an ongoing challenge. In
particular, regurgitant blood flow through a leaky mitral valve sometimes hugs
the wall of the left atrium (known as the Coanda effect), which makes it
difficult to see and measure the regurgitant volume. By using sophisticated
mathematics, scientific computing, and experimental validation, the
interdisciplinary team consisting of mathematicians and echocardiographic
specialists, is investigating the blood flow conditions, and the shape of the
regurgitant valves, that lead to the Coanda effect. This is a novel fluid-
dynamics problem that has not been studied before due to the difficulties in
resolving the interaction between blood flow and the moving regurgitant valve.
By using a recently developed state-of-the-art computational algorithm that is
capable of resolving this problem, and by developing novel mathematical
techniques that will capture the bifurcation in the flow associated with Coanda
effect, the results of this project will shed light on the complex intracardiac
flow conditions associated with this phenomenon, and lead the way in designing
novel protocols in echocardiographic assessment of mitral regurgitation.
Students participate in all the aspects of this research. They are being trained
in computer simulations, mathematical modeling, and in experimental validation
of the mathematical models.