* 1109832
* Collaborative Research: Observing Cosmic Dawn with the Long Wavelength Array
* MPS,AST
* 08/01/2011,07/31/2014
* Gregory Taylor, University of New Mexico
* Continuing Grant
* Richard Barvainis
* 07/31/2014
* USD 88,885.00

A short time after the Big Bang, the Cosmic Dawn emerged and featured the
formation of the first stars, black holes, and galaxies. Neutral hydrogen gas
dominated the Universe during this epoch and is now detectable in the radio
bands through its redshifted 21-cm line, initially manifest as an absorption
line in the cosmic microwave background. As the life cycle of the first stars
ended and the first black holes formed, matter accreting onto the black holes
produced X-rays, which heated the intergalactic medium (IGM). As the IGM was
heated, the 21-cm line of the neutral hydrogen gas moved from producing
absorption lines to emission lines until the gas was ionized during the epoch of
reionization, thus removing the detectable signal.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
proposed two-year research project is to employ a novel observing strategy to
detect this redshifted 21-cm line signal using the existing first Long
Wavelength Array station (LWA1) in New Mexico, which consists of 256 dual-
polarization dipole antennas that are digitally combined to form multiple beams
on the sky. While the time history of the absorption and emission features is
imprinted on the all-sky radio spectrum, the observational challenge is to
separate the approximately 100 mK signal from the dominant Galactic foreground
emission. The investigators' strategy exploits the unique beam forming
capability to remove calibration uncertainties that plague other instruments by
simultaneously targeting science and calibrator fields. The investigators expect
to their efforts to lead to the first detection of the 21-cm absorption signal
at a redshift of z=25 that will open a new window on early star formation and
the IGM.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Educationally, as both institutions have high
minority enrollment, this project will actively seek to involve underrepresented
student groups, and it will fund a graduate student for two years and will
provide opportunities for student training and mentoring in an interdisciplinary
environment including principles of digital signal processing, software design,
statistical analysis, model fitting, and astrophysics.