* 1109682
* Analysis of Diffusion Equations with Nonlinear Singular Sources in Mean Field Games
* MPS,DMS
* 10/01/2011,12/31/2012
* Maria Pia Gualdani, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Henry Warchall
* 12/31/2012
* USD 208,430.00

The goal of this project is to investigate the evolution dynamics of a class of
nonlinear diffusion equations that appear as mathematical models in life and
social science: &lt;br/&gt;(1) Analysis of existence and long time behavior of
solutions of a free boundary problem in one and two dimensional
space;&lt;br/&gt;(2) Study of the regularity of solutions to a Hamilton-Jacobi-
Bellman equation coupled to a Fokker-Planck diffusion equation;&lt;br/&gt;(3)
Analysis of long-time behavior of parabolic equations with nonlinear singular
sources. &lt;br/&gt;These equations present several difficulties due to high
differential order as well as the underlying nonlinear structure, and new
analytical tools need to be developed: some key techniques involve combination
of classical partial differential equations technique with methods from
statistical mechanics, optimal control and kinetic theory. Of particular
interest is the study of stability and finite time blow-up phenomena in the
model: in case of stability, behavior of solution for large time will be
investigated (possible bifurcations or convergence towards equilibrium state).
In case of blow-up, relation between formation of singularities and blow-up of
the related quantities will be analyzed. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Complex, real-
life systems in sociology, economics, and life sciences often contain a large
number of individuals that interact and can develop a collective behavior; these
are exactly the areas of sciences where this project draws the topics from and
where mathematics could offer great insights and contributions. The
understanding of diffusion processes and collective behavior is essential in
many areas of science. The project focuses on investigating a class of mean
field and kinetic models that can describe very well interactions among agents,
collective behavior and averaging processes. Applications of such a study range
from game theory (decisional strategies, behavior of investors), socio-economic
(opinion formation, population dynamics), to biology (tumor growth, flocking)
and neuroscience. The project will also provide education and training through
research to undergraduate and graduate students.