* 1109285
* From Central Engine to Bipolar Outflow: Binaries, MHD and the Evolution of Planetary Nebulae
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2014
* Eric Blackman, University of Rochester
* Continuing Grant
* Nigel Sharp
* 08/31/2014
* USD 411,500.00

Dr. Frank and his team study the late stages of stellar evolution for low and
intermediate mass stars, when these stars evolve into proto planetary nebulae
(PPN) and planetary nebulae (PN) and lose large fractions of their mass to the
interstellar medium. Proto planetary nebulae often show collimated energetic
outflows that cannot be explained by radiative driving and launching or
collimation of proto planetary nebulae is not well understood. The team
developed a new paradigm in which binaries and magneto-hydrodynamic processes
are responsible for the majority of PPN and PN. The researchers established the
potential efficacy of magneto-centrifugal launching processes in PPN and PN and
found pathways by which binary companions create conditions for magneto-
hydrodynamic launching including the efficacy of dynamo processes. Here the work
focuses on several topics: Simulations of the pathways for accretion disk
formation in PPN and PN binary systems by wind capture; common envelope
evolution in the context of PPN/PN to understand when disks form after ejection
of the bulk stellar envelope; and the propagation of magnetically dominated
magnetic tower jets which are likely resulting in the disks. The magneto-
hydrodynamic outflow simulations are compared to laboratory astrophysics
experiments at Imperial College in London that generate hyper-fast mode,
radiative magnetic plasma outflows and jets. All computations use the Adaptive
Mesh Refinement magneto-hydrodynamic, multiphysics code AstroBEAR built at the
University of Rochester. The parallel AMR engine of the AstroBEAR code will be
redesigned to allow it to reach towards Petascale computing on massively
parallel platforms. This work is relevant to other research areas where
collimated outflows from a central gravitating source are observed. The project
provides student and postdoc training in computational astrophysics and fosters
closer connections between astronomers and plasma experimentalists.