* 1109202
* RUI: Multidimensional Conservation Laws and Related Applications
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2011,05/31/2015
* Eun Heui Kim, California State University-Long Beach Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Henry Warchall
* 05/31/2015
* USD 163,097.00

This project consists of two parts. The first project aims at understanding the
solution structures of mixed (hyperbolic-elliptic) type systems of partial
differential equations arising from multidimensional conservation laws. A
distinctive feature of multidimensional conservation laws written in self-
similar coordinates is that they change their type: they are hyperbolic far from
the origin, and mixed near the origin. The latter confronts us with important
problems in nonlinear equations of mixed types and free boundaries. In
particular, when the waves are weak enough that the nonlinear acoustic waves
dominate the nonlinear entropy and vorticity waves, shock polar analysis fails
to explain the nature of shock reflection. This is the so called von Neumann
paradox. It is one of the main motivations of this project to address the
failures of asymptotic and computational analysis to resolve certain paradoxes
concerning the existence and the stability of solutions of multidimensional
problems. Understanding the mathematical structure of multidimensional
conservation laws is a crucial step in improving computational methods and in
resolving such paradoxes. The project is directed at investigating these mixed
type problems to gain new physical insights, to develop novel analytical tools,
and to find the correct mathematical framework in which to pose the nonlinear
conservation laws and to develop efficient numerical methods. The second project
will investigate the feasibility of various wildfire spread models with sparse
data, and development of efficient algorithms to solve the model problems. This
project will be conducted in communication with the USDA Forest Fire Lab in
Riverside, CA. The wildfire spread models inherit scale separation of the local
atmospheric dynamics (one kilometer and larger) and the local combustion
dynamics (one meter and smaller). Also, available data are irregular and
sometimes inaccurate. Existing extensive models, require complete data, are
computationally intensive, and thus may not provide immediate results, which are
crucial for effective fire-fighting plans. The project will develop efficient
algorithms for simplified models, which can be incorporated with sparse data, so
that the fire-fighting could be planned immediately and as accurately as
possible.

Multidimensional conservation laws are mathematical models for fundamental
processes in physics and engineering, such as high-speed flows and supersonic
jets. A deeper understanding of multidimensional conservation laws will provide
efficient and effective methods for applications, such as compressible gas
dynamics, thermodynamics, multi-phase flow and porous medium flow. Our wildfire
modeling will contribute to effective fire-fighting planning and thus will have
direct benefits for society. This project will take place at a Hispanic-serving
institution, and involve undergraduate/master students in simulations of the
model problems, thus preparing the students for further work in the design,
implementation, and development of algorithms. This project will provide
students with training to prepare them for their academic careers (as Ph.D.
students), or their future jobs in the high tech industry in the greater Los
Angeles area.