* 1109095
* Alabama Alliance for Graduate Education and the Professoriate Planning Activity
* EHR,HRD
* 11/01/2011,10/31/2012
* Louis Dale, University of Alabama at Birmingham
* Standard Grant
* Mark Leddy
* 10/31/2012
* USD 141,496.00

Alabama's participation in the NSF Alliances for Graduate Education and the
Professoriate (AGEP) activities ended in 2008. Alabama AGEP began with twelve
institutions, six doctoral granting institutions and six non-doctoral granting
institutions. The undergraduate institutions served as feeders for the doctoral
granting institutions and are now supported by the Alabama Louis Stokes Alliance
for Minority Participation (LSAMP) Program. Thus, it is now appropriate to
develop a planning proposal to establish a new alliance consisting of only
doctoral degree granting institutions that will collaborate with the LSAMP
program for the recruitment of underrepresented minority STEM students and focus
fully on the achievement of AGEP goals and objectives. While the former alliance
was successful in increasing doctoral degree recipients, this move will serve to
increase doctoral degree output even more, as well as include postdoctoral
training. Planning is needed for this new alliance to re-align human resources,
the research infrastructure, project management, budget priorities and develop
an outstanding postdoctoral training program. In addition, an education
component directed at preparing students for the professoriate is planned. Data
collection and research on activities and programs that will maximize student
networking and interactions across the alliance also require planning. To
accomplish this, it is proposed that a planning committee consisting of faculty
and administrators from the doctoral institutions, external consultants and
graduate students be formed. The committee will review STEM education research
findings and effective implementation strategies as well as STEM program
assessments and evaluations. Data collection and analysis will also be a focus
of the committee along with postdoctoral training and mentoring. The proposed
planning committee will hold meetings and a retreat with stakeholders. In
addition, a subset of the planning committee will visit an AGEP program
considered to be a model based on the number of students graduated, postdoctoral
faculty produced and number of AGEP participants entering the professoriate. To
accomplish these tasks four subcommittees will be formed to address STEM data
collection and analysis; AGEP goals, strategies, activities, assessment and
evaluation; post doctoral training, mentoring and retreat planning; and
resources. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit &lt;br/&gt;The proposed
planning activities for Alabama AGEP are important to advancing knowledge and
understanding of the elements of STEM graduate education and postdoctoral
training within the fields. The proposal team consists of faculty,
administrators and graduate students eminently qualified to implement the
proposed project. The proposed postdoctoral training and mentoring will explore
creative, original, and potentially transformative concepts. The proposed
project will have sufficient access to resources. &lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts
&lt;br/&gt;The proposed planning activities will advance discovery and
understanding while promoting teaching, training, research and learning, and by
the nature of the project participants will broaden participation of
underrepresented groups. The infrastructure for research, education, networks
and partnerships will be enhanced and project results will be disseminated
broadly.