* 1109882
* BREAD: Fast Breeding for Slow Cycling Crops: Doubled Haploids in Cassava and Banana/Plantain
* BIO,IOS
* 07/01/2011,06/30/2015
* Anne Britt, University of California-Davis
* Continuing Grant
* Diane Jofuku Okamuro
* 06/30/2015
* USD 1,280,145.00

PI: Simon Chan (University of California - Davis)

CoPIs: Paul Chavarriaga and Hernan Ceballos [International Center for Tropical
Agriculture (CIAT), Colombia] and Jim Lorenzen [International Institute of
Tropical Agriculture (IITA), Uganda]

Senior collaborator: Leena Tripathi [International Institute of Tropical
Agriculture (IITA), Uganda]

Cassava and banana/plantain are crucial crops for food security in the
developing world, especially in sub-Saharan Africa. Improving these crops
through breeding is extremely challenging, because they have a long generation
time and lack pure inbreds that yield consistent traits. The ability to produce
doubled haploid plants containing only one set of parental chromosomes could
revolutionize breeding in slow cycling crops such as banana and cassava.
However, there are no methods available for doubled haploid production in these
crops. A novel strategy for producing haploids was recently developed in the
model plant Arabidopsis thaliana. The strategy is based on mutations in
centromeric proteins that are required for accurate inheritance during cell
division. When Arabidopsis plants containing a defective centromere protein
(CENH3) are crossed to wild type or normal plants, chromosomes from the mutant
are eliminated to give haploids with only chromosomes from the wild type parent.
The goal of this project is to develop this novel centromere engineering
technology for doubled haploid production in cassava and banana. To accomplish
this, haploid cassava and banana will be created by down-regulating the
expression of CENH3 and expressing an altered transgenic protein in its place.
Transgenic plants expressing altered CENH3 proteins will be crossed to wild
type, and progeny will be screened for haploid individuals. Haploid plants will
be characterized using genomics approaches and converted into fertile diploids
for breeding.

Radical improvements in cassava and banana breeding have the potential to
increase food security and economic well-being for smallholder farmers. The
doubled haploid production approach to be developed in this study could
potentially transform banana and cassava breeding and facilitate rational
improvement of these vital crops. Homozygous plants resulting from this
technology can accelerate introgression of favorable traits, and development of
vigorous hybrids. Results of this project will establish the feasibility of this
technology for other slow-cycling food security crops such as sweet potato and
yam. This project will also provide unique training opportunities for
researchers and students from Colombia, Uganda, and the US. Research capacity in
Colombia and Uganda will be strengthened by training researchers from CIAT and
IITA in genomics and cytogenetic techniques, and providing opportunities for
career development, including presentations at scientific and group meetings and
mentoring of undergraduate students. Participation of students from
underrepresented groups will be promoted by drawing from an NIH-funded MARC
program and the minority-rich Biology Undergraduate Scholars Program at UC
Davis. Educational outreach will be extended to Colombian and Ugandan sites by
holding yearly meetings at which PIs will present general interest lectures on
plant breeding. Results and a description of available sequences, reagents and
germplasm will be described in a project website (to be constructed; accessible
via http://biosci3.ucdavis.edu/FacultyAndResearch/FacultyProfile.aspx?FacultyID=
182), and further disseminated through plant research conferences, publications,
and outreach to cassava and banana breeders through existing CIAT and IITA
programs. Data to be generated in this project include nucleic acid sequences
for CENH3 genes in cassava and banana, which will be released through GenBank,
and genotyping markers for breeding lines through the project website. Molecular
reagents include gene constructs and clones which will be freely available from
UC Davis. Genetic resources including breeding germplasm, transgenic haploid-
inducing banana and cassava plants, and non-transgenic doubled-haploid cassava
and banana plants will be made available to the public through CIAT and IITA.