* 1109156
* Collaborative Research: Optimal Statistics for Redshifted 21 cm Observations of the Reionization Epoch
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2015
* Judd Bowman, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Richard Barvainis
* 08/31/2015
* USD 280,731.00

One important new frontier of cosmology is the Epoch of Reionization (EoR),
marking the time when the Universe's first luminous objects formed and the time
of the final phase of cosmological formation of structure in the Universe. Most
investigators seek to observe the EoR by detecting neutral hydrogen gas of the
intergalactic medium (IGM) through its signature in the redshifted 21-cm
spectral line. While a variety of projects are currently underway to detect the
EoR signal, thermal noise will dominant the signal and will require careful
statistical analysis of the observational data to infer the statistical nature
of the EoR signal. Unfortunately, one of the statistical techniques employed
will be to characterize power spectrum of the EoR signal even though this signal
is expected to be non-Gaussian.

The intent of this project is to systematically explore statistics that reach
far beyond the power spectrum technique. The investigators will compute
radiative transfer simulations of reionization for a wide variety of well-
defined theoretical models. Expected thermal noise, foreground corruption, and
instrumental distortions will next be added to the simulations to produce
complete simulations of observational sky maps in 21 cm. The investigators will
next measure a range of statistics on these simulated observational maps to
characterize the most robust useful information obtainable from the EoR signal.

Educationally, an undergraduate will receive support and mentoring at one
institution, and graduate students at two institutions will receive support and
mentoring. An important feature of student training in this project is the
interdisciplinary nature of the research including complex statistical analysis,
analytical and numerical simulations, instrumental modeling, and astrophysics.
The student experience will also emphasize the interconnection between
experimental conditions and scientific analysis.