* 1109687
* Investigating the Capacity of Game-based Design Elements to Enhance Affective Dimensions of Genetics Learning
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2015
* David Kanter, New York Hall of Science
* Standard Grant
* Finbarr Sloane
* 08/31/2015
* USD 1,291,793.00

Project based learning has received increasing attention in recent years and has
come into more wide-spread use. One expectation of this instructional approach
is that it promotes engagement via active learning and student interaction with
peers. However, some research has shown that this is not the case. This proposal
will address this quandary by empirically testing the extent to which adding
specific interactive and competition-based game elements to a genetics project-
based science curriculum can increase engagement and improve other affective
dimensions of science learning---particularly for students from underrepresented
groups. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Researchers from the New York Hall of Science, the
Concord Consortium, and Michigan State University will do this by modifying the
Geniverse curriculum. They will add (1) a strong story line narrative, (2) a
goal attainment stimulus, and (3) a team competition feature. Each modification
will be tested as an experimental condition. Data will be collected from ninth-
graders, many from underrepresented populations, using instruments that measure
motivation, cognitive-emotional engagement, and
learning.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research has the potential to advance our
understanding of project based curricula, gaming, and the melding of the two,
both from the point of view of practice and knowledge building. It directly
addresses the proposition that games increase motivation and thus learning. The
research is unusual in that it will blend curriculum and game; formal and
informal learning environments. If successful, outcomes of this project could be
adopted in other project based curricula. The project will be evaluated through
an advisory committee, including experts in genetics, the learning sciences,
cognitive science, and gaming. The dissemination plan includes publishing in
peer-reviewed literature, the distribution of the game, and professional
development via the New York Hall of Science's network of teachers and other
educational practitioners.