* 1109834
* Learning Evolution through Model-Based Inquiry: Supporting Agent-Based Modeling in STEM Classrooms
* EDU,DRL
* 05/15/2012,08/31/2016
* Uri Wilensky, Northwestern University
* Continuing Grant
* Gregg Solomon
* 08/31/2016
* USD 1,009,710.00

In this project, the investigators design and explore the use of agent based
models in advancing high school students' understanding of evolutionary biology
while promoting their computational thinking skills. Using the NetLogo
programming environment, the students and teachers focus on the relationship of
evolutionary change at the level of the organism (micro-evolution) with
evolution at the population level (macro-evolution). This is one of the basic
concepts in evolution that seems most difficult for students to grasp. The use
of NetLogo is well-suited toward this end given that it can depict how changes
at the individual level relate to shifts in the population of the organism as a
whole.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research examines the impact of using such
methods on student outcomes including learning and student interest. The
learning environment is designed to examine students working either alone or in
pairs at laptop computers or as a group on a table top computer. Design research
is used to explore the relative effects of these approaches. Inner city students
in grades 9 through 11 are the study population.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
research is important because if learning technologies and modeling evolution as
a computational problem can help overcome a critical sticking point in students'
understanding in this area, which is core to the biology curriculum, then
student learning of evolution can be improved. If the approach used by the
investigators is effective, then it demonstrates that significant changes in the
productivity of student learning can be achieved by the use of learning
technology. In addition, the project expects to contribute to the theory and
practice of learning using instructional technologies, agent based models, and
computational models. Because inner city students are involved in the study, the
findings should be particularly beneficial to this group.