* 1109309
* Transforming Text to Diagram: Investigating and Helping Students Develop Key Cognitive Strategies for Solving Engineering Pproblems
* EHR,DRL
* 06/01/2011,05/31/2014
* Joseph Le Doux, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Finbarr Sloane
* 05/31/2014
* USD 249,991.00

This exploratory project investigates a complex problem of why many engineering
students have difficulty mastering the problem solving approaches regularly
conducted by expert engineers. The study will particularly focus on the
transformation of a textual or linguistic account of a problem into a
diagrammatic or schematic representation one. This transformation seems
particular problematic when solving problems addressing conservation of mass and
energy balance.

The investigators will explore differences between novice and expert engineers
by videotaping problem solving sessions with the two populations followed by
retrospective questioning with the subjects viewing the videos. Then they will
code and classify the steps taken by the experts to solve the problem and
compare these with those of learners. Generalizations will be made about what
practices appear to be particularly useful for instruction. In later steps, the
team will design classroom interventions and conduct a comparative study of a
control group (no intervention) and an experimental group (the intervention will
be based on phase I findings).

This project is intended to determine whether further exploration of this
complex problem is worthy of future study. Eventually study results of expert
development would be used to improve the teaching of engineering problem-solving
approaches for introductory engineering students. The investigators do not begin
the observations with a clear hypothesis of stages but their observational
research methods will result in improved hypothetical explanations for the
process of becoming an expert in complex engineering topics through the use of
diagrams and verbal explanations. The in depth exploration of a small number of
cases will enable the two researchers to modify their expectations, develop
intervention strategies, and try out some of their observations at a reasonable
expense.