* 1109679
* Disk Lifetimes as a Function of Stellar Mass and Environments in Young Stellar Clusters
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2011,09/30/2016
* Naibi Marinas, University of Florida
* Continuing Grant
* Nigel Sharp
* 09/30/2016
* USD 364,735.00

Dr. Lada and her team study the dependence of circumstellar disks lifetimes on
stellar mass and stellar cluster environment. This is important to understand
the disk development into planetary systems. The researchers combine near-
infrared FLAMINGOS spectroscopy and photometry to study the stellar populations
for a sample of eight young (about 1-2 million years old) embedded clusters in
the molecular clouds Perseus, Orion A, Orion B and Mon OB1 with archival mid-IR
Spitzer photometry. The sample of clusters covers a range of sizes, stellar
populations, stellar densities and morphologies. The spectroscopic data provide
extinction, stellar spectral types, median ages, age spreads, stellar masses and
distribution of stars within each cluster. The derived extinction is combined
with Spitzer mid-infrared photometry to obtain the intrinsic infrared excess for
the sources, which is an indicator for distinguishing sources with disks and
envelopes, sources with optically thick disks, sources with optically thin
anemic disks, and diskless sources. The disks lifetimes might depend on both
stellar mass and cluster environment and the goals here are to assess the
dependence of fraction of stars with discs on stellar mass, and to evaluate the
dependence of disks fraction on cluster environments such as cluster stellar
density, stellar population, morphology, and median ages. This research also
provides training for graduate students and young scientists in astronomical
research, and they participate in educational outreach activities.