* 1109849
* Beyond Academic Math and Science: The Role of Applied Engineering and Computer Science in the High School Curriculum
* EDU,DRL
* 07/01/2011,06/30/2014
* Michael Gottfried, Rand Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Finbarr Sloane
* 06/30/2014
* USD 299,216.00

The project will conduct a secondary analysis of large scale longitudinal survey
data of students who have been followed into college to explore the types of
applied engineering and computer science courses that youth take in high school,
and the extent to which these courses help promote advancement toward careers in
science, technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM). The analysis will
inform researchers and policy makers about the extent to which high school
course taking in applied engineering influences math achievement, fields of
college study, and jobs with STEM applications. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The study
will analyze the study known as ELS:2002 which is a nationally representative
study of 10th-graders in 2002 sponsored by NCES. A sample of approximately
14,000 students with full transcripts will be analyzed using five Math
Achievement scores (10th grade) and first follow-up (12th grade). The study will
provide a new descriptive overview of the STEM course taking in high school and
an econometric test of the efficacy of applied math and science. They will apply
multivariate, quasi-experimental regression techniques.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The results of this study will provide answers to both a
theoretical and a practical question. For theory, the study will indicate the
extent to which learning in non-academic courses during high school years
actually create student knowledge in mathematics that will be applied later in
their school and work life. For practice, the study will provide evidence for
educators about the value of non-academic courses for later development. If the
study finds that non-academic high school courses are as influential as academic
training, then the fields of vocational education will be especially interested.
If however this national study shows that only academic courses provide the
requisite background in mathematics for any adult application, then the school
policies might be encouraged to improve the access of all students to academic
training.