* 1109270
* Sensor-enabled Geometric Blocks for Research in Early-childhood Education
* EDU,DRL
* 08/01/2011,07/31/2014
* Kiju Lee, Case Western Reserve University
* Standard Grant
* Finbarr Sloane
* 07/31/2014
* USD 290,492.00

This REESE Pathways project aims to develop and evaluate a novel procedural and
methodological approach for assessing cognitive and fine-motor skills in
children through sensor-embedded geometric blocks. Cognitive problem-solving,
fine-motor control, and working memory skills are closely linked to fundamental
STEM reasoning and learning abilities. Employing a set of sensor-integrated
geometric blocks and an interactive graphical user interface, the blocks will
function as an automated, objective, and multimodal assessment and educational
tool for researchers, clinicians, educators, and parents, while also being
engaging for children.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Three types of blocks will be
developed: assembly, shape matching, and shape memory. The three types address
children's abilities of conceptual reasoning, problem-solving, and working
memory, in addition to fine-motor control and visual-motor integration. Initial
evaluation will focus on testing safety, durability, and usability of the
developed technology. Reliability and validity evaluation will later be
conducted on young children, aged 4 to 6. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
will provide advanced instrumentation for related research areas by enabling
collection from multiple real-time data sources that are objective,
simultaneous, and cumulative in a variety of different environmental settings.
It will bring a direct impact on early education for preschoolers and school-
aged children by providing a tangible interface for learning fundamental STEM
content in various formal and informal educational settings. Furthermore, it can
be easily transformed into various tests for measuring intelligence,
achievement, learning capability, motor proficiency, spatial memory, and
attention, while addressing individual differences and special needs,
particularly for underrepresented groups. The blocks may also be extended to
interventional and therapeutic applications for persons with cognitive or motor
disabilities.