* 1109548
* Reducing the Racial Achievement Gap in STEM: A Social-Neurobiological Investigation and Values-Affirmation Intervention
* EHR,DRL
* 07/15/2011,06/30/2015
* Valerie Purdie-Greenaway, Columbia University
* Continuing Grant
* Celestine Pea
* 06/30/2015
* USD 1,114,684.00

The research focus of this project is the concept of social identity threat,
i.e., academically at-risk minority students are concerned that they could be
negatively judged in light of stereotypes of others about their racial group's
intellectual ability. Social identity threat has been shown to impair
performance of minorities in STEM. The research hypothesizes that social
identity triggers a physiological threat response, which involves hormonal and
immune-system reactions to threatening situations which can undermine a
student's ability to engage in higher level cognitive processing required for
success in learning.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PIs propose studies over three
years to: (1) examine the role of social psychological and neurobiological
processes in understanding the racial achievement gap between White, Black and
Latino college students in STEM educational attainment, (2) implement a social-
psychological intervention approach to improve performance, (3) test a new
theory-informed version of the intervention, (4) test an online intervention
delivery system that could facilitate widespread national
dissemination.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Using psychological and neurophysiological
levels of analysis, this research will test: (1) how the threat of confirming
negative stereotypes "gets under the skin" to impair cognitive functioning for
minority students in STEM, and (2) whether a well-validated values-affirmation
intervention works because it reduces the physiological stress of identity
threat &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The ultimate project goal is to provide a powerful,
cost-effective, and easily-implemented intervention to reduce the effect of
identity threat on minority college student academic functioning, thereby
reducing the racial achievement gap in STEM fields and increasing and
diversifying the pool of STEM workers.