* 1109855
* Investigation of near-Earth asteroid properties through a combination of infrared and radar observations
* MPS,AST
* 05/01/2012,04/30/2016
* Michael Nolan, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* James Neff
* 04/30/2016
* USD 429,340.00

This project will provide renewed support for the proposing team's work on the
modeling of the surface properties of near-Earth asteroids (NEAs). The proposers
have developed sophisticated computational methods for both constraining the
shapes of NEAs from radar observations and for predicting the thermal infrared
radiation emitted from their sunlit surfaces. By comparing the model predictions
to observations obtained using space- and ground-based infrared telescopes, the
team will be able to constrain the sizes and surface reflectivities (albedos) of
the observed NEAs, as well as to test and refine the thermal models. The team
plans to obtain radar observations of 6 to 10 NEAs per year in the 3-year term
of the project, and to obtain infrared spectroscopic data for these objects and
for objects with already-existing radar data. They will model the spectra using
a "thermophysical" code that takes into account multiple important physical
effects including heat conduction, shadowing, self-irradiation of the surface,
and multiple scattering in the surface. The results will have wider implications
for Solar System science, as thermal models are routinely used to infer the
physical properties of small bodies. This study will enable a better
quantification of the uncertainties in the sizes of NEAs and, therefore, a
better assessment of the hazards from asteroid impacts on Earth. Educational
opportunities for both students (K-12, undergraduate, and graduate) and teachers
will be actively pursued through existing programs in place at the participating
institutions.