* 1109372
* Laboratory Studies of O2 Excited States Relevant to the CO2 Planets
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2014
* Konstantinos Kalogerakis, SRI International
* Standard Grant
* Maria Womack
* 08/31/2014
* USD 339,901.00

In the upper atmospheres of Venus, Earth, and Mars, molecular oxygen is
dissociated into atomic oxygen by absorption of solar ultraviolet radiation. The
oxygen atoms can then recombine through a 3-body interaction with another
molecule to form molecular oxygen in an excited state. On Venus and Mars, the
third molecule is carbon dioxide. The competition between photodissociation,
recombination, and diffusive transport determines the atomic and molecular
composition of the mesosphere and lower thermosphere. Accurate knowledge of the
oxygen atom recombination processes is critical for modeling the diurnal
behavior of the altitude profile of oxygen atoms and interpreting nightglow
emissions from atomic oxygen, molecular oxygen, and hydroxyl. In this project,
the Principal Investigator and a postdoctoral fellow will conduct laboratory
experiments to study the yields of the excited molecular oxygen states generated
following O-atom recombination in a carbon dioxide environment. An ultraviolet
light pulse from an excimer laser will photoinitiate O-atom recombination in
carbon dioxide, maintained in a temperature-controlled gas flow cell.
Fluorescence and resonance enhanced multiphoton ionization (REMPI) techniques
will detect excited oxygen molecules and determine the yields of the excited
states produced following O-atom recombination and subsequent relaxation in
carbon dioxide. These measurements are needed to quantify oxygen airglow in the
upper atmospheres of Venus and Mars and to probe their atmospheric dynamics by
remote sensing. The results will benefit modelers of planetary atmospheres and
will enhance the scientific returns on past and future missions to Venus and
Mars. Application of basic chemistry and physics to the study of collisional
processes is also critical for understanding the operation of high-power
chemical lasers. Finally, the project will contribute to the training and
research experience of a postdoctoral fellow and summer undergraduate students.