* 1109753
* The Massive Black Hole at the Center of the Galaxy and its Immediate Environment
* MPS,AST
* 08/15/2011,01/31/2016
* Farhad Yusef-Zadeh, Northwestern University
* Continuing Grant
* Glen Langston
* 01/31/2016
* USD 446,463.00

Dr. Yusef-Zadeh and his team study the massive black hole at the center of our
Galaxy. The black hole is associated with the radio source Sagittarius A* (Sgr
A*) that is centered on two clusters of evolved and young stars. The accretion
of ionized thermal winds from nearby young stars onto the black hole is
responsible for the luminosity of Sgr A*. On a scale of a few light years,
molecular material is distributed in a ring orbiting both Sgr A* and the cluster
of stars. The gaseous and stellar systems co-exist spatially and physically
interact with the massive black hole. Observations at radio, sub-millimeter,
X-ray and infrared wavelengths probe variability and flaring activity. The
emission properties of Sgr A* are probed using data from multiple space- and
ground-bases observatories (e.g., Herschel, ALMA, EVLA, ATCA, VLBA, CSO, HST and
Chandra). Observational results and theory are combined to study the dynamics,
accretion rate, and effects on the surrounding stellar populations of the
massive black hole at the center of Galaxy. The work will advance our
understanding of star formation in the extreme tidal environment around the
central black hole; and how mass loss from massive stars feeds the black hole.
&lt;br/&gt;The team has developed interactive image viewers to bring
astronomical images to the public and new results from this research will be
included (http://spaceimages.northwestern.edu). There is a collaboration with
the Space Visualization Laboratory at the Adler Planetarium. Narrative WorldWide
Telescope Tours about the variability of emission from Sgr A* and star formation
in the Galactic center are planned, and the Galactic center research will be
shared with the public through Adler's "Astronomy Conversation" program.