* 1109772
* Perihelion advance and Yarkovsky drift of near-Earth asteroids: asteroid physical properties, solar oblateness, and general relativity
* MPS,AST
* 07/01/2011,06/30/2016
* Jean-Luc Margot, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Faith Vilas
* 06/30/2016
* USD 171,907.00

The proposing team will obtain high-precision radar distance and velocity
measurements for twelve near-Earth asteroids (NEAs) that have trajectories
strongly affected by the light of the Sun, the shape of the Sun, and the effects
of General Relativity. These measurements, combined with similar measurements
that this team has been obtaining since 2006 under a previous NSF award, will
provide unique observational constraints on current models of asteroid physics,
solar physics, and fundamental physics. Asteroid orbits are altered by the
absorption and reemission of solar energy, known as the Yarkovsky effect. These
changes will be quantified with the radar measurements in order to constrain the
densities, compositions, and thermal properties of NEAs. Other perturbations to
NEA orbits arise from the gravitational effects of Solar oblateness. The radar
data will provide a direct probe of the mass distribution in the Sun's interior
by measuring these changes to the asteroid trajectories. Radar tests of general
relativity (GR) will also be improved by quantifying the perihelion advance
(apsidal precession) of NEAs that reach deep into the gravitational well of the
Sun. The effects of GR, solar oblateness, and the Yarkovsky mechanism can be
separated from each other because of their different dependences on orbital
semi-major axis, eccentricity, inclination, and time. Most of the measurements
will be performed with the planetary radar on the Arecibo telescope at the
National Astronomy and Ionospheric Center (NAIC). A computer presentation
describing the project will be prepared for dissemination at the Arecibo visitor
center, teacher workshops, and other venues. One or more graduate students will
be supported and trained in the project, and results will be incorporated in
undergraduate courses. Finally, the careful calibration required for this work
may prompt improvements to the research infrastructure at Arecibo.