* 1109776
* Architecture of Planetary Systems: Solar and Extrasolar
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2015
* Yoram Lithwick, Northwestern University
* Continuing Grant
* James Neff
* 08/31/2015
* USD 398,389.00

If one were to arbitrarily put multiple planets in orbit around a star, one
might find the system to be dynamically unstable: the orbits would deviate
exponentially from their original paths on time scales of a few orbital periods.
Real planetary systems, which have survived for at least millions of orbits, are
not dynamically unstable. On these long time scales, a planet behaves as if its
mass were spread around its orbit, like an elliptical ring around the star.
These rings pull on each other gravitationally, causing slow changes in their
shapes and orientations, which may lead to so-called secular instability or
secular chaos. The Principal Investigator and collaborators on this project plan
to develop a complete theory of secular instability, using analytic techniques
as well as computer simulations of interacting elliptical rings and direct
N-body simulations. Their goal is to determine whether secular instability and
secular chaos can quantitatively explain and predict (1) the long-term orbital
evolution of the Inner Planets, (2) the distribution of orbital properties and
masses of "hot Jupiter" exoplanets, and (3) the properties of exoplanet systems
in general. In particular, they aim to determine whether secular chaos is a
viable alternative to disk-driven migration for the formation of hot Jupiters
which may be able also to account for the wide distribution of orbital
inclinations with respect to the stellar equator. They will make quantitative
predictions for the eccentricities and spacings of extrasolar planets, and build
an understanding of how observations of exoplanet systems can be used to
constrain planet formation physics. The project will support and train one
postdoctoral researcher and two undergraduate summer students, and the Principal
Investigator will give public presentations on the results of the work.