* 1109856
* Collaborative Research: Lagrangian data blending for hurricane tracking and source estimation
* MPS,DMS
* 10/01/2011,09/30/2015
* Shankar Venkataramani, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Michael Steuerwalt
* 09/30/2015
* USD 200,000.00

Restrepo, DMS-1109856&lt;br/&gt;Mariano, DMS-1108949&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; A
Lagrangian methodology based on a Discrete Kernel Filter (DKF) and the Ensemble
Bred Vector (EBV) that uses local estimators that preserve significant dynamical
features, detected by observations and in numerical simulations, is developed
for the Forward Lagrangian Trajectory Prediction (LTP) and inverse source
estimation problems that are fundamental in many different scientific
disciplines. These nonlinear filtering problems are non-Gaussian and can have
large-dimensional state spaces. DKF is based upon a particle filter and it does
not suffer ensemble collapse because it has a built-in regeneration process in
the parameterization of the diffusion process that defines the primary branches
for prediction. The method linearizes about branches of prediction, yet makes no
Gaussian assumption in the analysis stage. The EBV algorithm is used to find the
best choices for branches of prediction, thus increasing the efficiency of the
method significantly for application to important real-world problems such as
oil spill modeling and pollution source identification, transport and dispersion
of radioactive gases in the atmosphere, fish larvae transport and fishery
connectivity, predicting sea ice motion, human colonization, mapping invasive
species, and monitoring asteroid movements, to name a few.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;
Observations of fluid flows and the trajectories of the flows are called
Eulerian if the observations are taken from points fixed independent of the
flows, and Lagrangian if they are taken from points that move with the flows
themselves. In the same way, a computational simulation of a flow is called
Eulerian if the flow moves through a fixed computational grid, and Lagrangian if
the grid moves with the flow. The investigators develop a method to predict the
trajectories of fluid flows, which are subject to random perturbations. They
apply the method to two problems where capturing features is critical:
hurricane/typhoon tracking, and US Coast Guard search and rescue. Both of these
problems are of great societal importance because more optimal solutions with
tighter error bars can save both lives and money. For reasons of practicality
they seek an efficient method that is also capable of (1) fusing multi-platform
observations and numerical model simulations of ocean circulation for improving
both the Eulerian, diagnostic variables of the model and prediction of
Lagrangian trajectories, as well as the associated estimation uncertainties, and
(2) handling already existing ensembles, fusing hurricane track forecast
ensembles from the leading operational models (such as NCEP GFS, GFDL, UKMET,
ECMWF, NOGAPS, others) to improve predictions of the path of tropical cyclones
(hurricane, typhoon). The method can help produce state-of-the-art uncertainty
maps that are critical in search and rescue flight planning and for reducing the
"cone of uncertainty" for operational hurricane predictions.