* 1109667
* Investigations in Galaxy Intrinsic Alignment 3-Point Correlations (GGI, GII, III)
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2014
* Mustapha Ishak-Boushaki, University of Texas at Dallas
* Continuing Grant
* Patricia Knezek
* 08/31/2014
* USD 222,092.00

Weak gravitational lensing - the subtle distortion of the images of background
galaxies caused by the bending of light by intervening mass - is one of the most
potentially powerful probes of dark energy. But measurement and interpretation
of the lensing signal is complicated by intrinsic correlations between the
alignments of galaxy images. Intrinsic correlations can arise when physically
close galaxies are aligned by the gravitational field of the matter surrounding
them, or when a matter structure links the orientation of a galaxy close to it
to the lensed image of a galaxy far behind. Previous studies have shown that if
intrinsic alignments are ignored, the lensing constraints on the dark energy
equation of state are biased by up to 50%. This project will study the 3-point
intrinsic correlations of alignments and how their effects can be removed from
the lensing signal. The Principal Investigator, collaborator, and graduate
student supported by the project will carry out analytical calculations and
numerical integrations to develop the method of "self-calibration," which uses
additional correlations that can all be extracted from the same lensing survey
to calculate the intrinsic alignment contamination and remove it. They will
derive statistical estimators of the 3-point correlations and study their
dependencies on redshift, luminosity, color, and morphology in order to
understand their scaling properties. The work will have broad impact in
cosmology, in developing an essential correction to lensing surveys. It will
also contribute to graduate education and to the development research program at
the Principal Investigator's institution. The Principal Investigator will also
be involved in outreach to local amateur astronomy groups and through
participation in public presentations and professional development programs for
teachers.