* 1109367
* Mathematical analysis of synchronization in complex networks
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/2011,07/31/2014
* Georgi Medvedev, Drexel University
* Standard Grant
* Lora Billings
* 07/31/2014
* USD 139,835.00

Synchronization is an important mode of collective behavior in diverse physical,
biological, and technological networks. In many applications, local dynamics is
modeled by systems of differential equations and the interaction schemes are
defined by weighted graphs. This research is aimed at advancing the mathematical
theory of synchronization and pattern formation in coupled systems of
differential equations on graphs. Networks with different types of local
dynamics, such as those generated by limit cycles, chaotic attractors, or
induced by noise, are considered under general assumptions on the network
architecture. The principal investigator (PI) develops mathematically rigorous
yet practically efficient conditions guaranteeing synchronization, studies
robustness of synchrony to noise, and analyzes patterns of electrical activity
in gap-junctionally coupled neuronal networks. The graph-theoretic
interpretation of the analytical results is emphasized. The PI seeks systematic
ways of quantifying the contribution of the network topology to the dynamics of
coupled oscillators by integrating combinatorial techniques into dynamical
systems analysis.

Synchronization is a universal phenomenon with abundant applications across
science and technology. Power grid safety, effective communication in
information networks, and coordination of unmanned vehicles are just three of
many areas of technology where synchronization is crucial. Furthermore,
synchronization plays a prominent role in the mechanisms of many vital
physiological and cognitive processes such as respiration, sleep, and attention,
as well as in the mechanisms of several severe neurodegenerative disorders such
as Parkinson's Disease and epilepsy. The PI develops new mathematical tools and
uses them to study synchronization in biophysical models including that of the
Locus Coeruleus network, a group of neurons in the mammalian brainstem involved
in the regulation of cognitive performance and behavior. This study enhances our
understanding of how to achieve, control, or destroy synchrony in an important
class of models. This investigation fosters research at the interface between
theories of dynamical systems, stochastic processes, and algebraic graph theory.
The results of this research will be integrated into graduate courses in
dynamical systems and mathematical neuroscience that are taught by the PI at
Drexel University. This grant supports one graduate student and sponsors summer
research for two undergraduate students.