* 1109514
* Conference: Student Support for 2011 Summer Bioengineering Conference, Naples, Florida, June 22-26, 2011
* ENG,CBET
* 04/15/2011,03/31/2012
* David Vorp, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Aleksandr Simonian
* 03/31/2012
* USD 22,500.00

1109514, Vorp&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will support the 2011 Summer
Bioengineering Conference in Naples, Florida on Jun 22-26, 2011. The NSF funds
will aid in reducing student registration fees; and to help fund awards for the
annual Student Paper Competition (the existence of awards is believed to
increase participation and hence student attendance to this meeting). A hallmark
of this meeting is the interaction and true integration of rigorous engineering
principles and biologic concepts. The conference format will be 6 parallel
sessions of oral presentations. Approximately a third to half of the accepted
papers will be presented in poster format. A booklet will provide program
details to the participants of the conference. All technical presentations will
be two-page extended abstracts and compiled in a CD format, distributed to all
registrants.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: The SBC is an extremely
high quality scientific and intellectually stimulating interdisciplinary
meeting. It is the premiere meeting for bioengineering with a focus on
biomechanical engineering. The conference brings together the different
bioengineering communities including cell and molecular engineering, tissue
engineering, cardiovascular engineering, etc. It is co-sponsored by several
prestigious bioengineering related societies. The requested funding for this
meeting is to increase and enhance the participation of student attendees, to
help ensure the future of our field. Plenary lectures at the 2011 SBC will
highlight an outstanding speaker with lectures relevant for all attendees, and
especially inspiring for student attendees. Dr. Elazer Edelman (MIT and Harvard)
will deliver a lecture on vascular biotechnology from a clinician-scientist?s
perspective.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dr. Roger Quinn (Case Western Reserve
University) will lecture on nature-inspired design of robots and mechanisms to
perform tasks to better assist people with disabilities.&lt;br/&gt;Six
workshops, one ?Grand Challenge? event and our usual three award lectures will
be held at the 2011 SBC. The Grand Challenge Competition to Predict Knee Loads
in Vivo will build on successful similar events held in both 2009 and 2010. The
aim of this competition is to advance the entire field of musculoskeletal
modeling by critically evaluating muscle force estimates at the knee during gait
using data collected from an actual patient with a force-measuring knee implant.
Competitors will be given access to key biomechanical data and asked to use
their unique computational models to predict knee contact forces which will be
compared to those that are measured. Workshops to be held will include
?Frontiers in Research to Aid People with Disabilities?, ?Funding Landscape in
Research to Aid People with Disabilities?, ?Mentoring of and for Bioengineers?,
?Gradients in Tissue Engineering?, ?360 Degree View in Orthopedics Research? and
?Mechanical Circulatory Support?. Finally, stimulating lectures will be given by
the winners of the three Divisional awards ? YC Fung Award, Van Mow Medal, HR
Lissner Award - to highlight three different career levels ? early, mid and
late, respectively. Student and young professional attendees particularly
benefit from hearing from these award winners.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impact: In addition to the direct impact this conference will have on the
mainstream bioengineering community, it will serve an important cross-
fertilization role. We expect to have bioengineers, engineers from other
disciplines, cell and molecular biologists, biochemists, biophysicists, and
other scientists participating in the meeting. In that manner, this conference
will have a much broader impact than if it were to be attended by just the
bioengineering community. Most importantly, we expect that more than 50% of the
attendees will be students and other trainees (post-docs). This will provide a
broad impact for the current times as well as for the future as these students
will benefit by participation in the meeting and through the material presented
by the plenary speakers and workshops. Furthermore, through the CD containing
technical proceedings and conference web site, information presented at the
meeting will be available to multiple societies and to the public at large.