* 1109099
* Stochastic Variational Inequalities: Analysis, Computation, and Applications
* MPS,DMS
* 07/15/2011,06/30/2015
* Shu Lu, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Michael Steuerwalt
* 06/30/2015
* USD 192,993.00

Stochastic variational inequalities model a large number of equilibrium problems
subject to data uncertainty. They are closely related to stochastic optimization
problems, which form an important subfield of mathematical optimization. The
investigator and her colleagues study the mathematical structure of stochastic
variational inequalities, develop their solution methods and analytic tools, and
apply these to handle data uncertainty in equilibrium and optimization problems.
They analyze the relation between parameters and solutions of stochastic
variational inequalities, investigate the convergence of major computational
methods such as the sample average approximation method, and use such knowledge
to develop and justify methods to establish confidence regions for solutions to
stochastic variational inequalities and stochastic optimization problems. To
broaden the application areas of these methods, they extend the work from
single-stage problems to multi-stage ones, and from the single measure of
expected values to a general class of risk measures. They implement the
resulting computational tools in specific operational planning
problems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The variational inequality is a mathematical
problem that characterizes an equilibrium status. It provides a unified
framework for a very large number of problems from areas including materials
science, transportation, computer networks, signal processing, mechanics,
economics, and other areas. Whereas deterministic variational inequalities are
formulated with fixed parameters, real world problems almost invariably include
some uncertain parameters. Such uncertainty may be caused by lack of reliable
data, measurement errors, future and unobservable events, and so on. A common
approach to tackling such uncertainty is by introducing a probability
distribution on the parameters. The resulting problem is a stochastic
variational inequality, which aims to find the "average" equilibrium status.
Stochastic variational inequalities have been used to model a wide variety of
problems in energy market analysis, communication network modeling,
transportation planning, inventory management, and other areas. In this
research, the investigator and her colleagues study to develop better insight
into the mathematical structure of stochastic variational inequalities, and to
exploit this insight to produce better computational algorithms and analytic
tools. They investigate how solutions to these problems depend on their data,
how to find a good solution effectively, and how to identify practical problems
that are easy to solve and have robust behavior. Success in the work helps to
better understand, analyze and solve a broad class of equilibrium and
optimization problems subject to data uncertainty.