* 1109803
* Cold Gas in Hot Galaxies
* MPS,AST
* 08/01/2011,07/31/2015
* Lisa Young, New Mexico Institute of Mining and Technology
* Standard Grant
* Richard Barvainis
* 07/31/2015
* USD 414,908.00

Exactly how galaxies form and develop is a mystery that has long eluded
astronomers. So, it is crucial for scientists to unravel clues of galaxy
formation and development. This project pursues three primary goals to move this
field forward. The first goal is to read the assembly, interaction, and
accretion history of early-type (elliptical and lenticular) galaxies through
studies of the detailed properties of their cold gas. The second goal is to test
empirical and theoretical models of the structure of the interstellar medium and
its effect on star formation efficiency. Specifically, the true test of
theoretical models of the interstellar medium will be whether the models
developed for late-type spirals can be extended to the very different conditions
inside elliptical and lenticular galaxies. The third goal is to pursue
observational constraints on the role of active galactic nuclei (AGN)-driven
feedback in clearing cold gas from galaxies, thus transforming their morphology
and color and contributing to the establishment of today's Hubble
sequence.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To accomplish these three goals, the
investigators will use the observations of the volume-limited, well-studied
ATLAS-3D sample of nearby early-type galaxies. Existing millimeter
interferometers and the National Radio Astronomy Observatory's (NRAO's) Expanded
Very Large Array (EVLA) will map trace molecular species as astrochemical probes
of the properties of the cold ISM, and will make deep observations of radio
continuum emission from low level star formation activity and low level AGN
activity. The astrochemical work will also be suitable for early Atacama Large
Millimeter/submillimeter Array (ALMA) science
proposals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Educationally, the project will support two
graduate student research assistants for three years as well as an undergraduate
researcher. The project will also provide K-12 teacher training in science
through the development of a radio astronomy course, related to the research
project, delivered in a Master of Science Teaching program offered at New Mexico
Tech for K-12 teachers. The teachers who benefit from this program will be
teaching underrepresented students and thereby strengthening their exposure in
and training for STEM careers. The research and training offered to K-12
teachers is hands-on using a radio telescope. The teachers learn not only how to
collect and examine radio telescope data like the research project, but they
also learn how the professional radio telescopes in New Mexico function, a
tremendous and rare teacher training opportunity that integrates research and
education.