* 1109587
* Dynamical systems and singular perturbation theory for multi-scale reaction-diffusion phenomena
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2011,06/30/2017
* Tasso Kaper, Trustees of Boston University
* Continuing Grant
* Victor Roytburd
* 06/30/2017
* USD 446,337.00

The PI will conduct research on scientific problems exhibiting multiple time
scales and multiple length scales. The first project centers on reaction-
diffusion models for chemical patterns involving waves, fronts, pulses, and
spots. The theoretical framework of semi-strong interaction theory and
renormalization group theory, which the PI helped develop, will be used to
understand the dynamics of scattering and pinning in multi-component reaction-
diffusion systems, as well as the stability of traveling waves in a reaction-
diffusion-advection model of bioremediation. In the second project, the PI will
study R-D equations in two space dimensions with cut-off functions on the
reaction terms. These cut-offs accurately model regions of low concentrations.
The principal goal is to analyze the impact of these cut-offs on the speeds and
stability of propagating fronts. This will build on the PI's pioneering use of
geometric desingularization to find analytical formulas for wave speeds with
cut-offs in 1-D, which match well the numerical data. In the third project, the
PI will continue his long-term analysis and development of accurate model
reduction methods. These are used in large-scale combustion, chemical, and
biochemical systems exhibiting multiple time scales, to find low-dimensional
manifolds that govern the effective dynamics. The new research will build on the
PI's earlier analysis of the most commonly-used model reduction methods
including the ILDM and CSP methods and will take this project to the next level
by developing and analyzing methods that find low-dimensional manifolds in the
presence of diffusion. In the fourth project, the new phenomena of canards in
PDEs will be investigated, as will the new phenomenon of torus canards in
mathematical neuroscience models.

The PI will conduct research on scientific problems exhibiting multiple time
scales and multiple length scales, with the goals of explaining recent
experiments, of analyzing computational methods, and of developing new
mathematical theory. The first project centers on patterns and waves in chemical
and biological systems, with the goal of modeling the interactions between
stripes and spots. Traveling waves in models of bioremediation will also be
studied. Bioremediation is the process by which microorganisms are induced to
degrade environmentally-harmful organic compounds in soil. The PI has
established fundamental properties of these traveling waves, and will determine
the operating parameters, such as injection rates, that lead to stable
bioremediation within the models. In the second project, the PI aims to model
the more challenging and realistic problem of front propagation in two space
dimensions in the presence of cut-offs. Determination of how cut-offs change the
speeds and stability of the fronts will be useful in physics, in particular for
many-particle systems in statistical physics. In the third project, the PI will
focus on model reduction methods that are critical for combustion science,
large-scale reaction networks in chemistry and biochemistry, and in gene
regulatory modeling. Despite the ever-advancing speed of computational methods,
understanding of these large-scale reaction systems depends critically on the
analysis of tractable low-dimensional reduced models. In the fourth project,
canards are solutions that stay near unstable system states for relatively long
periods of time. The new types of canards to be studied are important in
mathematical neuroscience for understanding the transitions between fundamental
states, such as tonic spiking and bursting. All of the above planned research
will have broader scientific impacts. More than half of the PhD students and
postdocs who will work on these projects are women, as is the case for the
twenty PhD students and postdoctoral fellows whom the PI has supervised to date.
Moreover, the planned projects are parts of collaborations involving scientists
at national laboratories and in NATO countries.