* 1109642
* Collaborative Research: Personalized Learning: strategies to respond to distress and promote success
* EHR,DRL
* 09/15/2011,08/31/2013
* Ivon Arroyo, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Finbarr Sloane
* 08/31/2013
* USD 399,982.00

The purpose of this proposal is to explore the extent to which timely emotional,
cognitive, and metacognitive interventions in tutoring software will have
positive effects on students' emotions, attitudes, and achievements in
mathematics. The intelligent tutor, Wayang Outpost, a high school mathematics
tutoring system, is being enhanced to leverage automatic detection of emotions
to guide cognitive, metacognitive, and affective forms of learning support.

The PIs are conducting a set of experiments to understand the interplay of
observed emotional states, emotion assessments, student behavior within tutors,
and student achievement. In particular, the experiments are testing the effects
of the tutoring system when it assesses the emotions of a student and then
responds with instructional support appropriate to that student's affect and
content knowledge.

In this project, an interdisciplinary team of researchers in learning
technologies and mathematics education are working together to investigate
issues related to motivation in learning mathematics. They are taking the
results of lab-based studies into classrooms. The novel technology and
approaches developed in the lab were tested with a small population of learners;
in their classroom-based investigations, they are testing feasibility of the
approach with a more diverse population and refining the technology for use in a
broad range of classroom learning environments. This translational research
project will not only make significant contributions to the field of learning
technologies, but will also contribute to our understanding of issues related to
motivation in mathematics learning.