* 1109239
* Collaborative Research: Preparing to Teach Algebra: A Study of Teacher Education
* EDU,DRL
* 08/01/2011,07/31/2016
* Yukiko Maeda, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Celestine Pea
* 07/31/2016
* USD 364,194.00

This project is to study how secondary mathematics teacher preparation programs
to provide preservice teachers opportunities to develop knowledge for teaching
algebra and address algebra expectations in state-level policies and the Common
Core State Standards for mathematics (CCSSM). It is designed to answer two
important research questions: (1) What opportunities do secondary mathematics
teacher preparation programs provide to learn about algebra, algebra teaching,
and issues in achieving equity in algebra learning? And (2) In what ways do
secondary mathematics teacher preparation programs address the algebra,
functions, and modeling standards and mathematical practices described in the
Common Core State Standards for Mathematics (CCSSM)?
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Mixed-methods will be employed in this research project,
including developing, piloting, refining, and administering data collection
instruments and protocols for a web-based large-scale national program survey,
case studies of teacher preparation programs, and focus group interviews with
student teachers. This project focuses on algebra, an important topic in
mathematics education that has been described as both the fundamental to learn
advanced mathematics and a gatekeeper for success &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There is
no any national survey about pre-service teachers? opportunities to develop
knowledge for teaching algebra in the literature, therefore, this project will
fill a gap in the literature. This project addresses critical issues with
national significance about teacher preparation. In particular, this proposed
project is well-positioned and needed to address issues raised in the National
Research Council and PCAST Reports about the need for information related to the
content of teacher education programs and the need for teachers with strong
content and pedagogical knowledge for teaching algebra. This project will
address the Common Core State Standards for Mathematics (CCSSM) by examining how
closely aligned the current national teacher preparation programs with the
CCSSM. The findings shall have broad policy implications regarding teacher
preparation.