* 1109228
* Adaptive Sequencing and Perceptual Learning Technologies in Mathematics and Science
* EHR,DRL
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2015
* Philip Kellman, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Finbarr Sloane
* 08/31/2015
* USD 1,263,282.00

The purpose of this project is to increase our understanding of how to optimize
the features of learning technology systems, which have the potential to be
applied widely across domains, settings, and age groups. The team of researchers
from the University of California, Los Angeles, and the University of
Pennsylvania focuses on learning technology that integrates (1) principles of
perceptual learning that accelerate learners' abilities to recognize key
structures and relations in science and math domains, and (2) adaptive learning
algorithms that use a constant stream of performance data to adapt the learning
process to each individual. The collaborating partners include two K-12 schools
serving diverse populations and two community colleges.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
researchers will investigate the role of response time data as a novel input
into both spacing and the setting of learning criteria in adaptive and
perceptual learning systems. Specific hypotheses will be tested in a series of
randomized controlled experiments. Students will complete pretests, posttests,
and delayed posttests to evaluate gains and long-term durability of learning.
The researchers aim (1) to test adaptive sequencing that utilizes learner
response times (along with accuracy) to guide spacing in learning; (2) to
improve learning systems based on understanding the role of response time in
setting learning criteria; (3) to develop integrative adaptive and perceptual
learning systems that incorporate best practices for the use of combined speed
and accuracy data; and (4) to demonstrate the feasibility and effectiveness of
such systems across STEM learning domains and age groups by testing learning
modules for elementary mathematics and high school and college
chemistry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is a major step in the merging of
principles of cognitive science with learning technology in service of STEM
learning.