* 1109483
* Empirical Research, Contextual Research: Taking advantage of Cognitive Science Principles: Adding to a Computer-Based Tutor an Automatic Reassessment and Relearning System
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2016
* Neil Heffernan, Worcester Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Gregg Solomon
* 08/31/2016
* USD 749,600.00

The proposed project will build and test new functionality onto an existing
intelligent tutoring system in mathematics, called ASSISTments. The new
functionality will incorporate a feature inspired by research in cognitive
science on spacing effects--that students' performance is improved when
instruction occurs over a variety of time points, rather than being focused in a
single experience. The project will test whether this spacing effect is
effective and, if so, will provide the functionality for it to be included in
future ASSISTments environments for the benefit of mathematics learners. The
target audience is K-12 mathematics students; the sample for this study will be
drawn from students using the ASSISTments system in Massachusetts.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The ASSISTments system is a web-based environment for
mathematics learning, which quizzes learners as they complete mathematics
problems with the help of an intelligent tutor. It uses the finding that
learners can improve their understanding and retention of content by being
quizzed on the content. This project will add ReLearning and ReTesting phases to
the ASSISTments system, allowing students to relearn material to support their
retention of the content that they may have forgotten or not learned adequately
in previous sessions. These phases will be developed, implemented, and
redesigned for a sample of the students who currently use ASSISTments--about
15,000 students. Outcomes for determining effectiveness of the new phases will
include students' performance on the ASSISTments tasks as well as the state
test, MCAS. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study will test the hypothesis that a
spacing effect would improve students' performance in a mathematics intelligent
tutoring environment. The immediate product will be functionality for ReLearning
and ReTesting, as well as research findings for the field. If shown to be
effective, this project's findings could lead to significant improvement in
students' performance within the ASSISTments intelligent tutor system. It would
also be informative for other systems that use intelligent tutors to support
mathematics and science learners.