* 1109952
* First Meeting of the North American Society for Comparative Endocrinology (NASCE)
* BIO,DEB
* 03/01/2011,02/29/2012
* Cunming Duan, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Maureen Kearney
* 02/29/2012
* USD 15,000.00

Two international scientific meetings will be supported at the University of
Michigan in July, 2011: the inaugural meeting of the North American Society for
Comparative Endocrinology (NASCE 2011), and the 7th International Symposium on
Amphibian and Reptilian Endocrinology and Neurobiology (ISAREN 2011). The NASCE
is a new scientific society formed in 2010 with the purpose of promoting the
comparative study of hormones and hormone action. This includes topics in
evolutionary, environmental (including endocrine disrupters), general and
biomedical endocrinology/neuroendocrinology. The ISAREN was formed in 1992 to
promote the study of the endocrinology and neurobiology of amphibians and
reptiles. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The NASCE 2011 and ISAREN 2011 meetings will
revitalize and strengthen the field of comparative endocrinology in North
America by bringing together students, young investigators, and trainees from
diverse areas and backgrounds to exchange ideas and to establish and strengthen
collaborations. We promote diversity in our field of science as well as
diversity of scientific topics in the meeting program, and we provide
significant opportunities for groups traditionally underrepresented in science
to attend the meeting. Meeting abstracts will be published in the open access
journal Frontiers in Endocrinology, and the plenary lectures and selected
symposium presentations will be published in the journal General and Comparative
Endocrinology. This will allow for the presentations to be widely disseminated
to the scientific community.