* 1109625
* Kinetic transport and  dynamics in complex interacting systems: analysis and simulations
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2011,07/31/2015
* Irene Gamba, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Henry Warchall
* 07/31/2015
* USD 210,000.00

The objective of this proposal focus on a broad program in analytical and
numerical problems associated with the complex nature of non-conservative
particle interactions in a kinetic (integro-differential Boltzmann type)
framework of statistical transport equations. These models appear and the
studies of semi-classical transport for short and long range interactions models
that describe self-consistent phenomena at nano and mesoscales. More recently
they have been appearing in the modeling of social interactions and the
formation of networks such as Internet social dynamics and queuing in supply
chains. New tools from non-linear analysis as well as new computational
strategies need to be developed in order to address the linking from quantum to
kinetic to fluid level of modeling. Of special interest is the understanding and
developing of long time behaviour of the model, decay rates to stable modes,
qualitative behavior of the solutions and optimal computational strategy.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This area of research, essentially Applied Mathematics and
Probability and Statistics, is related to Mathematical and Statistical Physics
with remarkable new applications to non-linear dynamics modeling in Bio Sciences
and Social Sciences as well. The investigated problems range into a broad area
of statistical transport from modeling and prediction phenomena of rapid
granular flows, reacting gas molecule mixtures, transport modeling at atomistic
scale, particle swarms, opinion dynamics, multi-agent information transfer flow,
and social information dynamics in Internet to name a few.