* 1109429
* Determining Algebra Readiness and Cognitive Skills Profiles by Using a Diagnostic Cognitive Model to Set a Performance Standard on a Pre-Algebra Test
* EHR,DRL
* 08/01/2011,07/31/2014
* Serge Hein, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Finbarr Sloane
* 07/31/2014
* USD 348,376.00

The primary purpose of the research is to investigate the extent to which a
performance standard can be set for an assessment instrument using a diagnostic
cognitive model (DCM). The proposed Pathway research project is to use of an
emerging psychometric methodology to investigate different approaches to
establish a performance standard on an instrument for algebra readiness. The
proposed research will use TIMSS algebra items and involve a secondary analysis
of the 2003 TIMSS U.S. Grade 8 data. The research will focus on the skills and
knowledge required for algebra readiness. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research
project involves both quantitative and qualitative studies. The qualitative
study provides strong evidence to support the findings of the quantitative
investigations. The use of Diagnostic Cognitive Models to inform standard
setting is exciting because it offers both a clearly defined methodology, but
also because it promises diagnostic information regarding the strengths and
weaknesses of each student so that teachers can design a specific remediation to
meet each student's needs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To date there is no research
that has examined the topic of setting performance standards using a diagnostic
cognitive model (DCM). This research project offers a promising way forward for
improving processes of standard setting, such that they rely less on the
inscrutable judgments of panel members, and relatively more on factors that can
be easily measured and related to test outcomes, such as DCM. The approach is
potentially transformative not only for its potential to change how standard
setting is conducted, but also for its potential to change the relationship
between standards and teachers' ability to intervene effectively in the
classroom, by targeting aspects of the DCM that best predict algebra readiness.
The findings of the research project have broader implications for both
instruction and policy. This research project cannot only advance our
understanding of related issues in educational measurement and mathematics
education, but also establish a model for two camps to communicate and work
together for value-added research endeavor.