* 1109591
* Surface Plasmon-Assisted Nanolithography
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/2010,08/31/2012
* Shaochen Chen, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Kramer
* 08/31/2012
* USD 144,966.00

The objective of this project, to be conducted at the University of Texas at
Austin, is to develop a new nano-fabrication technique, Surface Plasmons-
Assisted Nanolithography (SPAN), to manufacture sub-50 nm structures in a
massively parallel fashion. The PI will conduct comprehensive investigations by
a combination of experiments and theoretical simulation to obtain a fundamental
understanding of enhanced optical transmission through nano-slits and
photoresist. Optimal design of the SPAN process using different mask materials,
photoresists, and coating on the substrate will be carried out aiming to address
the underlying necessities for predictability, producibility, and productivity
using SPAN. The proposed research requires the unique combination of nano-
photonics and nanomanufacturing. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As a general purpose
nanomanufacturng technique, the technical impact of the SPAN process will be
very broad, ranging from the fabrication of nanoelectronics, to the development
of nanophotonics and nano-bio systems. Compared to existing nano-fabrication
techniques, this new method offers high throughput and low costs, which are
critical to industrial scale manufacturing. Moreover, the results of this work
will provide exciting teaching materials and interesting laboratory projects.
The proposed efforts of integrating research with education will offer
undergraduates and graduate students increased exposure to nanoscience and
engineering technologies and applications. In particular, improving on-going
graduate courses in NEMS/MEMS, initiation of a new undergraduate course
-Introduction to Micro and Nanoengineering", and implementation of emerging
nanoengineering components into traditional undergraduate core courses will have
a significant impact on graduate and undergraduate education. &lt;br/&gt;