* 1109017
* Collaborative RUI. Nonlinear Schroedinger Models in Fluid Dynamics: Rogue Waves and Vortex Filaments
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/2011,07/31/2016
* Robert Mignone, College of Charleston
* Standard Grant
* Henry Warchall
* 07/31/2016
* USD 174,104.00

This project combines the complementary expertise of the two principal
investigators (PIs) to study two areas of fluid dynamics modeled by the
integrable focusing Nonlinear Schroedinger (NLS) equation and higher order
generalizations: rogue wave generation in deep water, and vortex filament
dynamics, for which accurate numerical methods will be used to guide theoretical
work, and to study more physically relevant models. Floquet theory, dynamical
systems methods, perturbation theory, numerical spectral diagnostics, and multi-
symplectic and conformal integrators, will be used to address the questions of
generation and persistence of rogue waves. Physical lab-tank experiments will
test and validate the analysis of the correlation between proximity to
instabilities and homoclinic data, and the likelihood of rogue waves; whether
nonlinear damping eliminates rogue waves through downshifting. Stability and
dynamics of vortex filaments will be investigated theoretically and
numerically.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Rogue waves are extremely rare and destructive
waves in the ocean that are believed to arise spontaneously (in contrast with
tsunamis). They are transient large amplitude waves whose heights are
significantly larger than the background sea, 25 meters and up to 35 meters. The
research on rogue waves is aimed at improving predictors of these extreme wave
events. Vortex &amp;#64257;laments are important models of localized vorticity
structures that often emerge as distinctive features in various physical
phenomena; for example, vortex &amp;#64257;laments can be used to describe the
&amp;#64258;ow of super&amp;#64258;uids and of turbulent &amp;#64258;uids.
Filamentary structures in geophysical systems (e.g. tornados) and in magneto-
hydrodynamics (e.g. slender plasma-&amp;#64257;lled tubes in the solar corona)
can also be modeled by vortex &amp;#64257;laments. The analytical and numerical
tools developed for both rogue wave and vortex filament models will be of value
for other applied fluid mechanical problems. &lt;br/&gt;This research will
involve one undergraduate and one graduate student at each of the institutions.
The PIs will continue mentoring students from underrepresented groups and
broadening their training by bringing students to meetings that connect
mathematicians and experimentalists.