* 1109115
* Feedback from the First Stars: Chemical Abundances in the First Billion Years after the Big Bang
* MPS,AST
* 08/01/2011,07/31/2015
* Robert Simcoe, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Richard Barvainis
* 07/31/2015
* USD 413,711.00

A great deal of work remains to understand how the first stars in the Universe
formed and how their formation and life cycles affected the formation of the
first galaxies in the Universe. Understanding these essential details will
provide important clues to understanding the formation and life history of our
own Galaxy and many others. This project aims to track the time history of heavy
chemical elements in the intergalactic medium (IGM) at very high redshift.
Because most researchers believe that heating from supernovae and/or active
galactic nuclei (AGN) played a vital role in galaxy assembly, the principal
investigator (PI) has chosen to study the heavy elements, which are a byproduct
of this heating "feedback." The PI will address the following specific
scientific questions: (1) Is there a decline in the C IV abundance as the epoch
of reionization is approached? (2) Is there a change in the ionization structure
of heavy element systems at redshift around 6? (3) Do the large differences in
absorption properties between QSO sightlines at redshift 6 reflect cosmic
variance or a signature of stochastic early star formation? (4) What mechanism
populates galaxy haloes with cold baryons (seen in Mg II) at early times?

The broader impacts of this project include important educational components. A
graduate student will be supported for the three years of this grant, and the PI
works closely with his institution to mentor undergraduates in research and
astronomical observing activities. The PI also has an excellent track record in
working with students from groups underrepresented in the physical sciences.