* 1109888
* Collaborative Research: Chemical Cartography in the Milky Way with APOGEE
* MPS,AST
* 08/01/2011,07/31/2015
* Verne Smith, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Glen Langston
* 07/31/2015
* USD 76,402.00

The PI and his team work on the scientific outcomes from the large and
systematic survey for precision stellar elemental abundance analyses that is set
out to map the spatial variations in the chemistry across the Milky Way Galactic
disk. They employ the Apache Point Observatory Galactic Evolution Experiment
(APOGEE) in the Sloan Digital Sky Survey (SDSS)-III survey, which is a large-
scale, near-infrared (H-band), high-resolution (R ~ 30,000), high signal-to-
noise (&gt;100) spectroscopic survey of Milky Way stellar populations. The
survey covers wavelengths from 1.51-1.68 microns which is a region that includes
useful absorption lines from about 15 chemical elements, including alpha, odd-
numbered, and iron peak elements. A three-year bright-time observing campaign
from 2011-2014 will enable APOGEE to observe about 100,000 giants stars across
the Galactic bulge, disk and halo, with the vast majority of these stars in the
disk. This large catalog of chemical abundance data for stars all across the
Milky Way from APOGEE is used to address a number of key questions related to
the chemistry of the Galactic disk.&lt;br/&gt;The analysis of the data from the
APOGEE pipeline gives the stellar parameters (e.g., effective temperatures,
gravity, metallicity) and abundances for about 15 elements which are used to
deduce additional stellar properties (star-by-star extinctions, distances, ages)
that are needed to map the abundances in the disk and to constrain models of
Galactic chemical evolution. These maps provide the three-dimensional
distributions represent an order of magnitude improvement in what has been
achieved before in terms of numbers of stars included, numbers of chemical
elements probed, homogeneity in the collection, reduction, and calibration of
the data, and spatial coverage, including vast regions of the disk never before
probed because of the limitations from dust. &lt;br/&gt;As part of this work,
the team plans to release a value-added APOGEE catalog of extinctions, distances
and age estimates, along with the APOGEE data on abundances of about 15 chemical
elements for about 100,000 stars from the thin and thick disks, and the
reduction of these data into multidimensional maps of elemental abundances.
These data should have significant value to the wider community of Galactic
chemical evolution modelers.