* 1109395
* What Controls Star Formation in Galaxies?
* MPS,AST
* 07/01/2011,06/30/2017
* M. K. Ryan Joung, American Museum Natural History
* Continuing Grant
* Glen Langston
* 06/30/2017
* USD 451,232.00

This investigation evaluates the relative importance different physical
processes during molecular cloud and star formation. Overall, this improves our
understanding of the dynamics of molecular cloud formation and of how external
flows and internal massive star formation act to disperse or destroy them again.
It tests whether star formation rates are governed by molecular cloud formation
due to high pressure in a disk's mid-plane, or by gravitational instability of
the combination of gas and stars. Related problems are the lifetimes and star
formation efficiency in molecular clouds. &lt;br/&gt;Dr. Mac Low and his team
use the FLASH adaptive mesh refinement (AMR) simulation code that can handle the
modeling of the most important physical processes important to star formation
models. These include effects of supernova explosions; self gravity;
differential rotation in the shearing sheet approximation; ionizing,
dissociating, and non-ionizing but heating radiation from point sources;
magnetic fields; molecular chemistry in two different levels of approximation;
an approximation to radiative cooling in optically thin and thick regions; a
fixed stellar gravitational potential to maintain vertical stratification; the
full galactic fountain; and sink particles emitting both radiation and stellar
jets and winds. The models are done so that effects are integrated into a
multiscale model of star formation covering scales ranging from 0.5 kiloparsec
down to 100 Astronomical Units. The results help to distinguish between the
"high midplane pressure" and the "gravitational instability" models. Thus, self-
consistent numerical models follow the assembly of giant molecular clouds and
the results of star formation within them. The team evaluates the relative
importance of these processes by parameter studies using the fully resolved
version of these models with full chemistry.&lt;br/&gt;This research program is
an international collaboration between the Museum and the Institute for
Theoretical Astrophysics of the University of Heidelberg. It will also support
the training of a graduate student. Results from this research are also
incorporated into the exhibition and education program of the American Museum of
Natural History, including the Hayden Planetarium.