* 1109008
* Collaborative Research: The First Galaxies and their Stellar Populations
* MPS,AST
* 07/01/2011,06/30/2014
* Daniel Reynolds, Southern Methodist University
* Continuing Grant
* Nigel Sharp
* 06/30/2014
* USD 53,052.00

AST-1109243/1109008&lt;br/&gt;Norman/Reynolds&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Adaptive mesh
refinement cosmological radiation hydrodynamic simulations pioneered by this
group have recently expanded to include sufficient physics and enough resolution
to simulate directly the prior effects of Population III star-forming mini-halos
on the first galaxies. This technical advance has occurred just when
observations from both ground and space are providing astrophysical data on
galaxies in the previously unimaginable range of redshifts from 6 to 8.5. These
observations indicate substantial evolution in the bright end of the luminosity
function, and a steep faint end slope consistent with the notion that high-
redshift dwarfs dominate the reionization photon budget. They also reveal
substantial evolution in stellar populations over this redshift interval. The
advance in simulation capability is also well timed for the start of operations
of the first NSF-supported sustained petaflops supercomputer, Blue
Waters.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Combining these software, hardware, and data
advances, this project will simulate the formation and evolution of the first
galaxies across the entire range of masses and luminosities observed, and
compare the results to the data through simulated images and spectra. This will
lead to inferences about the Population III initial mass function, feedback
effects, the growth of supermassive black holes, and even the dark matter power
spectrum, and place important constraints on the accretion rate of gas onto
galaxies. The simulations will improve estimates of the escape of ionizing
radiation into the intergalactic medium, and directly address whether high-
redshift galaxies are capable of reionizing the Universe. This is the very first
time such near-first-principles simulations are feasible, due to the convergence
of petascale computing hardware, simulation software, and algorithmic advances,
and also the first time that relevant observational constraints are being
obtained.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Simulations at this scale have a strong impact on
the astronomical community, the high performance computing community, and the
larger science and technology-curious public. They drive the development of the
hardware, software, and networking infrastructure. This project is one of six
selected for first access to NSF's new petascale supercomputer, and the required
code enhancements will be made generally available. There are also plans to
include these scientific results in a new IMAX film by the Reuben H.Fleet
Science Museum in Balboa Park, San Diego, anticipated in 2013.