* 1109469
* Collaborative Research: Observational testing of interstellar grain alignment theory
* MPS,AST
* 10/01/2011,09/30/2014
* Bengt-Goran Andersson, Universities Space Research Association
* Standard Grant
* Glen Langston
* 09/30/2014
* USD 219,789.00

The collaborative research lead by Dr. Andersson (Universities Space Research
Association), Dr. Jones (University of Minnesota), and Dr. Lazarian (University
of Wisconsin, Madison) advances our ability to trace magnetic fields in the
interstellar medium and molecular clouds through new multi-wavelength
observations and theoretical modeling. It leads to a better understanding of the
foregrounds to the cosmic microwave background (CMB) polarization through
targeted observations of interstellar grain alignment and modeling based on the
leading theoretical paradigm. The combined new quantitative effort addresses
interstellar grain alignment mechanisms. A quantitative theory based on
radiative alignment torques provides specific, testable predictions of the grain
alignment as functions of the environment and grain characteristics.
Observations, employing optical and near-infrared (NIR) polarimetry, directly
probe the theoretical predictions of the variations of grain alignment
efficiencies from the molecular cloud surfaces to the depths where (sub-)mm wave
polarized emission is observed. Extensive modeling of the grain alignment,
simulating the polarization arising from aligned grains, supports
interpretations of the observations. A quantitative understanding of the
alignment mechanism is important to understand the structure and strength of the
magnetic field (through the geometry of the polarization vectors and the
Chandrasekhar-Fermi method, respectively). The impact on related research ranges
from models of star formation (through a reliable magnetic field tracing) to the
physics of Early Universe (through a reliable separation of polarized dust
foreground from the CMB polarized radiation) as well as a better
understandinging micro-physics of interstellar dust grains. This project trains
young researchers and graduate students in the acquisition, analysis and
interpretation of the optical and NIR observations, and on computational models
necessary for the study of astrophysical magnetic fields and the nature of
interstellar polarization.