* 1109121
* Collaborative Proposal: Pathways of Blacks and Hispanics in Engineering Education
* EHR,DRL
* 08/15/2011,07/31/2015
* Leonard Bliss, Florida International University
* Standard Grant
* Celestine Pea
* 07/31/2015
* USD 448,153.00

Howard University and Florida International University plan a large, empirical,
three year collaborative research study with partners Prairie View A&M
University and University of Puerto Rico-Mayaguez. The proposed research will
consider persistence and identity factors in undergraduate engineering education
of students at these four Minority Serving Institutions (MSIs). That is, the
researchers will examine the impact of students' culture and ethnicity on the
development of engineering identity and the importance of previously identified
persistence factors (i.e., self-confidence, attitudes toward engineering,
quality of instruction, etc.) on minority student attrition in institutions
where they are the majority. This project seeks to address short-comings of the
Academic Pathways Study, which included two of the PIs as members of the
research team.

Retention theory and social cognitive career theory provide the theoretical
underpinnings of the study and the team will explore their evolution and current
status relative to student experiences. The project team will utilize a
triangulated mixed methods research design to collect and analyze data. That is,
surveys will be used to collect quantitative data and a mix of individual and
focus group interviews will provide qualitative data. The project directly
addresses broadening participation in engineering education with a unique focus
on (1) identifying how environmental factors at MSIs versus Predominately White
Institutions contribute to academic and career outcomes for minority students
and (2) determining potential differences in outcomes among Historically Black
Colleges and Universities (HBCUs), among Hispanic Serving Institutions (HSIs)
and between HSIs and HBCUs. The proposed work has the potential to influence how
scholars approach the study of ethnic minority students, as well as how they
conceptualize and study MSIs, settings that often are marginalized in the study
of college students. The fact that MSIs produce a substantial proportion of
Black and Hispanic STEM degrees increases the relevance and potential impact of
this work. In a broader sense this project considers the relevance of context in
student achievement and persistence in STEM, which is a significant issue in the
education of all students.