* 1109014
* Studies of Warm and Diffuse Gas and High Ionization Rate Near the Galactic Center Using Infrared Spectra of H3+ and CO
* MPS,AST
* 09/15/2011,10/31/2015
* Takeshi Oka, University of Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Glen Langston
* 10/31/2015
* USD 441,444.00

Dr. Oka and his team study the properties of warm, diffuse gas in the Galactic
center by measuring (H3)+ and CO infrared absorption towards the Central
Molecular Zone. Protonated molecular hydrogen, (H3)+, is a tracer of the
density, temperature, ionization rate, and volume filling factor of the large
regions containing this molecular ion. It is also a tracer for other polyatomic
molecules that are difficult to measure in the diffuse interstellar medium. The
(H3)+ discovery and observations along 14 sight lines showed that warm diffuse
gas (T about 250 K, density of 100-1000 particles per cubic centimeter)
indicates the presence of a warm, diffuse component to the longer known
components of dense-molecular, hot-ionized, and ultra-hot plasma. The
researchers found that the volume filling factor of this gas appears to be very
high, and the ionization rate for the warm diffuse gas an order of magnitude
higher values for these sight lines near the Galactic Center than expected for
these regions. The present work investigates more sight lines towards the
Galactic center using new background stars that are selected from the Spitzer
GLIMPSE (Galactic Legacy Infrared Mid-Plane Survey Extraordinaire) database and
CO observations. The data are compared with new Herschel observations of (H2O)+
and radio and infrared spectra of CO to fully characterize the physical
properties of the warm diffuse gas and the other components in the complex and
dynamical regions at the Galactic center. This project trains a post-doctoral
fellow in observational infrared astronomy and molecular astrophysics.