* 1109447
* Collaborative Research: Finding the Gas that Lights up Galaxies
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2015
* Jason Prochaska, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Standard Grant
* Patricia Knezek
* 08/31/2015
* USD 155,466.00

Damped Lyman-alpha (DLA) systems, layers of low-ionization gas with neutral
hydrogen column densities characteristic of modern, gas-rich galaxies, are
frequently detected in spectra of background quasars. DLA systems are important
probes of the history of galaxy formation and heavy-element enrichment in the
universe. The proposing team plans to continue their ongoing work on DLA systems
in this project, which has three major components: (1) A survey for DLAs at
redshifts near 5. The team will measure ionic column densities, in order to
track the build-up of metals in these first galaxies and the evolution of the
neutral gas, and will search for a decrease in ionization level close to the re-
ionization epoch. (2) A search for 158-micron emission from singly-ionized
carbon in galaxies at redshifts near 2, using the ALMA observatory. The targeted
galaxies are already known to have [CII] absorption; ALMA observations will
connect properties of the gas detected in emission and in absorption to
constrain their sizes, dynamics, and star formation rates. Numerical simulations
will also be used to predict the [CII] emission properties of galaxies at higher
redshift. (3) Imaging far ultraviolet (FUV) light from DLAs. The team will use
stacked images of Lyman-break galaxies at redshifts between 1 and 5 identified
in the Hubble ultra-deep field to search for low surface-brightness emission.
They plan also to exploit the chance alignment of a DLA with a higher redshift,
optically-thick absorber to obtain imaging and spectroscopy of the star-forming
regions in the FUV and estimate the star formation rate, size and morphology of
the galaxy. The project will support the work and training of two graduate
students, and the collaborating Principal Investigators will participate in
outreach talks in various venues, including a charter minority-serving high
school and a science festival for middle school girls. They maintain a public
website dedicated to DLA science targeted to both the general public and the
research community. The team intends to release all of the high-resolution
spectra obtained in this program through the website within 2 years of the first
observations.