* 1109595
* Factors that Affect Implementation, Spread and Sustainability: An Implementation Study of Everyday Mathematics
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2015
* Jeanne Century, University of Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Finbarr Sloane
* 08/31/2015
* USD 886,117.00

This proposed project is to investigate how and why STEM innovations are
implemented and sustained in schools. The PIs seek to identify factors at the
district, school, and classroom levels that contribute to or inhibit
implementation and sustainability of Everyday Mathematics (EM). It is designed
to answer several important research questions, such as, (1) What factors
contribute to and/or inhibit the implementation of EM in the study sites? (2) Do
the factors that affect implementation and sustainability change with maturity
of implementation and if so, how? (3) What are the relationships between the
status of EM implementation, maturity of implementation, factors that affect
implementation, and student demographics and
achievement?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will use sophisticated
quantitative methodologies and a Fidelity of Implementation instrument to answer
the research questions. While it focuses on EM, it is likely to generate much-
needed insights about the specific mechanisms and processes that underlie the
adoption and use of any standards-based instructional materials.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Educational innovations are a constant fixture in school
districts across the country. One of the most important goals for any
educational innovation is to improve student learning. However, too often these
innovations fail to improve student learning because they are not implemented
with fidelity or are not sustainable. This project will contribute to emerging
foundational understandings about how to enact and support lasting innovations.