* 1109127
* Network formation and ion transport in polymer electrolyte membranes
* MPS,DMS
* 10/01/2011,09/30/2015
* Keith Promislow, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Eugene Gartland
* 09/30/2015
* USD 329,940.00

Promislow&lt;br/&gt;DMS-1109127&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; The project centers on an
analysis and extension of the functionalized Cahn-Hilliard (FCH) energy. This
higher order energy incorporates solvation and elastic energies to model the
rich network structures produced by functionalized polymers in solvent. The FCH
energy supports a wider class of novel interfaces, including multi-parameter
families of thin bi-layers, small radius pore structures, and small micelle
networks. The investigator addresses the convergence of the FCH energy to the
classic Canham-Helfrich in sharp interface limit. He reduces a class of mass-
preserving gradient flows of the FCH energy to curvature-driven evolution for
surfaces of co-dimension one and two. The structured interfaces constructed in
the unfolding of the original energies' critical point structures drive the
geometric flows, with the interfacial structure coupling the interface's
evolution. The flexibility of the FCH energy lies in the freedom to assign
positive or negative energies to different critical points, selectively driving
growth of favored structures. The investigator rigorously derives these
geometric flow reductions via analysis of the linearized structures and an
adaptation of his renormalization group approach. He extends the FCH energy to
model multicomponent mixtures of functionalized and neutral polymers in
solvents, unfolding the bifurcation of bi-layer critical points from
heteroclinic connections for potentials with multiple global minima. The
construction of small-radius pores as a connection problem between asymmetric
wells is achieved via the constrained minimization approach developed for
traveling waves in multi-wells.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; The US has a growing need
for clean energy sources for the 21st century. This involves capturing energy
from the environment, either from solar or wind sources, and storing this energy
either in batteries or in a concentrated chemical form. These processes require
membrane separators that permit ions of one charge to cross, but not ions of the
opposite charge. The investigator has developed a model that has the possibility
to optimize the nanoscale structure of these membrane separators when they are
cast from solvent form. The analysis and numerical studies performed in this
project elucidate the mechanisms underlying the formation of the nanoscale
networks, and lead to the development of more energy-efficient conversion
processes. The project is funded by the Division of Mathematical Sciences and
the Division of Materials Research.