* 1109476
* Exploring the Star Formation History of the Universe Using ZEUS-2
* MPS,AST
* 08/15/2011,01/31/2017
* Gordon Stacey, Cornell University
* Continuing Grant
* Richard Barvainis
* 01/31/2017
* USD 426,462.00

Star formation activity in the universe peaked 2 to 6 billion years after the
Big Bang, corresponding to redshifts between 1 and 3. Most of the radiant energy
from these stars was absorbed by dust in their nascent molecular clouds, re-
radiated in the far infrared part of the spectrum, and can be observed today
redshifted to the submillimeter. To measure the intrinsic luminosities and star
formation rates of these galaxies, one must therefore observe in the
submillimeter bands. Moreover, the star forming interstellar medium (ISM) is
cooled by atomic spectral line radiation observable at these wavelengths; hence
submillimeter spectroscopy is critical for understanding the star formation
process. This project makes use of the scientific capabilities of the ZEUS and
ZEUS-2 spectrographs, developed with prior funding from the Advanced
Technologies & Instrumentation (ATI) and Major Research Instrumentation (MRI)
programs, to observe specific atomic fine-structure lines of carbon, nitrogen,
and oxygen in high-redshift galaxies. ZEUS-2 will be used on the Caltech
Submillimeter Observatory (CSO) and the Atacama Pathfinder Experiment (APEX),
together with other space- and ground-based follow-up observations in the
millimeter, submillimeter, and far infrared in order to: (1) extend an ongoing
survey of [CII] emission lines to deeper redshift and lower luminosity, tracing
the change is star formation mode over time; (2) observe [OI] and [NII] lines in
the same redshift range, to trace the changes in stellar populations; (3)
observe gravitationally lensed galaxies comparable to the Milky Way in
luminosity at redshifts around 2; and (4) study the connection between
starbursts and active galactic nuclei. These observations will represent a key
stepping stone linking discovery with the Herschel Space Telescope to future
spatially resolved investigations with the Atacama Large
Millimeter/Submillimeter Array (ALMA). ZEUS-2 also lays the ground-work for
instrument development and science opportunities that will be enabled by a
future spectrometer on the proposed 25-meter Cerro Chajnantor Atacama Telescope
(CCAT). The project will support the active involvement of multiple graduate and
undergraduate students, many from under-represented groups, in instrument
development and research.