* 1109826
* COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH: Central Anatolian Tectonics (CD-CAT): Surface to mantle dynamics during collision to escape
* GEO,EAR
* 12/01/2011,11/30/2019
* Paul Umhoefer, Northern Arizona University
* Continuing Grant
* Dennis Geist
* 11/30/2019
* USD 640,676.00

This project involves an integrated program to study the process of tectonic
escape in Central Anatolia. This is the location where this process was first
recognized in the 1970s and the PIs make a strong case that this is good place
to investigate the temporal and spatial characteristics of this process in the
context of a continent-continent collision. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research
builds on previous geophysical and geological studies by many of the PIs in
other parts of Turkey (both to the east and west of the planned study area). The
research will investigate modern structure through a combination of geophysics
and geology. Past history will be reconstructed through studies of elevation,
drainage and volcanism. Studies of the Central Anatolian fault are important as
this is a major feature that is poorly understood in Anatolian
tectonics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specifically, the PIs will address the
questions:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;? What are the plate dynamics from the mantle to
the Earth?s surface, the transition from distributed to localized strain in
large strike-slip faults, the origin and consequences of magmatism, and the
evolution of relief and landscape during development of escape
tectonics?&lt;br/&gt;? What are the effects of boundary conditions (collision of
Arabian plate to the east, extension of Aegean to the west, subduction of
African plate to the south) on the driving forces of tectonic
escape?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The study will integrate results of passive seismic
experiments; magnetotelluric profiling; geomorphic, structural, and
stratigraphic-sedimentological analysis of surface geology and exhumed orogenic
crust; geo/thermochronometric determination of temperature-time histories of
magmatic, metamorphic, and fault zone rocks and geomorphic features; isotopic
fingerprinting and dating of magmatic rocks; and 2D and 3D numerical modeling.