* 1109937
* Optimal Geometric Control for the Contrast Imaging problem in Nuclear Magnetic Resonance
* MPS,DMS
* 09/15/2011,08/31/2015
* Monique Chyba, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* Lora Billings
* 08/31/2015
* USD 199,984.00

Recent experimental projects in quantum control using finite-dimensional systems
as the control of spin systems in nuclear magnetic resonance and references
therein) are motivating new theoretical studies in the case where the system
interacts with its environment. The primary objective of the proposed research
is to apply techniques of geometric optimal control theory to the control of the
spin dynamics by magnetic fields in Nuclear Magnetic Resonance (NMR). Through
interaction with a magnetic field, NMR involves the manipulation of nuclear
spins. It has many potential applications extending from the determination of
molecular structures (NMR spectroscopy) and quantum computing, where NMR remains
one of the most promising road in the construction of a scalable quantum
computer, to medical imagery (MRI). The control technology developed over the
past 50 years allows the use of sophisticated control fields and permits the
implementation of complex quantum algorithms such as the Deutsh-Jozsa and the
Grover algorithms. NMR is therefore an ideal experimental testbed for quantum
control. The proposed research will also impact the domain of quantum mechanics.
First, solving the contrast imaging problem can potentially have a profound
impact on how medical imaging is done in hospitals. Indeed, by designing
magnetic fields to maximize the distance between the two spin we increase the
image resolution and therefore improve its quality which improves patient care.
Second, by using geometric techniques our approach will complement existing
efficient numerical tools for pulse sequence optimization, such as the GRAPE
(gradient ascent pulse engineering) by providing an understanding of the
qualitative structures of the dynamics of the system. In particular, the
physicists will gain insight about the control mechanism that lead to the
optimal solutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Starting as a tool for characterization
of organic molecules, the use of nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) has spread to
areas as diverse as pharmaceutics, medical diagnostics (medical resonance
imaging) and structural biology. The principles of NMR have served as a paradigm
for other physical methods that rely on interaction between radiation and
matter. It is therefore not surprising that experiments in NMR also serve as
good model problems in control of quantum systems. Recent advancements on the
study of spin dynamics strongly suggest the efficiency of geometric control
theory to analyze the optimal synthesis. Until now, the analysis of nonlinear
optimal control has been mostly concerned with the class of single-input
systems. Via this application in quantum control, it is proposed to extend the
analysis to the multidimensional case. The proposal research will also impact
significantly the field of quantum mechanics. First, medical imagery can be
drastically improved through the contrast problem which will directly impact
patient care in hospitals. Second, by using geometric tools to develop optimal
synthesis, we provide physicists with an additional understanding about the
control mechanism of the optimal solutions which in turn will help developing
improved numerical schemes. We also propose an initiative to address the
underrepresentation of minorities, and particularly of Native Hawaiian women, in
the fields of science, technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM
disciplines) at UH Manoa and nationwide. The goal is to address the dual
barriers of gender and ethnicity that Native Hawaiian females face in these
fields.