* 1109731
* Long Time Scales and Unlikely Events: Sampling and Coarse Graining Strategies
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/2011,07/31/2015
* Jonathan Weare, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Victor Roytburd
* 07/31/2015
* USD 175,049.00

Weare&lt;br/&gt;DMS-1109731&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; The investigator uses tools
from probability theory, partial differential equations, and numerical analysis
to analyze and simulate interesting physical phenomena that occur on very long
time scales or are very unlikely to be observed. Such problems arise in nearly
all areas of science and often involve stochastic effects. The investigation of
any stochastic system ultimately reduces to the sampling of some random
variable. Most sampling applications are limited by the presence of strong
spatial correlations and unlikely or long time scale events. Overcoming these
obstacles is the key to understanding many of the most important scientific
mysteries such as protein folding and climate change, and will be the subject of
increased intellectual effort in the near future. This project results in
several new methods for attacking problems of this kind as well as applications
of these techniques to important problems in engineering, geophysics, and
chemistry. In particular the investigator develops and applies new affine
invariant ensemble sampling schemes that are relatively insensitive to spatial
correlations. These samplers are applied to various statistical inverse
problems. The investigator also mathematically studies the convergence of these
samplers. The investigator applies new highly efficient importance sampling
techniques for rare events to applications in geophysical data assimilation. For
long time scale events such as chemical reactions the investigator introduces a
new branching process that focuses computational effort on reactive trajectories
as well as new parallel-in-time techniques to better utilize today's massively
parallel supercomputers on problems involving electronic structure calculations.
Finally the investigator rigorously establishes connections between various fine
scale models of crystal relaxation and continuum descriptions. Continuum
descriptions offer the possibility of reaching much longer time scales
computational by removing strongly correlated degrees of
freedom.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; The investigator develops new techniques for
studying phenomena that occur over long time scales or involve rare events. The
techniques are applied to important problems such as exoplanet discovery, the
prediction of rare transitions of the Kuroshio current running along the eastern
coast of Japan, crystal surface growth, and several challenging chemical and
bio-chemical problems. In general, techniques capable of reaching long time
scales and simulating rare events have the potential to significantly impact
many problems crucial to our national interests, e.g. drug design, global
warming, hazard prediction for CO2 and nuclear waste storage, prediction of
extreme geological events like earth quakes and volcanic eruptions, prediction
of extreme weather events like hurricanes, prediction of extreme climate events
like draughts, drug validation, deep time analysis (analysis of the geologic
record), discovery of extra terrestrial life and life in extreme environments,
and disease propagation. Even with the massive computing power currently
available these problems are not expected to be solved by conventional "brute
force" techniques any time soon. Techniques designed to directly interrogate the
phenomena of interest and to make more efficient use of large-scale computing
power are required. The development and analysis of these techniques form the
core of this project.&lt;br/&gt;