* 1109498
* Nonlinear Signal Processing and Distributed Optimal Control using Frames and Operators Algebras
* MPS,DMS
* 10/01/2011,09/30/2015
* Radu Balan, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Michael Steuerwalt
* 09/30/2015
* USD 250,484.00

Balan&lt;br/&gt;DMS-1109498&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; The investigator and his
colleagues study new methods to recover a signal from a nonlinear processing
scheme. Recently two far-reaching discoveries have been made that connected the
nonlinear information (magnitudes of frame coefficients) to certain scalar
products in larger embedding spaces. Thus the initial problem, which is
fundamentally nonlinear, is recast into a linear reconstruction problem coupled
with a rank-one approximation problem. When the linear redundant representation
is associated with a group representation (such as Weyl-Heisenberg, or windowed
Fourier transform), then the relevant tensor operators inherit this invariance
property. Thus a fast (nonlinear) reconstruction algorithm is possible. This
approach suggests a new signal representation model, where signals are not
represented simply by vectors in a Hilbert space, but rather by operators in a
larger dimensional Hilbert-Schmidt like-space, similar to the quantum state
theory. These methods use results from a wide range of mathematical areas such
as harmonic analysis, operator theory, and polynomial
algebras.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; Results of this project have a practical
application to areas such as signal processing, optical communication, quantum
computing, and X-ray crystallography. Besides advancing the scientific
understanding in applied harmonic analysis, this project broadens the two-way
communication between mathematics and electrical engineering while promoting
teaching, training and learning. The investigator is training graduate students
for a globally competitive STEM force through his contacts with industry and
international research labs. The project is supported by the Division of
Mathematical Sciences and the Division of Computing and Communication
Foundations.