* 1109085
* Chemical Enrichment of the Young Solar System
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2016
* Fabian Heitsch, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Glen Langston
* 08/31/2016
* USD 327,059.00

Dr. Heitsch and his team model how hot, diffuse supernovae ejecta are integrated
into turbulent molecular clouds and collapsing dense, molecular cloud cores.
They assess the mixing efficiencies and mixing timescales for the fraction of
supernova ejecta that can enter into the densest parts of molecular clouds which
then can collapse into cores and finally become stars. One of the issues being
studied is whether ejecta have to be mixed with the diffuse gas which
subsequently gets compressed into collapsing objects, or whether they can be
injected directly into dense cores. One specific aspect is to determine the fate
of the short-lived radioactive nuclides (those with half-lives around a few
million years) that are produced in supernovae. This has direct implications for
formation models of our solar system because such short-lived radioactive
nuclides were present when the solar system formed. &lt;br/&gt;The improvement
over earlier model computations is that instead of assuming idealized, smooth
molecular clouds, the clouds themselves will have been naturally assembled in
large-scale flows, and thus will have inherited their turbulent density and
velocity structure from first principles. The investigators test the hypothesis
whether this pre-existing substructure can increase the injection efficiencies
and whether this is consistent with the available constraints for the young
solar system. The program will involve a series of simulations of increasing
complexity, including heating and cooling, magnetic fields, self-gravity, and
the Eulerian and Lagrangian tracking of supernova ejecta. Calculations are
performed with fixed and adaptive resolution codes, evolving the magneto-
hydrodynamical equations including the above-mentioned physics. The simulations
produce predictions for the fraction and distribution of short-lived radioactive
nuclides. This project provides training opportunities for a postdoc, and for
undergraduate student research projects on numerical techniques and data
analysis. Resulting visualizations will be made available on the web and be
integrated into a public outreach program involving shows at the Morehead
Planetarium and presentations on the formation of the Solar System.