* 1110809
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Biotic controls of the ecology and evolution of plant growth and defense
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/2011,06/30/2014
* Evan Siemann, William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* Saran Twombly
* 06/30/2014
* USD 14,786.00

Changes in species interactions between native and introduced ranges of exotic
species are important determinants of invasion success. Despite this, little is
known about how predation and competition interact to affect the evolution of
traits that increase the impacts of invasive species. Underlying predictions of
plant invasiveness is the assumption that individuals tradeoff energy devoted to
growth and defense, and that the effects of this tradeoff depend on the biotic
environment. The goal of this research is to understand how variation in
important species interactions contributes to invasive species success and to
predict when certain traits that may influence invasiveness are likely to
evolve. The project relies on multiple lines of a rapidly growing model plant
that differ in lifetime intensity of competition and predation, will
characterize differences in life history strategies among these lines, and will
use a field invasion experiment to detect the effects of both historic and
current biotic interactions on plant success. Exotic species threaten global
biodiversity by damaging native ecosystems and the services they provide. This
project will increase understanding of the evolution in exotic species and
bridges the gap between plant ecology and evolution. The project includes a
collaboration with Chinese scientists. One of the investigators has considerable
experience mentoring undergraduate students, and particularly those from under-
represented groups, and plans to continue these training activities during the
proposed project.