* 1110525
* Dissertation Research:  Quantifying the role of mixotrophic feeding in aquatic food webs
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2011,05/31/2014
* Jacob Gillette, SUNY College of Environmental Science and Forestry
* Standard Grant
* Saran Twombly
* 05/31/2014
* USD 15,000.00

One of the basic tenets of aquatic ecology is that primary production by algae,
through the process of photosynthesis, supports all aquatic food webs and is
responsible for approximately half of the primary productivity on earth. In
reality, many algal species are mixotrophic; that is, they are capable of
supplementing photosynthetic production with heterotrophic consumption of
bacteria, other algae, or even dissolved and particulate material transported
into lakes from terrestrial sources. The proposed dissertation research will use
natural stable isotopic tracers to quantify the amounts of algal production due
to photosynthesis versus mixotrophy. Estimates of mixotrophy from laboratory and
field experiments will be combined with predictive models of mixotroph abundance
across the continental United States to evaluate the importance of mixotrophy in
freshwater food webs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Mixotrophy represents a potentially
important natural process that has been known for some time, but is poorly
understood. Results from this study will allow more accurate descriptions and
models of aquatic food webs. This knowledge will provide better predictions of
changes to freshwater ecosystems - such as the occurrence of toxic algal blooms
- that are increasingly exposed to human-induced modifications. The
investigators will recruit undergraduates from under-served groups to
participate in the research through ongoing SUNY-ESF programs. In addition, the
research will be carried out at SUNY-ESF's Cranberry Lake Biological Station,
which is an active teaching campus throughout the summer. Students enrolled in
courses at the station will participate in the study.