* 1110445
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH:  Genetic Architecture and Genomic Divergence During Ecological Speciation in Boechera stricta, a Wild Relative of Arabidopsis
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/2011,10/31/2014
* Cheng-Ruei Lee, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* George Gilchrist
* 10/31/2014
* USD 15,000.00

This research aims to identify key factors contributing to the genetic
differentiation within a species and the genetic mechanism underlying such
differentiation. Using a North America native mustard plant species as model,
preliminary study has found significant genotypic and phenotypic divergence
between two subspecies. In order to study the genetic mechanism responsible for
this differentiation, the investigators will generate a cross between the two
subspecies and identify possible genes responsible for the phenotypic
differentiation. Also, the direct contribution of genes and phenotypes to
adaptation will be measured by growing the plants in their native environments.
The investigators will further examine the genome-wide differentiation pattern
between the two subspecies. Combining these results, the effect of local
adaptation on the pattern of within-species genetic variation will be
investigated empirically.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; This proposed research will
advance understanding of patterns of within-species genetic diversity.
Understanding the extent and driving factors of genetic variation will provide
valuable information in various applications, such as identifying genetic
factors underlying important traits in various species, including agricultural
plants. The proposed project will be one of the first studies identifying
possible genes responsible for important phenotypes, investigating the adaptive
effect of these genes and phenotypes, and unifying these results with the
investigation of population genomic divergence patterns. The utilization of a
plant species in this research enables direct experimental manipulation on
studied individuals. Finally, several undergraduate students will be trained
with the interdisciplinary knowledge of ecology, population genetics, and
genomics in this project.