* 1110590
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH:   Evolution of the weevils and development of the weevil rostrum (Coleoptera: Curculionoidea)
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2011,12/31/2013
* Michael Engel, University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* David Mindell
* 12/31/2013
* USD 14,824.00

Dissertation Research: Evolution of the Weevils and Development of the Weevil
Rostrum (Coleoptera: Curculionoidea)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project focuses on
elucidating the development of the weevil head capsule, in particular the
elongate snout, a structure that is implicated in their considerable
evolutionary success. Key weevil species critical in agriculture, forestry,
and/or horticulture will be investigated for the formation of the snout, used in
producing holes for feeding or egg deposition in plant tissues. This project
will resolve those genetic elements responsible for snout formation and
alterations in its overall structure, as well as the timing of episodes of
diversification. It will also provide the first comprehensive consideration of
weevil evolution and those factors driving their success.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Weevils rank among the most diverse of all organisms, with
around 60,000 species. They are of extreme economic importance owing to their
impact on natural and agricultural ecosystems, damaging all major groups of
plants and representing one of the most serious lineages of arthropod pests.
Resolution of those factors that have led to the remarkable diversity of weevils
will permit a refined understanding of their specialization on different plant
families and tissues. Insight into those genetic factors which have fueled their
diversification and evolutionary success will develop new avenues for research
in biological control as well as fundamentals of weevil biology.