* 1110570
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: The Evolution of Thermal Physiology Within the Anolis Adaptive Radiation
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2011,11/30/2013
* Alexander Gunderson, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* George Gilchrist
* 11/30/2013
* USD 14,898.00

A fundamental problem in ecology is to understand how a large number of similar
species are able to coexist in the same community. This project will explore the
role of thermal physiology in facilitating habitat partitioning by multiple
species. The study organisms are 18 species of tropical lizard in the genus
Anolis. As a generality, anoles tend to prefer either cool, shaded areas or hot,
open areas. It is predicted that, in cold-blooded animals such as lizards,
species that live in cool areas should have high physiological performance at
low temperatures, whereas species that inhabit warm areas should have high
physiological performance at high temperatures. Support for this prediction is
mixed. This study will measure the temperature-dependence of sprint performance,
a physiological trait important for lizard survival. Lizards of each species
will be collected and run at multiple temperatures and their temperature-
dependent physiological performances will be compared. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; In
order for species to coexist, each species must occupy a different niche.
However, our understanding of the adaptations that promote niche differences and
thus species coexistence are far from complete. This project seeks to understand
these adaptations, as the lizards being studied co-occur in complex biological
communities. In addition, the project will provide critical information
essential for developing successful management plans to maintain biological
diversity under predicted conditions of global change. This project will also
provide an opportunity for undergraduates to become actively involved on
multiple aspects of the research process.