* 1110341
* Workshop on Questionnaire Design Issues in Longitudinal and Repeated Cross-sectional Surveys: Balancing Continuity and Innovation at Duke University in February 2011
* SBE,SES
* 01/01/2011,12/31/2011
* D. Sunshine Hillygus, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Brian Humes
* 12/31/2011
* USD 38,235.00

This project organizes a two-day workshop for survey methodologists and
practitioners. The workshop will be held at Duke University in February 2011,
and will consist of panels devoted to best practices for proposing, testing, and
implementing changes to questionnaires used in longitudinal and repeated cross-
sectional surveys. The workshop will feature some fifteen presenters, all of
whom are being recruited on the basis of their leadership roles in major
longitudinal and cross-sectional surveys and their publishing record in survey
methodology topics relevant to the workshop. In total, roughly seventy
researchers will participate in the workshop.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Recurring
surveys face a unique set of challenges--most notably, the need to balance
comparability and continuity over time with any innovations in the
questionnaire. The workshop is expressly designed to help clarify the
appropriate standards for considering and implementing questionnaire changes in
longitudinal studies, thereby informing the decision making of study
investigators. The conference is also intended to encourage a broader dialogue
between investigators across various major longitudinal studies, and across
academic, government, non-profit, and commercial sectors. Moreover, the workshop
aims to enhance future social science research: the guidance on measurement
decisions it offers investigators will also inform the substantive analyses of,
and conclusions reached by, the user community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
workshop makes significant and substantial broader contributions. Large-scale
recurring surveys are costly projects often made possible through taxpayer
support, either through government agencies (e.g., National Health Interview
Survey, Current Population Survey) or through NSF grant support for
"infrastructure" recurring surveys--the American National Election Studies
(ANES), the General Social Survey (GSS), and the Panel Survey on Income Dynamics
(PSID). These surveys serve large and diverse communities of scholars, policy-
makers, and businesses, and it is essential that the data they provide be of top
quality. Achieving and maintaining this standard is an ongoing challenge; this
conference provides a valuable service by creating a forum in which to discuss
the current state-of-the-science in updating recurring surveys and to create
guidelines for broad use by those implementing such survey protocols.