* 1110358
* US-Egypt Travel to a workshop on Holographic Techniques in Cosmology, Luxor, Egypt February 6-10, 2011
* O/D,OISE
* 02/01/2011,07/31/2013
* Sumit Das, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Osman Shinaishin
* 07/31/2013
* USD 3,600.00

1110358 &lt;br/&gt;Das&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project provides partial
support for a planning visit by two US scientists, Dr. Sumit Das
and&lt;br/&gt;Dr. Alfred Shapere, both at the Department of Physics and
Astronomy at the University of Kentucky, Lexington, Kentucky to attend a meeting
on Holographic Techniques in Cosmology in Luxor, Egypt, February 6-10, 2011. The
topics cover applications of holographic duality to outstanding problems in
cosmology and gravitation. The topics include: Brane world cosmologies and
String Theory models of inflation, resolution of Cosmological Singularities,
analog models of cosmology and gravity and their gauge theory duals,
thermalization and black hole formation and causal structure of space-time. The
foreign collaborator&lt;br/&gt;is Dr. Adel Awad at Ain Shams University in
Cairo, Egypt.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual merit: The two investigators are
currently carrying out research funded by the NSF/Physics Division for
interdisciplinary work at the border between traditional theoretical high-energy
physics and condensed-matter physics. That work is considered to be potentially
transformative. They are working on a new topic called the AdS/CFT
correspondence. This is a theoretical tool which has developed over the past
decade which enables physicists to study theories in new mathematical limits
that have been literally beyond the reach of earlier analysis techniques. The
two physicists are pioneers in using these techniques in order to build new
connections between different subfields of physics, and their recent work has
taken them in the direction of connecting string theory and gravity. The
workshop/conference in Egypt is squarely aimed at this question, and their
presence there will likely assist them in furthering their own research and in
developing new collaborations with the physicists there. These physicists are
highly reputable, and such collaboration will be very likely to bear significant
fruit. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The award will help these PI's
further their research activities and collaborations with scientists from Egypt
and with others participating in the workshop in significant ways.