* 1110354
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH:  Phytolith Undulation Index: Developing a new proxy for tracking habitat openness in the Eocene-Miocene of Gran Barranca, Argentina
* BIO,DEB
* 05/15/2011,10/31/2012
* Regan Dunn, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Alan Tessier
* 10/31/2012
* USD 12,450.00

This study aims to develop a new method for determining whether vegetation was
open (for example steppe) or closed (forest) in the fossil record from the shape
of silica-filled plant cells called phytoliths. The shape of epidermal cells in
leaves depends on how much sunlight a leaf receives when it develops. Plants
growing on shaded forest floors have more undulated, or wavy epidermal cells
than plants growing in full sun. Epidermal cells from some plants are preserved
as silica casts in the fossil record. This study will develop a way to calculate
mathematically vegetation openness (measured as Leaf Area Index-LAI) from how
undulated epidermal phytoliths are, by examining phytoliths collected from
modern soils from open and closed vegetation (savanna to multi-tiered
rainforest). We will use this mathematical relationship to interpret from fossil
phytoliths how open vegetation was millions of years ago. Specifically, we will
look at how vegetation openness changed with shifts in global climate and
frequent volcanic eruptions in Patagonia, Argentina during the Eocene-Miocene
(42-18 million years ago). We will also compare our record of vegetation
openness with the record of fossil mammals to test whether plant-eating animals
were adapting to increasingly open landscapes through evolutionary changes in
their teeth (increasing crown height).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; LAI measurements
are important in modern ecological studies and in climate modeling. Having a
method for estimating LAI from the fossil record allows scientists to understand
the structure of ancient vegetation, and permits more direct comparisons between
modern and ancient vegetation, which is vital for investigating how environments
have changed over time. This study offers opportunities for undergraduates to
become involved in research, provides online resources for education and
research and will be accessible for the public through museum exhibitions.