* 1110290
* SHF: Small: Collaborative Research: Using Identified Circuit Invariance for Online error Detection
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2010,08/31/2013
* Jennifer Dworak, Southern Methodist University
* Standard Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 08/31/2013
* USD 362,379.00

Ensuring reliable computation at the nanoscale requires mechanisms to detect
errors. The PIs propose fundamental research for developing efficient hardware
techniques to support online error detection and manufacturing test by
monitoring invariant relationships. These invariant relationships naturally
occur across multiple levels of digital logic and across multiple time cycles.
Violations of these relationships indicate that errors have occurred, either
because of transient faults or manufacturing defects; thus monitoring them in
hardware can significantly improve circuit reliability. While other techniques
exist for error detection, this approach has several advantages, including
significantly lower power dissipation, no high-level information requirements,
fine-grained optimization capabilities, and providing a potentially powerful
source of diagnostic information. A key challenge in this project is the
efficient selection of an optimal set of implications to include in the
hardware, such that desired reliability is obtained with low
overhead.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Reliable operation of logic devices is key for
the continued push for smaller and faster electronic circuits. Any benefit in
performance and power brought forth by rapid scaling of transistors cannot be
fully realized if high reliability cannot be guaranteed for systems composed of
these devices. The proposed research is a collaborative effort between Brown and
Bucknell Universities. The project involves undergraduate students, many of whom
are women and under-represented minorities. The PIs will use this project to
create new opportunities to expose undergraduates to research, and to develop
outreach workshops to encourage women and under-represented minorities to pursue
degrees in computing.