* 1110843
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Exploring the Impacts of Long-Term Warming on Arctic Soils: Linking Microbial Communities with Seasonal Biogeochemical Dynamics.
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2013
* Joshua Schimel, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Alan Tessier
* 08/31/2013
* USD 15,000.00

The total soil organic carbon (SOC) in the northern permafrost zone is estimated
to be more than twice as much C as is in the atmosphere. The accumulation of
this SOC is driven by the cold climate limiting decomposition. Climate models
predict that the Arctic will warm over the next century, therefore accelerating
microbial decomposition of SOC is one of the most significant potential
greenhouse gas release feedbacks from terrestrial ecosystems to the atmosphere.
Winter snow cover and spring thaw are particularly important in influencing
decomposition. Few studies, however, have explored how long-term warming will
affect the seasonality of soil biogeochemical dynamics. To address this
knowledge gap, this research project uses a greenhouse experiment initiated in
1988 at the Toolik, AK Long Term Ecological Research site to explore the
consequences of long-term warming on Arctic soil microbial dynamics and nutrient
cycling through repeated sampling across seasons and soil horizons. Bacterial
and fungal communities? DNA will be studied, to characterize phylogenetically
how different organisms respond to long-term warming across seasons and soil
horizons. This work is being used to develop and parameterize a mechanistic
model of tundra soils? responses to warming.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
impacts: The data and model that grows from them are part of a multi-institute
collaborative effort supported by the Arctic System Science Program's ?Changing
Seasonality in the Arctic System initiative.? The model directly links the
structure and activity of the Arctic microbial community to C and nutrient
cycling, increasing our ability to predict how biogeochemical cycling in this
system will respond to rapid climate warming. Additionally, any pyrosequencing-
derived sequences generated through this project will be added into the NIH
GenBank database. In addition to scientific collaborations, this project will
foster the development of several students in the biogeochemical sciences,
including two female undergraduates and a minority high school student, as well
as supported participation in several science outreach projects targeted to the
local K-12 community. The NSF DDIG grant will enhance the completion of a
doctoral dissertation by a female scientist, as well as promoting continued
outreach efforts in global change science education and cross-disciplinary
research.