* 1110526
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH:   Antagonistic selection and speciation in the platyfish
* BIO,DEB
* 04/01/2011,03/31/2013
* Samuel Scarpino, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* George Gilchrist
* 03/31/2013
* USD 13,895.00

This study investigates the evolutionary forces acting on a potent oncogene and
putative speciation gene in the Southern Platyfish, Xiphophorus maculatus. The
Xmrk gene in X. maculatus causes the formation of aggressive melanomas in
hybrids between X. maculatus and a closely related species, Xiphophorus helleri.
As a result, this has been a classic system for both skin cancer and speciation
research. However, relatively little is known about the evolutionary genetics of
Xmrk. This research will use sophisticated molecular techniques and mathematical
models to estimate the strengths and types of evolutionary forces acting on
Xmrk. Specifically, this research will determine whether genetic evidence exists
for reproductive isolation between X. maculatus and X. helleri caused by Xmrk
and the strength of selection operating on Xmrk. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; This
study will advance our understanding of the evolutionary forces acting on cancer
genes. It will also provide much needed data on the molecular basis of
reproductive isolation in natural populations. The molecular, mathematical, and
computational techniques developed for this project will advance the
capabilities of future research in these areas. This research is a collaborative
effort between scientists at the University of Texas at Austin and at Centro de
Investigaciones Biológicas del Noroeste in La Paz Mexico. International
collaboration is a critical component of modern research and developing strong
bonds between universities in Mexico and the United States greatly advances the
science in both countries.