* 1110487
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Function and Evolution of Sweet Taste Receptors in Birds
* BIO,IOS
* 07/01/2011,06/30/2013
* Maude Baldwin, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Michelle Elekonich
* 06/30/2013
* USD 15,000.00

The sense of taste is vital to an animal's survival. Current knowledge of the
molecular basis of taste perception is mostly based on studies conducted on
mammals, but it is unclear to what extent other vertebrates, such as birds, use
similar mechanisms. From available genomic resources, it appears that part of
the sweet-taste receptor is missing in birds, which raises the question of how
nectar-feeders, like hummingbirds, can detect sugar. The investigators will
clone candidate hummingbird taste receptors and will perform functional tests of
these receptors in cell culture assays, as well as use imaging techniques to
localize these taste receptors on the hummingbird
tongue.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Research into the sense of taste in non-model
systems is important for a variety of reasons. It addresses basic questions in
evolutionary biology, such as how genes lose and acquire new functions over
evolutionary time. Every organism perceives the world in a unique way, through
the filter of its sensory system, and understanding how these sensory systems
differ can inform a variety of applications. Knowledge of bird taste abilities
can be applied in developing pest control for agriculture, as well as in the
formulation of appropriate diets for the pet trade or for captive breeding
programs for endangered species. Many questions surrounding human diet and diet-
related diseases rely on an understanding of what is palatable for humans:
research into the mechanism of an alternative sweet-detection system may give
novel insights into how mammalian taste functions and thus is of interest to
both the flavor industry as well as to medical researchers. In addition, work on
both taste and on hummingbirds has powerful outreach potential and a strong
ability to engage the general public: this research will be presented in K-12
settings to introduce concepts in evolutionary biology and popularize the
scientific process.