* 1110094
* Workshop/Collaborative Research:  Charting a Course for Computer-Aided Bio-inspired Design Research; Palo Alto, California; March 20, 2011
* ENG,CMMI
* 03/15/2011,02/28/2013
* Daniel McAdams, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Paul Collopy
* 02/28/2013
* USD 6,000.00

The objective of this award will be to conduct a one day workshop with the aim
of investigating the emerging research area in engineering design known as Bio-
inspired Design (BID). The key intellectual merit of the workshop lies in
identifying future research directions of BID -- specifically problem focused
research directions such as complex system design and sustainability. Another
key intellectual contribution is the identification of the fundamental
impediments to joining the engineering and biological (and related) disciplines
and the associated research directions needed to overcome them. Bringing these
two disciplines together is critical due to: i) the relevant technical knowledge
in each community; and ii) the cultural difference between them that has
occurred through the development of engineering as a solution generating applied
science and biology as a knowledge generating pure science. This workshop will
serve as a means of gathering researchers in a single location to identify the
state of the art in the emerging field and to identify critical knowledge gaps
that represent potential for further exploration. The attendees will address the
critical question: "How do we transform BID from point solution efforts to
fundamental methods and theories?" Additional discussion points will focus on
biological/natural sustainable solutions that could potentially be explored as
models for engineered systems. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If successful, this award
will enable researchers in the emerging field of Bio-Inspired Design (BID) to
lay the framework that allows BID to move from a general concept with point
specific applications to a full research field with identified problems,
challenges, and rigorous approaches to deal with those challenges. The issue of
sustainability for complex engineered systems is presently of national and
global importance and will be explored in the context of BID. The continuing
forums on the workshop website combined with a follow-up workshop six months
later allow an aftershock effect of the effort to reach additional individuals
in a slightly altered and matured form. A final report will be widely
distributed across traditional disciplinary lines in order to achieve the
greatest impact and provide the greatest guidance to researchers.