* 1110631
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Integrating morphology, molecules and information technology for the taxonomic revision of Signiphoridae (Hymenoptera)
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2011,05/31/2012
* James Woolley, Texas A&M Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Ranker
* 05/31/2012
* USD 11,733.00

This grant is for the improvement of the taxonomic revision of a family of
parasitic wasps, Signiphoridae (Chalcidoidea), which are natural enemies of
scale insects, mealybugs, psyllids, and flies. The project is based on a
comparative study of material collected worldwide. The species will be
classified and new species will be described (at least 25 new species).
Evolutionary relationships will be inferred from morphological and molecular
data, using state-of-the-art analytical methods. The award will also be used to
develop tools to manage the large amounts of data produced (specimen
information, descriptions, images, DNA sequences), prepare it for public
delivery, and to visit two institutions with valuable material from the
Brazilian savannah (cerrado), Atlantic Rainforest, and Amazon.&lt;br/&gt;Besides
enhancing significantly the depth of the study, this grant provides training for
a graduate student in three areas (comparative morphology, molecular studies and
bioinformatics) which are essential to taxonomists in the 21st Century. Training
of taxonomists is important given the increasing scarcity of such professionals.
This study will facilitate the use of these insects in the control of insect
pests, provide tools to other scientists in taxonomy, provide opportunity for
undergraduate student workers, and contribute to the knowledge of the fauna of
the New World tropics.