* 1110058
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Physiological mechanisms in climate-induced forest mortality
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2011,05/31/2013
* Christopher Field, Carnegie Institution of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Henry L. Gholz
* 05/31/2013
* USD 15,000.00

In western United States, massive mortality events have occurred recently across
many tree species, often linked to severe drought and temperature, and are
expected to increase with climate change in the next century. Trembling aspen
forests recently experienced a severe and rapid drought-driven mortality across
several western states, affecting up to a fifth of aspen forests. Despite the
prevalence and impact of these events, there is relatively little known about
exactly how forests die from drought and temperature stress. The proposed
research would help illuminate the physiological mechanisms of how aspen forests
succumb to drought stress over multiple years. Understanding the long term
effects of severe drought on water uptake and use by trees is critical to
informing pathways and thresholds of such mortality events. This research will
shed light on the response of forests to climate change, currently a large
uncertainty.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Tree death can transform regional landscapes
and have severe effects on how forests function and on the services they provide
to humans, such as timber, tourism, and wildlife habitat. Furthermore, forest
diebacks can lead to dramatic decreases in forest uptake of carbon, resulting in
an positive feedback to climate warming. Thus, understanding how and where
forests could die in the future would greatly benefit local stakeholders in the
western United States. This research will aid in projecting which regions, tree
species, and forests could be most vulnerable to drought and climate.
Additionally, the research will involve students from local communities in field
research and will communicate the results to a broad array of land managers and
stakeholders, greatly increasing the impact of the findings.