* 1110351
* Lipid Asymmetry: A New View on Lipid Dynamics and Membrane Structure
* MPS,CHE
* 08/15/2011,07/31/2015
* John Conboy, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* David Rockcliffe
* 07/31/2015
* USD 465,000.00

The Chemistry of Life Processes Program supports Professor John C. Conboy at the
University of Utah whose research will explore and understand the complex
interplay between the movement of lipid species across the cellular membrane and
the establishment of lipid compositional asymmetry. The connection between lipid
compositional asymmetry and flip-flop in planar supported lipid bilayers will be
explored using a novel application of sum-frequency vibrational spectroscopy
(SFVS) developed by the PI to selectively probe the asymmetry in a planar-
supported lipid bilayer (PSLB). This new surface analytical method allows for
the direct detection of lipid flip-flop without the need for a fluorescent or
spin-labeled lipid probe, which can alter the measured translocation rates. The
goal of this research is to use this surface analytical tool to address some of
the central issues concerning the transbilayer movement and the establishment of
lipid asymmetry in bilayer systems. In addition, the coupling of lipid flip-flop
energetics to the establishment of lipid asymmetry will also be explored. These
studies are aimed at providing physical insight into the mechanism of lipid
compositional asymmetry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With the support of the Chemistry
of Life Processes Program in the Chemistry Division at the National Science
Foundation, Professor Conboy will perform research that has far-reaching
implications in molecular and cellular biology and will provide a foundation for
interpreting the influence of small molecules such as cholesterol and the
influence of transmembrane peptides on lipid flip-flop and distributions in
living cells. In addition to the studies outlined above, which will provide a
solid foundation for the investigation of transbilayer movement of phospholipids
across the membrane, studies could be extended to examine the exchange of fatty
acids, steroids, hormones and other small molecules, all of which dramatically
modulate the physical properties of lipid membrane. The goal of the education
plan is to incorporate the concepts of bioanalytical chemistry into the graduate
and undergraduate analytical curriculum. At the graduate level, the continued
enhancement of the core analytical curriculum will be achieved by the offering
of bioanalytical chemistry, a course that the PI has developed. The course is
designed to utilize the most recent analytical techniques used in the biological
sciences and draws heavily from the literature, exposing students to the latest
advancements in the field. At the undergraduate level, the introduction of
bioanalytical principles and techniques in the undergraduate instrumental
analysis laboratory will be introduced. This will not only give students
exposure to bioanalytical techniques, but will also entail the use of problem-
solving based exercises. Several undergraduates will be involved in ongoing
research in the laboratory of Professor Conboy, in order to foster a growing
interest in biophysical/bioanalytical chemistry.