* 1110911
* Templated Synthesis and Applications of Cucurbituril Type Receptors
* MPS,CHE
* 07/15/2011,06/30/2015
* Lyle Isaacs, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Suk-Wah Tam-Chang
* 06/30/2015
* USD 519,370.00

The Macromolecular, Supramolecular and Nanochemistry (MSN) Program supports the
work of Professor Lyle Isaacs at the University of Maryland College Park which
focuses on the development of the synthetic and supramolecular chemistry of the
cucurbit[n]uril (CB[n]) family of molecular container compounds. Although
unfunctionalized CB[n] compounds are being widely explored by the supramolecular
chemistry community, the preparation of CB[n] derivatives displaying reactive
functional groups is still a major challenge. The Isaacs group is developing
robust synthetic methods for the tailor-made synthesis of monofunctionalized
CB[n] derivatives. These derivatives will be explored for a variety of purposes
including their immobilization to solid phases for chromatography, for the
preparation of stimuli responsive molecular machines, and to promote the
dimerization of biomolecules in water for diagnostic and sensing application.
The Isaacs group is also developing a series of freely downloadable videos for
world wide web distribution based on challenging problems in Undergraduate
Organic Chemistry that illustrate how a practicing chemist solves
problems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Containers are tremendously important in everyday
life including the preservation of foodstuffs and the shipping of items to
specific locations. Molecular containers do the same things for molecules and
constitute vital ingredients in household products and pharmaceutical
formulations. The compounds and procedures developed by the Isaacs group will
impact both academic and industrial science by providing a series of container
compounds bearing reactive functional groups that allow their incorporation into
advanced functional systems. This program encourages the participation of
undergraduates and students from under-represented groups in chemical research.
Freely available web videos showing a chemist solving challenging problems in
undergraduate organic chemistry promises to enhance the learning outcome of the
global undergraduate community.