* 1110444
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: The Impacts of Global Climate Change on the Annual Cycle of Long-Distance Migratory Birds
* BIO,DEB
* 05/01/2011,04/30/2012
* John Fitzpatrick, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Saran Twombly
* 04/30/2012
* USD 15,000.00

Global climate change is causing spring to arrive earlier across much of the
Northern Hemisphere, and particularly at the most northerly latitudes. This
presents a significant problem to organisms such as migratory birds that breed
at these northerly latitudes but spend much of the rest of the year in other
regions. This study examines how two different populations of a long-distance
migratory bird, the Hudsonian Godwit (Limosa haemastica), change the timing of
their migrations and breeding seasons in response to a rapidly changing climate.
Migration will be quantified by tracking individual birds, and nest success and
chick survival will be measured at two separate breeding
sites.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Gaining a better understanding of how global climate
change is affecting migratory birds is pivotal to the ability of scientists and
land managers to plan for the conservation of these species under future climate
change scenarios. The results of this research will facilitate this
understanding through publication in scientific journals and through diverse
social media to educate citizens living throughout the entire range of Hudsonian
Godwits. The investigators plan to distribute a documentary film in both English
and Spanish, and to mentor middle- and high-school students through video chats
and on-line discussions. Undergraduate students and citizen scientists will be
included in collection and analysis of field data.