* 1110792
* Dissertation Research: Catch-per-unit-effort as an indicator of "bushmeat" sustainability
* BIO,DEB
* 09/15/2011,08/31/2014
* Wayne Getz, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Alan Tessier
* 08/31/2014
* USD 14,400.00

Wildlife hunting for human consumption and use is a major threat to global
biodiversity and, paradoxically, to the very people who depend on it. While
fisheries research has a long history of investigating maximum sustainable
yields and methods for monitoring fisheries stock population status, research in
bushmeat (wild meat) sustainability and management is still relatively nascent.
This project will examine wildlife utilization in the Congo Basin of Africa,
which has traditionally been approached from a conservation perspective, rather
than a utilitarian perspective. Wildlife populations in the Congo Basin are
notoriously difficult to monitor due to remoteness and dense tropical forest
canopy, precluding aerial surveys. The main objective of this research project
is to determine if hunter catch-per-unit-effort indices, commonly used in
fisheries management, can be used as indicators of the status of harvested
wildlife populations in Central Africa. This project will test whether the
harvest system for African bushmeat is influenced by factors such as gear-type,
vegetation, season, and hunter experience, and will also investigate whether
ancillary data of harvested population structure (e.g. age and sex) can serve as
a proxy for wildlife abundance or harvested population
status.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project addresses a major gap in current
management of wildlife harvesting in Central Africa, a resource that is
currently under threat of unsustainable harvests. Millions of people across
Africa rely on wildlife as a primary source of protein, and alternative protein
sources are difficult, if not impossible, to access. Hence, it is imperative
that cost-effective, technologically feasible, and socially acceptable methods
for monitoring harvested wildlife populations are identified. Results from this
project will be provided to stakeholders in conservation and government agencies
in the Congo Basin to better inform management strategies. This project will
support the doctoral dissertation research of a graduate student.