* 1110868
* Collaborative Research: Cyber-Collective Movements: Novel Socio-Computational Approaches in Studying the Blogosphere
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2011,05/31/2016
* Nitin Agarwal, University of Arkansas Little Rock
* Standard Grant
* William Bainbridge
* 05/31/2016
* USD 402,191.00

Using the global female Muslim blogosphere, this research aims to understand the
complexity of cyber-collective action and factors contributing to its success or
failure. Despite the exponential growth of Internet users in Muslim countries,
there is a lack of empirical study of socio-political uses of the technology for
expressing opinions and mobilizing individuals in these countries. The female
Muslim blogosphere was selected as a test-bed for two reasons: First, while
research shows that three of four females online are active social media users,
very little research attempts to understand social, cultural and political roles
of female bloggers and collectivity among female social groups. Second, the
domain epitomizes an important contrast deserving attention, between socio-
political systems where women are frequently denied freedom of expression and
active political uses of social media by female Internet users. Female Muslim
bloggers find the blogosphere as a digital recourse to exercise their freedom of
speech if compared to their physical and repressively controlled spaces.

This longitudinal study will develop the theoretical underpinnings and
experimental tools to examine the factors that govern the success and failure of
cyber-collective movements more generally. It will develop novel algorithms
modeling cyber-collective movements by utilizing existing social theories on
collective action and computational social network analysis and basing the
analysis upon three central tenets of individual, community, and transnational
perspectives. Essential questions to be addressed in this study are: What
transforms individual sentiments into collective sentiments? What are the
dynamics of various socio-cultural dimensions in the evolution of opinion
leaders? What social or organizational factors help transcend the nation-state
barriers? Several independent validation strategies will be investigated,
including monitoring the manifestation of cyber-collective movements as physical
social movements, human evaluation, and crowdsourcing initiatives to bridge the
gap between qualitative and quantitative evaluation measures.

The lessons learned from this research will create greater synergies between
social science and computational science. Data collected from this research will
be made publicly available due to its efficacy for various interdisciplinary
research endeavors, especially in human-computer interaction, game theory,
political communication, social network analysis and mining, and social
computing, among others. Members of underrepresented groups, especially female
bloggers will play an essential role in the project, lending insights into the
idiosyncrasies of their socio-technical behavior advancing our understanding of
the female demographics, thus making a significant impact on society at large.
Educational impacts include the creation of much-needed interdisciplinary
courses and training undergraduate, graduate and doctoral students by involving
them at all stages of the research.