* 1110137
* Dissertation Research:  Synergistic Effects of Predators and Trematode Parasites on Larval Amphibians
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/2011,06/30/2013
* John Marino, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Douglas Levey
* 06/30/2013
* USD 14,155.00

Both parasites and predators can affect animals in a variety of complex ways in
addition to directly affecting survival and reproduction. For instance,
parasites can change how susceptible their hosts are to predators by affecting
host behavior or other traits. Similarly, prey that sense a predator is near
through visual or chemical cues (e.g., smell) may change their behavior, which
may affect their susceptibility to parasites. Such complex effects can impact
each species within a community differently, which may benefit some species at
the expense of others. As a result, an animal community affected by the
combination of predators and parasites may look very different than a community
affected by only one type of these natural enemies. This project will evaluate
how echinostomes (a trematode parasite) and predators interact to affect larval
frog (tadpole) communities in ponds. First, the susceptibility of different
species of larval frogs to echinostome infection in the presence and absence of
predators will be measured. Second, the interactive effects of predators and
parasites on a simple community of larval frogs will be examined. An experiment
in artificial ponds will demonstrate the extent to which parasite infection
rates depend on the composition of the amphibian community and the presence of
predators. The results will also reveal how the combination of infection and
predator cues affects competition for resources among larval frogs. Finally, a
field survey will suggest how these effects play out in natural ponds in
Southeast Michigan. This research will thus provide new insights into complex
mechanisms through which parasites and predators affect communities.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The outcome will be valuable from a conservation
perspective because echinostomes are present at higher levels in areas
associated with human impacts, such as pollution and urbanization. Because
predators have a strong impact on amphibian communities, their interactions with
parasites in these ponds will be particularly important to understand.
Additionally, amphibians are a class of special concern because many populations
are in decline globally, in part due to disease. This research will involve
collaboration with local organizations, undergraduate students, K-12
organizations, and landowners, which will provide an excellent opportunity for
public outreach and education.