* 1110503
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Rapid warning color evolution in a poison-dart frog: Does male-male competition play a role?
* BIO,IOS
* 06/15/2011,05/31/2014
* Laura Crothers, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Michelle Elekonich
* 05/31/2014
* USD 13,861.00

One of the most spectacular examples of evolution is the existence of the
bright, conspicuous colors that are widespread throughout the animal kingdom.
Aposematic species, for example, use conspicuous ?warning? signals to advertize
their toxicity to predators. The aposematic poison-dart frog, Dendrobates
pumilio, has undergone a recent, rapid diversification in warning coloration.
Though warning coloration evolves to deter predators, recent research suggests
that it can also function in the context of within species communication. For
example, the investigators have recently shown that male warning color
brightness can predict the outcomes of D. pumilio male-male territorial
interactions. Following from this, this study investigates the conditional
correlates and fitness consequences of warning color variation in these males.
Laboratory assays and behavioral observations will delineate the hormonal and
dietary correlates and the social consequences of male color and brightness
variation in natural populations of this species.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Because
warning coloration can communicate to a triad of viewers (predators, males, and
females), this research will provide insights into how the interplay between
natural and sexual selection drives conspicuous signal evolution. Results will
also yield information on what environmental and physiological factors are
correlated with warning color, an ecologically important trait. This species has
proven to be a charismatic animal for educational outreach: the investigators?
research has been featured in public outreach talks in Panama and the US and on
internationally broadcasted television specials. The proposed work will provide
research experience for undergraduates, opportunities for collaboration with
Panamanian scientists, and its findings will be shared with the public through
publically available databases, blogs, and ongoing outreach work by the co-PI at
the Texas Natural Science Center.