* 1110564
* Dissertation Research:   The Deep Evolution and Development of the Archosaurian Head and the Origin of the Face of Birds
* BIO,DEB
* 06/15/2011,05/31/2013
* Bhart-Anjan Bhullar, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* David Mindell
* 05/31/2013
* USD 13,311.00

Birds represent the most successful group of modern land vertebrates. Much of
their enormous ecological diversity is driven by evolution of the unique bird
face, specifically the beak or bill. A key evolutionary innovation, such as a
bird beak, can only be fully explained by examining both its ultimate and
proximate causes -- the broad-scale evolutionary patterns of change leading to
appearance of beak structure and the developmental processes that must be
altered to turn a reptilian face into a bird beak, respectively. This study will
trace the transition from a nonavian reptile face to the unique bill of birds by
applying quantitative techniques to the fossil record, tracing the sequence and
nature of transformations during bird evolution. Using that information, the
proximate molecular developmental mechanisms behind each transformation will be
dissected using chickens and, as comparative material, embryos of crocodylians
(the closest living relatives to birds) and lizards. Experimental support for
hypotheses about the significance of changes in gene expression will be provided
by replicating 'reptilian' states in chicken embryos, producing an altered
phenotype that resembles the ancestral condition. This detailed, integrative
study of the evolution of the bird face will provide insight into the
fundamental nature and mechanisms of key evolutionary transitions that lead to
the major radiations populating the earth today.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Understanding these transformations is at the core of
comprehending the driving forces behind biodiversity and biological disparity.
Few studies have so comprehensively examined the biology of a major adaptive
feature. Moreover, this work will be broadly integrative in that the advanced
molecular development investigations will be tied heavily to legacy museum and
digital collection based activities. Even embryos used in the developmental work
will find a permanent archive in the Harvard museum collections. This close tie
to the museum lends itself easily to public communication. Exhibits based on
this work will draw in the public using the charismatic study subjects -- birds,
dinosaurs, and crocodiles -- and will represent a prime opportunity to tie such
classical natural history subjects to cutting-edge molecular science.