* 1110901
* Workshop: Transitioning Research-Developed Learning Technologies into Broad Use Phases, Challenges, and Needed Infrastructure
* CSE,IIS
* 12/01/2010,05/31/2011
* Uri Wilensky, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth VanderPutten
* 05/31/2011
* USD 41,268.00

We propose a 1-day workshop designed to seed a cross-agency analysis of the
infrastructure that is needed to bring research-developed learning technologies
to broad use. While technology transfer programs exist within NSF and the
Department of Education, we believe the challenges of bringing learning
technologies to broad use go beyond what general-purpose technology transfer
organizations are designed to provide.&lt;br/&gt;The workshop will be held on
December 14, 2010, in Washington, DC. It will bring together individuals who
have successfully taken their research-developed learning technologies to broad
use with representatives of organizations that have brought some of those
technologies to market, that help researchers develop learning technologies with
scale-up in mind, that provide infrastructure for transitioning technologies
from research to use, and organizations that fund design and development of
learning technologies and research on learning with technology (the National
Science Foundation (NSF), the U.S. Department of Education (ED), and the
Institute for Education Science (IES)).&lt;br/&gt;Our objectives for this
workshop are as follows: (1) Identify pathways for taking research-developed
technology to broad use, (2) Identify phases in each of those pathways, and for
each phase, identify the&lt;br/&gt;challenges to successfully completing it, (3)
Identify infrastructure that is available for addressing those challenges, (4)
Identify gaps in that infrastructure, and (5) Provide an opportunity for a broad
range of program officers at NSF, IES, and&lt;br/&gt;ED to come together to
consider this set of important issues.&lt;br/&gt;The end product of the workshop
will be a document that identifies pathways for transitioning learning
technologies to broad use, phases along each pathway and the challenges to
success at each phase, available infrastructure for enabling the processes and
mitigating the challenges, and infrastructure that is missing. Our hope is that
these lists will enable and empower appropriate communities to continue the
discussion and plan toward the needed infrastructure.&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
Merit: The workshop will build on the experiences and research of those who have
worked towards bringing learning technologies to broad use and identify
challenges and some of the ways of addressing those.&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Objectives: An infrastructure that can help researchers transition worthy
learning technologies to broad use will enable rich and effective learning
experiences for the entirety of the country?s school-age population and beyond.