* 1110838
* International: US-China IRES with Collaborative Research on Nano Crystal Dot Electrostatic Discharge Protection for Integrated Circuits
* O/D,OISE
* 10/01/2011,09/30/2014
* Albert Wang, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Anne Emig
* 09/30/2014
* USD 150,000.00

This award supports an International Research Experiences for Students (IRES)
project in China. Participating undergraduate students will engage in research
on nano-scale crystal quantum-dot (NC-QD) integrated circuits (ICs) and
particularly on electrostatic-discharge failure mechanisms and protection
methods for sub-90nm nodes. This is an important and critical research area for
the semiconductor industry. The research group in University of California at
Riverside will collaborate with Tsinghua University, University of Electronic
S&amp;T, Shanghai Jiaotong University, and Huazhong University of S&amp;T, all
in China. A total of five US undergraduate students will be involved in this
international collaborative research project in each of three years. The annual
three-month IRES program consists of two phases: six weeks at Tsinghua
University in Beijing and six weeks at a second university in a different
Chinese city. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The IRES activities include research
projects on IC reliability through design and fabrication, joint education
sessions, global industrial training and exposure to diversified cultures and
social settings in China. IRES seminars are planned in each phase at the host
Chinese institutions and back at home for the participating undergraduate
students to present their IRES experiences. The language training and cultural
experience gained by the students at universities in China will enable them to
interact effectively in their future careers in a global setting.