* 1110412
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Effects of Ocean Acidification on the Physiology and Species Interactions of Crustose Coralline Red Algae
* BIO,DEB
* 05/01/2011,04/30/2013
* Catherine Pfister, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Alan Tessier
* 04/30/2013
* USD 14,968.00

Ocean ecosystems are among those most at risk from global climate change.
Coastal systems in particular are undergoing rapid change in seawater chemistry
that stresses the organisms living there. It is therefore important to assess
the potential for biological response to such changes resonating from the
species level to ecological communities. This project will assess physiological
responses of crustose coralline algae, which inhabit the marine intertidal, to
environmental changes associated with global warming. Using available historical
information on food web interactions between algae and their grazers, this work
will conduct field and laboratory experiments to quantify the broader ecological
changes expected from physiological changes in the algae. Results from these
experiments will inform models of species dominance based on environmental
factors and will be used to predict the fate of important primary producers in
the coastal northeast Pacific Ocean. A further goal is to sample archival and
modern algae for stable isotopes to reconstruct environmental change over the
past century. As climate change alters ecosystems worldwide, it becomes
increasingly important for ecologists to collaborate with researchers in other
environmental fields. This project applies ecological, physiological, and
biogeochemical techniques in tandem to address an important environmental
problem and promotes interaction and collaboration between closely related
disciplines that have historically remained isolated. This research will make
new connections between physiological responses to climate and how such
responses factor into community-level changes through species interactions.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The impacts of this project are cultural as well as
environmental. Coastal communities in the state of Washington, including tribal
nations, depend socioeconomically on ocean productivity through the fishing
industry. Results from this research will be used to increase local awareness
about climate change effects on coastal biology. Additional public outreach will
be conducted in collaboration with the Shedd Aquarium in Chicago to explain
climate change impacts on marine ecosystems to a mid-western population whose
primary interactions with the ocean occur through public aquaria. By better
understanding ecological responses to climate change this research will play a
pivotal role in making climate change science accessible to a general audience.