* 1110409
* 2nd International Workshop on  Bio-Soil Interactions and Engineering, held at Churchill College, Cambridge, UK, September, 2011
* ENG,CMMI
* 05/01/2011,12/31/2013
* Jason DeJong, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Richard Fragaszy
* 12/31/2013
* USD 60,316.00

The role of biological processes in the engineering behavior of soils, or "bio-
mediated soil improvement," has become a "hot topic" in geotechnical
engineering, as predicted by the National Academy of Sciences committee
"Geological and Geotechnical Engineering in the New Millennium: Opportunities
for Research and Technological Innovation." In 2007, the First Workshop on Bio-
Soils Interactions and Engineering convened academics from a broad spectrum of
disciplines to identify the biological processes that had potential for
geotechnical applications. The results of the workshop were presented to NSF and
UK funding agencies (EPSRC, NRC), summarized in a report (DeJong et al. 2007),
and discussed at two conferences in the United States (GeoCongress 2008 and TRB
2008). Since that time, more than a dozen projects have been funded, more than
50 researchers are exploring this field, and more than 50 publications on the
topic have been produced worldwide. The research done to date has shown that
some soils can be modified in the laboratory by biological activity, resulting
in significant enhancement in engineering properties such as strength and
stiffness. If it is possible to achieve these results in the field, significant
savings in materials and energy use can be expected.

The objective of the Second International Workshop is to determine which topics
and applications hold the greatest potential, and therefore should be considered
high priority for further research, and which topics/applications appear to be
less promising, and thus should be assigned a lower priority. Workshop
participants will also assess experiences in the training and development of
graduate students for this new field, and identify approaches that have been
successful or appear to be promising. The workshop be held over a period of 2.5
days in late September, 2011. Approximately 30 leading researchers in the field,
about one-half from the United States, will convene in Cambridge, England. The
international participants will be invited from the UK, Netherlands, Belgium,
Israel, France, Japan, China and Singapore. The workshop objective will be met
through a series of activities prior to, during and after the workshop,
including distribution of workshop ?reader? that includes recent publications by
participants, collection of white papers (one submitted by each participant)
outlining the primary issues that need to be addressed to advance the field, a
mix of working group and full workshop discussions, with each working group
writing up a white paper summary of the outcome of the workshop discussions on
their topic, and delivery of workshop outcomes into an NSF report, a summary
engineering news article and a journal paper.

The workshop creates the opportunity to for experts to meet and discuss an area
that resides at the interface of a number of traditional fields, including
geotechnical engineering, geoenvironmental engineering, geosciences,
microbiology, and bioengineering. The proposed workshop will provide significant
broader impacts within and beyond the associated engineering and science
communities including: (a) discovery of new environmentally safe engineering
solutions, (b) cost effective solutions to engineering problems, (c) improved
understanding of scientific problems, (d) improved understanding of the effect
of construction on nature, (e) cross-education of researchers, (f)
identification of opportunities for improved undergraduate education, (g)
development of graduate students for this new field.