* 1110620
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Predation Behavior of Bacteriovorax and Bacteriophages Against Vibrio spp. - Linking Predatory Traits with Systematics of the Bacterial Predator
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/2011,06/30/2013
* Henry Williams, Florida Agricultural and Mechanical University
* Standard Grant
* David Mindell
* 06/30/2013
* USD 13,974.00

Bacteriovorax are unique predatory bacteria with potential roles and benefits as
antibacterial agents to mitigate certain bacterial diseases in plants and
animals, controlling bacterial populations and recycling nutrients in the
environment. These bacteria may also be an important unexploited source of new
novel therapeutic compounds. To realize the full potential of Bacteriovorax, it
is necessary to better understand their genome structure and to bring order to
the system of classifying and naming them. The purpose of this study is to use
whole-genomic sequences to identify the best-performing genes in order to
advance the classification and systematics of Bacteriovorax bacteria. The
construction of a more accurate phylogenetic tree of Bacteriovorax will provide
a framework to define novel isolates in future
studies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This information and resulting classification
scheme will be disseminated to the scientific community through publications,
sequence databases and a website. Florida A&amp;M is a historically black
college and university with few applicants submitting DDIG proposals. The
student Co-PI will share her experiences in planning and writing the proposal
through presentations to inspire others and thus potentially increasing future
numbers of proposals from minority students.