* 1110501
* Structure and Function of Membrane Proteins
* BIO,MCB
* 12/01/2011,11/30/2015
* Vasanthi Jayaraman, The University of Texas Health Science Center at Houston
* Continuing Grant
* Gregory W. Warr
* 11/30/2015
* USD 534,211.00

Intellectual Merit&lt;br/&gt;Ligand gated ion channels are a family of proteins
that act as switches, which convert chemical signals to electrical signals in
nerve cells. Acid sensing channels, a member of this family of proteins, are
transmembrane proteins that bind to protons and open channels that are specific
for cations. They not only play a critical role in neurotransmission in higher
vertebrates but also play a role in mediating sensory responses proteins in
lower vertebrates such as worms, flies, hydra, and sea urchins which have
proteins with similar sequences. A recent structure of one type of the acid
sensing channel indicates that the mechanism by which this protein responds to
protons (lower pH) is by the protonation of acidic residues present on the
extracellular side of&lt;br/&gt;this protein. The proposed project will test
this hypothesis and establish if these residues are indeed the sensors for the
acidic pH. For these studies the vibrations of the acidic residues will be
investigated to determine if they are protonated at the pH where the protein
functions. In addition, the proposed research will also determine the structural
changes initiated by protonation that ultimately leads to the formation of the
cation channel. To study these large scale structural changes in the protein the
investigator will attach fluorescent probes at specific sites, and determine
distances between the probes by measuring the extent of energy transfer from one
site to the other. The changes at specific carboxylate residues and the large
scale structural changes will then be contextualized in terms of electrical
measurements that allow for characterization of the opening and closing of the
cation channels. This multi-scale structural and functional study should provide
a comprehensive understanding of the mechanism of chemical to electrical signal
transmission in these proteins.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts&lt;br/&gt;This project will also address the broader impacts criterion
defined by NSF. Training both undergraduate and graduate students in methods
relevant to a better understanding and utilization of the synergistic areas of
chemistry and neuroscience will continue to be a focus of the proposed project.
The goal of the training is to reinforce students' interest in science, develop
technical and critical thinking, and improve their communication skills. An
additional goal in the training will be to continue our efforts to promote the
participation of underrepresented minorities and women in science. We have been
successful in training several minority students and women in the lab, with the
most recent minority graduate student obtaining her doctoral degree last spring.
Finally, the broader impact on society of the proposed project will be through
the training of future scientists in cutting edge interdisciplinary research
that covers various aspects of science.