* 1110221
* Conference: Travel Support for Junior and Underrepresented US Scientists to Present Research at the July 1-4, 2011 SEB Meetings in Glasgow, Scotland.
* BIO,IOS
* 03/01/2011,02/29/2012
* Klaus Beyenbach, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Steven Ellis
* 02/29/2012
* USD 15,000.00

Without insects pollinating plants and trees, which we use for food and
construction, most of the terrestrial life forms would disappear. Insects are
also the most successful animals on planet Earth, not only in biomass but also
in the number of species with estimates as high as 30 Million (compared to about
42,000 species of vertebrates). On the other hand, some insects can cause
devastating destruction of forests and crops, and insects feeding on the blood
of birds and mammals are known to transmit dreadful diseases such as malaria,
yellow fever, dengue fever, encephalitis, West Nile disease, filariasis, lyme
disease, leishmaniasis, sleeping sickness, Chagas disease, typhus fever, and the
plague. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The evolutionary success of insects stems in part
from their functional diversity. For example, insects have developed
extraordinary mechanisms for handling water problems with great alacrity.
Insects inhabiting arid environments have developed rather water-impermeable
armor, insects inhabiting saline waters raise the salt content of their blood to
prevent water loss, insects inhabiting fresh water produce large quantities of
dilute urine, and mosquitoes gorging on blood have powerful mechanisms for
getting rid of unwanted salt and water. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;At the 2011
meeting of the Society of Experimental Biology in Glasgow, Scotland, the
evolutionary success of insects will be examined from the perspective of water
balance. Of particular interest will be mechanisms in 1) the intestine, where
water is taken up, and 2) the kidneys and salivary glands, where water is
eliminated. Central to water transport is the transport of diverse solutes by
so-called ion pumps and ion-dependent carriers. Since differences between
animals disappear as one proceeds to study progressively smaller parts, the
fourth and final oral session will introduce new transport systems discovered in
vertebrate tissues with the aim of stimulating the discovery of counterparts in
insects. Thus, the primary purpose of the SEB meeting is to enhance our research
and teaching. The second aim of the scientific sessions is to give junior
scientists from undergraduate to assistant professor the floor in four oral
sessions and to allow senior scientists to present new work in two poster
sessions. Speakers will reflect the increasing presence of women scientists and
underrepresented scientists. One scientific session will be dedicated to William
Harvey, now 83, who can look back on a productive career in his study of
transport phenomena in insects. Other role models to speak in oral sessions are
Sylvie Breton (Harvard Medical School), and Shireen Davies (University of
Glasgow).