* 1110814
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Ecology and Host Affinity of Foliar Endophytic Fungi in Amazonian Trees
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/2011,06/30/2014
* Paul V. Fine, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Simon Malcomber
* 06/30/2014
* USD 12,550.00

Plants contain a diverse array of fungi that cause no apparent harm, and may
even benefit the host. These&lt;br/&gt;"endophytes" are especially prevalent in
tropical forests, but it is not known how many types exist, nor
how&lt;br/&gt;their diversity is distributed within- and between host species.
This project will quantify endophyte&lt;br/&gt;diversity in a lowland Amazonian
tree species, and examine the relative importance of geographic
distance&lt;br/&gt;and habitat in determining endophyte community membership.
This will be achieved using cutting-edge&lt;br/&gt;DNA sequencing technology
that allows direct examination of microbial communities, independent
of&lt;br/&gt;conventional cultivation methods.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Fungi and
other microbes have immense effects on ecological processes, often resulting
from their&lt;br/&gt;interactions with larger organisms. In the case of
endophytes, the ability of a plant to respond to its&lt;br/&gt;environment may
be partly mediated by its fungal partners. Because chemistry is the currency of
host-symbiont&lt;br/&gt;interactions, this project will reveal potential targets
for drug discovery, as well as advance our&lt;br/&gt;understanding of fungal
species richness and ecology. During the field component, undergraduates from
a&lt;br/&gt;university in Amazonian Peru will receive training in ecology, plant
identification, and fungal culture&lt;br/&gt;techniques. An undergraduate in the
United States will receive training in basic molecular methods.
Results&lt;br/&gt;will be published in English and Spanish, to facilitate
further study by scientists from the host region and&lt;br/&gt;abroad.