* 1110315
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Oxidative stress and trade-offs in the cooperatively breeding Florida Scrub-Jay (Aphelocoma coerulescens)
* BIO,IOS
* 07/01/2011,12/31/2012
* Stephan Schoech, University of Memphis
* Standard Grant
* Michelle Elekonich
* 12/31/2012
* USD 14,854.00

Oxidative damage results from the inability of an organism to cope with reactive
oxygen species (ROS) that are formed as byproducts of metabolism. Damage to
various classes of biomolecules has been implicated in cellular senescence,
aging and debilitating diseases. This research will be the first to address the
effects of multiple aspects of oxidative damage on fitness-related measures in a
free-living long-lived avian model. The framework currently being developed from
this research may be of importance to the medical community as birds are
increasingly being recognized as viable models to assess adaptations to combat
oxidative damage, senescence, and associated diseases in humans. Florida Scrub-
Jays will be used to assess whether the accumulation of oxidative damage
negatively affects reproductive decisions and output, as well as fitness. Both
nestling and adult birds will be supplemented with antioxidants which neutralize
ROS. Thus, birds that receive antioxidants are predicted to demonstrate higher
reproduction and survivorship. Florida Scrub-Jays are a federally threatened
species and therefore, the results of this research may be applied broadly to
assist in the conservation of this, and other threatened species by providing
important clues as to the best management practices with regard to supplemental
antioxidant diets. Additionally, through collaboration with Archbold Biological
Station (ABS), an ecological research facility intimately involved in
environmental education, this research will integrate scientific advancement
with educational opportunities. This research will be published in high profile
journals and presented at scientific and lay meetings. It will also be shared
informally through interactions with visitors to ABS, and formally both through
the station?s internship program which brings several dozen undergraduate and
graduate students to the station to work on independent projects each year and
the ABS ecology education program which hosts nearly 3,000 3rd-5th grade
schoolchildren every year.