* 1110030
* Multi-Frequency Studies of Lightning Initiation and Propagation
* GEO,AGS
* 07/15/2011,06/30/2015
* Thomas Marshall, University of Mississippi
* Standard Grant
* Chungu Lu
* 06/30/2015
* USD 710,646.00

Lightning is one of the worst natural hazards, killing more people in the USA on
average than hurricanes or tornadoes and causing substantial damage to property
and sensitive equipment. In spite of decades of study, we still do not
understand exactly what physical mechanism causes the first spark of a lightning
flash, how that spark grows into a conducting path (the lightning "channel"), or
how the channel moves through cloudy and clear air.

By using a unique array of sensors, this project aims to gather new information
about lightning initiation and lightning propagation to help explain how these
two fundamental aspects of lightning may work. The measurements will be made at
the NASA Kennedy Space Center (KSC) in Florida. Lightning is especially frequent
at KSC, causes expensive operational delays, and sometimes damages sensitive
rocket and shuttle vehicles and/or facilities.

Intellectual merits: This NSF project is an extension of a recently completed
NSF EArly-concept Grant for Exploratory Research award - "EAGER Multi-Frequency
Studies of Lightning Initiation and Propagation" - and builds on the successful
results of that initial award. The completed EAGER project used lightning
observations with five different measurement systems. The enhanced observational
scheme for this NSF project will expand EAGER project with eight systems to
observe lightning processes: (1) "slow" antennas, (2) "fast" antennas, (3) a
network of seven crossed-loop magnetic sensors, (4) the KSC electric field mill
network, (5) the KSC Lightning Detection And Ranging (LDAR) system, (6) the KSC
Cloud-to-Ground Lightning Surveillance System (CGLSS), (7) high-speed video
cameras (at 54,000 frames/second), (8) VHF radio emissions, and (9) fast
electric field changes (dE/dt). All nine sensors look at electromagnetic changes
caused by lightning as it accelerates and moves charge; the sensors operate
across a wide and partially overlapping range of electromagnetic frequencies.

The various sensors respond to different parts of a flash: some parts are only a
few meters in length while others are as long as a several thousand meters.
There are two key features of the sensor array that will be especially useful in
this new lightning investigation. First, the array will be able to determine the
previously unknown locations of the long, fast electromagnetic pulses that occur
during the initiation of both in-cloud and cloud-to-ground lightning flashes.
Second, the high-speed video images of a propagating lightning flash will
literally give us visual pictures to combine with and compare with the data from
the other 8 sensors. Overall, the intellectual merit of the project stems from
combining the data from these nine sensors to provide new insights into how
lightning initiation and lightning propagation work.

Broader impacts: Developing a better understanding of the mechanisms behind a
particular hazard (lightning, in this case) can lead to new and improved ways of
protecting people and property from that hazard. Lightning protection systems
are primarily based in science, and determining how lightning initiates and
propagates may reveal new ways to protect objects on the ground and in the air.

This project will also be important for the development and training of several
new scientists, including one graduate student pursuing a Ph. D. degree, two
other graduate students just beginning their training, and two undergraduate
physics students interested in being involved in scientific research. The
training involves techniques that are specific to electromagnetic measurements
of lightning as well as techniques that are generally applicable in many
situations (including computer programming, computer control of instruments,
computer modeling, etc.). The results of this project will also be broadly
disseminated in the peer-reviewed literature.