* 1110533
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:  Assessing geographic patterns of negative density dependence in temperate tree species.
* BIO,DEB
* 05/15/2011,04/30/2014
* Daniel Johnson, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Alan Tessier
* 04/30/2014
* USD 13,386.00

The development of forest communities is shaped by both environmental factors
and interactions between organisms. Recent evidence from both tropical and
temperate forests suggests that host-specific pathogens play a major role in
shaping forest community development at seedling stage, especially for less
abundant species. The seedling to sapling transition is a critical stage of the
tree life cycle that will determine forest community composition for years to
come. The goal of this project is to determine, using experiments in natural
forests and the greenhouse, the role of pathogens in determining the outcome of
the seedling to sapling transition in relation to the plants' proximity to adult
trees of the same species. Seedlings and saplings will be sampled in three
different forests where all trees greater than 1 centimeter diameter have been
mapped and tagged. These forests in Virginia, Indiana and Wisconsin will provide
a broad geographic sampling of eastern temperate forests. The survival and
growth of seedlings and saplings of several species will be tracked for two
years to determine their rates of mortality and growth around randomly selected
adult trees. The results will inform species selection for greenhouse studies to
determine the factors behind seedling success or failure in the forests. The
researchers predict that rare species in the community will be more affected by
pathogens in the early life stages than more common
species.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Forests are vital to a sustainable human society
and provide an essential renewable resource. It is therefore important to
understand how forests grow and develop. This research will inform conservation
and management efforts of forest systems by highlighting the role that pathogen-
driven mortality has in structuring forest communities. Additionally, it will
provide evidence on how forest regeneration may be affected by climate change by
examining the regional differences in species performance across a latitudinal
gradient. Finally, the researchers will continue their outreach partnerships
with local and national land conservancies to educate the public on the results
of this research and the importance of forest in general.