* 1110223
* STTR Phase I:  Use of Serious Games to Improve Learning Outcomes in Engineering Programs
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2011,12/31/2012
* P. Raju, Toolwire, Inc
* Standard Grant
* Glenn H. Larsen
* 12/31/2012
* USD 165,000.00

This Small Business Technology Transfer Phase 1 project combines the game-based
learning scenario development and business entrepreneurship expertise of
Toolwire Inc., with the instructional material development and evaluation
expertise of the Laboratory for Innovative Technology and Engineering Education
(LITEE) at Auburn University. They worked together to develop a pilot version of
an engineering design Smart Scenario that included information on the Challenger
STS 51-L case study. This was implemented in introductory engineering classes
and an evaluation showed that the students perceived that they learned the
subject matter deeply due to the gaming nature of this pilot. This evaluation
reinforces results from earlier research that shows that serious games have the
ability to improve student engagement, positively affect learning, and help
retain students in engineering. This project will design and develop serious
games in the four topics of engineering design, communications, ethics, and
industrial safety for use in introductory engineering classes. These games will
be implemented in introductory engineering classes. The evaluation methodology
will use a Presage-Pedagogy-Process-Product-model using control and experimental
classes. Data will be collected based on constructs designed to measure the
variables in the 4-P model. The intellectual merit of this proposal is that it
develops, implements, and tests a set of games that emphasize developing
capabilities in addition to content, brings real-world problems into classrooms,
uses gaming-technologies to mediate learning, includes assessment methodology in
the games, and provides students multiple iterations to learn the concepts,
thereby changing the approach to both teaching and learning in an introductory
course.

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project is its ability to
directly provide massively effective parallel education in engineering by being
scalable to different levels of classes, using compelling scenarios that lead to
deep learning, triggering brain chemistry through games that better engages
students in learning while being available anytime, anywhere through secure,
web-based services. This combination of highly engaging ?active learning by
doing? on advanced technology platforms achieves lower costs of delivery,
greater long-term adoption of material in workforce development, improved user
experiences and lower dropout rates. These serious games produce continuous
experiential learning cycles for both students and teachers alike in both
classroom and workplace contexts.