* 1110320
* Dissertation Research:  The Role of Cnidarian Immunity in Pathogenic and Mutualistic Interactions:  A Functional Genomics Approach
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2011,05/31/2013
* C. Drew Harvell, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 05/31/2013
* USD 14,898.00

Animals interact with a variety of microorganims and these interactions range
from harmful to beneficial. One of the most important beneficial relationships
is that between cnidarians (e.g., corals and sea anemones) and single-celled
algae that live within cnidarian tissues. It is this relationship that enables
coral reefs to thrive and to provide a number of ecosystem services. The
stability of this relationship likely involves the interplay between the
cnidarian immune response and the algal symbiont. However, we have a poor
understanding of cnidarian immunity. The proposed research employs microarrays,
a tool for looking at the expression of thousands of genes simultaneously, to
characterize the immunological ?tool kit? of cnidarians and to determine how
this ?tool kit? interacts with both harmful and beneficial microorganisms.

Because cnidarians are relatively simple animals, this study will provide
insight into the development of animal immune systems and the subsequent changes
that allowed for more complex responses. This study will leverage a vast
literature on interactions between animal cells and parasitic protozoans, like
those that cause malaria, to initiate a comparative exploration of the parallels
and novelties of beneficial and harmful interactions. This research will also
enable a better understanding of coral bleaching and disease, both of which are
responsible for substantial coral reef decline. Finally, this research will
support undergraduate training and a number of outreach programs catering to
local middle-school students, undergraduates, and the general public.