* 1110946
* Evaluation of the AGEP Collaborative Research Training:  North Carolina Alliance to Create OpportunityThrough Education
* EHR,HRD
* 08/15/2011,07/31/2013
* Bruce Carney, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Mark Leddy
* 07/31/2013
* USD 149,480.00

Intellectual Merit &lt;br/&gt;This proposal is for the evaluation of a
currently-funded NSF program: The AGEP Collaborative Research Training: North
Carolina Alliance to Create Opportunity Through Education (OPT-ED). In
evaluating the program, the OPT-ED alliance administration and partners seek to
accomplish two objectives: &lt;br/&gt;1. Assess the extent to which OPT-ED has
been successful in meeting the goals of AGEP and its specific objectives; and
&lt;br/&gt;2. Inform the OPT-ED alliance about effective strategies in
accomplishing AGEP goals as it moves forward. &lt;br/&gt;As the OPT-ED alliance
implements strategies that are designed to increase the enrollment and retention
of URM students in STEM disciplines and advance into the professoriate, it is
important to assess the impact of each program component and the strategies that
are most effective in producing the desired outcomes. Evaluation results are
intended to inform OPT-ED alliance partners as they plan future strategies and
activities. It is also intended to inform the alliance about additional partners
that may be included (e.g., community colleges, early childhood educators,
etc.); existing and new resources to tap into; and potentially new concepts to
incorporate. &lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact &lt;br/&gt;The OPT-ED alliance strategies
are designed to broaden the participation of underrepresented groups; namely,
URM doctoral graduates and faculty in STEM fields. The evaluation of OPT-ED
seeks to identify those strategies that have proved to be most effective in
raising the interest of URM students in STEM majors; retaining them through
their college years up to receiving the doctorate degree; and impacting their
decision to pursue STEM faculty positions. Successful strategies have the
potential for replication across other universities at a national level.
&lt;br/&gt;Moreover, the evaluation will serve to assess the extent to which the
alliance serves as a model for replication. One of the questions the evaluation
seeks to answer is the role each partner plays in enhancing the enrollment and
retention of URM students in STEM majors. Evaluation results will identify the
most critical type of partners, the type and level of networking and
collaboration across partners, and the barriers that must be overcome for
implementing a successful alliance. &lt;br/&gt;The national concern over the
small presence of URM groups in STEM fields is clearly warranted. The OPT-ED
alliance is established to implement strategies and activities that raise URM
student interest in STEM disciplines and help them overcome obstacles to their
retention until completion of doctoral degrees. This evaluation will identify
critical partnerships and successful strategies in enhancing URM student
enrollment and retention in STEM majors and careers.