* 1110441
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: The causes and consequences of asymmetric dispersal: an experimental approach
* BIO,DEB
* 05/01/2011,04/30/2013
* Robert Fletcher, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Saran Twombly
* 04/30/2013
* USD 14,954.00

The ability of organisms to move among patches has broad implications for
evolutionary and ecological processes such as gene flow and population
persistence. Understanding these processes often rests on the assumption that
movement among patches is symmetric. In reality, individual movement frequently
follows environmental cues or tends to be directed toward higher quality habitat
patches, and is asymmetric. This study proposes to quantify the effects of
asymmetric or directional dispersal on metapopulation colonization-extinction
dynamics and, therefore, persistence of patchy populations. It relies on field
experiments to test how different behavioral mechanisms affect the magnitude of
movement asymmetries in a common insect. Results will lead to more accurate
measures of population connectivity and thus to more accurate metapopulation
models&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Results from the study will be made available in
different formats to four distinct groups - scientists, managers and
conservationists, the general public, and young students. One of the
investigators is Hispanic and serves as an effective role model for
undergraduates from under-served groups. Undergraduates from these groups will
be recruited to the project, and diverse social media (such as YouTube,
TeacherTube) will be used to disseminate research results to young scientists
and teachers. Manuals for managers and policy makers will be produced in both
English and Spanish; these will explain metapopulation theory and how to conduct
and analyze metapopulation experiments.