* 1110876
* International Summer School on Biocomplexity from Gene to System, Istanbul, Turkey on July 1-7, 2011
* ENG,CBET
* 05/01/2011,04/30/2013
* Metin Akay, University of Houston
* Standard Grant
* Kaiming Ye
* 04/30/2013
* USD 23,000.00

1110876, Akay&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The biological sciences have become more
quantitative and information-driven science since emerging computational and
mathematical tools facilitate collection and analysis of vast amounts of
biological data. Complexity analysis of biological systems provides biological
knowledge for the organization, management and mining of biological data by
using advanced computational tools. The biological data are inherently complex
and non-uniform and collected at multiple temporal and spatial scales. The
investigations of complex biological systems and processes require an extensive
collaboration between biologists, mathematicians, computer scientists and
engineering to improve our understanding of complex biological process from gene
to system.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The main objective of this summer school is to
train undergraduate, graduate biological science students and post-doctoral
fellows in Bionano Science, Engineering and Technology (BNSET). The system level
understanding of biology will be derived using mathematical and engineering
methods to understand complex biological processes. It will expose the attendees
with biology background to the latest technological developments. It will also
be helpful to students in computer science and mathematics who are interested in
doing research in BNSET, since the summer school provides exceptional insights
into the fundamental challenges in science, medicine and
engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The summer schools are excellent learning,
teaching and brain storming opportunities&lt;br/&gt;for students, post-docs and
young researchers as well as the summer school faculty. The summer school will
stimulate further interdisciplinary research and collaborations among engineers,
mathematicians, computer scientists, and medical researchers, and will help in
identifying new, challenging directions in complex biological science and
bioengineering research with focus on bionano science, engineering and
technology. This project will support the travel of 10 people (7 graduate
students and 3 post-doctoral fellows) the 10th International Summer School on
Biocomplexity from System to Gene to be held in Istanbul, Turkey on July 1-7,
2011; these students and faculty will interact with the participants from Turkey
and other countries.