* 1110607
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Investigating the Functions and Phenotypes of Recently Originated Genes and Their Roles in Lineage-Specific Evolution
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2011,11/30/2011
* Sidi Chen, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* George Gilchrist
* 11/30/2011
* USD 11,136.00

To understand the evolutionary diversification of animals, the applicants will
investigate the variation of phenotypes and their genetic basis in multiple
species of fruitflies in the genus Drosophila. The connection to diverse
phenotypic features has been mapped to protein-coding changes, cis-regulatory
changes and lineage-specific genes. The applicants' recent discoveries showed
that many young genes played essential roles in organism development. This
research will (1) investigate the reproductive contribution of young genes using
the evolutionary genetic analysis and gene silencing techniques, (2) detect
their interactions with other genes in the genome using the gene-chip based
techniques of experimental genomics, and (3) study their roles in the species
divergence by comparative analysis of related species. These efforts will
advance the understanding of fundamental problems of gene evolution and
phenotypic evolution. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;These studies will bring conceptual
innovations in the understanding of biological systems. The applicants will also
create new data and share with the public. Furthermore, the applicants will
train undergraduate students, visiting students from other schools and different
disciplines, to encourage more talented undergraduates to enter graduate schools
and nurture cross-disciplinary investigation. The applicants will purposely
initiate more collaborate with multiple research groups in various institutions
both nationally and internationally. The knowledge on gene origination is
important to the understanding of human evolution. The proposed project will be
of general interest to the broad audience including scientists and non-
scientists and the discoveries from this project will play a role in scientific
education for the general public.