* 1110658
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH:  Linking ecological divergence and reproductive isolation: the role of chromosomal fusions
* BIO,DEB
* 05/15/2011,04/30/2013
* Emma Berdan, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 04/30/2013
* USD 14,965.00

The observation that many closely related species differ in chromosome number
and morphology has lead to the idea that chromosomal rearrangements (fusions,
fissions, inversions, etc) may be contribute to reproductive isolation (the
inability to interbreed). Recent evidence has linked certain types of
chromosomal rearrangements (inversions) and the development of reproductive
isolation. However, other types of common rearrangements, such as chromosomal
fusions, have yet to be investigated in this capacity. The proposed studies will
determine the importance of a chromosomal fusion to the development of
reproductive isolation between two killifish in the genus Lucania. This will be
accomplished using a three stage design. First a breeding design will create
hybrids that vary in their possession of the fused chromosome. Second, these
animals will be measured for several traits important in reproductive isolation.
Third, the animals will be genotyped to determine if they possess the fused
chromosome. This will allow for the detection of any relationship between
reproductive isolation and the fused chromosome.

This is one of the first studies to empirically examine the effects of a
chromosomal fusion on reproductive isolation between two recently diverged
species. This project will impact the Lucania community through the development
of new molecular markers as well as the creation of two linkage maps.
Participation of undergraduates will continue to be a priority and will involve
hands on behavioral and molecular experience. In addition, a student with
disability will be invited to perform a related research project.