* 1110622
* Atmospheric Boundary Identification and Delineation Experiment III (ABIDE-3)
* GEO,AGS
* 08/01/2011,07/31/2015
* Kevin Knupp, University of Alabama in Huntsville
* Continuing Grant
* Chungu Lu
* 07/31/2015
* USD 732,107.00

This research seeks to improve understanding of the physics of convergent
boundary zones (CBZ), focusing on the neutral to stable boundary layer, within
which CBZ's and convective initiation (CI) are poorly understood. Two primary
and closely related objectives include comprehensive investigations
of:&lt;br/&gt;1. CBZ kinematics and CI during the Afternoon to Evening
Transition (AET);&lt;br/&gt;2. Characteristics of CBZs (e.g., bores, gravity
waves) within the stable (nocturnal) boundary layer and their impact on cloud
formation and CI.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project involves data collection,
analysis, and numerical modeling activities. A major component of this research
will be accomplished by deploying a mobile X-band dual polarization radar (MAX)
and a mobile profiling system (MIPS) within a meso-Gamma-scale mesonet when
CBZ's are anticipated from mid-afternoon to evening. The MIPS will be embedded
within one lobe of a high-resolution dual Doppler network (18 km baseline),
formed by the MAX and a fixed site C-band radar. Additional surface observations
will include fixed and mobile platforms. The research team also plans to use
data from the Department of Energy's Atmospheric Radiation Measurement-Southern
Great Plains (ARM SGP) profiling site in Oklahoma, combined with multiple
Doppler radar observations from a new network of radars installed around the ARM
SGP central site. Numerical simulations, designed to complement the
observations, will provide additional details on boundary layer and CI processes
inferred from the observations. Results of this project will be compared to
International H2O project (and other) studies, which have shown a highly 3-D
structure of CBZ's within deep convective boundary layers, due to interactions
of large eddies with cold front and drylines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
merit. &lt;br/&gt;This project will provide considerable advances in our
understanding of the physics of CBZ's and CI by examining these phenomena in a
parameter space (neutral to stable) that has not been comprehensively explored
in previous studies. The unique feature of this project is its emphasis on the
AET and nocturnal boundary layer (neutral to stable conditions). Since the MAX
and MIPS are mobile platforms, they will be utilized in a preconfigured dual
Doppler network when CBZs are expected during the mid-afternoon to evening time
periods. This flexibility will provide comprehensive datasets at low cost and
low risk when compared to limited duration field campaigns. In addition, data
from the ARM SGP site (northern OK) will be monitored and analyzed similarly.
Both experimental locations will provide comprehensive data from wind profilers,
vertically pointing radars, balloon soundings, ground-based IR/microwave
profilers, and multiple Doppler radar arrays. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
impacts. &lt;br/&gt;Improved forecasting of CI, lightning, severe weather
(tornadoes), and boundary-layer atmosphere transports (air quality) represent
significant societal benefits of this research. The comprehensive nature of
measurements (and the 24/7 capability) will increase probability of
serendipitous scientific discoveries. The data collected at the Huntsville and
Lamont (OK) sites, and the University of Alabama in Huntsville (UAH)
instrumentation, will be utilized extensively in PI's (i) two graduate level
courses, Boundary Layer Meteorology and Ground-Based Remote Sensing; and (ii) a
book Ground-Based Remote Sensing. Two UAH graduate students and one postdoctoral
associate will be actively engaged in all aspects of the field campaign and
subsequent modeling activities. The UAH platforms will be made available to
other UAH students who have research interests in related topics. The project
will support and utilize MIPS and MAX, the former of which has been utilized in
numerous scientific projects over the last decade. The datasets will contribute
to other disciplines, such as mesoscale/microscale structure of fronts, gravity
waves in the severe storms environment, boundary layer process, and properties
of biological flyers.