* 1110634
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Aggressive Signaling and Fitness Consequences in a New World Warbler
* BIO,IOS
* 06/01/2011,05/31/2013
* Jeffrey Podos, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Michelle Elekonich
* 05/31/2013
* USD 14,987.00

Disputes often arise among animals competing for limited resources. In such
circumstances, animals may avoid direct combat through use of stereotyped
communication signals, such as visual or vocal displays. Prior studies by the
co-PI on vocal signaling in a songbird, the black-throated blue warbler, showed
that two vocal display features are particularly "honest" signals of threat, in
terms of forecasting future aggression. Specifically, the production of
extremely quiet songs ("soft" songs) and a certain song category ("type II"
songs) both reliably predict whether a bird will subsequently attack a model
opponent. The first part of proposed research will test whether these two signal
features convey differing levels of threat, and if and how birds may escalate
aggressive interactions by modulating these two song features either alone or in
sequence. Towards this end, a field experiment will simulate interactive song
contests that escalate in intensity. Birds that respond with type II songs
during low levels of escalation are predicted to give soft songs during higher
stages of escalation, with each higher stage becoming a more reliable predictor
of eventual attack. This experiment will indicate whether animal disputes follow
a hierarchical "ladder" of escalation, as has been predicted in recent
theoretical work. The second part of proposed research asks if and how animals
benefit through their use of threat displays. Natural variation among males in
threat display use will be documented, and "winners" and "losers" of vocal
interactions coded based on who backs down first. Genetic paternity analysis
will provide estimates of correlations between threat displays and reproductive
success. Males that more frequently use threat displays and "win" more
interactions against opponents are predicted to be more successful at siring
offspring. This project will provide field research experience for
undergraduates, and will be showcased in outreach activities to elementary
school students.