* 1110957
* EAGER: Dosage and Small RNA Regulation of Imprinting and Seed Development
* BIO,MCB
* 05/01/2011,04/30/2015
* Z. Jeffrey Chen, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* Karen Cone
* 04/30/2015
* USD 359,499.00

Intellectual Merit: Seed size is important to crop domestication and fitness in
natural populations and is largely affected by the balance of maternal and
paternal genomes in endosperm, tissue produced inside the seeds of most
flowering plants around the time of fertilization. This genome balance can be
disrupted, resulting in effects on imprinted genes, expression of genes in a
parent-of-origin specific manner, and seed size. In Arabidopsis thaliana,
increased paternal genome dosage can result in larger seeds, whereas increased
maternal genome dosage leads to smaller seeds, suggesting that the balance of
maternal and paternal genomes affects endosperm and seed development. In the
developing seed a major class of short-interfering RNAs (siRNAs), are maternally
expressed. Genome-wide demethylation occurs in endosperm during seed
development, suggesting that small RNAs serve as the factors responsible for the
parental genome balance, leading to expression changes in candidate genes
essential for seed development. It is likely that maternal siRNAs can regulate
expression of protein-coding genes important to seed development. In this EAGER
project, small RNAs and their targets that affect imprinting and seed will be
characterized, the mechanism by which maternal expression of small RNAs is
established will be addressed, and it will be determined when and how parent-of-
origin effects are established during endosperm
development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: Seed production is vital to
agriculture, food security, renewable resources, and human nutrition. At the
mechanistic level, results from this research will reveal a novel biological
role for small RNAs in regulating gene expression and seed development. Novel
small RNA targets and candidate genes will be identified and characterized in
this project, and the functions of selected candidates will be rigorously
tested. A better understanding of how small RNAs and their targets regulate seed
development will ultimately help us improve productivity and fertility of plant
and animals. Plant seeds, DNA sequences, and small RNA and gene expression data
will be regularly deposited to Arabidopsis Biological Resource Center (ABRC),
GenBank, and Gene Expression Omnibus (GEO), respectively. Throughout the
project, interdisciplinary training opportunities, including genomics,
epigenetics, molecular genetics, plant biology, and computational biology, will
be provided for graduate and undergraduate students in this project.