* 1110202
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Testing for declining fitness and error catastrophe in adapting asexual  populations
* BIO,DEB
* 05/01/2011,04/30/2012
* Paul Sniegowski, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 04/30/2012
* USD 13,350.00

Because the process of mutation introduces new genetic variation at random, it
has been thought that too high a mutation rate will cause a population to go
extinct. A phenomenon known as error catastrophe is predicted to occur when the
mutation rate of a population surpasses the point at which the accumulation of
mutations overpowers the strength of natural selection to maintain the fittest
genotype. Recent work gives a quantitative prediction for the necessary
relationship between genomic mutation rate and fitness variation in a population
that will precipitate error catastrophe. In the current study we will conduct a
detailed experimental characterization of a set of asexual bacterial populations
engineered to have extraordinarily high mutation rates. These populations have
been observed to decline to extinction in the laboratory, suggesting the
occurrence of error catastrophe. The results may help explain the longstanding
observation that many asexual populations are short-lived. In addition, the
results may provide a basic science rationale for novel approaches to the
treatment of viral and bacterial infections and cancers.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research is novel in that it is the first well-
controlled experimental test of error catastrophe. This project is associated
with several broad impacts. Two undergraduates and a high school student have
contributed to the preliminary results. At present, one undergraduate at the
University of Pennsylvania is directly involved in related research.
Additionally, a pilot program is being launched in our department which will
expose local high school students to research in the laboratory. This project
combines both theoretical and experimental components that students of varying
backgrounds may take interest in. The results of this project will likely may
provide the basis for another undergraduate student?s thesis project which may
ultimately produce published research.&lt;br/&gt;