* 1110588
* Dissertation Research: Determining the Mechanisms of Recurrent Cline Evolution in White Clover (Trifolium repens)
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2011,05/31/2013
* Nicholas Kooyers, Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 05/31/2013
* USD 13,539.00

Investigating the spatial and temporal scales of adaptation has proven difficult
because the molecular basis of ecologically important traits is often complex.
This project examines in white clover the process of adaptation using five
independent geographical gradients in a well-characterized trait called
cyanogenesis (cyanide release after tissue damage). Specifically, this work
compares genetic variation throughout the clover genome to variation in the two
genes underlying cyanogenesis, with the goal of understanding the degree to
which natural selection, gene flow, and other processes are conserved across
gradients. The origins of the adaptive variation in each gradient will also be
investigated. Further, ecological experiments will be used to identify the
ecological trade-offs that maintain cyanogenesis variation within populations.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Understanding the processes that create and maintain
ecologically important variation is fundamental in making predictions regarding
species responses to changing environments and establishing future policy. This
proposal investigates these processes in a tractable natural system. This work
will answer broad questions about adaptation while providing a useful case study
for predicting species responses. This proposal carries a large educational
outreach component for undergraduates and high school students, using clover
cyanogenesis as a basic teaching tool for understanding the connection between
genetics and ecology. The project will also provide training to young scientists
and high school teachers in laboratory and field settings.