* 1110538
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: An interdisciplinary approach to testing intraspecific evolutionary processes
* BIO,DEB
* 06/15/2011,05/31/2014
* David Jacobs, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 05/31/2014
* USD 14,960.00

Several mechanisms are known for generating new species, but studying these
processes in the ocean is much more difficult than on land because such
processes are frequently not apparent. The work presented here aims to better
understand how the movement and changing shape of continents and oceans affect
living organisms over time. The Gulf of California is only about 6 million years
old and is separated from the Pacific Ocean by the Baja California peninsula.
This work examines how fishes originally colonized the Gulf, whether in the past
a seaway once connected presently separated populations, and whether currently
separated fish populations are becoming different species today. First, their
DNA is studied to reveal the relationships between these populations and reveal
their past migratory events. Second, the rocks on the peninsula are examined
because they reflect the region?s past environment and would indicate whether or
not some of the land was under water in the past.

Formation of new species is a principle contributor to biodiversity across the
world, and Baja California has a greater number and diversity of species than
expected from its size and location alone. The size, location, and climatic
characteristics of estuarine habitat are always changing, but on too long a
timescale for scientists to observe. This molecular work will help understand
what processes have generated and are maintaining southern and Baja California?s
diverse estuarine life. Disseminating information from this work to high school
and undergraduate students (through mentorships) and to residents (through
educational YouTube videos) promotes conservation awareness. Working with
authorities like the NFWS and NERRS helps focus conservation efforts not only on
regions that are diverse today, but that are likely to preserve and generate new
species in the future.