* 1110151
* BREAD: Toward Development of a Vaccine for Contagious Bovine Pleuropneumonia (CBPP)
* BIO,IOS
* 12/01/2011,04/30/2019
* Sanjay Vashee, J. Craig Venter Institute, Inc.
* Continuing Grant
* Diane Jofuku Okamuro
* 04/30/2019
* USD 4,110,805.00

PI: Sanjay Vashee [J. Craig Venter Institute (JCVI)]&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;CoPIs:
JÃ¶rg Jores and Vishvanath Nene [International Livestock Research Institute
(ILRI), Nairobi, Kenya]; Carole Lartigue, Alain Blanchard, and Pascal Sirand-
Pugnet [National Institute for Agronomy Research (INRA), Bordeaux, France]
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Senior Personnel: John Glass
(JCVI)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Contagious bovine pleuropneumonia (CBPP), caused by
Mycoplasma mycoides subspecies mycoides (Mmm), is an economically very important
livestock disease within Africa that limits the availability of protein sources
for nutrition and restricts trade. The current control relies on a live vaccine
that has shortcomings, such as, limited efficacy and severe side effects.
International efforts to create a rational vaccine to protect against CBPP have
been thwarted because of an almost complete lack of genetic tools for this
species. As a result, it has been difficult to apply the tools of modern biology
to this pressing African need. In this project, the International Livestock
Research Institute (ILRI), the National Institute for Agronomical Research
(INRA) and the J. Craig Venter Institute (JCVI) join forces to explore the use
of new synthetic biology technologies to genetically manipulate Mmm genomes to
identify virulence traits with the ultimate goal of creating strains that can be
developed as live vaccine derivatives. These JCVI synthetic biology approaches
are a transformational advance in the ability to design and engineer novel
bacteria with extraordinary properties to serve human needs. The JCVI work was
done using a closely related species to Mmm, Mycoplasma mycoides subsp. capri
(Mmc). During the course of this study, JCVI will continue its work with Mmc,
INRA will develop the synthetic biology tools for Mmm as well as the pneumonia-
causing strain of Mmc and ILRI will implement the tools and test mutants using
in vitro and in vivo assays. While the long term perspective is to use key
synthetic biology technologies to produce a safe and efficient Mmm vaccine
strain by rationally modifying its genome, the current research is meant to lay
the foundation for the development of a modern CBPP vaccine. Several approaches
will be pursued. First, the pan genome of the mycoides cluster will be
characterized to identify target virulence genes for subsequent mutagenesis.
Second, the JCVI synthetic biology tools will be adapted to Mmm at INRA and the
synthetic biology technology will be transferred to ILRI in Africa. Third, a
caprine model for pulmonary mycoplasma infections will be established with the
available tools using the closely related pathogen Mmc. Lastly, the mycoplasma
toolbox will be expanded using Mmc as a model in order to enhance the capacity
to produce modern Mmm vaccines. The consequences of success will be dramatic and
pervasive as not only a novel approach to making vaccines against infectious
diseases caused by mycoides cluster members will have been demonstrated but
newly developed technical methods will have been transferred to a major research
institution in Africa that is capable of sustaining and improving upon what JCVI
and INRA seek to accomplish.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research project will
have a major impact on livestock farming in Africa where CBPP is a significant
problem. The methods used here will enable the development of vaccine candidates
that could not be created previously for this disease. This study also has the
potential to revolutionize the area of mycoplasma biology because the methods
discussed here will be applied to other members of mycoides cluster and may be
applied to mycoplasma pathogens of humans, animals and plants for which there
are no tractable genetic methods. An important component involves training of
postdoctoral fellows, graduate students as well as undergraduate students as
summer interns in the foundations of molecular research. The students will gain
valuable insight to cutting-edge research areas such as the new discipline of
synthetic biology. The research will also help capacity building of a research
institute in a developing country and provide scientific training to an
underrepresented segment of society. Information from this study will in the
long term benefit the livestock-dependent people by enabling them to increase
their protein source from cattle and by reducing restrictions on the trade of
cattle and bovine products. The collaborating institutions recognize the need to
make the biological resources available to the scientific community. Genome
sequencing data of the mycoides cluster will be deposited as rapidly as possible
in publically accessible databases such as Genbank
(http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/genbank/). All biological resources developed under
this project will be made available to outside researchers through ILRI and INRA
who have agreed to serve as repositories for the strains and to review all
requests for materials upon receipt.