* 1110787
* Dissertation Research: Understanding introgression dynamics through a comparative and genome-wide analysis of a tropical suture zone
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2011,05/31/2013
* Sonal Singhal, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 05/31/2013
* USD 14,998.00

Understanding how speciation happens is a long-standing and exciting challenge
in biology. Zones of secondary contact, or areas where previously-isolated
lineages meet and interact, are one way to test hypotheses and theories about
speciation. This study investigates a unique system in the Australian
rainforest, in which there are over twenty overlapping zones of secondary
contact. This study considers four such contacts within a closely-related group
of lizards to investigate patterns of introgression, or gene exchange, across
the zone. In particular, this study examines how evolutionary forces, such as
demographic processes and selection, influence introgression, and more
generally, the evolution of barriers between species. To test these predictions,
high-throughput sequencing will be used to develop genomic resources, and fine-
scale sampling and genotyping of populations in the contact zone will be used to
measure rates of introgression.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will serve as
an excellent vehicle to engage with students and to conduct outreach activities.
Undergraduate students in both the United States and Australia will develop
their own independent laboratory and field projects related to this project.
Additionally, this research will be shared with underserved middle school and
community college students through outreach programs. Finally, this research
will generate new genomic and bioinformatic tools for use by the greater
research community.