* 1110773
* Dissertation Research: Costs of Plasticity in Plant Defense: Sexual and Asexual Fitness Across Years
* BIO,DEB
* 05/01/2011,04/30/2014
* Nora Underwood, Florida State University
* Standard Grant
* Maureen Kearney
* 04/30/2014
* USD 14,688.00

One characteristic of invasive weeds that may contribute to their success is
their ability to actively respond to herbivores. Understanding the spread of
weeds therefore requires studying how these responses, called "induced
defenses", may evolve. While many invasive weeds live for many years and can
reproduce asexually through underground stems, previous studies of defense
evolution have only measured sexual reproduction (seed set) over one year. This
project examines the evolution of induced defenses in the weed Solanum
carolinense by using genetic analysis to measure both sexual and asexual
reproduction. Sexual reproduction and defenses have already been measured in an
ongoing field experiment over one year; re-sprouts from this experiment will be
identified using microsatellite DNA analysis to quantify reproduction in a
second year. The relationship between defenses and combined reproduction will
indicate how induced defenses are expected to evolve in natural
populations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will address how herbivores
affect the evolution and asexual spread of a noxious weed that is also a host
for several economically important insect pests, including the Colorado potato
beetle. Better understanding of how weeds succeed is relevant to developing
better management of weeds and invasive species. Additionally, this project will
develop genetic markers for future studies and provide undergraduate research
training.