* 1110552
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH:  The evolutionary history of beryciforms and the contribution of signal and noise to phylogenetic inference in multi-locus datasets
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2011,05/31/2014
* Thomas Near, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Simon Malcomber
* 05/31/2014
* USD 14,950.00

The evolutionary pathways that culminated in the present day diversity of deep
sea fishes remain poorly understood. Beryciform and stephanoberyciform fishes
have successfully transitioned between near shore and deep-sea habitats multiple
times over their 100 million year history. Thus, they provide an exceptional
opportunity for investigating the evolutionary dynamics associated with
transitions between these extreme habitats. This project will provide the most
detailed phylogenetic study of this radiation to date, providing the necessary
infrastructure for future investigations into the mode and tempo of
diversification across deep-sea fish groups. &lt;br/&gt;Our utilization of these
fishes as a model group for further developing phylogenetic theory also sets a
new standard for the screening of molecular markers for phylogenetic
experimental design. A common question in phylogenetic inference concerns the
selection of genes to employ in a given study. This project will empirically
depict the utility of screening markers for a given question a priori, and
demonstrate the potential for incorrect, yet strongly supported, inferences when
loci are not carefully scrutinized. This presents an objective metric from which
to screen the utility of sequence data for a phylogenetic problem that is
applicable to any taxonomic group. This project also provides training in
phylogenetics, bioinformatics, and museum techniques to undergraduate students
and further contributes specimens and data to museum collections and public
databases.