* 1110557
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Inducible egg stacking defends against parasitism in a seed beetle
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/2011,06/30/2013
* Martha Hunter, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Saran Twombly
* 06/30/2013
* USD 8,238.00

A broad range of organisms appears able to predict the harshness of future
environments and to change the quality of their offspring accordingly. This
project focuses on a common beetle that lays stacks of two eggs in order to
protect the lower egg from an egg parasitoid and to increase its survival.. Top
eggs have reduced mass relative to bottom eggs, and do not complete development,
even in the absnce of parasitism. While stacking eggs improves the quality of
the bottom-most eggs, it requires more resources and therefore decreases the
number of offspring that can be produced. Female beetles anticipate this
tradeoff by reducing the nutrients allocated to the sacrificial (top) eggs
before they are laid, but the cues eliciting nutrient reallocation and stacking
behavior are currently unknown. The researchers will initiate a series of
experiments to determine the specific environmental cues responsible for
stacking behavior and the sensitivity of female beetles to these cues. They
predict that both chemical and volatile cues from the parasitoid cause the
stacking response; and that beetles adjust the number of stacks they produce in
response to parasitoid density.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The beetle-wasp interaction
system offers special opportunities for communicating the excitement of
scientific discovery to young people. The research has been used in K-12 classes
and public settings to illustrate insect diversity and to teach ecological
interactions such as herbivory and parasitism. Over the course of the project,
outreach using this interspecific interaction will be continued through an
elementary and middle school outreach program at the University of Arizona,
Insect Discovery. In addition, undergraduate students recruited from under-
served groups in biology will participate in the project.