* 1110492
* Dissertation Research: Molecular systematics, evolution, and historical biogeography in Corybas (Orchidaceae)
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2011,05/31/2014
* Thomas Givnish, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* David Mindell
* 05/31/2014
* USD 14,950.00

The helmet orchid genus Corybas contains about 140 species with exquisitely
complex flowers, distributed from Asia to Australia and other parts of the
southwest Pacific basin. Corybas has been poorly studied due to their small size
and the large number of species in tropical montane forests. The goals of this
project are to use DNA variation from a broad sample of species to examine
relationships within Corybas; to reconstruct the historical timing and
geographic patterns of distributional changes and species diversification; and
to examine the frequency and ecological context for changes in flower structure.
One group of closely related species in Australia will be studied in detail to
investigate these questions on a finer scale.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research
will result in the discovery and description of new species, in development of a
revised classification, and in helping set conservation priorities by
quantifying patterns of genetic uniqueness and diversity. The results will
provide an important context for future studies on the ecology of individual
species, and will further our understanding of historical biogeography and
speciation. This project involves substantial collaboration with foreign
researchers, including several in developing countries, and will contribute to
the professional development of scientists in these regions.