* 1110653
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Is mitochondrial DNA lying about its age? Assessing diversification history in a species complex of sea cucumbers (Echinodermata: Holothuroidea)
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2011,05/31/2014
* Gustav Paulay, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 05/31/2014
* USD 14,996.00

Given that species diverge mostly in geographical isolation, the dynamics of
local diversity is governed by the time it takes for these species to co-occur
(secondary sympatry). Based on mitochondrial DNA and morphological evidence,
some echinoderms seem able to achieve secondary sympatry an order of magnitude
faster than other groups of marine invertebrates. The proposed research seeks to
investigate whether these patterns could alternatively be caused by
introgressive hybridization masking an earlier divergence, or reflect high
levels of intraspecific polymorphism obscuring similar rates of secondary
sympatry. To tease apart these hypotheses, the parameters of the isolation-with-
migration (IM) model will be estimated from a multilocus dataset in a complex of
sea cucumbers comprised of four putative, recently diverged, species.
Furthermore, computer simulations will be used to determine whether the history
of some loci deviates from this model, suggesting introgressive
hybridization.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Results will contribute to our understanding
of species limits in challenging groups, and diversification in the richest
marine biogeographic region. They will also generate hypotheses on the
mechanisms involved in the generation of this diversity. In particular, the
estimation of gene flow and population sizes will lead to predictions on the
role of these demographic parameters in speciation. Furthermore, these estimates
will help improve stock delineation and estimation of sea cucumbers, a major
marine resource in tropical coastal communities.