* 1110468
* DISSERATION RESEARCH: Toward resolving lecanicephalidean familial relationships using morphology and molecules
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2011,11/30/2013
* Kirsten Jensen, University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Simon Malcomber
* 11/30/2013
* USD 14,555.00

Tapeworms are gut-dwelling parasites known from all vertebrate classes.
Tapeworms of sharks and rays have been useful bioindicators of elasmobranch
migration, distribution, and feeding. The proposed research focuses on the
elasmobranch tapeworm order Lecanicephalidea. Recent contributions to
lecanicephalidean diversity (29 new species and 6 new genera in the past 10
years) have created a lag in our understanding family-level relationships of
genera within this order resulting in the need for an updated classification.
The specific goals of this study are to: (1) generate the first molecular
phylogeny for a subset of lecanicephalidean genera; and (2) identify
morphological characters supporting family-level relationships using standard
techniques (light and scanning microscopy and histology) and novel techniques,
traditionally not used in this group (transmission electron
microscopy).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study will add to our knowledge of
tapeworm biodiversity, evolution, and to host-parasite relationships. Increased
understanding of evolutionary relationships in this group will hone our
predictions about diversity in selected hosts and geographic areas. A series of
parasitology lectures will be taught to Kansas high school biology student,
introducing Kansas parasites in the classroom and field, as well as elasmobranch
tapeworms and their hosts. Collaborations will be fostered between
parasitologists in the U.S., Mexico, and Czech Republic.