* 1110924
* The Universities Network for Leadership Through Diversity (UN-LTD): Developing a Successful Masters-to-PhD Bridge Program for Broadening Participation in Science and Engineering
* EDU,EES
* 07/01/2011,06/30/2014
* Dennis Hall, Vanderbilt University
* Standard Grant
* Mark Leddy
* 06/30/2014
* USD 149,834.00

Vanderbilt proposes the UN-LTD Partnership as an innovative pathway to the PhD
and beyond for substantially broadening participation of underrepresented
minorities in STEM. The nucleus of UN-LTD is the highly successful Fisk-
Vanderbilt Masters-to-PhD Bridge program, in which students earn a Master's
degree at Fisk as a stepping stone to the PhD program at Vanderbilt. Vanderbilt
and Fisk are joined in this AGEP by Delaware State University (DSU). Columbia
University and neighboring Hunter College will serve as an independent proving
ground for transferring and replicating the model. UN-LTD's path to the PhD and
to the professoriate emphasizes research engagement and deliberate mentorship by
faculty at PhD granting institutions to help students cross the aspirational and
institutional transitions. The educational components of UN-LTD include
recruitment, graduate training and mentoring, research internships, networking
and professional development, along with deliberate preparation for the next
level of STEM engagement. With this planning grant they will be developing their
program in preparation for a full AGEP.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of their
full AGEP program will be to produce at least 10 times the U.S. institutional
average number of minority PhD recipients in these disciplines, and to sustain
this level in steady state.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;UN-LTD's three objectives will
be to:&lt;br/&gt;1. Expand the Fisk-Vanderbilt Masters-to-PhD Bridge Program to
include all core STEM disciplines at Fisk and Vanderbilt: Physics, Astronomy,
Materials Science, Biology, Chemistry, Mathematics, Computer Science, and
Engineering.&lt;br/&gt;2. Extend the Bridge Program in partnership with Delaware
State University. The resulting Fisk- Vanderbilt-DSU Masters-to-PhD Bridge
Program will permit students to transition from the MS at Fisk to the PhD at
Vanderbilt, from the MS at Fisk to the PhD at DSU, or from the MS at DSU to the
PhD at Vanderbilt.&lt;br/&gt;3. Export the Bridge Program to Columbia University
and its neighboring partners, as an experiment in knowledge transfer and
institutional-change model portability and
adaptability.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With this planning grant, they will pilot
four key components of their eventual full AGEP program: (1) A multi-tiered
management structure, designed to integrally involve key stakeholders both
vertically and horizontally through the UN-LTD alliance; (2) a multi-faceted
approach to program evaluation, research, and dissemination, designed to
document our successes and failures, track our progress, inform ongoing
refinement of their AGEP program, and contribute to the emerging body of
scholarship on the science of broadening participation; (3) a discipline-by-
discipline expansion of the Masters-to-PhD Bridge Program model; and (4) a
concentric mentoring structure, including leadership development for
postdoctoral associates&lt;br/&gt;who also serve as near-peer mentors for the
AGEP graduate fellows.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit includes the
synergistic areas of collaborative research in biology, chemistry, physics,
materials science, astronomy, mathematics, computer science, and engineering
that will engage MS and PhD students at the alliance institutions; the
refinement, demonstration, and replication of a department level model of
institutional change that will be proven to nurture the success and PhD
attainment of underrepresented minority students; and thorough evaluation to
monitor the approaches, recruiting, experiences, and retention in the various
fields to see if there are differences, understand the causes of the
differences, identify best practices, and design interventions that overcome
problems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts include dramatic increases in the
production of well prepared, underrepresented minority PhDs by the participating
institutions; rich interdisciplinary interaction and cross-fertilization of
ideas among the faculty and students in the diverse STEM disciplines involved in
UN-LTD; the enhancement of research capacity and graduate STEM programs at the
participating minority-serving institutions; and positive transformations in the
departmental culture at the research universities to become more inclusive,
supportive, and nurturing of talent.