* 1110605
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH:  Patterns of Adaptive Radiation in Sphaerodactylus Geckos
* BIO,DEB
* 05/15/2011,04/30/2014
* Richard Glor, University of Rochester
* Standard Grant
* Maureen Kearney
* 04/30/2014
* USD 15,340.00

Adaptive radiation is the diversification of an ancestral lineage into a
multitude of ecologically adapted species. This study will use the West Indian
radiation of Sphaerodactylus geckos to investigate two hypotheses emerging from
recent work on adaptive radiation: (1) adaptation is replicated among radiations
isolated by time or geography, and (2) access to ecological opportunity drives
diversification. Sphaerodactylus is an ideal group to test these hypotheses
because multiple evolutionarily independent radiations occur across the West
Indies. This study will address each hypothesis by combining morphological and
habitat-use data with phylogenetic comparative methods and geometric
morphometrics, to assess the extent of replicated adaptation and the importance
of access to ecological resources in the diversification of
Sphaerodactylus.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Throughout this project, undergraduate
assistants will be trained in a variety of field, laboratory, and analytical
techniques. Results from this study will be disseminated through scholarly
journals and conferences, as well as through journals and symposia organized by
gecko enthusiasts. Furthermore, results from this study will be incorporated
into a pre-collegiate summer program at the University of Rochester, to expose
students to both emerging research and applied science. Finally, this study will
contribute to the conservation of these poorly known geckos.