* 1110116
* Support for Student and Postdoc Participation in 44th CIRP ICMS 2011; Madison, Wisconsin; June 1-3, 2011
* ENG,CMMI
* 03/01/2011,02/29/2012
* Neil Duffie, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Zhijian Pei
* 02/29/2012
* USD 19,200.00

This grant provides funding to offset the costs for 30 students and postdocs
from U.S. educational institutions to attend the 44th CIRP International
Conference on Manufacturing Systems (ICMS 2011) to be held June 1-3, 2011, in
Madison, Wisconsin. The conference provides an international forum for
researchers to discuss innovation and the state of the art in the broad field of
manufacturing systems, and to disseminate their recent advances and share their
views in this area. More than 150 abstracts have been submitted on topics
ranging from machining to sustainable manufacturing to maintenance logistics.
The conference will consist of 2 days of technical presentations and keynote
speeches, as well as tours of the University of Wisconsin-Madison?s
manufacturing laboratories for research and teaching. Publishing and
participation in ICMS 2011 is open to all members of the international
manufacturing research community. A committee will select the students and
postdocs for conference support (hotel and registration) based upon the
following criteria: presenting a paper, their research statement,
underrepresented status, and paper authorship. The availability of conference
support will be advertised on the conference website and through mailings to the
U.S. manufacturing research community. In this unique intellectual environment,
students and postdocs will attend technical presentations by the leading
international experts in the broad field of manufacturing systems and network
with senior and peer researchers from around the world. These experiences, both
within and across disciplines, will foster new ideas in their research and
deeper fundamental understanding of manufacturing science and engineering.

Students and postdocs from U.S. institutions attending ICMS 2011 will learn
about the latest research progress and challenges in manufacturing systems, and
to present papers they co-authored. They will have the opportunity to practice
their communication skills and network with researchers and engineers from the
U.S. and around the world, fostering future collaborations and shaping their
future careers in, manufacturing science and engineering. This conference
experience will be invaluable for the highly talented group of students and
postdocs who, as future manufacturing professionals and academics, will drive
U.S. efforts to ensure its competitiveness in manufacturing.