* 1110375
* Asia-Pacific Summer School on Smart Structures Technology (APSS), China 2011, India 2012, and Korea 2013
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/15/2011,12/31/2014
* Billie Spencer, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Kishor Mehta
* 12/31/2014
* USD 153,450.00

This project will provide support for 10 US graduate students each year to
participate in three Asia-Pacific Summer Schools on Smart Structures Technology
(APSS) to be held in China, India, and Korea in 2011, 2012 and 2013,
respectively. These summer schools include coursework, lectures, labs, and site
visits that allow civil engineering graduate students to learn about smart
structures technology in an international setting. The graduate students from
other countries, supported by the organizations such as KOSEF/SISTeC in Korea,
JST in Japan, NNSFC in China, and DST/IUSSTF in India, will also participate in
these summer schools. The summer schools are organized to provide advanced
training to graduate students in a multicultural and multidisciplinary learning
environment to produce next generation of experts to create and design smart
structures. The environment exposes the students to a broad knowledge frontier
that does not currently exist. New education and mentoring paradigms are
discovered during the summer school teaching and learning experiences.

One of the engineering challenges is the design and construction of smart
structures. However, civil engineering graduate students are only exposed in a
limited way to the wide range of other disciplines that make up smart structures
technology. Seamless interaction between the fields of structural dynamics,
control systems, circuit technology, wireless technology, bio-sensing, and
informatics is required for successful applications. Additionally, some of the
most advanced research and its applications are occurring overseas, which makes
it difficult to access easily. Thus, the main educational challenges in the
field of smart structures technology are: (1) providing students with the needed
multidisciplinary background, and (2) familiarizing students with forefront
research in other countries.