* 1110767
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Investigating recombination and the origin of genetic variation in apomictic ferns
* BIO,DEB
* 05/01/2011,04/30/2014
* Amanda Grusz, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Simon Malcomber
* 04/30/2014
* USD 14,956.00

Asexual plant and animal lineages have long been considered evolutionary dead
ends, incapable of generating significant genetic variability. Recent evidence,
however, suggests that some asexual lineages may undergo subsexual processes
that can lead to an increase in genetic variation, thereby improving
evolutionary potential for adaptation in extreme environments. This dissertation
research will examine whether recombination can be documented in an apomictic
fern lineage. Apomictic ferns are capable of a unique type of sporogenesis (one
not known to occur in flowering plants) where there is a possibility for
homologous chromosomes to pair and recombine genetic information during meiosis.
Using modern genomic approaches in combination with cytological studies, this
study aims to identify whether such genetic variation exists in these ferns and
the possible extent of this phenomenon in natural
populations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research will enhance current
understanding of apomixis in ferns, an early diverging lineage of vascular
plants that shares certain asexual traits with both animals and angiosperms. An
increased knowledge of the biology of apomixis across plants is relevant not
only for evolutionary and ecological studies of genetic variability in ferns,
but can have wide-ranging implications for agricultural and crop sciences.