* 1110860
* RAPID for NEES and E-Defense Collaboration:  U.S. Instrumentation and Data Processing for the Four-Story Reinforced Concrete and Post-Tensioned E-Defense Building Tests
* ENG,CMMI
* 01/15/2011,12/31/2011
* John Wallace, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Joy Pauschke
* 12/31/2011
* USD 41,556.00

Researchers from Japan and the United States have been collaborating during the
past two years on building tests to be conducted at the E-Defense shake table
facility in Miki City, Japan, in December 2010, where two four-story, full-scale
buildings will be tested side by side subjected to three dimensional seismic
shaking. As the outcome of this international planning, U.S. researchers have
the opportunity to provide additional sensors on the test specimens to enable
measurement of more detailed building response during the tests. Through this
award, the U.S. research team will provide additional sensors, cables, and data
acquisition systems for the testing in addition to the 400 sensors being
provided by the Japanese; the Japanese E-Defense staff will install the U.S.
sensor mounts, sensors, and cables. This additional data will enable improved
building model calibration and/or calibration for flexure and for shear-flexure
interaction. Data obtained from these tests will be archived in the NEES Project
Warehouse data repository (http://www.nees.org). This award also provides travel
support for faculty and students to participate in the testing in Japan and
process the data, and to continue collaboration with Japan on analytical
building models.

Intellectual Merit: These two building tests are each multi-million dollar tests
and the United States currently does not have facilities to conduct such tests.
These tests will provide data for the U.S. earthquake engineering community to
learn about the behavior and response of three-dimensional buildings subjected
to a range of ground motion intensities, including motions expected to produce
near-collapse. The additional sensors will measure local response quantities to
aid in the development and calibration of analytical models and to improve
understanding of a very commonly used building system (internationally).

Broader Impacts: This award is an outcome of active collaborations between
Japanese and U.S. researchers on the instrumentation needed to record detailed
response data that is critical to improve understanding of the seismic
performance of building systems. The data will be archived in the NEES Project
Warehouse and be publicly available for reuse by researchers and practitioners.
Results of this research will be presented at major U.S. and international
conferences.