* 1110087
* Collaborative Research:  BICEP2 and SPUD - A Search for Inflation with Degree-Scale Polarimetry from the South Pole
* GEO,OPP
* 09/01/2010,04/30/2013
* Clement Pryke, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Vladimir Papitashvili
* 04/30/2013
* USD 944,253.00

&lt;br/&gt;ANT-0742818, PI: John M. Kovac, California Institute of
Technology&lt;br/&gt;ANT-0742592, PI: Clement L. Pryke, University of
Chicago&lt;br/&gt;Collaborative Research: BICEP2 and SPUD - A Search for
Inflation with Degree-Scale Polarimetry from the South
Pole&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed work is a four-year program of research
activities directed toward upgrading the BICEP (Background Imaging of Cosmic
Extragalactic Polarization) telescope operating at South Pole since early 2006
to reach far =stretching goals of detection of the Cosmic Gravitational-wave
Background (CGB) . This telescope is a first Cosmic Microwave Background (CMB)
B-mode polarimeter, specifically designed to search for CGB signatures while
mapping ~2% of the southern sky that is free of the Milky Way foreground
galactic radiation at 100 GH and 150 GHz. The BICEP1 telescope will reach its
designed sensitivity by the end of 2008. A coordinated series of upgrades to
BICEP1 will provide the increased sensitivity and more exacting control of
instrumental effects and potential confusion from galactic foregrounds necessary
to search for the B-mode signal more deeply through space. A powerful new 150
GHz receiver, BICEP2, will replace the current detector at the beginning of
2009, increasing the mapping speed almost ten-fold. In 2010, the first of a
series of compact, mechanically-cooled receivers (called SPUD - Small
Polarimeter Upgrade for DASI) will be deployed on the existing DASI mount and
tower, providing similar mapping speed at 100 GHz in parallel with BICEP2. The
latter instrument will reach (and exceed with the addition of a SPUD
polarimeter) the target sensitivity r = 0.15 set forth by the Interagency
(NSF/NASA/DoE) Task Force on CMB Research for a future space mission dedicated
to the detection and characterization of primordial gravitational waves. This
Task Force has identified detection of the Inflation's gravitational waves as
the number one priority for the modern cosmology. More broadly, as the cosmology
captures a lot of the public imagination, it is a remarkably effective vehicle
for stimulating interest in basic science. The CGB detection would be to
Inflation what the discovery of the CMB radiation was to the Big Bang. The
project will contribute to the training of the next generation of cosmologists
by integrating graduate and undergraduate education with the technology and
instrumentation development, astronomical observations and scientific analysis.
Sharing of the forefront research results with public extends the new knowledge
beyond the universities. This project will be undertaken in collaboration
between the California Institute of Technology and the University of
Chicago.&lt;br/&gt;