* 1110904
* Collaborative Research: Discovering and Exploiting Latent Communities in Social Media
* CSE,IIS
* 08/01/2011,07/31/2016
* Scott Kiesling, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* William Bainbridge
* 07/31/2016
* USD 202,195.00

Despite the prevalence of social network platforms and apps in nowadays daily
life, existing research on social media takes the terms "social" and "media"
separately, and fails to address important needs for intelligently managing and
utilizing social media, such as finding the information that users want,
situating information in a social context that gives it meaning, and providing
order and structure to an intricate and intertwined network of relationships.
This interdisciplinary project will provide a holistic view of social media by
combining socially intelligent language processing with linguistically motivated
social network analysis. Specifically, the project will: (a) discover
sociolinguistic communities and identify the demographic and sociological
factors that underlie community membership; (b) discover cross-community
linguistic variation at various levels and develop new computational tools for
dialectometric and sociolinguistic analysis and for prediction of user interests
and trends; and (c) recommend content and social connections across community
boundaries, which will help people to broaden their perspectives with new
information, opinions, and social
relationships.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual merit: The project will lead to
(a) new modeling formalisms that jointly incorporate linguistic information with
social network metadata; (b) a new computational methodology for sociolinguistic
investigation from raw text; and (c) flexible models of linguistic variation
that model temporal dynamics and move beyond simplistic bag-of-words approaches
to higher-order phenomena such as multi-word expressions, syntax, and joint
orthographic variation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts: The project will
lead to advancements in basic research in statistical machine learning, social
sciences, and language technology. It will also bring innovations and practical
applications in all these areas, such as software that reasons intelligently
about community structures and linguistic patterns and conventions in social
media. The findings will benefit a wide range of needs, such as personalized
information service and intelligence and security operations, which require
precise and timely understanding of social-cultural events and trends. The
project will also provide undergraduate research opportunities and outreach to
high school students through summer programs.