* 1110947
* NetSE:Large: MONACO: Fundamentals of Molecular Nano-Communication Networks
* CSE,CNS
* 09/15/2011,08/31/2016
* Ian Akyildiz, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Darleen Fisher
* 08/31/2016
* USD 3,000,000.00

Nanotechnologies are providing a new set of tools to the engineering community
to design and manufacture devices in a scale ranging from one to a few hundred
nanometers. At this scale, a nanomachine is defined as the most basic functional
unit, which is able to perform only very simple tasks, such as computing, data
storing, sensing and actuation. Nanonetworks, i.e., the interconnection of
nanomachines in networks, will expand the capabilities of single nano-devices by
providing them a way to cooperate and share information. Traditional
communication technologies based on electromagnetic waves need to undergo a
profound rethinking in order to meet the requirements of these networks.
Moreover, there are specific applications of nanonetworks in which the
utilization of electromagnetic waves is not feasible, such as in intra-body
applications. Alternatively, molecular communication, i.e., the use of molecules
to encode and transmit information among nanomachines, represents a radically
new communication paradigm that demands novel solutions, including the
identification of existing molecular communication mechanisms, the establishment
of the foundations of molecular information theory, or the development of
architectures and networking protocols for nanomachines. This project will
address the above challenges to realize this new communication
paradigm.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: This project seeks to develop
a research area spanning across diverse fields, which include communication and
information theory, computer science and biology. Specifically, this project
will make contributions along four broad directions. First, the researchers will
develop Theoretical Foundations of Molecular Nanonetworks, which include the
definition and modeling of the attenuation, delay and noises affecting the
emission, propagation, and reception processes in molecular communication. In
addition, they will analyze the information capacity of nanonetworks first for a
network with only two nodes and then for a network with N nodes, for which the
effect of interference and collaborative communication will be taken into
account. Second, the researchers will design Protocols for Molecular
Nanonetworks based on the development of novel principles, primitives and
services. Third, the researchers will implement a Simulation Tool for Molecular
Nanonetworks in order to validate the information theoretical results as well as
to evaluate the performance of the proposed protocols, by accounting for the
interactions in the network molecule by molecule. Finally, the researchers will
develop an Experimental Validation Platform for Molecular Nanonetworks by using
a concrete testbed based on bacteria communication to verify the correctness of
the information theoretical results and the protocols developed within the
project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: The project will pave the way for
research in nanoscale communication. The outcomes of this work is expected to
have a significant impact on research in nanotechnology, biology and information
and communication technologies, since this project will represent the entrance
of these three main communities to this converging field and will follow a
realistic and integrated approach. The range of potential applications of
nanonetworks is astonishingly wide, covering from intra-body networks for health
monitoring, cancer detection or drug delivery, amongst others, to chemical
attack prevention systems. The principal investigators teach a variety of
classes in Georgia Tech spanning information theory, network algorithms,
communication protocols and biology. They will immediately incorporate output
from the proposed research into their classes. The team will develop an open
source simulation tool to test the solutions developed and the tool will be made
available for public use. This tool will represent the first simulation tool for
molecular nanonetworks and will also be used in class projects as an educational
tool to provide insights and deep understanding of nanosensor/actuator networks.
Scientific results will be disseminated at international conferences, journals
and magazines in the field.