* 1110453
* Exploring the Role of Computational Adaptive Expertise in Design and Innovation
* ENG,EEC
* 08/31/2010,12/31/2013
* Ann McKenna, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Donna Riley
* 12/31/2013
* USD 135,979.00

TThe objective of this engineering education project is to advance both basic
and applied understanding of how to prepare engineering graduates to effectively
and efficiently contribute to America's leadership in technological innovation.
The PIs propose to study the role that computational and analytical abilities
play in innovation in the context of a conceptual framework that has recently
emerged in the engineering education literature: adaptive
expertise.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Adaptive expertise is an emerging area of
research on learning that has shown promise in providing enhanced understanding
of transfer of knowledge issues. It is a critical area of research that directly
relates to U.S. global competitiveness through improving understanding of what
is required to train innovative and efficient problem solvers who can transcend
narrow disciplinary fields. The PIs plan to perform fundamental research with
the intent to inform the practice of teaching and learning. They hypothesize
that the general model of adaptive expertise can be applied specifically to
characterize the attributes of efficiency and innovation in the context of
developing CADEX. Therefore, they plan to focus on basic research to understand
the nature of CADEX and to define the efficiency and innovation axes in terms of
the underlying cognitive or affective attributes of each. This approach allows
them to uncover how innovation and efficiency may be conceived more broadly,
while at the same time enables us to define terms specifically in the context of
CADEX. The advantage of combining fundamental and applied research is that the
PIs not only identify cognitive aspects of computational adaptive expertise and
potentially effective instructional strategies, they will also verify and test
their findings in actual educational settings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research
will benefit society by providing recommendations for instructional and
assessment strategies to develop competencies required for technological
innovation. These are essential skills in today's competitive economy and thus
will enhance the United States' industrial competitiveness by producing
graduates poised with cognitive strategies for developing efficient and
effective design solutions.&lt;br/&gt;