* 1110425
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Vesicular soil horizons -  the fragile skin of desert soils: Their distribution, formation processes, and relation to surface hydrology in the western U.S.A.
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2011,05/31/2012
* Robert Graham, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Henry L. Gholz
* 05/31/2012
* USD 14,962.00

Soils found in dry parts of the Earth, including large areas of the western
United States, that have a layer of distinctive bubble like pores at or near the
soil surface, are called vesicular soils. These layers are relatively thin,
usually less than 10 cm, but can act as a water repellent skin that determines
whether water infiltrates, runs off, or evaporates from the soil surface. Plans
for solar and wind power facilities in the deserts of the southwest have raised
concern about increased soil disturbance in previously undeveloped lands. The
formation of these soils is still a mystery. This project will evaluate the
formation of vesicular layers in deserts, including their distribution,
formation and relation to soil water movement. An index will be used to quantify
the relative development of the layers. The study also considers new ways to
explain the formation of vesicular pores, such as modeling their expansion using
basic chemical principals relating the temperature and volume of gases. The
study will include analyses of soil data bases, laboratory experiments and field
studies. One new approach will be to use high resolution CAT scans to look
inside soil samples and examine the size and shape of the pores without
disrupting soil structure. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Results will be presented at
professional meetings and in high school classes. Results will also be used in a
proposal for the formal recognition of vesicular soils. Management of arid lands
is at a critical moment right now, with plans for extensive energy facilities
under development and review. Since the vesicular layer is a fragile surface
that is highly susceptible to erosion by wind and water when it is disturbed,
adoption of this terminology will increase awareness and highlight management
options for the arid west.