* 1110433
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Implementing a pioneering approach to document and describe the taxonomically neglected sterile crustose lichens through a revision of the genus Lepraria s.l
* BIO,DEB
* 05/01/2011,10/31/2012
* William Buck, New York Botanical Garden
* Standard Grant
* Robb Brumfield
* 10/31/2012
* USD 12,290.00

Asexual reproduction via specialized propagules that contain both fungal and
algal components occurs throughout the diverse lineages that comprise lichens,
and is one of the most interesting aspects of lichen biology. Although lichens
that reproduce this way represent up to ~50% of lichen biodiversity in any given
area they have been chronically neglected. This project implements a novel
methodology to remedy this problem using a revision of the lichen genus Lepraria
in North America as a case study. This methodology relies on extensive field
observations to reconcile the results of analyses of molecular data against
those based on traditional characters such as morphology and chemistry. Lepraria
is a unique group that has lost the ability to reproduce sexually yet continued
to diversify. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project addresses a significant
knowledge gap in lichenology by producing the first comprehensive treatment of
Lepraria on a continental scale and introducing the first standardized
morphological terminology for any group of sterile crustose lichens. Field
studies in boreal/arctic North America will substantively increase the
functionality of this treatment. Similarly, newly generated molecular data will
shed light on the evolution of asexual reproduction in lichenized fungi while
providing taxonomic placement for numerous species currently orphaned within
Lepraria. Most notably the methodology implemented here is broadly applicable to
other sterile lichens, providing a timely and cost-effective way to document and
describe the biodiversity of this highly speciose but chronically neglected
group. The project will train a doctoral student and results of the study will
be disseminated through the development of websites, videos, and mass media
public outreach activities.