* 1110335
* Dissertation Research: Investigating Phylogeny, Reticulate Evolution, and Gene Tree Discordance in New World Dryopteris (Dryopteridaceae)
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2011,05/31/2012
* Emily Sessa, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Ranker
* 05/31/2012
* USD 14,864.00

Ferns are the second largest group of vascular plants on earth, and are the
sister group of the diverse and economically important seed plants. This project
will be one of the first to produce a family tree for a widespread fern genus,
and will employ that tree to investigate a number of critical questions about
how evolution has proceeded in this important but understudied group of plants.
The current study will use DNA sequence data to test several hypotheses
regarding species relationships, biogeography, and the roles of hybridization
and genome doubling (polyploidy) in shaping the history of the North American
species of woodferns (Dryopteris). Dryopteris is a species-rich, morphologically
diverse, biogeographically widespread, and beautiful genus, and the North
American members have long been thought to reflect a complex history of
reticulate (non-branching) speciation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will
facilitate international collaboration and will result in the training of a
female PhD student as well as undergraduate students that she will mentor. All
data and results will be disseminated widely, to the scientific community via
online databases, in publications and talks, to the public via outreach
presentations, via a fern weblog, and to middle and high school students through
the Botanical Society of America's PlantingScience program.