* 1110652
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Untangling the Cystopteris fragilis Complex: An Investigation of the Effects of Polyploidy on Diversification Rates
* BIO,DEB
* 05/01/2011,01/31/2015
* Carl Rothfels, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* joseph miller
* 01/31/2015
* USD 15,000.00

Arguably the most dramatic mutation possible (whole-genome duplication, or
polyploidy) results in an individual with double the chromosome number of its
parents. Polyploidy is a common and ongoing phenomenon in plants, where many
crops, for example, are polyploid. This project aims to examine the evolutionary
potential and fate of polyploid lineages in ferns¬¬a plant group where nearly
all species have experienced one or more episodes of polyploidy in their
evolutionary past. The globally distributed fern genus Cystopteris encompasses a
complex mix of diploid and polyploid species, making it ideal for investigating
the effects of polyploidy on diversification rates. Using DNA sequence data from
200 Cystopteris individuals, each of known ploidy level, evolutionary
relationships will be inferred, ancestral ploidy levels will be reconstructed,
and speciation and extinction rates will be estimated through time.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;Despite its ubiquity and scientific importance, the long-term
potential and evolutionary dynamics of polyploidy remain contentious--are
polyploid lineages "dead-ends" that are prone to rapid extinction, or do they
instead drive evolutionary novelty? This empirical study is well positioned to
make a key contribution to understanding the evolutionary importance of
polyploidy, with implications for evolutionary theory, biodiversity
conservation, and crop improvement.