* 1110472
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Evaluating frequency-dependent selection on Borrelia burgdorferi
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2011,05/31/2012
* Durland Fish, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 05/31/2012
* USD 15,000.00

Understanding how pathogen diversity is maintained is the central question of
this project. It has been suggested that two mechanisms of natural selection may
maintain genetic diversity within the bacterium Borrelia burgdorferi: frequency-
dependence and host specialization. Computer simulation modeling, field data
collection, and molecular techniques will be integrated to evaluate the evidence
for these mechanisms of selection. The first aim of this project is to develop a
method for identifying different genotypes of B. burgdorferi from a large number
of samples. This method will then be used to monitor wildlife populations
naturally infected with this pathogen, for evidence of either selection
mechanism.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;B. burgdorferi is the bacterium that causes Lyme
disease, which has a significant public health impact in the United States.
Diversity within this species also relates to human illness, as some types tend
to cause more severe disease than others. Understanding how this diversity is
maintained may provide insight into the evolution of virulence in this
bacterium. The molecular identification method to be developed should be an
economical and effective tool for further studies on this pathogen and system.
Findings will be disseminated to high school students and the general public,
via established relationships between the co-PI and various educators and public
outreach programs.&lt;br/&gt;