* 1110981
* Collaborative Research: Improving Online Deliberation with Computational Supports for Frame Reflection
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2016
* Francesca Polletta, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* William Bainbridge
* 08/31/2016
* USD 149,063.00

This research will involve designing, implementing, and evaluating computational
tools to support frame reflection in processes of online political engagement.
The internet, social media, and online communication have great potential as a
platform for political engagement, from seeking political information to
participating in political discussion and deliberation. The wealth of content
available via the web can make for more informed discussion, and the fact that
discussion can take place on a much larger scale than face-to-face forums offers
the potential for participation by many and diverse groups. However, thus far,
online political participation has not proven radically democratic. Rather, it
has tended to reproduce preexisting inequalities and balkanization in political
talk. The constantly and rapidly increasing quantity of political content
produced on a daily basis can also be difficult to understand and evaluate,
particularly with respect to how issues are framed. The latter is especially
important given the fact that, as numerous researchers have shown, how issues
are framed - that is, how they are formulated in terms of familiar assumptions,
metaphors, and images - profoundly affects how citizens understand, assess, and
act upon those issues.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will both leverage
existing computational techniques and develop novel analytic approaches to
encourage citizens to identify and evaluate the frames that underpin competing
positions on issues. Through evaluation in two real-world settings, public
deliberative forums and readers of political blogs, this work will make two
distinct sets of contributions. First, this project will develop human-computer
interaction design principles for interactive tools and visualizations involving
complex computational techniques. These principles will help ensure that such
tools are designed to be useful for, comprehensible to, and interpretable by
users. Second, by examining the impacts of various computational interventions,
this work will enhance political and social scientific understanding of online
political deliberation, both in terms of how technology mediates the
deliberative process, and in terms of how deliberation can be improved through
increased awareness of and reflection about framing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
immediate impacts of this research will take the form of tools deployed in real-
world settings with politically engaged users, namely through a partnership with
a non-partisan convener of online forums, and through public deployment among
readers of political blogs. Additionally, the tools developed in this project
will be made readily available for use by others, either in support of political
deliberative processes or in other contexts. In the long term, the work has
significant potential to improve understanding of political deliberation, and it
provides an opportunity to explore alternative roles that technology can play in
supporting political participation.