* 1110371
* Dissertation Research: Behavioral and quantitative genetic mechanisms for the development and evolution of individual differences in Drosophila aggression
* BIO,IOS
* 07/01/2011,06/30/2013
* Andrew Sih, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Michelle Elekonich
* 06/30/2013
* USD 10,916.00

Despite widespread interest in aggressiveness, the genes, experiences, and
evolutionary forces contributing to individual differences in aggression remain
mysterious. Clearly, genes and social experience both contribute to
aggressiveness; but, increasingly, researchers are aware that genetic and social
environmental influences on behavior may be connected. Fruit flies (Drosophila
melanogaster) are an ideal system for addressing questions about individual
differences because multiple, natural individuals with a particular set of genes
can be grown repeatedly in the lab. Using a design similar to studies of
identical twins, experimenters can thereby untangle the effects of genes and
experience. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will determine whether
individuals with genes that make them more aggressive also have different social
experiences. Preliminary data suggests that more aggressive flies are more
likely to be socially isolated than non-aggressive flies -causing aggressive
flies to become even more aggressive, and non-aggressive flies to remain non-
aggressive. This type of positive feedback may explain why individuals in many
species show the animal analog of personalities -that is, long-lasting
individual differences in behavior. The interaction between heritable behavioral
types and situation choice can be critical for many questions in many systems.
For example, there is evidence that humans with a hereditary predisposition to
certain mental illnesses -including alcoholism and schizophrenia-are at greater
risk of illness because they experience risky environments. These hypotheses are
impossible to directly test in humans, where systematic manipulation of genotype
and environment are not feasible. Thus, work on Drosophila will allow
researchers to test and refine these theories, and thus guide future research.
Finally, Drosophila behavioral research provides an ideal entr√©e for
undergraduates interested in research experiments. The PIs will involve
undergraduates in every stage of the research, requiring students to read papers
from the scientific literature and working with them to contribute their own
ideas to the project.