* 1110806
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Comparative phylogeography of Rattus rattus and Rattus norvegicus in the U.S. and dispersal potential of rat-bourne pathgens.
* BIO,DEB
* 04/01/2011,03/31/2012
* Ronald Van Den Bussche, Oklahoma State University
* Standard Grant
* George Gilchrist
* 03/31/2012
* USD 11,624.00

Rats are arguably the most destructive invasive species on the planet, carrying
pathogens that have been responsible some of the most devastating epidemics in
human history. Through their close relationship with humans, rats have spread to
every continent and can reach high numbers in densely populated urban areas,
making them effective vectors for the spread of infectious disease. Hepatitis E
virus (HEV) infections have been detected at a high frequency in humans from
urban areas in the US, but the transmission pathways traditionally thought to be
responsible for HEV spread (oral-fecal transmission or swine-human contact) are
not present. Invasive rats have been shown to have high HEV infection rates in
the U.S. (&gt;40%) and are competent hosts of human HEV. In the proposed work,
invasive rats collected from across the US will be examined for HEV infection to
determine the infection rate and the rate with which rats are spreading
HEV.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research has important public health
implications. The mortality rate of HEV infection ranges from 1-4% in the
general public, but is as high as 20% in pregnant women. In addition, HEV is the
only hepatitis virus known to have animal reservoirs. Yet no study has examined
invasive rats as reservoirs for spreading HEV to humans. This project will
provide the first data concerning the spread of HEV by rats, providing valuable
information to manage the spread of HEV infections. Additionally, several
undergraduates, including Native American students, will assist in the research.