* 1110459
* Dissertation Research: A mechanistic approach to quantifying the costs of parasite communities
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2011,05/31/2013
* Sarah Budischak, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Alan Tessier
* 05/31/2013
* USD 14,923.00

Most animals, including humans, are infected with multiple parasites
simultaneously, but until recently, most infections have primarily been studied
in isolation. Emerging evidence from human and wildlife diseases suggests that
interactions among parasites co-infecting (i.e., cohabiting) the same host can
influence the overall impact on individual host health and disease spread. This
research project will examine ways in which co-infecting parasites interact
within a host, and investigate the consequences of infection with different
combinations of parasites for host health. Free-living (non-parasitic) species
often interact directly by competing for food or space, or indirectly via a
shared enemy; similarly, communities of co-infecting parasites may compete for
limited resources within the host, or attempt to evade host immune defenses
triggered by co-occurring parasites. The investigators will use laboratory
experiments in mice to manipulate host resources (via nutrition) and parasite
community composition (the number and identity of infecting parasites), to test
the hypothesis that resource competition and/or predation by the immune system
drive changes in interactions between co-infecting parasites with consequences
for parasite reproduction, host condition and susceptibility to new parasites.
The wealth of immunological and singe-species parasite infection data in
laboratory mice provide a strong foundation upon which to build this complex co-
infection experiment. Furthermore, the conserved nature of the vertebrate immune
system enables broad applicability of study results. Overall, the results of
this study will answer fundamental questions about the potential synergistic
effects of multiple infections on hosts. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will
provide research experiences for two undergraduate students in addition to
enhancing the doctoral research of a graduate student. The principal
investigators will also participate in a program that brings hands-on ecological
learning to K-12 classrooms in Georgia. Specifically, methods and results from
this project will be used to develop a teaching module on the similarity of
ecological processes taking place in the external (e.g. competition and
predation between species in free-living communities) and internal environments
(e.g. competition and immune evasion between parasites within a single host
individual).