* 1110322
* Collaborative Research: High-resolution studies of glacier dynamics at two major outlet glaciers in East Greenland
* GEO,OPP
* 06/30/2010,08/31/2011
* James Davis, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* William J. Wiseman, Jr.
* 08/31/2011
* USD 42,270.00

ABSTRACT Nettles OPP-0713970 Davis OPP-071

The Principal Investigators request support for an interdisciplinary, high-
resolution study involving remote sensing and field investigations at two of
Greenland's largest outlet glaciers. The study of the Helheim and
Kangerdlugssuaq Glaciers will integrate seismological, glaciological, and
geodetic observations to build an understanding of flow dynamics at major outlet
glaciers, which represent a critical junction between the atmosphere,
cryosphere, and hydrosphere. The project would be the first long-term occupation
of an outlet glacier by a GPS receiver network, and would address questions of
flow variation on earthquake to interannual time scales. Recent discoveries have
made it clear that our understanding of the dynamics of flow at large outlet
glaciers is limited and inadequate for understanding the ways in which the
outlet glaciers, and the ice sheets they drain, respond to external forcings.
The spectrum of timescales over which significant velocity variations in outlet
glacier flow can occur appears to be much broader than previously believed, with
significant variations occurring on timescales of 10s of seconds to several
years. Analysis of glacial earthquakes suggests that significant volumes of ice
may move at speeds 1000 times faster than their average annual velocities for
periods of a minute or two and a doubling of average annual flow speeds over
only a few years has been observed at some glaciers. Multiple observations now
indicate that glacier flow behavior can respond quickly to environmental
changes, including rapid climate change. It is not currently clear, however,
what mechanisms or combination of mechanisms allow for, or drive, the temporal
variations, nor is it clear how variations in flow behavior at different
timescales are related to one another. Understanding the changes in force
balance that control variations across the range of timescales from minutes to
years requires observations at higher resolution in both space and time than are
currently available, and achieving a comprehensive picture of the interactions
between short- and long-timescale processes, and between external forcings and
glacier flow behavior, requires the integration of data and expertise from
several traditionally separate disciplines..

Intellectual Merit. The research will lead to a greatly improved understanding
of the dynamics of flow at the large, fast-moving outlet glaciers that drain the
Greenland ice sheet and of the temporal variability in their rates and modes of
flow. It will provide insight into the processes controlling glacial earthquakes
and possible connections between glacial-earthquake activity and global climate
change.

Broader Impacts. Understanding the controls on flow configuration at major
outlet glaciers, and the timescales over which they may respond to climatic
forcing, is of great importance for proper modeling of systems affected by the
transfer of fresh polar meltwater to the world's oceans. A better understanding
of glacier and ice-sheet response to climate change will allow for improvements
in modeling of the coupled ice ocean atmosphere system, and of its interactions
with the solid Earth. The geodetic instrumentation and processing techniques
developed under this proposal will benefit researchers in a variety of
environments such as glacier and volcano monitoring involving rapid, large-scale
motions and the risk of instrument loss.