* 1110629
* Dissertation Research: The effects of invasive plant species on biodiversity across spatial scales
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2011,05/31/2014
* Kristin Powell, Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Douglas Levey
* 05/31/2014
* USD 13,913.00

Humans are intentionally and unintentionally transporting species around the
globe at an increasing rate. Some of these transported species become highly
invasive and cause large declines in the diversity of native species. At the
same time, some researchers note that invasive species, specifically invasive
plant species, rarely cause native species to go extinct and are rather
harmless. These contrasting views have prompted people to question the
environmental harm caused by invasive plants. This research aims to synthesize
these seemingly conflicting ideas about the effects of invasive plants on
biodiversity. The hypothesis of this research is that the effect of invasive
plants on biodiversity changes depending on spatial scale. Specifically,
invasive plants have larger negative effects on diversity at small scales than
broad scales. Scale-dependent effects are expected if invasive plants have
larger negative effects on the abundance of common plant species than rare plant
species in a community. This proposal tests the hypothesis of scale-dependence
by conducting (1) a quantitative review of studies that examine the effect of
invasive plants at different spatial scales, (2) field surveys of plant-invaded
communities across the U.S., (3) demography of common and rare plant species
that are affected by invasive plants, and (4) experiments to test which
mechanisms cause differences in the effect of invasive plants at different
spatial scales. This research integrates studies on communities and populations
to understand the effects of invasive plants on native communities and provides
a framework for how to understand current and future loss of biodiversity.

Broader impacts: This proposal will provide research and mentoring opportunities
for undergraduate women and high school students during the data collection for
this research. Further educational outreach will involve teaching ecology and
invasive species modules at urban schools and day-long workshops for teachers
and high school students. This research will continue to provide opportunities
for undergraduates and K-12 students, particularly students from
underrepresented backgrounds. Public education will continue to be important
through public articles and recommendations for restoration and invasive species
management at local natural areas.