* 1110393
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Genetic Polymorphism in Behavioral Traits in a Bird with Maltreatment of Young
* BIO,IOS
* 07/01/2011,06/30/2014
* David Anderson, Wake Forest University
* Standard Grant
* Michelle Elekonich
* 06/30/2014
* USD 14,974.00

Sula granti, a long-lived seabird, offers a unique opportunity to study the
underlying mechanisms of physical and social maltreatment by non-parents, in
nature. Non-breeding adults show a directed and intense social interest
(affiliative, aggressive, and/or reproductive) in unrelated young. This is a
unique behavioral quality among vertebrates, though inappropriate human adult
reproductive behavior directed toward non-related pre-pubertal or under-age
young is perhaps the most similar such vertebrate behavior. Sula granti
maltreatment behavior is a promising new model system for early social trauma
because it shares several features with human child abuse, including
intergenerational transmission through a "cycle of violence", the relationship
between age and vulnerability, frequency of social maltreatment episodes, and
evidence for transmission of maltreatment through both early social trauma and
long term neuroendocrine organizational effects. The researchers will
investigate interactions between genetic polymorphisms and rearing environment
that may influence intergenerational transmission of this behavior and other
aspects of personality (e.g., shyness, aggression, anxiety/neuroticism). It is
expected that some variants of specific genes will buffer individuals from the
effects of early maltreatment, reducing the probability of displaying abusive
and/or anxiety-related behavior as an adult. This research will be conducted on
a wild population under natural conditions, will be the first comprehensive
evaluation of the relative separate and combined predictive ability of multiple
genes and gene x environment interactions, and will investigate the associations
between genetics, animal behavior, and physiological response to early trauma
which may be analogous between, or alternatively predate the divergence of,
mammalian and avian lineages. The researchers and Avian Biology undergraduate
students will use local school connections developed through the Wake Forest
University International Baccalaureate Partnership to take their results into
local high school biology classes to address North Carolina Educational Standard
4.05 on innate, learned, and social animal behavior.