* 1110201
* STTR Phase I:  Educational Gaming for Teen Driver Safety
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2011,06/30/2012
* Noelle LaVoie, Parallel Consulting, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Glenn H. Larsen
* 06/30/2012
* USD 148,928.00

This Small Business Technology Transfer (STTR) Phase I project will develop the
first in a series of theoretically grounded, evidence-based multi-player games
designed to address the leading health risk to teens - motor vehicle crashes.
This STTR will provide a new model for translating discoveries in teen driver
safety to driver education that captures the difficult to articulate aspects of
knowledge that are gained through experience, i.e. tacit knowledge. Our research
has been translated into a theoretically grounded, demonstrated efficacious
program, Ride Like a Friend (RLAF), to reduce risk from peer passengers. The
long-term goal of this new research effort is to leverage our foundational
science and expertise to develop a suite of theoretically-driven, evaluated
games that promote safe driving behaviors among teens. As a first step, this
STTR will develop and assess a prototype RLAF game. Multi-player strategy games
provide a unique opportunity for teens to experience the effects of their
driving decisions, especially passenger interactions. Findings will advance not
only the field of driver training but also education of teens about other health
behaviors. Outside of mentorship programs, this type of knowledge is rarely
targeted for explicit instruction. We will demonstrate the benefits of
implementing formal training for experiential knowledge in improving the ways
that teens reason and make decisions about their safety, health and social
interactions, particularly relevant for teens who lack role models to pass on
healthy and effective strategies. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader
impact/commercial potential of this project includes the translation of
scientific research on teen driving risks, particularly dangers from peer
passengers, into games that will offer educators and teens the opportunity to
improve teen driving safety. Vehicle accidents remain the leading cause of death
and injury for teens, accounting annually for over 3000 deaths, 100 times as
many injuries, and over 14 billion dollars in associated costs. CHOP/CChIPS has
been at the forefront of research devoted to understanding the combination of
social pressures, developmental cognitive limits, and lack of experience that
may be at the root of teen passenger driving risks and this STTR will translate
this scientific foundation into games that when commercialized and distributed
will improve teen driver safety.