* 1110707
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Evolution of an aerial syndrome in owlflies (Neuroptera: Ascalaphidae)
* BIO,DEB
* 05/01/2011,04/30/2013
* John Oswald, Texas A&M Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* David Mindell
* 04/30/2013
* USD 14,975.00

Although most living insects are capable of flight, their aerial abilities vary
widely from group to group. Owlflies (Neuroptera: Ascalaphidae) are one of the
few groups of insects that exhibit a highly specialized "aerial syndrome",
characterized by the ability to mate, capture prey, and consume prey, all while
on the wing. The factors involved in the origin and evolution of this
distinctive behavioral syndrome have never been examined in detail. This project
will investigate -- through new taxonomic and phylogenetic work -- the
development of the syndrome in owlflies and its influence on their evolutionary
history. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This work will provide additional insights into
the repeated emergence of novel life history strategies that occur in animals
through the convergence of advanced anatomical and behavioral adaptations -- an
area of considerable conceptual interest, as the development of these new
strategies may be a prerequisite for the broader radiation of particular
lineages into previously unoccupied niches. Support from this award will enhance
dissertation research in neuropteran systematics by enabling new collaborations
and by supporting fieldwork and research collection visits. The work will also
contribute to the development and extension of new tools for aggregating and
disseminating global information on neuropterid insects through its
collaborations with the web-based Lacewing Digital Library project.