* 1110619
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Testing the Pleistocene aggregate island complex (PAIC) model of diversification in co-distributed avian lineages
* BIO,DEB
* 05/01/2011,04/30/2014
* Peter Hosner, University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Maureen Kearney
* 04/30/2014
* USD 14,866.00

An intense concentration of biodiversity, combined with complex yet well-
understood geologic and climatic histories, make the Philippines an ideal system
for phylogeographic studies. This research will evaluate the relative effects of
Pleistocene climate changes, geological history, and complex topography on the
process of diversification in a suite of island bird species. The project
integrates diverse sources of data, including mitochondrial and nuclear DNA
sequences, earth history data, spatial modeling, ongoing field research, and
study of museum collections. The results of this study will broadly apply to
questions of how periodic climate-associated sea level changes influenced
diversification and the geographic distributions of organisms in island
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Philippines is considered a "megadiverse
country" and a "global conservation hotspot", yet traditional recognition of
bird species has greatly underestimated diversity and obscured biogeographic
patterns. Gene flow estimates from this study will provide an interesting new
perspective on species limits across an island archipelago, and will likely
elucidate novel evolutionary patterns and highlight under-appreciated centers of
avian endemism in the Philippines. The project will also provide opportunities
for undergraduates at the University of Kansas to gain experience in
biodiversity research techniques, including DNA sequencing and analysis, and to
develop research skills such as scientific writing and public presentation.