* 1110514
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Influences of host variation on pathogen prevalence and disease dynamics in free-living communities
* BIO,DEB
* 05/15/2011,04/30/2014
* Evelyn Rynkiewicz, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Douglas Levey
* 04/30/2014
* USD 14,952.00

Vector-borne and zoonotic diseases (e.g. Lyme Disease, West Nile virus) have
become an increased public health and wildlife management concern in the US and
globally. Recent research in disease ecology has greatly improved our
understanding of the behavior and dynamics of parasites and pathogens. While
evidence shows some hosts become infected or transmit pathogens more than
others, most theoretical models describing disease dynamics have ignored
differences among individuals. Sources of individual variability such as sex,
age, pathogen co-infection status, previous infection, and immune function
influence how hosts become infected. Integrating population- and individual-
level approaches can better describe how pathogens are affected by the small-
scale environment of the host and the larger-scale community of hosts, vectors,
and pathogens, leading to better assessment of disease risk and pathogen
prevalence. This research addresses the following questions: 1) How does
variation among individual hosts affect parasite load and probability of
infection? 2) How does variation in the probability of host infection determine
pathogen prevalence at the population and community level? To address these
questions, ticks and small mammal hosts will be repeatedly sampled across the
season of peak tick activity, and the co-infection status of hosts and ticks, as
well as the host immune response, will be evaluated. Next-generation, high
throughput sequencing will be used to analyze tick and host microbial co-
infection patterns. A combination of a general, functional immune assay and
detailed measurement of host cytokine profiles will be used to inform how the
immune system interacts with vectors and vector-borne
infection.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project investigates many levels of
diversity, from bacterial to vector, host, and environment, using techniques
from multiple fields of biological science. The results of this research project
may lead to better on the ground assessment of human risk for vector-borne
disease. The interdisciplinary nature of this research provides many
opportunities for undergraduate research projects, from animal behavior to
vector and pathogen genetics, making this project exciting to a broad diversity
of students. Educational literature on tick-borne disease and minimizing risk
will be designed for local DNR, parks and recreation groups.