* 1110641
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Functional and comparative morphology of the nasal cavity in phyllostomid bats
* BIO,DEB
* 05/01/2011,04/30/2013
* Elizabeth Dumont, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Maureen Kearney
* 04/30/2013
* USD 10,487.00

Like most mammals, leaf-nosed bats use their noses in respiration (breathing)
and olfaction (smelling). Unlike most mammals, however, these animals also use
their noses to transmit echolocation calls. Each of these three functions
requires space and connectivity within the relatively small nasal cavity. As a
first step toward understanding the potential trade-offs in the evolution of
these functions, this study seeks to understand how the morphology of the nasal
cavity relates to olfaction in particular. Drawing on a diverse array of classic
and cutting-edge anatomical techniques (comparative anatomy, histology, micro-CT
scanning, and computational fluid dynamics), this research takes a
multidisciplinary approach to understanding how form relates to function across
evolutionary time in a sample of 14 species of bats. &lt;br/&gt;This research
will lead to a better understanding of functional trade-offs in the evolution of
complex systems. Questions about the relationship between form and function have
a long history in evolutionary biology, and this research will make significant
contributions to understanding the form-function relationship in an understudied
region of the skull. As part of this research, undergraduates will be trained in
generating and testing hypotheses, gathering anatomical data, and interpreting
results. CT scans and computational models will be disseminated to other
scientists and to the public through online databases.