* 1110521
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Rapid evolution and the character displacement hypothesis: a unique test using a replicated natural colonization experiment
* BIO,DEB
* 04/01/2011,03/31/2013
* Yoel Stuart, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* George Gilchrist
* 03/31/2013
* USD 15,000.00

According the character displacement hypothesis, similar species that use
similar resources and come to live in the same area should evolve differences
that allow them to coexist. Otherwise, one species will drive the other species
extinct. This research tests for character displacement in the lizard Anolis
carolinensis in response to the recent invasion of a closely related species, A.
sagrei. The two species compete for food and space, so the researchers expect
them to evolve to use different resources now that their geographic ranges
overlap. The researchers are using a replicated island experiment to test this
hypothesis, comparing habitat use patterns and physical characteristics of A.
carolinensis on islands where A. sagrei is present to control islands where A.
sagrei is absent. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research, the first replicated
experimental test of the character displacement hypothesis in nature, will serve
as a clear example of evolution in action, useful to teach evolutionary
principles to the general public and to help dispel the popular notion that
evolution by natural selection is a slow process. This research examines the
role that small-scale evolutionary processes may play in generating large-scale
evolutionary patterns, and the investigators will describe the results in
popular scientific articles, public museum exhibits, and high-school science
curricula. As a study of rapid evolution in response to environmental change,
this research will inform conservation biologists and policy makers who are
developing measures to conserve species and ecosystems in the face of an
increasing human population, climate change, invasive species, and habitat
destruction.