* 1110598
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Comparative studies in reproductive interference: linking floral adaptations and species divergence
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2011,05/31/2013
* Richard Ree, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 05/31/2013
* USD 15,000.00

Character displacement is an evolutionary process whereby two or more species
exhibit increased divergence when occurring together. Because the composition of
communities varies geographically, a single species may co-occur with a variety
of different species across its geographic range; as a consequence, variation in
interactions between species can cause selection promoting within-species
divergence among populations. The proposed research examines this process in the
flowering plant Pedicularis cranolopha, which exhibits substantial within-
species floral variation. Genomic markers will be used to trace population
genetic histories to test how floral variation among populations relates to
community similarity and whether it affects gene flow among populations. By
examining the evolution of reproductive isolation in a community context, this
research will improve our understanding of how species interactions affect rates
of evolution and speciation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study will be conducted
in the Hengduan Mountains in China, a biodiversity hotspot that is poorly
studied with little known about processes generating or maintaining diversity.
By working with Chinese scientists this work will promote future international
collaborations. In addition, it will provide educational outreach through
training of young scientists both in field and laboratory skills. Results will
be disseminated to the general public (including K-12 students) through outreach
portals available at the Field Museum of Natural History.