* 1110560
* Charge carrier relaxation and energy dissipation in one-dimensional nanostructures
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2015
* Gregory Hartland, University of Notre Dame
* Continuing Grant
* George Janini
* 08/31/2015
* USD 758,068.00

In this award, funded by the Macromolecular, Supramolecular, and Nanochemistry
Program of the Chemistry Division, Prof. Gregory V. Hartland, Prof. Masaru Kuno
and Dr. Libai Huang of the University of Notre Dame in conjunction with graduate
and undergraduate student co-workers will use ultrafast transient absorption
microscopy to study single nanostructures. These experiments will be performed
with diffraction limited spatial resolution. The materials that will be examined
include II-VI nanowires (such as CdSe nanowires and CdSe/ZnSe core-shell
nanowires), metal nanowires (Ag and Au), and carbon nanotubes (both metallic and
semiconducting tubes). For the semiconducting nanostructures, the main goals of
the project are to explore how the time scales for charge carrier trapping vary
between different nanostructures, how they vary spatially within a given
nanostructure, and the role of surface chemistry in these processes. For the
metal nanowires, the investigators will explore how the environment controls
energy relaxation. In particular, the investigators are interested in how liquid
properties, such as viscosity, affect vibrational relaxation in these systems.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Despite extensive studies over the past few decades, many
basic questions remain about the sequence of events that follow optical
excitation of nanomaterials, and their timescales. The proposed experiments will
provide new insight into these processes. For example, the investigators will
determine how surface properties affect the fate of charge carriers in
semiconducting nanostructures, which is important for integrating these
materials into devices, such as solar cells. They will also examine how the
elastic response of metal nanowires is affected by environment, which is
relevant to the development of ultra-sensitive mass sensors based on these
materials. The measurements of the energy relaxation processes in this project
are also relevant to biological imaging and photothermal therapy applications of
nanomaterials. In addition to the broader technological impact of the work, the
project will serve as a platform for training graduate and undergraduate
students in materials science, chemistry and physics.