* 1110537
* Dissertation Research:   Winter soil respiration in southeast Wyoming
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2011,05/31/2013
* Elise Pendall, University of Wyoming
* Standard Grant
* Henry L. Gholz
* 05/31/2013
* USD 14,922.00

In seasonally snow covered regions, the metabolism of living roots and
microorganisms in the soil over the winter may be an important part of the total
annual transfer of carbon dioxide from ecosystems on land into the atmosphere.
This project will measure wintertime soil respiration in southeast Wyoming and
determine the factors that control it. Measurement plots have been established
across a range of ecosystems from short grass prairies to subalpine forests that
experience a wide range of winter weather conditions. The highest elevation
site, at about 10,000 feet, is a subalpine forest that has snow cover for more
than eight months at depths up to ten feet. The lowest elevation site, at 5400
feet, has only four months of snow that is shallow and patchy. This results in
contrasting midwinter soil environments. At the high elevation site, snow
provides a deep insulating layer that effectively insulates the soil from
extremely cold air temperatures and prevents soil freezing. In contrast, soils
at the lowest elevation site are often directly exposed to the air and often
freeze in midwinter. This has the counterintuitive result that soils in the
coldest, snowiest ecosystems at the highest elevations are actually the warmest
in midwinter. The organisms responsible for soil respiration, mainly bacteria,
fungi and plant roots, rely on the presence of liquid water to be biologically
active. Therefore, it is expected that the highest elevation sites will have
higher rates of soil respiration during the winter than the lowest elevation
sites. Measurements will be made of soil respiration at the different study
sites in ways that will enable the relative amounts coming from microbes and
roots to be determined. Laboratory experiments will be done to determine the
controls over respiration at cold temperatures.

Over a year the flux of carbon dioxide from the land into the atmosphere is many
times greater than the amount released by the burning of fossil fuels. Over the
earth, most of the released carbon is taken back up by plants. But small shifts
in the relative rates of release and uptake can have a large impact on
atmospheric concentrations of carbon dioxide. Current computer models generally
contain overly simple descriptions of soil processes and how they may respond to
climate change, particularly at cold temperatures. Therefore, it is important to
learn about the interacting biological and physical factors that control these
processes. In addition to addressing the socially relevant issue of global
climate change, this project will help educate and train a new generation of
scientists through the employment of an undergraduate research assistant.