* 1110753
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH:  The Genetic Basis of Local Adaptation: Serpentine Tolerance in Mimulus guttatus
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2011,05/31/2013
* Jessica Selby, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 05/31/2013
* USD 14,980.00

Natural landscapes are often highly variable such that a species is likely to
experience different selective pressures across its range. Such divergent
selection can drive the adaptive differentiation of populations, maintain
genetic variation, and promote speciation. Adaptation of populations to their
local habitat has frequently been demonstrated, but is not well characterized at
the genetic level. This study will look at adaptation to serpentine soils in
Mimulus guttatus (common monkeyflower) to address the genetic basis of adaptive
divergence. Serpentine soils represent a particularly harsh habitat that most
plant species cannot survive in; however, M. guttatus is able to grow both on
and off of these soils. This project will use high-throughput DNA sequencing
technology to identify regions of the genome that contribute to differences in
tolerance to soil conditions, test the adaptive significance of these genomic
regions in the field, and identify traits that enable survival on serpentine
soils. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Characterizing the genetic basis of adaptation to
heterogeneous environments could provide important insights for predicting how
populations may respond to changing environments. Furthermore, by identifying
genomic regions involved in plant growth on metal enriched, nutrient poor soils
this project could have implications for phytoremediation of sites affected by
mining or other activities resulting in toxic soils as well as crop breeding to
improve tolerance to poor or stressful soils. This project will include
mentorship of high school and undergraduate students and the engagement of the
general public.