* 1110782
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH:  The Role of Mating System in Sperm Competition and Protein Evolution in Agelaius Blackbirds
* BIO,IOS
* 07/01/2011,06/30/2014
* Irene Liu, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Michelle Elekonich
* 06/30/2014
* USD 15,000.00

Individual differences in the ability to compete for mates can drive evolution
through a process known as sexual selection. While examples of sexual selection
acting on behavior or morphology are well known, much less established is the
understanding of how sexual selection acts at the molecular level to affect
individual reproductive success. &lt;br/&gt;In species where females mate with
multiple males, sperm compete for access to a female?s eggs. Sperm competition
can lead to selection on seminal fluid proteins (Sfps), a class of proteins
transferred by a male during mating that aid in successful fertilization by that
male while reducing success of subsequent matings by other males. Because of
their link to sperm competitiveness, Sfps may evolve differently in species with
polygamous mating systems (with high sperm competition) compared to monogamous
species (with low sperm competition). &lt;br/&gt;This project investigates the
relationship between mating behavior and selection on Sfps in New World
blackbirds (genus Agelaius), a group whose diverse behavior enables the study of
how sexual selection affects DNA sequence evolution. Genes coding for Sfps will
be isolated to test the hypothesis that such genes evolve faster in polygamous
than in monogamous species. These genes will be archived on the NIH sequence
database GenBank, providing researchers with tools for future comparative
studies. Ultimately, results will clarify how selection links traits across a
wide range of biological scales, from the molecular to organismal
level.&lt;br/&gt;Mentoring and outreach efforts are integral to this project.
Undergraduate students will be introduced to the basic research process by
learning fundamental lab techniques and writing original papers. Results will be
shared at Caribbean field sites, where a primary challenge facing natural
resources agencies is reconciling the need for preservation with those of a
tourist-driven economy. Work will also be communicated broadly at the
university, community and national levels.