* 1110334
* Collaborative Research: Dynamics in the Mesosphere and Lower Thermosphere over the Andes Lidar Observatory
* GEO,AGS
* 04/01/2012,03/31/2018
* Steven Franke, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* John Meriwether
* 03/31/2018
* USD 300,000.00

This is a 5-year scientific collaboration to investigate the dynamics in the
mesosphere and lower thermosphere (MLT) over the Andes Mountains in northern
Chile. The objective is to characterize and understand wave phenomenology in the
80 to 100 km region, including background state interactions and effects. The
investigation will be carried out at the newly established Andes Lidar
Observatory (ALO) at Cerro Pachón (30.3°S, 70.7°W, 2530 m), Chile. This location
is uniquely important for wave studies because it is a region of steep terrain
and prolific wave generation that produces particularly pure examples of terrain
generated waves due to the extreme dryness of the area and relative lack of
convection, and it provides data for a region, the subtropical Southern
Hemisphere, that currently is poorly characterized in terms of planetary waves,
tides and gravity waves. The suite of instruments at ALO comprises a Na
wind/temperature lidar, an all sky imager, a multichannel photometer, a
mesospheric temperature mapper, an infrared camera, and a meteor radar, which
will be used to observe waves and wave phenomena over a wide range of spatial
and temporal scales. The project aims to provide the most detailed study to date
from a Southern Hemisphere mountainous site of the characteristics and
variability of instabilities, gravity waves, tides, planetary waves and mean
winds and their interactions over a continuous 5-year period. Specific questions
that will be addressed include: &lt;br/&gt;1) What is the climatology of waves
and wave related phenomenology over the Andes?&lt;br/&gt;2) What are the
origins, lifecycle and morphology of instabilities at ALO?&lt;br/&gt;3) What
atmospheric conditions lead to the formation of various wave
phenomena?&lt;br/&gt;4) What are the characteristics of the interactions between
tides, planetary waves and gravity waves and their effects on the MLT
variability? &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will provide new education and
training opportunities for students at all three universities involved.
International collaborations with strong student involvement will also be
pursued under this project with the Ciudad Universitaria, Argentina and the
University of Adelaide, Australia. The unique dataset collected during this
project will be made available to the scientific community and will support
research on a wide range of scientific topics in both atmospheric science and
astronomy.