* 1110997
* Workshop: Development of an Integrated Understanding of the Sun-Earth System in Borovets, Bulgaria; September 12 - 16, 2011
* GEO,AGS
* 05/01/2011,04/30/2013
* Vania Jordanova, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* Ilia Roussev
* 04/30/2013
* USD 15,383.00

The Principal Investigator will organize an international community workshop and
symposium in Bulgaria to foster interdisciplinary research and education. This
sympoium will be held during September 12-16, 2011, in the Bulgarian town of
Borovets near the capital of Sofia. The proposed Second International Symposium
on Recent Observations and Simulations of the Sun-Earth System (ISROSES-II) will
provide a forum for scientists from all space physics communities to present and
discuss recent advances in modeling and observations of the Sun-Earth System.
This symposium is a continuation of the highly successful ISROSES symposium held
in Varna, Bulgaria, during September 17-22, 2006. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Each day
of the symposium will be devoted to a primary science topic, including both the
observational and modeling aspects of: (1) solar wind - magnetosphere
interactions; (2) magnetosphere - ionosphere - thermosphere coupling; (3)
dynamics of the near-Earth space environment; and (4) new measurement, data
analysis, and simulation techniques.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;One of the main goals
of the Symposium is to improve "understanding and prediction of processes
affecting solar activity and the propagation of resulting solar effects to the
Earth via the solar wind," which has been a prime objective of the NSF's
National Space Weather Program (NSWP). ISROSES-II is also relevant to the
strategic goals and focus aeas of the NSF's Solar, Heliospheric, and
INterplanetary Environment (SHINE) community, the Geospace Environment Modeling
(GEM) community, and the Coupling, Energetics, and Dynamics of Atmospheric
Regions (CEDAR) community.