* 1110695
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Evolutionary dynamics of female polymorphism: an invasive damselfly model
* BIO,DEB
* 04/15/2011,09/30/2012
* Eben Gering, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Friar
* 09/30/2012
* USD 14,980.00

Female coloration is highly variable within many animal species. What maintains
this diversity, and how can it inform our general understanding of evolution?
While theory suggests that both sexual and natural selection might diversify
female color, the role(s) of these mechanisms in female evolution have not been
jointly tested within a single study system. Invasive populations of a
damselfly, Ischnura ramburii provide unique opportunities to close this gap.
Frequencies of I. ramburii female color morphs have changed dramatically since
the colonization of Hawaii. Today, the frequencies of ?andromorph? females,
which visually resemble males, are correlated with both invasive population
densities and rainfall. Using experimental mesocosms constructed within invaded
sites, the investigators will examine how male-female interactions and color
morph performance (survival and fecundity) are influenced by morph frequency, by
population density, and by the abiotic environment (rainfall). Outcomes will be
used to determine how social and physical environments drive female color
evolution, and to identify conditions that promote female
diversity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; In addition to identifying factors that
maintain female variation in nature, the study will shed new light on how
invasive populations evolve, suggesting novel strategies for mitigating
invasions. Proposed work will provide unique research opportunities for several
undergraduates, and findings will be shared with the public via the media, and
through a series of highly successful outreach talks that the investigators co-
founded in 2008.