* 1110569
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Islands of invasion: savanna oak trees and plant community structure in California grassland
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/2011,06/30/2013
* Carla D'Antonio, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Peter Alpert
* 06/30/2013
* USD 13,163.00

Many of the world's grassland and savanna communities have experienced
significant changes in the abundance of shrubs and trees over the last century.
Woody plants have dramatically increased in many different types of grassland
and declined in others. In light of these shifts and of the high proportion of
threatened plants and animals that occur in grasslands, there is a need to
better understand the influences of trees on the surrounding plant communities,
how these impacts vary along regional climatic gradients, and the resistance of
these ecosystems to further change. In particular, the potential for trees to
exert long-term impacts on neighboring communities following their death has
never been evaluated. This project will explore the structure of the California
oak savanna at local and regional scales through time, focusing on the
relationship between the presence of oak trees and the diversity of other native
and non-native species. Research will focus on two main questions: (1) How long
do the effects of oaks on species diversity and soil properties last? and (2)
How do the resource patches created by savanna trees contribute to species
richness? Researchers will survey the surroundings of living and dead oak trees,
determine the time of death for each tree with radiocarbon dating, and use
mapping software and spatial analyses. At this time there is no overarching
theory predicting when canopy trees will have positive or negative impacts on
understory species diversity. This work will provide a unified theory for
understanding impacts of trees in grasslands. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Savannas and
grasslands are economically important grazing lands in North America and
throughout the world. This project will help understand how changes taking place
now in these habitats may affect them in the future, helping society adapt
management to keep pace with change. In addition, the project will provide
opportunities to mentor high school students in science and will work with
outreach programs at the University of California to introduce students from
groups under-represented in science to habitat conservation and restoration.