* 1110440
* Dissertation Research: The links between cognitive ability and individual variation in parental behavior
* BIO,IOS
* 07/01/2011,06/30/2013
* Daniel Wetzel, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Michelle Elekonich
* 06/30/2013
* USD 14,947.00

Parenting behavior, an important trait in many organisms, exhibits a curious
pattern - individual parents are often flexible in response to variable
conditions (e.g., time of season, number and age of offspring, and the behavior
of other caregivers), yet also exhibit consistently different levels of care.
Individual differences in care could be due to differences in cognitive skill at
finding food. This project will measure between-individual differences and
within-individual adjustments in care using a wild population of house sparrows
(Passer domesticus). A capstone experiment will provide subjects with an array
of foraging tests allowing assessment of individual food-finding skills. The
resulting data will test the idea that individuals who perform well on novel
foraging tasks exhibit higher levels of care. The experiment would provide the
first evidence from free-living animals that cognitive abilities impact
individual variation in parental care. This would advance our understanding of
diversity in parental behavior and the evolution of cognition in animal groups
exhibiting care, including humans. The findings also may provide insight into
the mechanisms leading to the success of some animals, especially the invasive
house sparrow, at adapting to human-induced changes in habitat. Finally, this
project will enhance the conceptual and empirical training of a talented young
scientist. It will provide opportunities to mentor undergraduate students from
diverse backgrounds; these students will experience the scientific method in a
field setting, learn modern techniques in studying behavior, and gain expertise
in statistical analysis.