* 1110623
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Effects of phytoplankton on bacterial community structure across varying temperature and light contexts
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2011,05/31/2013
* Angela Kent, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Alan Tessier
* 05/31/2013
* USD 14,890.00

Understanding the abundance, diversity, and distribution of organisms in the
environment is a central goal of ecology with broad implications including
ecosystem function and conservation. Ecologists have described many examples of
how species interactions, such as competition and predation, or environmental
conditions, such as temperature and salinity, influencing community composition.
However, the strength and relative importance of these forces and how they
interact to determine community composition remains poorly understood. This
research project will experimentally elucidate how forces that structure
communities act together to determine the abundance and composition of microbial
assemblages in lakes. Aquatic microbial communities provide an ideal system for
studying forces that influence community composition, because these communities
exhibit seasonal patterns of community change, are influenced by a number of
biotic and environmental factors, and are relatively easy to manipulate.
Observational studies and experimental manipulations indicate that phytoplankton
have a substantial influence on temporal patterns of bacterial community change.
Environmental conditions including temperature and light have the potential to
affect bacteria directly as well as indirectly through modifying bacterial
interactions with phytoplankton. This study will explore how bacterial community
structure is influenced by species interactions with phytoplankton under
different temperature and light conditions by use of manipulative, mesocosm
experiments. Bacterial response to all combinations of phytoplankton,
temperature, and light will be used to assess the relative influence of biotic
and environmental factors on bacterial community composition and how
phytoplankton influence changes across varying light and temperature contexts.

Results from this research will enhance the ability of scientists to forecast
responses of freshwater microbial communities to environmental change. This
project supports the doctoral research of a graduate student and will provide
research experiences for several undergraduate students. The principal
investigators will participate in outreach efforts aimed at introducing local
K-12 students to ecology and environmental science. Hands-on activities will be
conducted for students at the Campus Middle School for Girls, and the Don Moyer
Boys and Girls Club, and presentations will be made at the Illinois Envirothon,
a statewide environmental competition for high school students.