* 1110443
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Systematics of the Order Brassicales and Family Brassicaceae, and comparative genomic analyses (nuclear and organellar genomes): a phylogenomic approach
* BIO,DEB
* 05/01/2011,04/30/2013
* Patrick Edger, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Maureen Kearney
* 04/30/2013
* USD 14,951.00

The evolutionary relationships amongst species in the order Brassicales (which
includes approximately 4550 species, the model plant species Arabidopsis
thaliana, and many economically important crop species), are currently poorly
known. Knowledge of these relationships is required to interpret the wealth of
genomic, developmental, and physiological data available for this group within
an evolutionary context. This study will resolve the phylogenetic relationships
within the order Brassicales utilizing hundreds of loci encoded across the
nuclear, mitochondrial, and chloroplast genomes. In addition, this project will
investigate diversification rates and the evolution of each genome compartment
(i.e. nuclear and organellar genomes) -- including genome size, gene content
(e.g. gene loss and duplications, novel gene functions), and genome
structure.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Cultivated and wild Brassicales species possess
numerous novel traits and chemistries with enormous value to crop improvement,
including biotic resistances (e.g. insects, fungi, and nematodes) and abiotic
stress tolerances (e.g. drought, freezing, and heavy metals). In addition, this
plant group shares novel chemistries that are beneficial to human health,
including treatments for cardiovascular disease and high blood pressure. This
research will enhance our understanding of which species share these beneficial
novel biochemistries and traits, and characterizing the underlying biosynthetic
pathways. Ultimately, this framework will allow these traits to be targeted for
pharmaceuticals and to improve crops.