* 1110005
* HRRPAA: Development of Underwater Archaeology Techniques
* SBE,BCS
* 04/15/2011,03/31/2012
* Lisa Lucero, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 03/31/2012
* USD 17,576.00

With National Science Foundation support, Dr. Lisa J. Lucero and an
international team of freshwater divers will conduct a diving expedition to
explore cenotes (sinkholes fed by the water table) for ancient Maya offerings at
Cara Blanca, Belize May 1-20, 2011. The research is important because it has the
potential to shed new light on the processes which allowed prehistoric Mayans to
survive and adapt successfully for centuries in a forested lowland environment.
While many Mayan archaeological sites have been excavated, this project has the
potential to provide a unique type of data. One goal of the project is to assess
the impact of climate change on society. The Maya lived successfully in the
semi-tropics for millennia, and the challenges they faced at the end of the
Classic period are the same ones that today's societies are struggling to
address in dealing with accelerating global climate
change.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The team brings together U.S., Belizean, and
Mexican specialists in deep diving and underwater archaeology to assess ritual
intensification in the face of a series of droughts that struck the Maya
lowlands between c. A.D. 800 and A.D. 900. This period witnessed tumultuous
events in Maya history, ultimately resulting in the Maya abandoning their kings
and centers in the southern lowlands by the early 10th century. Several of the
25 Cara Blanca pools have ceremonial architecture with specialized artifact
assemblages indicating that they served not only as portals to the underworld or
Xibalba, but as places for pilgrimage. Cenotes are expected to yield Maya
offerings including ceramic vessels, stone items and sacrificial victims as
found in northern lowland cenotes and caves, another type of portal. While caves
have been the focus of much research, less work has been done on southern
lowland cenotes for two reasons: 1) the majority of cenotes are found in the
northern lowlands; and 2) underwater explorations require specialized equipment,
expertise, and time (divers can only stay in the water a limited amount of time
each dive). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;One major goal of the proposed research is to
assess the feasibility of conducting archaeology underwater at depths of at
least 60 m. Two of the eight pools explored in 2010, Pools 1 and 20, have
associated specialized settlement and are quite deep (over 35 m and over 60 m).
These dives will require the use of mixed gases (trimix, including helium) and
possibly the use of closed circuit re-breathers. The feasibility will be
determined based on the determination of an artifact layer and the volume that
would need to be excavated versus the time necessary to perform this work at
such depths.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The proposed investigation sets the stage for
a long-term project on sacred landscapes, including further diving and
excavating Cara Blanca's unique structures. Once a foundation is set,
undergraduate and graduate students will be included as they have been in
previous field seasons.