* 1110513
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH:  Elucidating stoichiometric and biogeochemical consequences of soil heterotrophic bacterial life history strategies
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2011,05/31/2014
* Sarah Hobbie, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Henry L. Gholz
* 05/31/2014
* USD 15,000.00

Mechanistic understanding of the relationship between microbial community
structure and ecosystem function is the key to moving microbial ecology from an
observation-based to a hypothesis-driven science. This project adapts a life
history strategy framework developed in plants and animals to microbial ecology
to enable mechanistic, hypothesis-driven examination of soil bacterial response
to changes in environmental conditions. By examining individual species of soil
bacteria and taking a whole-organism approach, this project investigates the
role of tradeoffs between growth rate and efficiency on the nutrient
requirements and biogeochemical consequences of growth across a diverse range of
soil bacteria. This holistic approach allows generalizations to emerge from
patterns in traits and genome allocation effectively defining bacterial life
history strategies. Life history strategies allow generation of hypotheses at
both the individual organism and bacterial community
levels.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Soil bacteria are responsible for the processing
and recycling of the majority of C fixed in terrestrial environments. By
defining life history strategies this project deepens understanding of the
effects of changes in environmental conditions on soil microbial community
dynamics and feedbacks affecting other ecosystem processes. The generalizations
discovered in this project promise to be applicable not only in the field of
ecosystem ecology, but anywhere understanding the mechanistic basis of microbial
community function is important including bioremediation, synthetic ecology, and
human health microbiology.&lt;br/&gt;