* 1110437
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH "Clinal variation for  life history in a freshwater snail"
* BIO,DEB
* 01/01/2012,12/31/2014
* Daniela Vergara, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* George Gilchrist
* 12/31/2014
* USD 14,584.00

A gradual change in the reproductive mode has been observed in two lake
populations of the freshwater New Zealand snail, Potamopyrgus antipodarum.
Clonal females dominate deep habitats, while cross-fertilizing males and females
dominate the shallow regions. Snails in both lakes are infected by a trematode
parasite, Microphallus sp., which sterilizes all individuals, and is more
prevalent in shallow regions. A cline in the snail's life history (LH) traits
has also been found where shallow-water snails mature at a smaller size than
deep-water snails. This project will determine whether the difference in
parasite frequency is positively correlated with the frequency of cross-
fertilization and with differences in LH traits for snail populations in 20
lakes on the South Island of New Zealand. The PIs will determine reproductive
mode, parasite prevalence, and whether resistance to infection can evolve in
cross-fertilizing individuals using laboratory experiments.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The P. antipodarum study system is well suited to test
important evolutionary theories using field data, providing information on the
extent to which parasitism shapes a host population. Moreover, trematode worms
are important disease agents in both humans and domesticated animals. According
to the World Health Organization, 200 million people are infected by the
trematodes that cause Schistosomiasis, which is second to malaria in its public
health impact. Nonetheless, little is known about the effects of the snail
populations in spreading these worms, which have similar life cycles to the
worms studied in this research. Thus, this international, multi-lab
investigation should interest organizations that aim to control these diseases.