* 1110682
* Comparative Phylogeography of Small Mammals in Montane Africa: Integrating Climatic History and Genetic Variation
* BIO,DEB
* 05/01/2011,04/30/2013
* Terrence Demos, CUNY Queens College
* Standard Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 04/30/2013
* USD 13,903.00

This project investigates how climatic fluctuations over the Plio-Pleistocene
have affected the geographical distribution, demographic history and genetic
structure of five species of co-distributed Eastern Afromontane small mammals in
the Albertine and Kenyan Rifts. In African montane forests, the expansion and
contraction of habitats may have played an important role in shaping the
diversity of mammalian communities where centers of taxonomic and genetic
diversity are predicted to be coincident with areas that acted as persistent
forest refugia during glacial maxima. My study jointly utilizes species
distribution models and multi-locus molecular genetic data to investigate how
geographic and climatic processes have driven these evolutionary and ecological
processes. Questions to be addressed include whether and by what forces taxa are
continuing to diverge and how historical scenarios shaped current patterns of
lineage and genetic diversity. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research uses next-
generation sequencing to generate large numbers of loci that will allow fine-
scale inference of population genetic patterns and more precise inferences
regarding demographic history. Results from this work can be used to assess the
conservation and evolutionary significance of African montane mammal species in
an imperiled global biodiversity hotspot and delineate sub-regions that harbor
historically persistent lineages. Collaboration with Kenyan researchers will
enhance professional credentials of developing African scientists as well as
contribute to taxonomic descriptions of new species being uncovered in this
project. This study will also provide undergraduates an introduction to new
approaches in molecular biological research, including phylogenomic analysis,
that are applicable to diverse sets of biological and biomedical fields.
&lt;br/&gt;