* 1110796
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Metabolic and behavioral integration in social insect colonies
* BIO,IOS
* 07/01/2011,12/31/2012
* Jon Harrison, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Michelle Elekonich
* 12/31/2012
* USD 14,078.00

Size is among the most important factors in determining the biology of an
individual animal. Characteristics that correlate with body size include
lifespan, metabolism, and growth. Despite the significance of these factors for
fields ranging from field ecology to human medicine, scientists have not yet
been able to explain the mechanistic link that generates these patterns
throughout nature. Recent studies have demonstrated that size not only affects
individual animals, but also entire societies such as social insect colonies.
The central focus of this study is to test the hypothesis that behavioral
organization influences the distribution of work within colonies and results in
the allometric scaling of metabolic rate with colony size. Two sets of
experiments will make it possible to test this hypothesis, first by measuring
colonies as they naturally grow and second by artificially manipulating colony
size. In both sets of experiments, metabolic rates, patterns of network
connectivity, and and growth rates will be measured to develop an integrative
perspective on how size affects whole colony energetics. This research will be
conducted with the help of undergraduate students from minority backgrounds all
of whom will have the opportunity to develop their own independent projects to
develop and present at national conferences. A collaboration with the Estrella
Mountain Regional Park in Maricopa County, AZ designed to educate and engage the
general public with an interest in insect biodiversity will also be supported by
this proposal.