* 1110571
* Dissertation Research:   Impacts of Biological Diversity on Sediment Transport Conditions in Streams
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2011,05/31/2013
* Lindsey Albertson, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Sudeep Chandra
* 05/31/2013
* USD 15,000.00

Many fields of natural science suggest that organisms both respond to and also
directly regulate the physical processes that structure ecosystems, in ways that
have major implications for how the current loss of Earth?s biodiversity will
affect our planet. A growing number of studies incorporates the influence of
organisms into our understanding of biogeochemical cycles, functioning of
ecosystems, and formation of habitats. Most of these studies still consider the
influence of only one species at a time, ignoring the diverse array of species
that might have unique impacts. The project proposed here will explicitly ask
how interactions between coexisting species influence the physical process of
erosion. In this project, caddisfly (Trichoptera: Hydropsychidae) diversity in
experimental streams will be manipulated. Caddisflies are one of the most
diverse and widespread groups of insects that live in riverbeds. They construct
silken nets across pore spaces between rocks to filter feed, and previous
studies have shown that nets from a single species reduce sediment motion during
floods. This study will test whether multiple species of caddisfly that coexist
in the same stream cause a synergistic decrease in sediment motion compared to
any single species alone. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Predicting sediment transport
has become increasingly important in light of land-use changes, altered flow
regimes, and channel-restoration efforts, and this work will help develop a
better understanding of one of the most important processes in ecology and
geology. Although many researchers have shown that a single biological species
can have a substantial impact on abiotic processes, few studies have
mechanistically explored how multiple species of animals can synergistically
regulate fundamental transport processes in streams. This approach will refine
our ability to quantitatively predict erosion.