* 1110738
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Effects of matrix habitat on metacommunity dynamics and ecosystem function
* BIO,DEB
* 05/01/2011,10/31/2013
* Brian Inouye, Florida State University
* Standard Grant
* Maureen Kearney
* 10/31/2013
* USD 14,550.00

Understanding how the spatial arrangement of habitats in a landscape affects
biodiversity, and the resulting consequences for ecosystem services, is a
continuing challenge for ecologists. Microcosms provide an opportunity to study
landscape-scale processes on a smaller, more tractable scale. A microcosm of
soil and leaf litter will be used to examine how the size and spatial
arrangement of leaf litter influence the diversity of organisms contained
within, and how observed differences in species diversity affects an important
ecosystem service: leaf litter decomposition.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The results
from this project will enable scientists and land managers to manage natural
resources more effectively and efficiently, while conserving biodiversity.
Conducting research on small, yet critical, soil organisms is challenging
because they can be difficult, time consuming, or even impossible to identify
visually. This project will use a state-of-the-art method of DNA analysis for
rapid and accurate identification of the target organisms. The use and
refinement of DNA technology is important for the field of community ecology,
and science in general, since adoption of new methods based on the latest
technology offers the opportunity to break new ground and to enable research in
areas where data collection was previously not practical.