* 1110523
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: The proximate basis of behavioral plasticity in the butterfly Bicyclus anynana
* BIO,IOS
* 06/15/2011,05/31/2014
* Antonia Monteiro, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Michelle Elekonich
* 05/31/2014
* USD 14,310.00

Changes in brain development can lead to changes in adult behavior. Such
developmental alterations may be due to changes in the environment, a phenomenon
known as phenotypic plasticity. Phenotypic plasticity is a ubiquitous phenomenon
but many questions about its underlying molecular basis remain unanswered. To
address these questions, gene expression in the brains of individuals exposed to
different environmental conditions during development will be compared. The
butterfly Bicyclus anynana, a seasonally plastic butterfly in which the
temperature during development determines the adult courtship behavioral
phenotype, will be used for these experiments. When reared under warm conditions
(27?aC), that mimic the natural wet season experienced by wild B. anynana, adult
males court females avidly. Male butterflies that are reared under cool
conditions (17?aC), that mimic the natural dry season, are passive and court
females significantly less. This study will use the sequencing technology known
as RNA seq to measure gene expression in the brains of butterflies exposed to
the different temperatures during development. This will enable identification
of genes that may play a role in the temperature dependant development of the
brain and behavior in B. anynana. &lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: This study is
expected to shed new light on how the environment affects behavior. This is an
important goal of both evolutionary biologists, who seek to understand how
organisms produce adaptive behaviors in changing environments, and
neuroscientists, who seek to understand the physiological basis of behavior.
Thus, this project promotes collaboration between branches of biology with
diverse perspectives, skills, and techniques. The results of this research will
be made available to the general public through a website that will convey
information in a jargon-free way that is accessible to high-school students, as
well as through presentations at local schools that highlight the contribution
of women in science.