* 1110675
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Ecological context shapes how consumers respond to predation risk
* BIO,IOS
* 06/01/2011,05/31/2013
* Geoffrey Trussell, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* Michelle Elekonich
* 05/31/2013
* USD 10,848.00

Predators can strongly influence the structure and function of ecosystems
through trophic cascades. Classically, trophic cascades emerge when predators
eat intermediate consumers and thus have a positive, indirect effect on the base
of the food chain. Recent work suggests, however, that the anti-predator
behaviors of consumers can also drive trophic cascades. Consumers often reduce
their foraging activity in order to minimize vulnerability to predators, but
reduced foraging comes at the cost of reduced energy intake and growth. Hence,
physiological (e.g., energy reserves, metabolic rate) and environmental
conditions (e.g., resource availability, environmental stress) may influence how
consumers balance these tradeoffs. For example, theory predicts that consumers
may be more willing to accept increased predation risk while foraging when the
risk of starvation is also high (i.e., low energy reserves or resources). The
proposed laboratory and field experiments use a model food chain from the rocky
shores of New England to examine consumer responses to predation risk. Despite
considerable theory, more empirical research is necessary to better understand
how ecological context shapes growth-predation risk tradeoffs in prey, which
ultimately determine the strength of risk-driven trophic cascades and the impact
of predators in ecological communities. Furthermore, because the stress of
predation risk also affects how energy transfers up the food chain, insights
from this work will improve scientific understanding of the importance of
biodiversity, food web dynamics, and the use of predators in the management of
natural ecosystems (e.g., Yellowstone National Park). Based at Northeastern
University?s Marine Science Center (MSC), the PIs will engage students from
diverse backgrounds in their research through summer internships and the many
well-established K-12 outreach programs based at the MSC. Additionally, the
proposed experiments will be integrated into their field-based Experimental
Design in Marine Ecology course that is offered to undergraduate and graduate
students at Northeastern.