* 1110633
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: How life history influences host manipulation by parasites in the California fiddler crab, Uca crenulata
* BIO,IOS
* 06/01/2011,05/31/2014
* Marlene Zuk, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Michelle Elekonich
* 05/31/2014
* USD 14,849.00

Many parasites manipulate host behavior to enhance parasite transmission and
reproductive success. Often ?risky? behaviors become intensified and make
intermediate hosts more susceptible to predation by final hosts; this step is
crucial for life cycle completion. While parasitism is the most common lifestyle
on Earth, many aspects of host-parasite relationships remain poorly understood.
First, parasites exhibit considerable variation in their manipulative effort.
Recent theoretical models suggest that this variation arises from differences in
parasite lifespan. Shorter-lived parasites should exhibit more manipulative
effort than longer-lived species to achieve transmission before death.
Manipulative strategies may also vary across parasite development to minimize
mortality. Specifically, parasites should suppress risky host behaviors when
immature, and enhance them once infective to final hosts. In addition, little is
known about the relationship between manipulative parasites and host sexual
signals. While parasites generally decrease a host?s ability to attract mates
and reproduce, manipulative species could increase sexual signals to make hosts
more attractive to predators, but also to potential mates. Paradoxically,
infected individuals would experience higher short-term mating success, as well
as increased mortality via predation. This view runs counter to conventional
models, and would reveal a new role for parasites in sexual signal evolution.
These hypotheses will be tested in the lab and field using naturally and
experimentally infected fiddler crab populations from Southern California.
Courtship and anti-predator behaviors will be quantified across parasite
development to determine how parasitic effects change through time. Predation
trials will reveal how parasites influence host predation and mortality. This
research will contribute to our understanding of host-parasite evolutionary
dynamics and how manipulative parasites influence host sexual signal evolution.
Zuk and Mora will disseminate their results to outreach organizations and to the
general public during citizen science events organized by Mora and nature
reserve managers.