* 1110332
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Endocranial capacity and extinction risk in mammals
* BIO,DEB
* 05/01/2011,04/30/2013
* Rodolfo Dirzo, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Alan Tessier
* 04/30/2013
* USD 14,028.00

Of the nearly 5,400 mammalian species alive today, a quarter of them are
currently at risk of extinction due to loss of habitat, overexploitation,
climate change and other human disturbances. Species not considered to be at
risk of extinction are regularly added to the list of threatened species.
Identifying species of greater conservation concern before their populations
become critically threatened may be more effective and less expensive for
protecting mammalian diversity than targeting species already known to have
suffered population declines. In the fossil record, species of mammals that have
gone extinct had significantly smaller relative brain sizes, (the size of the
brain relative to body size), than species that are still alive today. Further,
carnivore species listed currently as endangered have significantly smaller
relative brain sizes as compared to carnivore species that are not threatened
with extinction. Based on this preliminary data, this research project will
examine more broadly the relationship between relative brain size and
conservation status in order to test the hypothesis that species with larger
relative brain sizes may be more successful in the face of environmental change,
and thus more resistant to extinction. This project is unique in that it
examines both modern mammalian species, using a more comprehensive methodology
than has been employed to date, as well as mammalian species over the last 30
million years. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A goal of this research project is to
produce tools that scientists, governments and conservation organizations can
use to identify species that may be extinction-prone. By providing an
inexpensive and readily deployable metric for proactively identifying species of
concern, and guiding action to stem species loss, this work could provide
important insights for conservation science and policy. This research will be
disseminated through publications, conference presentations and continued
communication with non-governmental organizations. Additionally, the substantial
dataset that results from this work will be made available to other researchers
and state and federal agencies. This research project will involved high school
and undergraduate students in research methods and analysis, and supports the
doctoral research of a graduate student.