* 1110189
* SBIR Phase I:  Correlation of Surface Free Energy and Cytocompatibility of Amphiphilic Biomaterials
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2011,12/31/2011
* Joseph Salamone, Rochal Industries LLP
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 12/31/2011
* USD 150,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project will provide the
basis for producing a unique cytocompatible, liquid adhesive bandage that will
facilitate wound healing. This project is based upon a correlation of surface
free energy of hydrated, amphiphilic polymers and their ability to support cell
functions, such as growth and proliferation, deposition of extracellular matrix
proteins, and patterns of substrate surface coverage and morphology. Current
commercially available liquid adhesive bandages for professional applications on
humans are used in a variety of wound coverage applications. However, there is
no liquid adhesive bandage commercially available for human use that serves as a
cell substrate as well as protecting a wound from foreign contaminants. The
research will determine the surface free energies of a variety of amphiphilic
polymers, ranging from highly hydrophilic to highly hydrophobic, and then
correlate the surface free energy data to the cytocompatibility of the
respective polymer films. It is anticipated that this approach will result in a
selection of polymers in a narrow range of surface free energies that can
accelerate tissue regrowth for wound healing.

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project is the creation of a new
form of medical treatment for acute wounds (e.g., surgery sites, injuries), for
chronic wounds (e.g., ulcers) and for burn wounds utilizing a simple, low cost,
intimately conformal, protective polymer coating material that is capable of
facilitating tissue regeneration. Such a coating will function as a synthetic
skin substitute that will allow wounds to heal rapidly, without external
contamination, such as from bacteria and other microorganisms, because of its
ability to facilitate cell adhesion and proliferation. Importantly, this polymer
coating will self-remove over time as the wound heals, in contrast to typical
bandages that can cause new tissue abrasion and rupture when manually removed.
This project will demonstrate how enhanced cytocompatibility of liquid adhesive
bandages, and synthetic skin substitutes in general, can be obtained in topical
wound care, thus leading to a reduction of patient suffering and a reduction in
this nation's health care costs. The commercial impact of this product will be
game-changing for topical wound treatment in that future materials should
facilitate healthy tissue regrowth.