* 1110461
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Evolution of floral morphology in Zingiberales: the role of positive selection on B class MADS-box genes
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2011,05/31/2014
* Chelsea Specht, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 05/31/2014
* USD 14,957.00

Flowering plant diversity is regarded as a striking example of rapid radiation.
Hypotheses to explain the evolutionary success of flowering plants consider the
role of plant-animal interactions mediated by the flower. Using a candidate gene
approach, this proposal will test for the function of MADS box genes, known to
be responsible for flower development, in the evolution of floral form. We focus
on the Zingiberales, a lineage of tropical plants including bananas and gingers,
containing a diversity of floral forms associated with efficient pollination.
Also, this research will isolate candidate MADS box genes from Zingiberales
species and examine their expression temporally and spatially to characterize
the gene networks underlying flower development and evolution. Genome sequences
for Musa and transcriptome (RNA-Seq) data from across Zingiberales will be used
to investigate additional genes responsible for the evolution of flowers.

This research contributes to multi-disciplinary training of graduate and
undergraduate students in evolutionary biology, developmental genetics, and
plant morphology. Results will be presented at national and international
scientific meetings and as peer-reviewed publications. A better understanding of
the gene networks underlying evolution of flowers will benefit other research
studying non-model flowering plants and may prove helpful for agricultural
research in Musa acuminata (banana), Zingiber officinale (ginger), Cucurma longa
(turmeric), Elettaria sp. (Cardamom) and the improvement of horticultural
cultivars.