* 1110855
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: The Biomechanics and Evolution of Flight Reduction in Stick Insects
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/2011,05/31/2013
* Yu Zeng, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Friar
* 05/31/2013
* USD 9,230.00

How wings first appeared and then were lost in insects is not well understood.
The proposed research will study transitions in insect wing structure within a
functional context. The focus of the research is stick insects, which exhibit
tremendous diversity of wing morphology and flight capacity. Initial studies
have found flight performance to be correlated with relative wing size. This
study samples wing morphology and flight biomechanics of stick insects from the
field, and uses an integrative approach to compare wing morphology and flight
biomechanics among different species and to analyze the history of these traits
in an integrative, multi-dimensional manner. Anticipated results include
demonstrations of how stepwise transitions of wing morphology correlate with
changes in the flight performance, and the role of intermediates between flying
and non-flying forms. &lt;br/&gt; Understanding of the transition between flying
and flightless forms will be relevant to other fields, for example, to the
design of micro air vehicles. In schools and museums, scientific results from
this study can be used to help people understand the process of how insects
gained or lost wings. Furthermore, this study enhances scientific communication
between the U.S. and Malaysia, and continues to provide research opportunities
to undergraduate students in both countries.