* 1110495
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH:  Phylogenetic Relationships, Biogeography, and Genetic Diversity of the VHS Fish Virus
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2011,05/31/2014
* Carol Stepien, University of Toledo
* Standard Grant
* Simon Malcomber
* 05/31/2014
* USD 15,000.00

Viral Hemorrhagic Septicemia virus (VHSv) causes one of the world?s most
important finfish diseases. An outbreak of a unique and emerging strain (IVb)
has been observed across the Great Lakes since 2005, killing many important
species and harming our fisheries, baitfish, aquaculture, and tourism
industries. This study will analyze the evolutionary, biogeographic, and genetic
diversity patterns of this ?new? VHS strain throughout its distribution, in
comparison to other strains, providing important benefits for understanding and
combating this disease. DNA sequence variation and biogeographic patterns will
be tested across the virus?s geographic range, temporal course, and among
infected fish species. Genetic diversity within and among the strains will be
analyzed using three different genes, permitting the tracking of the patterns of
viral variation over time and space.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This investigation
will significantly enhance the research depth and opportunity of a female Ph.D.
student. Additional broader impacts are that the project will promote teaching,
training, collaboration, and understanding of evolutionary patterns in pathogens
to fellow graduate students, high school students, university and state
researchers, aquaculture fish farmers, and fisheries managers. Results will
enhance fisheries conservation and disease prevention efforts.