* 1110556
* A Planning Grant to Enrich and Enlarge the Michigan AGEP Alliance
* EDU,EES
* 06/01/2011,05/31/2013
* Janet Weiss, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Mark Leddy
* 05/31/2013
* USD 149,593.00

The Michigan AGEP Alliance (MAA) is a partnership of University of Michigan,
Michigan State University, Wayne State University, and Western Michigan
University. Over the past six years, the MAA has created a sustainable community
that supports the academic success of students from underrepresented minority
(URM) groups who are earning doctoral degrees in engineering, physical science,
life science, mathematics, social and behavioral sciences, and encourages and
prepares them to pursue careers in academia. Based on their experience thus far,
and informed by research on factors that promote degree completion and
transition to faculty careers, they have identified promising strategies to
leverage the value of the investments that NSF and our universities have made in
the MAA. They request support to enrich the intellectual and programmatic
foundations of their alliance. Intellectual Merit: The new directions they will
explore include: 1) Adding a fifth partner institution: Michigan Technological
University?a small, rural STEM-dominant institution closely located to a large
Native American population; 2) Expanding their focus on the postdoctoral
experience by engaging URM postdoctoral fellows in programming designed to meet
their professional needs, and linking them with URM Ph.D. students so that both
groups may benefit from a realistic appraisal of the opportunities available to
them in postdoctoral training and the pathways to faculty positions; 3) Finding
the synergy that comes from integrating students and faculty from NSF-supported
social, behavioral and economic sciences (SBE) with faculty and students who
participate in AGEP programming in STEM; and 4) Adapting technology to increase
opportunities for interaction and collaboration across the MAA partner and with
other AGEP institutions, and for delivery of selected professional development
programs. This grant will underwrite planning to accelerate the capacity of the
alliance to carry forward the mission of increased diversity in our STEM
community. Broader Impact: By strengthening the ability of the alliance to
support the academic success of URM graduate students, and by creating
mechanisms to support the success of URM postdoctoral scholars, they will
increase the representation of minority scientists in the professoriate.