* 1110421
* Dissertation Research:   Expression and Evolution of Genes Underlying Water Retention in Heteromyid Rodents from Xeric and Mesic Environments
* BIO,DEB
* 05/01/2011,04/30/2013
* James DeWoody, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Friar
* 04/30/2013
* USD 15,000.00

Kangaroo rats (Dipodomys sp.) and other members of the Heteromyidae have long
been noted for their ability to limit water loss through the production of
highly concentrated waste. Studies have focused on their kidney physiology;
however investigators previously lacked the resources necessary to identify the
genes underlying this adaptation. This project will use next generation
sequencing to survey the kidney transcriptomes (i.e., genes expressed in the
kidney) of desert adapted Heteromyids from the Southwestern United States
(Dipodomys spectabilis and Chaetodipus baileyi) as well as a Heteromyid species
from the rainforests of Costa Rica (Heteromys desmarestianus). The goal of this
research is to identify the genetic basis of an adaptation for efficient water
use by desert rodents in the family Heteromyidae. Thus, the project will
identify differences in gene expression and sequence evolution between desert
adapted species and a species that has evolved without the selective pressure of
water scarcity. These differences will permit the identification of genes
integral to efficient kidney function and water retention as well the molecular
basis of adaptations to life in arid habitats. Additionally, these insights
could extend our understanding of patterns of gene expression and mutations
behind abnormal kidney function and kidney disease.