* 1110967
* Supramolecular Structures Incorporating Fullerene Derivative Linkers
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2011,06/30/2015
* Jorge Gardea-Torresdey, University of Texas at El Paso
* Continuing Grant
* George Janini
* 06/30/2015
* USD 450,000.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY: &lt;br/&gt;With support from the Macromolecular,
Supramolecular, and Nanochemistry Program of the NSF these researchers will
synthesize, isolate, and characterize a series of new fullerene derivatives that
will be used in the construction of new supramolecular architectures. The new
derivatives will be regioisomerically pure compounds derived from C60 with bis-
and tetra-functionalities arranged so that they can form 2D and 3D architectures
via spontaneous assembly with specific and carefully selected metal ions.
Architectures ranging from simple triangles and squares to 3D cubes and even
more complex ones will be prepared, each containing fullerenes as intrinsic
linker components. Such structures have never been reported before, especially
containing fullerenes as linker units. The properties of these supramolecular
compounds will be fully characterized. In a second project, other fullerene
compounds will be synthesized and characterized for the first time using arc
discharge techniques, mainly endohedral fullerene systems consisting of
different carbon cage sizes containing a variety of atom clusters inside. While
we have worked and will continue to work with trimetallic nitride endohedral
systems (TMNs) this application focuses particular interest in a relatively new
family of endohedrals discovered during the previous grant period, the
dimetallic sulfides DMSs), M2S@C2n (M=Sc, and 40&lt;n&lt;48), which are
relatively abundant. Mixed metallic versions of these sulfide compounds will be
prepared where the two metals inside will be different, in an effort to try to
identify different cage sizes that are produced in high yields. The following
metals will be incorporated in a binary fashion, M=Sc, Y, Lu, Dy, Ho, Gd, Nd,
and Pr. The electrochemical properties of these new compounds will be measured
since it has been shown that some of these endohedral systems have potential
uses as acceptors in photovoltaic devices. The exohedral chemistry of these new
compounds will also be investigated, specifically looking at the regiochemistry
of multiple additions and its potential correlation to the structure and
orientation of the endohedral clusters (endo-exohedral templating correlations).
One final area proposed involves very fundamental studies of electron and spin
localization in reduced and oxidized endohedral compounds.
Electrocrystallization of several of these endohedral fullerenes will be
attempted in order to characterize the systems by X-Ray crystallography since
data from electrochemistry and ESR spectroscopy are somewhat in
contradiction.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY:
&lt;br/&gt;Fullerenes, also called "Buckyballs" are all-carbon compounds with
unique and somewhat unusual electronic properties that make them useful in
applications such as photovoltaics. They are closed carbon structures (the one
with 60 carbons is identical to a soccer ball) capable of undergoing chemical
reactions on their surfaces. One of the problems that will be addressed in this
work is how to control the exact positions of the chemical groups that will be
added to the surface, since lack of control leads to the preparation of too many
different compounds (isomers). Limiting the number of isomers to obtain only the
desired compounds is part of the aim of this work. Once prepared, the new
derivative compounds will be incorporated into more complicated structures using
mainly metal ions to induce their formation spontaneously. These structures will
be characterized and their properties measured. In addition to empty carbon cage
fullerenes, new endohedral derivatives will be prepared which contain metallic
and non-metallic atoms encapsulated in the cages, like molecular maracas. The
purpose is to vary and control the electronic properties for potential
photovoltaic applications in the future. Besides the immediate educational
experience and mentoring provided to the undergraduate, graduate and
postdoctoral associates involved in this project, the most profound broader
impact of this project derives from the commitment of the PI to recruit and
educate underrepresented minorities in his laboratories. The PI actively
recruits Puerto Rican and other Hispanic and minority students to his labs as
evidenced by the fact that 14 of his 22 PhD graduates have been Hispanic. In
addition to actively mentoring underrepresented minority students (Hispanics
primarily), the PI is heavily involved in international collaborations, mainly
with Spain and Germany and publishes extensively with them, as evident from his
biographical sketch. The PI has a long and fruitful history in both of these
broader impact areas and these are expected to continue under the present grant.