* 1110709
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH:   A Next-generation Sequencing Approach to the Evolution of Male Reproductive Transcriptomes in Seahorses and Pipefishes
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/2011,06/30/2013
* Adam Jones, Texas A&M Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* George Gilchrist
* 06/30/2013
* USD 15,000.00

Relative to the majority of proteins encoded by animal and plant genomes, those
responsible for reproductive processes change quickly over evolutionary time.
More specifically, protein-coding genes expressed in reproductive tissues
routinely show signatures of rapid evolution. This trend is currently thought to
arise as a consequence of sexual selection after mating, which occurs when the
gametes of one sex compete for access to the gametes of the other sex. In
seahorses and pipefishes, males nurture developing offspring in a placenta-like
reproductive tissue known as the brood pouch. There is great variation across
this family of fishes in the strength of competition among females for access to
this male reproductive resource. Using the latest in high-throughput DNA
sequencing technologies, the investigators will test the prediction that male
reproductive proteins evolve more rapidly in species subject to intense post-
mating sexual selection compared to species with little post-mating sexual
selection. The data will also shed light on evolutionary changes in patterns of
gene expression specific to male reproductive roles and the male's brood pouch.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In addition to addressing the central hypothesis, this
work will generate an unprecedented number of DNA sequence resources for
seahorse and pipefish biology. This information will be useful in many basic and
applied contexts, including the development of genetics tools for the
conservation of seahorses and their relatives, many of which are imperiled due
to over-harvesting and environmental change. The project will also stimulate
collaboration with international scientists and public outreach through the the
Dallas World Aquarium.