* 1110337
* Dissertation Research:   A subalpine forb's response to long-term experimental warming
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/2011,06/30/2013
* Maureen Stanton, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Saran Twombly
* 06/30/2013
* USD 15,000.00

When climatic change surpasses tolerance limits, plant and animal populations
have three possible general responses - they can adapt, either via plasticity or
genetic change, to their local changing environment; migrate to more suitable
habitats; or go extinct. This research investigates the potential roles of
evolutionary adaptation and migration in preventing the extinction of a short-
lived, subalpine wildflower in an experimentally warmed mountain meadow (the
'Warming Meadow'). A series of transplant experiments will 1) test for
adaptation to warmed microclimates, 2) tease apart the plastic and genetic
components of this adaptation, and 3) test whether immigrant seeds 'pre-adapted'
to warmer, drier, low-elevation conditions can potentially rescue the declining
Warming Meadow wildflower population.

Understanding population-level responses to global climate change is of central
concern to conservation, agricultural, and public health scientists and policy-
makers. This research uses a novel combination of common gardens, reciprocal
transplants, and molecular analyses to investigate evolutionary adaptation and
migration in response to climate warming. Thus, the intellectual and scientific
merits of this study lie in its use of a unique, long-term experiment to address
issues of global importance. The investigators will communicate research
findings and their enthusiasm for scientific inquiry to a broad public audience,
including adults of diverse cultural, economic, and political backgrounds;
grade-school students, and undergraduates in both California and Colorado.