* 1110515
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Functional ecology and evolution of an ant gut microbiome
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/2011,06/30/2014
* Jonathan G Sanders, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Alan Tessier
* 06/30/2014
* USD 15,000.00

In nature, the hidden things often make the most difference. For example, in the
rainforests of South America, fungus-gardening ants consume more leafy
vegetation than any other herbivore. In the forest canopy, other ants may
compose more than 50% of all insect biomass. But how do these tiny herbivores
affect the forest ecosystem? The answer may lie with an even more hidden player:
bacteria. Like coral reefs, cows, and even humans, many insects rely on
symbiotic microbes to augment their diets. There are hints that bacteria may
play an especially important role for ?herbivorous? ants, or those ants whose
diet consists primarily of nectar, extra-floral nectar, and other plant-derived
resources. However, little is known about the evolution, ecology, and function
of the microbial partners of herbivorous ants. This study aims to uncover some
of the mysteries surrounding ant/bacteria symbioses using the canopy-dwelling
tropical ant genus Cephalotes as a model system. Cephalotes are among the most
herbivorous of known ants, and have long been known to host an unusually dense
population of bacteria, or microbiome, in their guts. Using next-generation DNA
sequencing technology, this study will address the following
questions:&lt;br/&gt; Have Cephalotes gut bacteria co-evolved with their
hosts?&lt;br/&gt; How does the Cephalotes gut microbiome change among host
species, nests, locations, and across host development?&lt;br/&gt; What can the
genomes of Cephalotes gut bacteria indicate about their
function?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The answers to these questions
will clarify the role played by bacterial symbionts in one of the most important
and least understood elements of tropical rainforest ecology. Additionally, data
and techniques from this study will help to disentangle the evolutionary and
ecological dynamics operating within symbiotic gut communities themselves. These
communities have both direct (via diseases like Inflammatory Bowel Disease) and
indirect (via association with agricultural pests such as locusts and aphids)
impacts on human society, and yet they remain poorly understood. This research
will provide training opportunities for students in cutting-edge areas of
sequencing and data analysis, and the results will be communicated to the public
via ongoing museum- and K12-based outreach activities. &lt;br/&gt;