* 1110146
* The 6th USA-China Chemical Engineering Conference, Beijing, China, October 30-November 3, 2011
* ENG,CBET
* 04/15/2011,03/31/2012
* Norman Li, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Luke Achenie
* 03/31/2012
* USD 30,000.00

PI: Yang, Ralph T. and Norman N. Li&lt;br/&gt;Institution: University of
Michigan Ann Arbor&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number: 1110146&lt;br/&gt;Title: The 6th
USA-China Chemical Engineering Conference, Beijing, China,&lt;br/&gt;October
30-November 3, 2011&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
Merit&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This grant is to provide travel funds for U.S.
speakers, authors of papers, and particularly young academic participants to The
6th USA-China Chemical Engineering Conference, to be held in Beijing, China, on
November 7- 10, 2011 (the dates have been changed since the proposal was
submitted). The theme of the conference is: Chemical Engineering for Clean
Energy. The Conference is co-sponsored by the Chinese Academy of Engineering,
Chinese Academy of Science, the Chemical Industry &amp; Engineering Society of
China (CIESC), and the American Institute of Chemical Engineers (AIChE). The
purpose of the Conference is to provide a forum for U.S. Chemical Engineers to
meet their counterpart in China to discuss the latest advancements, exchange
research ideas and discuss opportunities for collaboration.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The $30,000 will provide for approximately 30 partial
travel grant awards to U.S. speakers, authors of papers, particularly young
academic participants at the Conference. Travel awards will be made based on the
following considerations: (1) scientific or technological merit of the
speaker/participant; (2) professional qualifications relative to age and
position; (3) institutional and geographical
distribution.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Global
issues such as new and renewable energy sources, clean fuels and environment
will be among the focal points of discussion that will be beneficial to the U.S.
participants. The direct communication will facilitate development and expansion
of the potentially vast markets in China for U.S. chemical products.