* 1110540
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Determining the drought sensitivity of the Amazon forest
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/2011,07/31/2013
* Thomas Powell, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Henry L. Gholz
* 07/31/2013
* USD 15,000.00

Most large scale computer models are limited in their ability to predict the
dynamics of forests under novel environmental conditions because the critical
process of inter-plant competition and the physiological responses to water
stress are not adequately represented. This project addresses these two
fundamental problems by incorporating a more realistic hydrodynamic model of
water movement in trees into a large scale model designed to predict changes in
the composition and structure of forests. Direct field measurements of the
conductivity of water in stems of trees and the point at which low water
availability in the soil leads to a loss in plant vigor are required to
constrain the model. This project will enable these critical field data to be
collected. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research addresses the fundamental
mechanisms that cause a tree to die under extreme water stress, particularly the
physiological traits that control plant water use and adjust under water stress.
That information will be formalized within the modeling framework that can then
be used to identify the fundamental processes and associated tradeoffs that lead
to survival or mortality within a dynamic tropical forest under extreme drought,
and predict how shifts in species composition will play out as precipitation
patterns change. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will fill a large gap in our
knowledge about water use and stress in tropical trees. With the models updated
and coupled, advances can be made in terms of predicting how forests of the
Amazon will evolve as climate change evolves over the next hundred years.