* 1110431
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Direct and indirect effects of invasive species on plant-seed disperser mutualisms
* BIO,DEB
* 05/01/2011,04/30/2013
* Nathan Sanders, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* Peter Alpert
* 04/30/2013
* USD 12,850.00

Many plants rely on fruit-eating animals to disperse their seeds. This
interaction benefits both the plant and the animal and is therefore termed a
mutualism. Because seed dispersal can determine the abundance and range of the
plant, seed dispersal mutualisms can benefit other species that use the plant
for food or shelter and thus affect patterns of biodiversity across the
landscape. The introduction by humans of new species into a habitat can disrupt
seed dispersal mutualisms, but we know little about such disruptions may affect
other, interrelated species. This project will test the larger ecological
effects of disruption of an important seed dispersal mutualism in the northern
temperate forests of Patagonia in Argentina. The mistletoe Tristerix corymbosus
is the sole winter nectar source for the hummingbird Sephanoides sephaniodes,
which remains in the region year-round and is in turn responsible for the
pollination of nearly 20% of the endemic woody flora in the region. The seeds of
the mistletoe are dispersed exclusively by the marsupial Dromiciops gliroides.
After passing through the gut of the marsupial, most of the defecated seeds
stick to branches of maqui, Aristotelia chilensis, the most abundant understory
shrub in the forest and the most common host for the mistletoe. Because of these
close ecological relationships, exotic species that reduce the density of maqui
could also reduce the abundances of the mistletoe, the hummingbird, and the
marsupial, changing the forest as a whole. This project will test the effects of
the exotic wasp Vespula germanica and of exotic ungulates on maqui populations
and on the linked species in the forest.&lt;br/&gt;Conservation of biological
diversity is important to human society, and one of the major threats to
biodiversity are the accidental and intentional introductions of new species
around the world by humans. This research will further our understanding of how
introduced species can affect biodiversity and help guide management to conserve
diversity. The research will also strengthen international scientific
collaboration and training.