* 1110172
* The First World Congress on Integrated Computational Materials Engineering (ICME)to be held July 10 - 14, 2011 in Seven Springs, PA
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2011,02/29/2012
* George Spanos, Minerals Metals & Materials Society
* Standard Grant
* Lynnette Madsen
* 02/29/2012
* USD 20,000.00

Integrated Computational Materials Engineering (ICME) is an emerging activity
that involves the integration of computational modeling with the manufacturing
process. It is expected to improve quality control and economic performance. The
First World Congress on ICME will be held at the Seven Springs Mountain Resort.
This site and the programming schedule are conducive to stimulating discussions
and interactions. There will be seven internationally renowned keynote speakers,
and additional oral presentations and presentations for a poster session will be
selected based on the submitted abstracts. Active student participation is
strongly encouraged, particularly in the poster session. An International
Advisory Committee representing 14 countries is promoting the conference
worldwide, and various associated international materials societies (including
those from Brazil, Canada, Australia, and Japan) are promoting the conference
their home countries. Participation by students, postdoctoral fellows and young
faculty is being especially encouraged for the purpose of fostering future
generations of the ICME workforce. NSF funding will be used to support
registration fees for 20 students, 5 postdoctoral researchers, 5 young faculty,
5 keynote speakers and for partial support of the conference proceedings. The
organizing committee is expected to invite candidates by contacting university
departments and/or laboratories that are known to have strong programs in
computational materials science and engineering. Every effort will be made to
encourage candidates from underrepresented groups to apply for financial
assistance.