* 1110455
* RUI - Preparation, Characterization, and Theoretical Modeling of Organometallic Porphyrins and Tetraazaporphyrins
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2015
* Viktor Nemykin, University of Minnesota Duluth
* Continuing Grant
* Tingyu Li
* 08/31/2015
* USD 300,000.00

In this project funded by the Chemical Synthesis Program of the Chemistry
Division, Professor Nemykin of the Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry at
University of Minnesota Duluth (UMD) will explore synthetic pathways for the
preparation of organometallic porphyrins and their aromatic macrocyclic
analogues. While chemistry of simple organometallic compounds (i.e. ferrocenes)
is well-explored, little progress has been made in the development of
organometallic aromatic macrocycles. Dr. Nemykin and others have recently shown
that introduction of organometallic substituents into the porphyrin core results
in rare long-range metal-metal coupling properties, which are essential for the
application of such compounds in molecular electronics, random access memory
devices and components for near infra-red optical limiters. Electrochemical,
spectroelectrochemical, and chemical oxidation methods will be used to identify
the properties of the target compounds. This work could result in the
preparation of efficient modules for molecular electronics and redox-driven
sensors. Successful development of the methodology will have an impact on any
area in which the synthesis of molecules is needed, such as microelectronics,
environmental engineering, as well as biological and chemical research
activities. In addition, this project will provide training opportunities for
undergraduate and graduate (M.S.) students, as well as for a post-doctoral
researcher who will be both teaching and conducting research in preparation for
a career at a predominantly undergraduate institution.