* 1110385
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Batesian mimicry: the evolution of deceptive coloration
* BIO,DEB
* 05/01/2011,04/30/2013
* David Pfennig, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 04/30/2013
* USD 15,000.00

In Batesian mimicry, a harmless animal resembles a dangerous one to deceive its
predators. Natural selection for mimicry is strong, but we do not know how
species? responses to selection are mediated by the genetic and biochemical
mechanisms available to them for adaptation, or how the selection imposed by
predators is affected by their sensory systems. This project will explore these
questions in the scarlet king snake (Lampropeltis elapsoides), which imperfectly
mimics the deadly eastern coral snake (Micrurus fulvius). The first part of this
project will examine the chemicals that models and mimics use to produce their
deceptive coloration, and how this deceptive coloration is perceived by their
predators. The second part of the project will explore the possibility that
mimicry can evolve via phenotypic plasticity (when the same genes produce
different phenotypes in different environments). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project will help us understand how species produce their adaptations from
different genes, why species do not always evolve to fit the demands of
selection perfectly, and how the interactions between organisms are shaped by
their preexisting characteristics. At the same time, this project will provide
educational outreach for young scientists by providing them with opportunities
to experience research first-hand, and will broaden access to science by
actively recruiting members of under-represented groups.