* 1110822
* EAGER: Cloning of a CNS Membrane Estrogen Receptor
* BIO,IOS
* 03/15/2011,02/28/2015
* Oline Ronnekleiv, Oregon Health & Science University
* Standard Grant
* Edda Thiels
* 02/28/2015
* USD 300,000.00

Estrogens are steroid hormones that affect virtually every tissue in the body
including the brain. All of the actions of estrogen have been ascribed to its
binding to the ?classical? intracellular estrogen receptors ERá and ERâ and
subsequent gene activation, which is a slow event. However, there is
overwhelming physiological evidence that estrogens have rapid effects in the
brain and other non-neural tissues that do not involve these classical receptors
but rather is thought to involve a plasma membrane localized estrogen receptor.
Indeed, a novel compound called STX has been synthesized that selectively
activates this membrane estrogen receptor and mediates many of the physiological
processes ascribed to estrogen without the growth promoting effects. The
structure of the membrane estrogen receptor is not yet known although aspects of
its cell signaling properties have been elucidated. Therefore, this project aims
to identify and clone the membrane estrogen receptor using well-established
functional cloning strategies. The specific sites expressing the membrane
estrogen receptor will be identified in the brain and non-neural tissues by our
two neuroscience graduate students. Identification of the membrane estrogen
receptor will break new ground and generate new approaches for studying estrogen
biology in particular physiological functions (energy and bone homeostasis,
temperature regulation, stress responses, circadian rhythms, sleep cycles,
learning/memory and mood) that become dis-regulated in hypo-estrogenic states in
females (e.g., menopause). In addition, students and fellows world-wide have
utilized STX to probe the function of the membrane estrogen receptor in multiple
tissues (brain, bone, liver, and pancreas) and will benefit tremendously from
having the membrane estrogen receptor clone since the gene sequence of the
cloned estrogen receptor will be deposited immediately in GeneBank for the
broader research community. Therefore, cloning the membrane estrogen receptor
will have an enormous benefit not only for neuroscientists but for students of
life sciences worldwide.