* 1110970
* SoCS: Studying the Computability of Emotions by Harnessing Massive Online Social Data
* CSE,IIS
* 08/01/2011,12/31/2017
* Jia Li, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* William Bainbridge
* 12/31/2017
* USD 784,821.00

The emergence of massive human-rated and commented visual data has opened
avenues for exploring fundamental questions in artificial intelligence beyond
the horizon. This project tackles the challenge of automatically inferring
visual aesthetics and emotions and inventing new systems that assist creative
and decision-making activities of the general public. An interdisciplinary team,
with expertise in visual modeling, data mining, psychology, and computational
sciences will build tools to distill information from a combination of visual,
textual, and numerical data. Visual features, selected based on published
literature and consultation with domain experts, will be extracted for
discriminating types of emotions. The resulting systems can select and rank
visual information based on aesthetics and
emotions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merits: This project will allow
computer scientists to gain understanding of next-generation computerized visual
aesthetics and emotion assessment systems. The complex inter-relationship among
content, context, and subjectivity in aesthetics and emotion assessment makes
the corresponding learning problems especially challenging, which is likely to
trigger innovation in machine learning and statistical modeling. Such
capabilities will fundamentally change the way visual information is analyzed,
processed, and managed. The project will advance our understanding of the
computability of emotions, and lead to new applications that can be used in a
variety of settings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The research will
have a transformative impact in the fields of information retrieval, human-
computer interaction, information processing, consumer electronics, and design.
The technology can also be used to refine multimedia content that serves as
education resources. The project will disseminate research findings, generate
new software implementations and collected datasets, and provide online services
that can be used by researchers, educators, and industry. Education efforts
include developing an interdisciplinary curriculum, training cross-disciplinary
scientists, and involving underrepresented groups in research.