* 1110885
* Advanced Study Institute on Global Healthcare Grand Challenges and Opportunities, Antalya, Turkey, July 15-30, 2011
* ENG,CBET
* 05/01/2011,04/30/2013
* Metin Akay, University of Houston
* Standard Grant
* Kaiming Ye
* 04/30/2013
* USD 50,000.00

1110885, Akay&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award will fund the travel expenses of
10 graduate students and post-docs and 25 faculty to participate at the 2nd
Advanced Study Institute on Global Healthcare Grand Challenges and Opportunities
cosponsored by National Academy of Engineering (NAE), the department of
Biomedical Engineering at the University of Houston and the Akdeniz University
will be held on July 15-30, 2011, Antalya, Turkey.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
National Academy of Engineering announced the 14 Grand Challenges for
Engineering at the annual meeting of the American Association for the
Advancement of Science. The committee also praised biomedical and biological
engineering as the research field to fulfill the promise of personalized
medicine. Included among these 14 challenges were Reverse?Engineering the Brain,
Engineer better Medicines and Advance Health
Informatics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;An important way of exploiting such
information would be through the development of methods that allow doctors to
forecast the benefits and side effects of potential treatments or
cures.&lt;br/&gt;"Reverse-Engineering" the Brain, is an emerging discipline that
helps us to understand how the brain works and treats several diseases. It
furthermore helps us to develop computerized artificial intelligence. Advanced
computer intelligence, in turn, should enable automated diagnosis and
prescriptions for treatment. Computerized catalogs of health information will
enhance the medical system's ability to track the spread of disease and analyze
the comparative effectiveness of different approaches to prevention and therapy.
Finally, engineering new medicines will help us fight the growing danger of
attacks from novel disease-causing agents. For instance, certain deadly bacteria
have repeatedly evolved new properties, conferring resistance against even the
most powerful antibiotics. New viruses arise with the power to kill and spread
more rapidly than disease-prevention systems are designed to
counteract.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merits: The main objective of the
Advanced Summer Institute on Global Healthcare&lt;br/&gt;-- Challenges and
Opportunities is to highlight and discuss these emerging grand challenges,
mainly focused on the latest advances in the areas of science, engineering,
technology and medicine. The institute provides a unique environment to discuss
the emerging research areas, challenges and opportunities which lead to very
fruitful discussions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: It exposes the
attendees with biology and medicine backgrounds to the latest developments in
these emerging enabling technologies. It is also helpful to those with
engineering and science background who are interested in doing research in
bionanoscience and nanomedicine, neuroscience and engineering since the advanced
institute provides exceptional insights into the fundamental challenges in
biology and medici