* 1110307
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: The influence of landscape heterogeneity and mycorrhizal fungi on the distribution of an epiphytic orchid and its genetic variation
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2011,05/31/2012
* Dorset Trapnell, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Peter Alpert
* 05/31/2012
* USD 14,986.00

Deforestation threatens biodiversity in the tropics, not only by reducing the
amount of forest, but also by dividing the forest that remains into small,
isolated patches that species may not be able to reach or where species may not
be able to survive once they get there. Epiphytes, plants that live atop other
plants instead of on the ground, are a major part of the biodiversity in many
species-rich tropical forests, and many of these epiphytes are orchids. Orchids
have tiny seeds that wind can move over long distances, so they might be able to
travel from one patch of forest to another. However, the tiny seeds cannot grow
without the aid of specialized fungi,known as mycorrhizal fungi,that provide the
orchids with nutrients. If the fungi are missing from a forest patch, the
orchids will not survive once they get there. This research will test whether it
is the dispersal of the seeds or the absence of the fungi that keeps orchids
from growing in patches cut from tropical forest. Work will focus on Epidendrum
firmum, an orchid found in the heavily used, mid-elevation forests of Costa
Rica, and use a combination of molecular genetics in the U.S. and field
experiments in Costa Rica. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Because tropical epiphytes are
among the most globally threatened groups of species, this research has
practical value for conservation of natural resources. The work should provide
valuable insights into the special ways in which dividing tropical forests into
smaller patches can affect the many orchids that grow on tropical trees, whether
by causing seeds to fall short or by disrupting the special ecological
relationships upon which the orchids depend. The results should help guide
efforts to conserve and restore the diversity of species in tropical forests.
Furthermore, the project will train graduate and undergraduate students in
tropical field research and molecular biology, and strengthen international
scientific collaboration.