* 1110386
* Incubation temperature as a source of phenotypic variation in birds
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2011,05/31/2013
* Sarah DuRant, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 05/31/2013
* USD 10,704.00

Recent research demonstrates that in wood ducks (Aix sponsa) less than 1¢ªC
variation in average incubation temperatures affects duckling growth, body
condition, thermoregulatory ability, immune function, stress endocrinology, and
locomotor performance. Many of these effects persist until at least several
weeks after hatching. The proposed research will continue to explore the role
incubation temperature plays in defining characteristics of hatchling wood ducks
that are important to their development. Specifically, this research will
investigate whether incubation temperature drives trade-offs between
physiological processes critical to early survival in birds, their
thermoregulatory ability and the immune system. The proposed research will also
explore a potential underlying mechanism responsible for meditating effects of
incubation temperature on avian phenotype. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research
will integrate research with education primarily by targeting K-12 teachers and
students and undergraduates in wildlife sciences and biology. The K-12 education
approach aims both to raise awareness of waterfowl natural history and
conservation as well as the scientific process. In teaming with the Virginia
Tech Science and Outreach Program, 12 elementary schools, 4 middle schools, 4
high schools, and 4 special education programs will have access to color-printed
cards highlighting the natural history and conservation status of Virginia
waterfowl. The schools will also have access to lesson plans pertaining to avian
incubation and reproductive ecology that incorporate Virginia standards of
learning. Education of undergraduates involves a new program that facilitates
reciprocal learning by pairing a graduate student with an undergraduate
researcher conducting a senior thesis project. The goal of the program is to
prepare undergraduates for their upcoming transition to graduate school by
giving them hands-on training with all major aspects of academic research, while
simultaneously preparing graduate students for their eventual transition into a
faculty position. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;