* 1110793
* Support for the Archaeometry Laboratory at MURR
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2011,06/30/2015
* Jeffrey Ferguson, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Continuing Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 06/30/2015
* USD 336,516.00

With National Science Foundation support Drs. Michael Glascock and Jeffrey
Ferguson will continue the operation of the Archaeometry Laboratory at the
University of Missouri Research Reactor Center (MURR). The Archaeometry
Laboratory is the most comprehensive US-based laboratory dedicated to chemical
characterization studies of archaeological materials, and is widely recognized
around the world for its leading role in the field. The analytical techniques
available include neutron activation analysis (NAA), inductively-coupled-plasma
mass-spectrometry (ICP-MS) of solutions using high resolution, quadrupole, and
multicollector instruments, laser ablation ICP-MS (LA-ICP-MS), and conventional-
and portable-XRF. These techniques permit the quantification of major, minor and
trace elements simultaneously and with a high degree of accuracy and precision
in a wide range of archaeological materials. The MURR laboratory also plays an
important role in training students in the analytical techniques for application
to specific archaeological questions. Frequently, archaeology students are
invited to spend time at MURR where they are taught a variety of methods for
interpreting archaeological data and have direct access to the large
compositional databases containing more than 100,000 previous analyses of
pottery, obsidian, basalt, and chert. Online access to these databases is
continuing to be developed and improved for integration with databases from
other laboratories. Laboratory staff and students are also involved in efforts
to rescue compositional databases from laboratories no longer in operation. The
ceramic databases in many parts of the world have reached a sufficient size to
allow regional syntheses that examine large-scale patterns of ceramic
production, use and exchange. In addition to continued support of student and
senior archaeology research projects, Glascock and Ferguson are also developing
calibration standards and analytical procedures that facilitate the integration
of data from multiple analytical techniques (e.g., INAA, ICP-MS, XRF). These
efforts will benefit both new and mature analytical programs involved in
archaeometric compositional analysis research. Glascock and Ferguson continue to
oversee the development and application of LA-ICP-MS to archaeological materials
and facilitate the development of portable-XRF for archaeometric research. The
broader impacts of this work includes the elemental data generated in
collaboration with colleagues and students that will be used to address
important topics related to human and social dynamics of prehistoric peoples and
societies, such as, mobility patterns and migrations of people, cultural
responses to conflict and stress, community social organization, the development
of craft production and specialization, and the creation and maintenance of
social boundaries and identity.