* 1110363
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH:   Osteological, Myological, and Phylogenetic Trends of Forelimb Reduction in Theropod Dinosaurs
* BIO,DEB
* 05/01/2011,04/30/2014
* Alan Turner, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Maureen Kearney
* 04/30/2014
* USD 15,000.00

The forelimbs of theropods (bipedal, predatory dinosaurs) have become greatly
reduced in several different lineages, each time with vastly different results.
The function, development, and evolutionary history of reduced forelimbs remains
a mystery. In this project, detailed analysis of the shape and bony features
(osteology) and the musculature of the arms of key theropod species will allow
for identification of the most important features in the evolution of highly
reduced forelimbs and how reduced forelimbs were used over time. This
information will be used to examine the trends in the osteology, musculature,
and overall size of the forelimb across the entire theropod family
tree.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study provides an engaging backdrop for
educating the public about evolution in the context of vestigialization and the
transitional stages of limb reduction (something that has happened in numerous
vertebrate groups). Moreover, this project will advance understanding of the
fundamental functional structure of the theropod forelimb and allows for further
studies of forelimb function, such as grasping, predation, and the origin (and
loss) of flight. New insights into the evolution and function of dinosaur
forelimbs generated by this study will be further used for reconstructions of
theropods for museum displays and educational television programs.