* 1110930
* Baltimore Washington Alliance AGEP Planning Grant
* EDU,EES
* 07/15/2011,09/30/2012
* Timothy Barbari, Howard University
* Standard Grant
* Mark Leddy
* 09/30/2012
* USD 144,999.00

Howard University, Georgetown University, and Morgan State University have
formed the Baltimore-Washington Area Alliance (BWA) and will undertake planning
activities with this project. With the planning grant, BWA intends to assess
current graduate student interest in faculty positions and to strengthen the
existing Howard-UTEP Preparing Future Faculty (PFF) and Postdoc Institutes (PDI)
informed by survey and other evaluation data. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
Merit. Because of growing science and technology needs of an increasingly
globalized economy, the United States is in greater need than ever before of a
scientifically trained citizenry. This growing need coincides with significant
demographic changes in the U.S., where minority populations that historically
have been underrepresented in science, technology, engineering, and mathematics
(STEM) disciplines are becoming an ever-larger share of the population. Ensuring
that this population gains access to necessary training in STEM is an important
national goal, and increasing the number of STEM professors from these
backgrounds is an important step---as a matter of equity and as a matter of
policy. This planning project will draw on findings from research literature
about the importance of creating intellectual and social community for minority
STEM students, breaking down barriers that isolate them from the informal
culture of science, and creating professional networking opportunities that
these students otherwise might not have. The planning project also draws on
research that is specific to the National Science Foundation?s Alliances for
Graduate Education and the Professoriate (AGEP) program, taking lessons learned
from research about the program to create a more cohesive Alliance of colleges
and universities. In drawing on this research, the proposal seeks to make the
efforts of individual institutions coherent, allowing them to become more than
the sum of their parts. BWA will leverage resources of a metropolitan area that
is rich in professional development opportunities for minority students and the
resources of 3 major universities in ways that address research-based findings
about the needs of STEM minority students. It will do so in ways that maximize
the efficacy of projects under the aegis of the national AGEP
program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact. The activities in this planning
grant will influence STEM graduate education at two of the nation?s leading
producers of African American STEM PhDs and will therefore have a noteworthy
national effect on the pipeline of African Americans entering the professoriate.
Additionally, the anticipated enhancement of the extant PFF and PDI will
increase professional development and networking opportunities for BWA students
and students from universities beyond the Alliance. The project also builds upon
an existing consortium of 14 universities and includes the intention to design a
structured, internet based, consortium-wide network of postdoc opportunities and
faculty position listings. This network will create a registry of STEM trained
minorities from which all 14 of the schools in the consortium can recruit new
faculty and postdocs. This project will also improve the student level data
including milestones in their educational careers.