* 1110754
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH:  Dissection of A "Model" Organism: Understanding the Morphological and Genetic Diversity of A Symbiotic Sea Anemone
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2011,05/31/2013
* Estefania Rodriguez, American Museum Natural History
* Standard Grant
* Simon Malcomber
* 05/31/2013
* USD 14,140.00

Sea anemones are ubiquitous members of marine ecosystems. Their ecological
success has been attributed to their resilience and plasticity, as well as
associations they achieve with other marine organisms. Despite this, sea
anemones traditional classification has been neglected. As a consequence,
understanding their morphological diversity and distribution remains very
limited. In order to gain knowledge in those respects, the proposed research
will study a highly abundant group of sea anemones with a worldwide
distribution. More than 1000 individuals will be collected covering the
distribution of 16 currently described species worldwide. A revision of the
group will be accomplished using morphological and molecular
approaches.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The combination of the field and descriptive
components of this project will provide material to create excellent educational
opportunities. Specifically, lectures will be developed for the curriculum of
the NSF funded High School Science Research and Mentoring Program (SRMP), which
exposes urban students from underrepresented groups to scientific research. A
broader audience will be reached by developing educational materials that will
be available in the public galleries of the AMNH and its Explorer web site.
Furthermore, the educational materials will be available in Spanish for ESL
learning and classroom activities.