* 1110156
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: The effect of nitrogen deposition on plant community dynamics across local and regional scales
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2011,05/31/2014
* Mary Cadenasso, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Henry L. Gholz
* 05/31/2014
* USD 14,996.00

Rapid urbanization of California's landscape exposes remnant oak savanna
ecosystems to increasing levels of atmospheric nitrogen (N) deposition.
Deposited nitrogen enters the ecosystem and exposes plants to amounts and
chemical forms of N that they may not be adapted to. Nitrogen deposition is not
distributed evenly across the landscape, but varies across multiple scales. This
results in the heterogeneous distribution of N in soil, which may alter plant
communities under increasing N inputs. The aim of this research is to
investigate how N deposition interacts with environmental conditions, which vary
at the regional (e.g., rainfall) and local (e.g., light) scale, to structure
plant communities. A combination of observational and experimental methods will
be used to understand patterns and processes by which oak savannas receive N
deposition and plants respond to it.

This research will study specific processes through which N deposition affects
plant communities in oak savannas. Understanding dynamics of natural areas
embedded within a changing landscape is critical for management and conservation
efforts. Managers are concerned about the effect of N deposition on invasive
species and how that affects forage quality in grazing lands. At the broader,
regional scale, results can inform land-use and regulation decisions affecting N
emissions and air quality.