* 1110805
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH Fossils and phylogeny: investigating the timing of diversification in a diverse lineage of Neotropical rodents (Caviomorpha: Octodontoidea)
* BIO,DEB
* 05/01/2011,04/30/2013
* Bruce Patterson, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Maureen Kearney
* 04/30/2013
* USD 15,000.00

Biodiversity patterns are products of historical processes such as speciation
and extinction, but living species preserve only part of this history. Lineages
with robust fossil records and diverse ecological and biogeographic radiations
offer greater insights. This project focuses on one such lineage, the
Octodontoidea (degus and their relatives). These rodents are diverse (193
species across six families), found throughout the Neotropics, and their fossil
record extends back to the Oligocene (78 fossil genera). This project will
investigate the patterns, timing, and rates of diversification of these rodents
by integrating information from fossils and their geologic ages with DNA
sequences from living species. These data will be used to generate a temporal
hypothesis for the group's evolution that will then be used to examine how
historical and ecological factors have influenced evolutionary rates over
time.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This project offers theoretical insights and
practical information for conserving biodiversity, as many living octodontoids
are threatened or endangered. Conducting this research at Chicago's Field Museum
will facilitate outreach to an international audience; results will appear on a
digital touch-screen in the Museum's DNA Discovery Center and shared through
programs in the Education and Membership departments. Besides providing key
training to a graduate student, this grant will contribute to public databases
where biodiversity and genetic data will be deposited.