* 1110728
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH:   Fungal endophytes and tree genetics: uncovering hidden fungal diversity and estimation of biomass allocation to fungal symbionts
* BIO,DEB
* 05/01/2011,04/30/2014
* Catherine Gehring, Northern Arizona University
* Standard Grant
* Alan Tessier
* 04/30/2014
* USD 14,286.00

Of the estimated 1.5 million fungal species on earth, only about 74,000 species
have been formally described. Current knowledge of the biology of most of the
described fungal species is poor. Estimates of global fungal diversity often
hinge on the number of unique fungal species thought to be associated with
individual plant species. However, if fungi that live in association with plants
are sensitive to genetic differences among individuals within plant species,
then there may be much more hidden fungal diversity. It is therefore important
to increase survey efforts, and to examine the potential for fungal communities
to differ among genetically different individual plants. This study focuses on
variation in fungal communities among genetically different individuals within
narrowleaf cottonwoods using an experimental forest in which multiple clones of
an individual are planted in the same environment. This project will add to
previous findings in two major ways. First, it compares the diversity estimates
of fungi using culturing techniques with diversity estimates based on direct
examination of fungal DNA. Second, the study will estimate the amount of fungal
tissue in individual plants by measuring the fungal steroid,
ergosterol.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: There are several ways in
which a broader impact will be ensured for this research. First, it will be
presented at the Flagstaff Festival of Science (FFS) 2011. The FFS is a 10-day
event that promotes science to people of all ages. Participants will view
endophytic fungal cultures using microscopy and handle locally collected
sporocarps from a variety of fungi. Second, findings from this research will be
disseminated to regional groups through the cottonwood ecology group's Research
Notes for Land Managers periodical. This publication is distributed to nearly 20
groups, including government agencies, non-profit land conservation groups, and
environmental education centers. Third, this research will also facilitate the
training of undergraduate lab volunteers in culturing and molecular methods.
Fourth, results will be presented to the scientific community at regional and
national meetings, and published in peer-reviewed journals.&lt;br/&gt;