* 1110481
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: A multidisciplinary approach to the conservation of bat species in the Oak Openings Region
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2011,05/31/2012
* Karen Root, Bowling Green State University
* Standard Grant
* Alan Tessier
* 05/31/2012
* USD 15,000.00

In the United States bats are the main predator of night flying insects and may
help in regeneration of forests through the high concentration of nitrogen in
their guano. Bats make up one quarter of all mammal species, but little is known
about them as they are difficult to study due to their abilities of flight and
activity at night. Nothing is known about if and how bats use oak savannas, a
critically imperiled habitat type that exists in small remnants in the
Midwestern United States, and very little is known about their use of urban
parks. This lack of knowledge is significant, as bats worldwide are on the
decline due to habitat loss, human persecution, and recently the onslaught of
White Nose Syndrome and the development of wind energy. If bats are to be
protected an understanding of their habitat needs is a necessity. This study
will investigate the use of urban parks by bats and the relative importance of
oak savanna habitats versus wooded areas in the Oak Openings Region of Northwest
Ohio. This region is an interesting mix of important and diverse habitat types,
including oak savannas, but exists within an urban/suburban setting. The study
will utilize technology that makes the ultrasonic vocalizations of bats audible
to humans and can be used in determining individual species presence and use of
an area. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: It is a crucial to involve the
public in conservation of endangered species, as the more they know, the more
likely they are to make decisions to protect that species and its habitat.
Another goal of this study is to determine what local residents of the region
know about bats as well as their attitudes towards them. The ecological
knowledge gained while studying this group of animals will then be used in
education and outreach, including participating in data collection through a
citizen-science-based project, which should result in behaviors that might
positively affect bats. &lt;br/&gt;