* 1110545
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH:  Food Webs in Space:  The Interplay Between Dispersal and Trophic Interactions
* BIO,DEB
* 05/01/2011,04/30/2013
* Joseph Simonis, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Douglas Levey
* 04/30/2013
* USD 14,773.00

Trophic interactions (the consumption of prey by predators) define the flow of
energy and nutrients in food webs. Many organisms involved in trophic
interactions are also able to move (disperse) among areas of suitable habitat.
For example, after eating a prey item in one patch of habitat, a predator may
disperse to another habitat patch before consuming additional prey. Such
dispersal of organisms may affect the outcome of trophic interactions by
altering the size of populations within patches. At the same time, trophic
interactions may influence population sizes, and thus determine the number of
organisms available to disperse among patches. As a result, trophic interactions
and dispersal likely combine to dictate the structure and dynamics of food webs
at the local (within-patch) and regional (among-patch) scales. This study uses a
system of freshwater rock pools on Appledore Island, Maine to determine how
dispersal and trophic interactions combine to influence local and regional food-
web dynamics. The simple rock-pool food web consists of phytoplankton,
herbivorous zooplankton, and a predatory water bug (Trichocorixa). Previous
research shows that predation by Trichocorixa strongly affects local food webs
and that Trichocorixa is capable of dispersing among rock pools. A field
experiment will be used to quantify the local and regional effects of dispersal
by Trichocorixa on the rock-pool food web. A specific mathematical model has
been developed to predict the outcomes of this experiment, and this model will
be extended to other ecosystems in order to determine the general effects of
dispersal on local and regional food-web dynamics.

This study combines theoretical and empirical approaches to increase
understanding of the role of spatial structure in food-web dynamics. As such,
results of this research will inform the conservation and management of
ecosystems threatened by habitat fragmentation. This project supports the
dissertation research of one graduate student and provides the opportunity for
an undergraduate to be involved in field research as part of a multi-university
internship program. Results will be disseminated broadly through scientific
publications and presentations, lectures to undergraduate courses, and outreach
to local high school students, teachers, and the general public.