* 1110178
* STTR Phase I:  3D Media Synchronization for Educational Tele-gaming
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2011,12/31/2012
* Normand Paquin, 4D Teleport Technologies, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Glenn H. Larsen
* 12/31/2012
* USD 149,998.00

This Small Business Technology Transfer Phase I project aims to enable novel
teleimmersive interfaces for digital gaming via the development of multi-site 3D
multimedia integration and synchronization technologies. These interfaces will
allow geographically distributed individuals to interact seamlessly with each
other and learn in shared 3D virtual gaming environments. The focus of this
project is to develop, evaluate, and transfer teleimmersive technologies that
synchronize multiple correlated and spatial audio and 3D video streams in
distributed multi-site games. These technologies are required to create
interfaces that will bring together learners in a novel manner and potentially
transform cultural education based on digital gaming. Current multimedia
technologies only fully address the synchronization of pairs of audio and 2D
video streams. The objectives of the proposed work are to (i) implement site-to-
site 3D multi-audio/video streams synchronization solutions through rugged
prototyping and experimental validation, (ii) identify and incorporate serious
gaming requirements, usability and evaluation factors into the teleimmersive
interface, and, (iii) design, develop and evaluate the extension of the
synchronization capabilities for multi-site, 3D multi-video/audio streams. The
project builds on research conducted at the University of Illinois.

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project lies in that the project
will enable the creation of a 4D teleimmersive interface that represents a
paradigm shift in the manner participants can be engaged in serious gaming
through real-time teleimmersion across distances. These new environments will
promote cultural awareness and understanding by providing (i) real-time
teleimmersive dialogue between gamers/learners separated by geography, (ii)
simulated travel to other cultures, and (iii) the means for structured
interactions with individuals and groups from other cultures. The proposed
interface will allow participants (and any physical objects they wish to bring
with them) to be immersed in a shared virtual space and interact freely with
each other, easily bringing into the games the complexity of human behavior. The
commercial potential lies in greatly reducing game development time and costs by
replacing the programming of 3D spaces and avatar behavior with 3D live capture
and recordings of individuals in virtual spaces while retaining maximum
flexibility and authenticity. The lower game development costs will enable the
deployment of many small individual learning-games that may otherwise simply be
too costly to develop using current methods. The teleimmersive interfaces and
their underlying synchronization technologies will also enable new social
interactions and collaboration capabilities in the educational games that are of
particular interest to girls and women.