* 1110460
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: The Effects Of Total and Proportional Densities On Patterns Of Associational Resistance: Reconsidering A Classic Pattern In Nature As A Dynamic Phenomenon
* BIO,DEB
* 05/01/2011,04/30/2013
* Nora Underwood, Florida State University
* Standard Grant
* Maureen Kearney
* 04/30/2013
* USD 13,116.00

Neighboring plants can sometimes influence the amount of insect damage
experienced by plants of interest (crops or weeds). This phenomenon
("associational effects") is the basis for some pest management strategies in
agriculture and forestry and might occur through many mechanisms. For instance,
neighboring plants may emit smells that repel insects, or attract predators that
feed on insects. Although the possibilities are numerous, we understand little
about how these specific mechanisms operate and the long-term consequences for
plant communities. In a previous study, associational effects were observed
between two common weedy plants (Carolina horsenettle and Tall goldenrod). This
study will examine how goldenrod neighbors influence insect damage to
horsenettle, focusing on four possible mechanisms. Results from this study will
contribute to a larger study examining how insect pests influence the
persistence of plants (such as the weedy horsenettle) in a community of other
plants. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Understanding the mechanisms by which neighboring
plants influence insect damage may lead to more effective management of weeds
(where we may want to increase insect damage) and crops (where we may want to
reduce insect damage). Results will be presented to agricultural researchers and
farmers through seminars, newsletters, and workshops at the local agricultural
experiment station and surrounding universities.