* 1110484
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: The geographic and ecological basis of species richness: diversification in Mertensia
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2011,05/31/2013
* Larry Hufford, Washington State University
* Standard Grant
* Simon Malcomber
* 05/31/2013
* USD 14,730.00

DISSERTATION RESEARCH: The geographic and ecological basis of species richness:
diversification in Mertensia&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Understanding why biotic
diversity differs among geographic regions is a fundamental challenge in
evolutionary biology and ecology. This research will combine phylogenetic
analyses with biogeography and ecology to examine diversification of the
bluebell genus, Mertensia, which has its greatest species richness in western
North America but also occurs in Asia. The research aims to: (1) produce the
first molecular phylogeny for Mertensia; (2) test for the ancestral area of
Mertensia; (3) estimate the time of Mertensia?s origin and identify shifts in
diversification; and (4) test for effects of geographic and ecological change on
diversification rates. Chloroplast DNA sequences will be used to reconstruct a
phylogenetic hypothesis of species relationships. A time-calibrated phylogeny
will be used to test hypotheses of geographic and ecological change.
&lt;br/&gt;This research will help explain the ecological and geographical
dynamics of plant diversification and have implications for understanding
effects of anthropogenic climate change. Results will be published in peer-
reviewed journals, presented at scientific meetings, and deposited in online
databases. Outreach from this research will be directed toward native plant
societies, popular periodicals, and work with the National Girls Collaborative
Project, sponsored by the STEM Education Coalition.