* 1110350
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Comparative genomic analysis of the Compositae, focusing on Carthamus tinctorius L. (safflower)
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2011,05/31/2014
* Stephanie Pearl, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 05/31/2014
* USD 15,000.00

Studies of crop domestication have the potential to provide insight into the
genetic basis of agronomically-important traits. Comparative analyses further
afford researchers the opportunity to investigate whether or not similar traits
have arisen in different crop species as a result of selection upon the same or
different genes. The Compositae, which is the largest family of flowering
plants, contains numerous important crop species. To date, much of the crop-
related research in this family has focused on sunflower (Helianthus annuus L.)
and lettuce (Lactuca sativa L.). The research outlined herein seeks to utilize
cutting-edge DNA sequencing technologies to develop the first high-density
genetic map of safflower, (Carthamus tinctorius L.), which is a third crop
species within this family. This map will facilitate subsequent comparative
genomic analyses between safflower, sunflower, and lettuce, thereby enabling an
investigation of the potential for parallel genetic changes across three crop
species. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Beyond providing fundamental insights into the
genetic basis of crop-related traits, this work will provide valuable molecular
tools for the safflower breeding community, both in developed and developing
worlds. In addition to contributing to the training of a female graduate
student, this work will also provide University of Georgia undergraduates with
hands-on research experience.