* 1110494
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH:  Earthworm invasions as drivers of soil carbon sequestration in north temperate forests
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2011,05/31/2013
* Jasmine Crumsey, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Henry L. Gholz
* 05/31/2013
* USD 15,000.00

The uptake and storage of carbon in North American temperate forests is an
important ecosystem service, locking up a portion of the carbon that would
otherwise accumulate in the atmosphere as carbon dioxide, a potent greenhouse
gas. Forests in the northern hemisphere take up many million tons of carbon
annually and store about half of it in soils. Various factors can affect rates
of forest carbon storage, including invasive species, which can dramatically
change above and below-ground processes. One such invader that has tremendous
potential to affect carbon storage in forest soils is the exotic earthworm,
whose burrowing and feeding are central to soil function and soil carbon
distribution. Human activities of the past century have led to introductions of
several earthworm species into North American temperate forests. Although there
has been a lot of recent research on earthworm invasions, no single study has
examined changes in all pools of soil carbon that may be impacted. Further, no
other study has examined how interactions among different earthworm species will
affect carbon storage. This project will answer unresolved questions regarding
changes in forest carbon storage in response to invasions involving multiple
earthworm species. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will have important
implications for assessments of exotic earthworm invasion impacts on forest
carbon balances in temperate regions. Further, results will improve our
understanding of biological invasions on temperate forests and their impacts on
forest environmental, economic, and cultural values. The project also has an
important international collaboration component that involves researchers in
France, where these worms invaded forests long ago. Outcomes will have
implications for science policy. For example, there are no current restrictions
on the importation of exotic earthworm species to the U.S., nor is there current
legislation designed to limit their further spread.