* 1110716
* Dissertation Research: Biomechanics of Feeding in Loggerhead Shrikes
* BIO,IOS
* 06/01/2011,05/31/2013
* Diego Sustaita, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* Michelle Elekonich
* 05/31/2013
* USD 14,452.00

It is well known that young birds succeed less often at catching food than do
adults; this may be part of the reason that they frequently die during their
first year of life. However, it is not clear whether this difference in feeding
results from all young birds individually improving their feeding performance by
learning over time, or whether adult birds are better feeders because all the
physically or behaviorally deficient young birds die out at earlier stages,
leaving only those that perform better to reach adulthood. The aim of this study
is to distinguish among these possibilities in the federally endangered San
Clemente Loggerhead Shrike (Lanius ludovicianus mearnsi), a predatory songbird
endemic to San Clemente Island, California. The change over time of their prey
capture, processing, and feeding performance will be measured using high-speed
video imaging. Feeding performance has been directly linked to survival and
reproductive success in other birds. This study will provide managers breeding
shrikes in captivity in order to re-establish wild populations with objective
criteria for deciding which individual shrikes are likely to feed themselves
successfully if released, and at which stage of development. This study will
also advance our theoretical understanding of why feeding performance improves
with age, which physical and behavioral characteristics are important for
successful prey capture, and how shrikes, as a group, have evolved their
remarkable predatory capabilities. Finally, because the analytical techniques
used for measuring feeding performance have distinct biomedical applications
(e.g., kinesiology, exercise physiology, physical therapy), this project will
also train undergraduate students who seek careers in medical, health, and
wildlife professions.