* 1110617
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: The Quantitative Genetics of Male-Female Conflict
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2011,05/31/2013
* Derek Roff, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 05/31/2013
* USD 14,545.00

DISSERTATION RESEARCH: The Quantitative Genetics of Sexual
Conflict&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project investigates the evolution of
differences between sexes (sexual dimorphism). Despite often dramatic physical
divergence, males and females share the majority of their genes. This creates
genetic conflict when selection favors different trait values in the two sexes,
because genes that are beneficial for females will be detrimental for males and
vice versa. Evolutionary theory predicts that this conflict can be resolved by
one of two mechanisms: location of genes with sex-specific benefits on sex
chromosomes (sex-linkage) or sex-specific patterns of gene expression. By
crossing populations of water striders that differ in both body size and
magnitude of sexual dimorphism, this study will quantify sex-linkage and sex-
specific patterns of gene expression to determine if they are responsible for
the observed variation in sexual dimorphism. Additionally, the project explores
the ability of statistical methods to detect the genetic effects, unique to the
two predictions, in wild populations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Direct involvement of
undergraduates is key to the project. While in the laboratory, students will
obtain hands on experience conducting scientific research. Although most UCR
undergraduates go into health professions, training during this project will
prepare them well for these biology based professions. Results from the research
will reveal the genetic architecture of sexually dimorphic traits and contribute
to the general theories on body size evolution and sexual selection. Further,
this project will contribute to the statistical methods available for
quantitative genetic analyses of non-laboratory populations. These results can
be used to advance livestock improvement programs and determine the genetic
basis of sex-specific diseases in humans.