* 1110390
* Collaborative Research: Geochemical and isotopic time-series of marine and terrestrial degradation of petroleum in the 2010 Gulf of Mexico oil spill
* GEO,EAR
* 10/05/2010,08/31/2012
* David Finkelstein, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Enriqueta Barrera
* 08/31/2012
* USD 65,531.00

The proposed research aims to document organic geochemical and isotopic changes
of petroleum over time following the April 20, 2010 Gulf of Mexico oil spill.
The objectives of this study are to document the geochemical fate of petroleum
in the wake of the marine oil spill using the analytical arsenal of organic
geochemistry, in particular by using mass-spectrometric identification and
quantification, and isotopic characterization. These techniques record the
history of chemical change of spilled oil through time, and also forensically
discriminate between residual oil from the BP spill and unrelated hydrocarbon
pollutants that would otherwise go undetected. As oil washes ashore and is
degraded in different littoral and terrestrial environments, the PIs will
characterize the residual organic compounds as a function of exposure time to
test whether published models for anaerobic biodegradation of crude oils in oil
reservoirs fit the recorded trends of aerobic biodegradation from each sampling
site. Their compositional and isotopic data from a variety of repeatedly visited
sampling sites representing ecologically different environments will evaluate
possible acceleration or retardation of oil degradation that result from
environmental factors.

One doctoral and several undergraduate students will participate in fieldwork,
subsequent sample preparations, and analyses, educating students that across
boundaries of organic, stable isotope and environmental geochemistry. Results of
this study will be communicated to the scientific community through publications
and presentations at conferences and will serve as a public outreach project at
Grand Isle State Park, LA. Their data and interpretations will be used to help
construct either a display or an informational pamphlet to educate the general
public and K-12 students. Knowing which coastal environments have superior
geochemical self-cleaning capability will help optimize the deployment of
limited resources during future cleanup efforts.