* 1110357
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH:  The phylogeny of basal coelurosaurian theropods and large-scale  patterns of morphological evolution during the dinosaur-bird transition
* BIO,DEB
* 05/01/2011,04/30/2014
* Mark Norell, American Museum Natural History
* Standard Grant
* Maureen Kearney
* 04/30/2014
* USD 14,840.00

The evolution of birds from theropod dinosaurs is one of the major evolutionary
transitions in the history of life. This transition has emerged as a textbook
example for understanding the origins of major groups, new body plans, and novel
behaviors, thanks to a rapidly expanding fossil record of early birds and their
closest dinosaurian relatives (the coelurosaurian theropods). Several
outstanding questions remain, however, most notably regarding the phylogeny of
birds and their closest relatives and the major macroevolutionary patterns in
morphological evolution during the theropod-bird transition. This project aims
to tackle both of these issues by integrating new data collection, phylogenetic
analyses, and quantitative evolutionary modeling techniques. A large anatomical
dataset will be used to derive a complete species-level phylogeny of Mesozoic
coelurosaurs and to measure two major macroevolutionary metrics--rates of
character change and anatomical disparity (variety in morphological
features)--during the theropod-bird transition.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project will result in better understanding of the evolutionary transition
between carnivorous dinosaurs and birds, which is one of the few major
transitions that is recorded in fine detail in the fossil record. This project
will help train high school students as part of the American Museum of Natural
History's Student Research Mentoring Program, involve the collaboration of
undergraduate students beginning their careers in scientific research, and will
be incorporated into public lectures, online data repositories, and a
forthcoming book aimed at undergraduate and graduate students.