* 1110965
* Interaction Economics:  Instruments that Measure Social-Computational Systems
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2016
* James Landay, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* William Bainbridge
* 08/31/2016
* USD 766,000.00

This project enables measuring the value of user interfaces and the associated
tasks carried out with those interfaces. In doing so it integrates the fields of
Economics and Human-Computer Interaction (HCI) into a new field called
Interaction Economics. By measuring value, the project quantifies the costs and
benefits underlying user preference for different computer systems. The project
will develop new methods that use Internet microtask labor markets to create
virtual scientific laboratories, which researchers and designers can use to test
new interfaces and social configurations easily, cheaply, and quickly. Designers
will be able to measure the utility of their system-the quantitative degree to
which users want to use it. This will allow researchers and designers to
experimentally design new systems of greater complexity and novelty, with
greater certainty of success. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual merit. This
work will enable new economic measurements of social-computational systems.
These measurements will in turn enable a new scientific understanding of these
systems. This project will use these methods to answer a basic set of questions
about these systems and will give other researchers the tools to answer new
questions. By bringing economics to HCI and an analysis of burdens and non-
monetary values to economics, the project will help both fields move forward in
a way that allows them to make more impact on one of the most important
phenomena of modern times, the Internet.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts.
The method of experimenting with online human behavior and measuring effects
economically can be applied in many domains beyond Economics and HCI. By
bringing Economics and HCI together, both in language and in methods, the
project will impact a new generation of researchers in many other fields. The
multidisciplinary students trained over the course of this research will serve
as connectors between previously disjoint areas of inquiry. The project will
provide an open-sourced website that practicing designers and researchers can
use to learn the economic value of their interface designs and thus make more
data-driven decisions with respect to design iteration and selection. This
system will also be available for other researchers to modify and use for
different online economic experiments.