* 1111546
* RUI: Experimental and Computational Study of Unimolecular Gas-phase Rearrangements
* MPS,CHE
* 09/15/2011,08/31/2016
* Bert Holmes, University of North Carolina at Asheville
* Continuing Grant
* Colby Foss
* 08/31/2016
* USD 290,975.00

Professors Bert Holmes and George Heard of the University of North Carolina
Asheville are supported by the Chemical Structure, Dynamics and Mechanisms
Program to carry out a joint experimental and computational study of the
kinetics and energetics of reaction pathways of molecules in the atmosphere,
with particular attention to processes involving a unimolecular rearrangement as
a part of the reaction pathway. This research builds on the PIs' experience in
identifying unusual rearrangements of hydrohalocarbon molecules, and expands
that study to include compounds containing sulfur atoms as well as
cyclopropanes. Molecules will be studied by a combination of direct synthesis
from radical combination, and computational modeling using ab initio and density
functional theory with a focus on characterizing transition state geometries for
rearrangement and elimination processes. Computational and experimental projects
intersect by the comparison of relative rate constants using RRKM theory and
direct measurement.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Research outcomes from this project
should be an increased understanding of fundamental processes going on in the
upper atmosphere and an understanding of the chemistry of compounds released
regularly in incineration processes. This project will support seven
undergraduate students per summer in research that is intended to improve
problem-solving skills and provide preparation for a career in advanced chemical
sciences.