* 1111799
* Colloidal plasmonic nanostructures for enhanced emission and optical nonlinearity.
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2011,07/31/2015
* Philippe Guyot-Sionnest, University of Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* George Janini
* 07/31/2015
* USD 271,907.00

Technical Abstract&lt;br/&gt;With support from the Macromolecular,
Supramolecular, and Nanochemistry program in the Chemistry Division at NSF, the
PI will synthesize colloidal elongated gold and silver nanoparticles and will
study their integration with semiconductor and polymer materials. Through the
controlled assembly of these materials, the project will produce nanoscale
nonlinear optical switches and fast single photon sources. Three separate
research thrusts will be pursued: (1) Fast nanoscale nonlinear optical switching
will be sought by coating an Au bipyramid with or embedding it in a medium
exhibiting an optical Kerr effect. Feedback between the intensity-dependent
refractive index of the medium and the index-sensitive resonant electric field
enhancement can support optical bistability on subpicosecond time scales. (2)
Picosecond single photon sources will be designed to take advantage of the large
and anisotropic field enhancement of a bipyramid, speeding its radiative rate
and defining its polarization state. (3) Since silver is a better plasmonic
material than Au at optical frequencies and there are no existing synthesis of
small monodispersed Ag antenna with narrow Plasmon resonance, the PI will
undertake synthetic strategies to produce monocrystalline Ag nanorods with good
shape yield and monodispersity using in particular underpotential deposition
(UPD) of lower work function metals to control surface energy and
stability.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Non-Technical Abstract&lt;br/&gt;With
support from the Macromolecular, Supramolecular, and Nanochemistry program in
the Division of Chemistry at NSF, this project will impact three separate
scientific areas: colloidal synthesis, plasmonic materials, and education.
Colloidal synthesis is a field still in its infancy and this project will focus
on the development of new methods to control both the shape of the particle and
its assembly into more complex structures. Electronic processing has changed
society profoundly, and the processing of light is already ubiquitous in
telecommunications and promises to continue to develop. Ultrafast nanoscale
optical switches and single photon sources must be developed as part of this
progress, and this project will chemically produce and characterize these two
basic but essential elements. The research project will educate two PhD students
to become skilled and creative scientists at the frontier in an
interdisciplinary research area, intersecting physics and chemistry. The PI will
also develop curricular materials and optical demonstrations to bring an
understanding of the properties of light and colloidal materials to
disadvantaged high school students and to the public at large.