* 1111074
* New Methods in Stereoselective Synthesis
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2011,06/30/2015
* Amir Hoveyda, Boston College
* Standard Grant
* Richard Johnson
* 06/30/2015
* USD 620,000.00

In this project funded by the Chemical Synthesis Program of the Chemistry
Division, Professor Amir H. Hoveyda of the Department of Chemistry at Boston
College will develop catalytic methods for selective synthesis of boron-
containing organic molecules as well as protocols that utilize such entities in
bond-forming processes. Specifically, catalytic methods for site-, diastereo-
and enantioselective hydroborations of trisubstituted olefins, of internal
alkynes as well as the resulting trisubstituted vinylboronates, will be
developed. Enantioselective reactions will be promoted by chiral N-heterocyclic
carbene-copper (NHC-Cu) complexes. NHC-Cu catalysts will also be utilized in
hydroborations of internal alkynes with emphasis on accessing the more
sterically hindered vinylboronates, which cannot be synthesized by other
catalytic or uncatalyzed reactions. Additionally, reactions involve addition of
Cu-B across alkynes, the resulting B-substituted vinylcoppers will be utilized
in tandem enantioselective C-C bond forming processes through allylic
substitution or conjugate addition reactions (vs Cu-C protonation to afford
hydroboration product). These new Cu-catalyzed processes will allow access to a
wide range of enantiomerically enriched carbo- and heterocyclic structures that
bear a tertiary alcohol stereogenic center and a trisubstituted vinylboronate.
Finally, catalytic inter- and intramolecular Cu-catalyzed ketone vinyl additions
will be developed wherein vinylboronates, accessed in situ by Cu-catalyzed
hydroborations mentioned above, serve as the source of the vinylcopper. Readily
accessible and air stable vinylboronates will be utilized, instead of other less
functional group tolerant vinylmetals, in new ways for preparation of a wide
range of acyclic and cyclic tertiary allylic alcohols with high
enantioselectivity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Development of new methods that allow
access to important molecules that are otherwise difficult to prepare is a
central objective of research in modern chemistry and is therefore of
substantial value; such developments require fundamental advances in chemistry
and thus positively impact future efforts in other areas of catalyst design. Of
particular importance are transformations that proceed with high site- and
chemoselectivity and are initiated by a readily accessible catalyst that
delivers products predominantly consisting of a single diastereo- and/or
enantiomer. Within this context, the introduction of general protocols for
catalytic and selective synthesis of B-containing organic molecules, such as
hydroborations of alkenes or alkynes, stands as a compelling goal in chemical
synthesis; the resulting C-B bonds may be converted to C-O, C-N or C-C bonds
with retention of sterechemistry, adding further value to such processes. The
proposed activities will serve to train numerous young scholars, including those
from historically underrepresented in physical sciences, at a wide range of
development stages. High school, undergraduate, graduate and postdoctoral
fellows, actively involved with the experimental as well as intellectual aspects
of our investigations, will gain the skills necessary to become future leaders
in industry as well as the academic sector.