* 1111217
* PROMISE Pathways
* EHR,HRD
* 06/01/2011,05/31/2014
* Renetta Tull, University of Maryland Baltimore County
* Standard Grant
* Mark Leddy
* 05/31/2014
* USD 150,000.00

PROMISE, the Alliance for Graduate Education and the Professoriate (AGEP) in
Maryland, proposes a new, expanded alliance, titled the PROMISE Pathways
Project, that seeks to expand upon successes from two prior AGEP projects by
partnering with additional institutions to increase the numbers of
underrepresented minority students (URMs) who will pursue graduate degrees in
STEM fields, increase the retention of URM graduate students in STEM, facilitate
more postdoctoral opportunities for participants, prepare graduate students and
postdoctoral fellows for the professoriate, and facilitate applications and
opportunities for academic careers at a variety of institutions. Formed in 2002
and led by the University of Maryland, Baltimore County (UMBC), PROMISE is a
multi-institution consortium that includes UMBC, the University of Maryland
College Park (UMCP) and the University of Maryland, Baltimore (UMB). This
proposed PROMISE Pathways project explores and develops the infrastructure
needed to expand the current alliance to include potentially all of the
universities within the University System of Maryland, four Maryland-based
community colleges, and a former NSF Model Institution of Excellence (MIE)
Hispanic Serving Institution (HSI) in Puerto Rico. The new members of PROMISE
Pathways will build upon the recruitment and retention successes that UMBC,
UMCP, and UMB made with previous AGEP funding to move their respective
undergraduate students to graduate programs at doctoral granting public research
universities in Maryland, build relationships among faculty, and provide
advanced graduate students and postdocs with mentored teaching and training
opportunities so that they can be equipped to be the next generation of STEM
professors. &lt;br/&gt;The plan for the new PROMISE Pathways project has four
major components: &lt;br/&gt;1. Creating an expanded pipeline of
underrepresented students from Maryland?s institutions who will pursue doctoral
degrees. &lt;br/&gt;2. Developing a stronger network of STEM faculty within the
State of Maryland who will facilitate research collaborations that will involve
underrepresented undergraduate and graduate students, and foster a stronger
sense of mentoring underrepresented students in STEM throughout the state.
&lt;br/&gt;3. Providing Maryland?s underrepresented STEM doctoral students with
programs that facilitate collegial academic networks, professional development,
and degree completion. &lt;br/&gt;4. Offering advanced graduate students and
postdocs interactive workshops that will train them for the professoriate along
with hands-on, mentored teaching experiences at a wide range of institutions,
including research institutions, Predominately White Institutions, Historically
Black Colleges and Universities, Hispanic Serving Institutions, and Community
Colleges. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: The PROMISE Pathways project
will facilitate wider academic networks for research collaboration. It will also
advance and inform the field of graduate education and the sub-disciplines of
broadening participation in STEM and psychological sense of community for
retention of URMs in STEM. The project will explore creative writing conferences
(e.g. application/proposal/dissertation/portfolio house) to coach students
through document preparation. The project will also develop a suite of mentored
teaching opportunities to facilitate preparation for the professoriate. Both of
these examples are potentially transformative with respect to developing a new
generation of diverse professors. The concepts are based on 7 years of
successful projects at smaller levels and are being considered for expansion.
The campuses have the resources, facilities, and administrative support to
develop the activities in this Pathways proposal. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts: This Pathways project advances discovery and understanding of
retention, pedagogy, and factors of influence for pursuing the professoriate. It
promotes teaching, training, and learning through peer mentoring, mentored
teaching experiences by faculty, and training/coaching methods that will prepare
participants for each milestone in their careers. This project broadens the
participation of underrepresented groups by specifically focusing on advancing
underrepresented minorities in STEM toward the professoriate. The project also
attends to participants with visible and invisible disabilities. This project
will enhance the distance learning infrastructure for professional development
activities between partner campuses. Results will be disseminated widely through
conference proceedings, journal submissions, and particularly through the
PROMISE network of blogs and websites. The expanded impact to society will
include an understanding of methods and models that can facilitate URM STEM
retention and transition to the professoriate. The project seeks to be a model
that can be replicated for other institutions, alliances, and university systems
in the U.S.