* 1111770
* Heterogeneous Catalysis on Plasmonic Metallic Nanostructures:  Selective Catalytic Conversion at Lower Temperatures co-Driven by Solar and Thermal Energy
* MPS,CHE
* 10/01/2011,09/30/2015
* Suljo Linic, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* George Janini
* 09/30/2015
* USD 285,000.00

Professor Suljo Linic of the University of Michigan Ann Arbor is jointly
supported by the Chemical Catalysis Program of the Division of Chemistry and the
Catalysis and Biocatalysis Program of the Chemical, Bioengineering,
Environmental, and Transport Systems Division to test the hypothesis that
plasmonic nanostructures of silver (Ag) can concurrently utilize thermal energy
and a low intensity photon flux to drive catalytic oxidation reactions on Ag
nanoparticles at lower temperatures than conventional thermally-driven
processes. Ag nanostructures of targeted sizes and shapes will be prepared and
used to tune the energy of surface plasmons and control the transfer of
energetic electrons into adsorbate states (orbitals) in order to achieve
selective chemical transformations. The proposed experiments will be combined
with theoretical calculations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Despite substantial advances
in the science of heterogeneous catalysis over the years, much remains to be
done for the rational design and synthesis of catalytic materials for targeted
chemical transformations. The proposed research will focus on the investigation
of the potential of plasmonic metallic nanostructures to activate targeted
chemical transformations using low intensity light flux, allowing the catalysts
to operate at lower temperatures. This promises to significantly improve
catalysts stability, energy efficiency, and product selectivity. Students will
be trained in sophisticated research methods, and activities will be organized
to educate high school students and the general public on heterogeneous
catalysis using web vehicles of content delivery such as YouTube.