* 1111033
* Planning for a Southwestern Regional Alliance to Broaden Participation
* EHR,HRD
* 07/01/2011,06/30/2014
* Richard Tapia, William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* Mark Leddy
* 06/30/2014
* USD 150,000.00

Rice University will lead an initiative of major southwestern research
universities; Rice, the University of Texas-Austin, the University of New
Mexico, The University of Arizona, the University of Houston, and Texas Tech
University along with the states; partnering minority-serving institutions
(MSI);to plan a next-generation alliance with the mission to increase the number
of underrepresented minority (URM) students who pursue science, technology,
engineering, and mathematics (STEM) Ph.D.s and subsequently enter academic
positions. Concentrated in the southwest is the nation's growing Hispanic
population, Native Americans, and primarily in its cities, a significant number
of African Americans. Schools in the southwest must increase participation to
serve the needs of this citizenry. &lt;br/&gt;The participating universities can
make a difference. They represent thousands of URM STEM undergraduates. Key
participating faculty and administrators also provide experience and expertise
that will be shared across the alliance. For instance, Arizona, New Mexico and
Rice U have faculty members who are former Rice AGEP graduate students. The
proposed project leadership has learned much from its eleven years of AGEP
participation, and this knowledge will inform the work of this next-generation
alliance, including a) it needs to do a better job of systematically motivating
and inspiring URM undergraduates at research universities to pursue graduate
studies, b) it needs to more fully and systematically engage faculty members,
critical to the success of the program, for functions such as evaluating
graduate admissions, mentoring, role models, academic graduate advising,
selecting research advisors, advocating for post-doc and faculty placement, to
name a few, c) it needs a systematic way to produce new faculty members, for
most, through a post-doctoral fellowship, d) it needs to integrate the
broadening participation effort more fully into the mainstream research, and e)
it needs a more systematic way of defining participation in the AGEP program so
that it is indeed increasing participation of the nation's URM population rather
than merely increasing international minority participation. &lt;br/&gt;Alliance
planning will be led by Rice University. Rice will begin this one year project
by hosting an in-person meeting of participants from all universities to build
understanding around a common vision and organize committees to continue
planning from a distance. Subsequently, cross-institutional committees formed
around strategic topics will meet weekly through teleconferences. Committee
chairs will also meet weekly with the Project Director. To facilitate the
planning, each committee will have staff support, and access to technologies
that support distant collaboration. In addition to crafting a new alliance plan,
the project will share through a report what is learned through this
collaborative activity and disseminate it broadly. &lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
Merit: This project will bring together many of the nation's leaders in the area
of diversity to develop a next-generation AGEP --one that is focused
strategically on producing URM faculty leaders. It builds on a base of
experience and builds towards new understandings and efforts. &lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts: No population is more critical to the health of the nation than that of
the southwest, with its concentration of a growing Hispanic population, Native
Americans, and concentrated in its cities, a significant number of African
Americans, and because of this growth, none provides greater potential.