* 1111638
* RI: Large: Collaborative Research: A Robotic Network for Locating and Removing Invasive Carp from Inland Lakes
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2017
* Ibrahim Isler, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Reid Simmons
* 08/31/2017
* USD 1,545,405.00

This project addresses open questions and challenges in search theory, energy-
efficient networked robotics, and fish biology. A network of robotic boats which
can track many fish in shallow waters over extended periods of time are deployed
in invasive carp infested waters. Provably correct cooperative search and
tracking algorithms are developed, energy efficiency is studied at multiple
levels including navigation, sensing, communication and complete system,
communication protocols for controllable mobile entities are studied, and data
analysis algorithms are developed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project provides a
means to sustainably reduce invasive carp populations in US lakes without
impacting other wildlife, thus solving a major environmental problem. Robots are
shown to serve as a major scientific instrument for environmental scientists.
The educational activities promote the results of this research to high school,
undergraduate and graduate students, as well as educators across the country. A
summer research experience is offered which blends mathematics, computer science
and biology. Participation of students from under-represented groups is ensured
through collaborations with predominantly Native American schools, as well as
Central State University which has a 96% African-American student population.
The project simultaneously raises awareness of environmental issues and attracts
students to science and engineering.