* 1111476
* Multi-Instrument Observation of Dynamics of the Ionospheric Trough During Substorms
* GEO,AGS
* 08/15/2011,07/31/2015
* Shasha Zou, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Therese Moretto Jorgensen
* 07/31/2015
* USD 320,739.00

This project will use a variety of ground-based and space-based observations to
examine the dynamics of the ionospheric trough during magnetic substorms. The
high and mid-latitude, ionospheric troughs are regions of unusually low plasma
density. The project will use observations from the Super Dual Auroral Radar
Network (SuperDARN) coherent scatter radars, the Poker Flat Incoherent Scatter
Radar (PFISR), and the all-sky imager and magnetometer arrays set up for NASA's
THEMIS mission. It will utilize measurements of field-aligned currents (FACs)
derived from the Iridium satellite network (the NSF supported AMPERE project).
Three specific scientific topics will be addressed: (1) How does the mid-
latitude trough evolve during substorms? (2) How is the high-latitude trough
formed and why is it typically located immediately eastward of the Harang
discontinuity? (3) What role do ionospheric conductances play in the discrepancy
between the electric field and magnetic field Harang
reversals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The large-scale variations in the plasma density
at mid and high-latitudes play an important role in the formation of smaller-
scale plasma irregularities that affect communications and navigation. This
project will examine the driving mechanisms that produce the large-scale
variations during magnetically disturbed times. The work will improve our
ability to understand and predict important space weather phenomena.