* 1111943
* SHF: Large: Domain Specific Language Infrastructure for Biological Simulation Software
* CSE,CCF
* 07/15/2011,06/30/2016
* Patrick Hanrahan, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Anindya Banerjee
* 06/30/2016
* USD 1,770,669.00

Biophysics simulation helps biomedical researchers understand the physical
constraints on biological systems as they engineer novel drugs, synthetic
tissues, medical devices, and surgical interventions. However, writing high-
performance biophysics simulation software for modern parallel computer hardware
is a challenging problem. This research project will solve this problem by
developing a new generation of biophysics simulation software that is optimized
for complex high-performance computer hardware. The project will develop this
software using a family of domain specific languages (DSLs). A DSL is a concise
programming language with a syntax that is designed to naturally express the
semantics of a narrow problem domain. Biophysics simulation DSLs will be used to
improve the productivity of simulation software developers and the efficiency
and performance of the resulting software by enabling the DSL implementation to
take advantage of high-level domain-specific optimizations that are inaccessible
to general-purpose compilers and general-purpose languages. The simulation
technology built from the family of biophysics simulation DSLs will be used to
solve the important biological problems of developing new neuroprosthetics,
combating viral infections, effective drug discovery, and understanding drug
side effects. In addition, this research will expose students at the graduate
and undergraduate level to the role that domain-specific languages play in
computing in general and biophysics simulation in
particular.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The biophysics simulation DSLs will be
developed with a general DSL infrastructure. This infrastructure will make use
of polymorphic embeddings, multi-stage compilation, and parallel execution
patterns to implement the high-level, implicitly parallel DSLs in a common host
language. The DSL infrastructure will simplify DSL development by providing a
reusable framework for parallelism and domain-specific optimization. When
completed, this infrastructure will allow scientists in other application
domains to create and use their own high-performance DSLs, in the same manner
that this research uses the infrastructure to develop DSLs for biophysics
simulation. The result will be a new generation of DSLs in a number of domains
that provide high-productivity application development and high-performance on
modern heterogeneous parallel hardware such as multicore microprocessors, GPUs
and distributed systems.