* 1111237
* HCC: Large: Collaborative Research: Information Technology, Remote Socialization, and the Development of Occupational Identity
* CSE,IIS
* 08/01/2011,07/31/2016
* Diane Bailey, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* William Bainbridge
* 07/31/2016
* USD 453,374.00

This project will explore how remote socialization enabled by information and
communication technologies (ICTs) is transforming four occupations: graphic
design, automotive engineering, banking, and Internet entrepreneurship.
Following a comparative, field-based research design, this research will examine
the effects of both organizational environments and socialization tactics on ICT
use and consider issues of technology use, socialization, and the changing
nature of work. In today's workplaces, it is increasingly common to encounter
arrangements in which occupational members are geographically distributed from
one another. This new reality calls into question existing theories of
socialization and learning practices that highlight the importance of collocated
interaction and in situ knowledge transfer. By focusing on how individuals use
ICTs to learn what it means to be an occupational member, this research will
contribute to a new breed of theory on socialization that indicates the
processes, practices, and strategies individuals can use to become effective
members of an occupation even though they work remotely from others. By drawing
on recent theorizing, which suggests that ICTs may provide particular
affordances for interaction that non-mediated (e.g. face-to-face) contexts do
not, it will explore the possibility that remote socialization may, in fact,
help occupations to transform themselves. One aim is to build theory about the
mechanisms by which technology leads to occupational transformation.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Occupational skill is critical to economic success, social
progress, and individual well-being. However, many occupations seem to be
failing to adapt quickly to changes in science, technology, and policy. The
failure of occupations to change and refashion themselves to meet new social and
technological pressures portends job loss from reduced skill for American
citizens, and potentially increased outsourcing to other countries. This study
will provide insight into how technology-enabled remote socialization may be
able to contribute to faster occupational transformation. Although, for many
years, ICT-mediated communication has been seen to be impoverished when compared
to face-to-face communication, but now that it has developed considerably, ICT-
mediated communication may provide more opportunities for workers to break free
from the inertia of established occupations and develop new work practices and
strategies that move the occupation forward. Additionally, it is imperative that
new occupational members learn how to effectively acquire the knowledge and
skills they need to perform their jobs well when they work remotely from others.
This study will provide insight into effective practices of remote socialization
and occupational learning such that individuals who are attempting to learn new
work practices and knowledge will be successful in their efforts.