* 1111971
* NeTS:Large: Collaborative Research:  Closing the loop between traffic/pollution sensing and vehicle route control using traffic lights and navigators.
* CSE,CNS
* 09/15/2011,08/31/2015
* Mario Gerla, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Darleen Fisher
* 08/31/2015
* USD 1,167,562.00

In this project, the researchers focus on the challenges of designing a real-
time networked sensing and actuation platform for future 'intelligent'
metropolitan traffic management with the aim of simultaneously reducing
congestion, pollution, and traveler delays. Today, most urban traffic control is
rudimentary: in smaller cities many traffic signals remain isolated, and while
most larger cities have integrated systems of signals, they for the most part,
are not dynamically timed in response to real-time vehicle information.
Congestion fees, which are increasingly popular as a traffic management and
revenue-generating tool, are usually based on historical traffic data rather
than varying dynamically to reflect instantaneous conditions. Recent advances in
communication, navigation, and sensor technologies present far more
opportunities to increase the intelligence and efficiency of metropolitan
streets than are in place today.

The pivotal element of the proposed Green City intelligent transport
architecture will be the ability to 'close the loop' between traffic/pollution
sensing and traffic control; a system achieved through an incentivized
collaboration between the central traffic management and the drivers. In this
collaboration, the 'intelligent' traffic signals, the Navigator Server and the
on-board navigators play key roles. In addition to the traditional control of
vehicular flow at signalized intersections, future traffic signal systems will
sense traffic characteristics and vehicular emissions, collect data from vehicle
sensors (pollution, emission, position, etc.), and broadcast traffic advisories,
routings, and restrictions to on-board navigators. The Navigator Server
interacts with central traffic controllers, and proposes optimal routes to the
on-board navigators. Finally, the on-board navigators, incentivized by
congestion/pollution fees and/or 'good navigation' credits, propose optimal
routings based on drivers' preferences, local perceived traffic, and signal
timing. All this is enabled by efficient vehicle to roadway infrastructure
communications, from 3G channels to DSRC radios (roadside and on-board) that
enable real-time, low cost, scalable information exchanges among the various
architecture components.

Broader Impact: This project will be highly interdisciplinary; it will benefit
from the collaboration and expertise of computer science, atmospheric science,
and urban planning faculty and students. The efficacy of our solution will be
demonstrated via simulation, emulation, and experimentation. New education
opportunities will result from the multidisciplinary nature of the project.