* 1111507
* RI: Large: Collaborative Research: A Robotic Network for Locating and Removing Invasive Carp from Inland Lakes
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2016
* Alexander Szalay, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* jeffrey trinkle
* 08/31/2016
* USD 485,716.00

This project addresses open questions and challenges in search theory, energy-
efficient networked robotics, and fish biology. A network of robotic boats which
can track many fish in shallow waters over extended periods of time are deployed
in invasive carp infested waters. Provably correct cooperative search and
tracking algorithms are developed, energy efficiency is studied at multiple
levels including navigation, sensing, communication and complete system,
communication protocols for controllable mobile entities are studied, and data
analysis algorithms are developed.

The project provides a means to sustainably reduce invasive carp populations in
US lakes without impacting other wildlife, thus solving a major environmental
problem. Robots are shown to serve as a major scientific instrument for
environmental scientists. The educational activities promote the results of this
research to high school, undergraduate and graduate students, as well as
educators across the country. A summer research experience is offered which
blends mathematics, computer science and biology. Participation of students from
under-represented groups is ensured through collaborations with predominantly
Native American schools, as well as Central State University which has a 96%
African-American student population. The project simultaneously raises awareness
of environmental issues and attracts students to science and engineering.