* 1111410
* Nanoscale Nuclear Spin Imaging and Spectroscopy using Nitrogen-Vacancy Centers in Diamond
* MPS,CHE
* 07/15/2011,06/30/2014
* Carlos Meriles, CUNY City College
* Standard Grant
* Lin He
* 06/30/2014
* USD 404,000.00

With support from the Chemical Measurement and Imaging program in the Division
of Chemistry, and co-funding from the Instrument Development for Biological
Research program in the Division of Biological Infrastructure, Prof. Carlos
Meriles and his group at the City University of New York - City College are
devising new approaches to magnetic resonance imaging (MRI). This important
analytical tool is used by scientists, health professionals, and lab technicians
to address a broad range of questions such as the functioning of cells and
proteins, the monitoring and optimization of chemical processes in industry, and
the diagnosis of organ dysfunction in humans. Magnetic resonance as currently
practiced lacks the sensitivity necessary to image samples with high (sub-
micron) spatial resolution, a serious impediment. Dr. Meriles addresses this
problem with a novel strategy ultimately aimed at probing small living systems
with nanometer resolution. The strategy makes use of "NV centers"- imperfections
in diamond crystals which are extremely sensitive to local magnetic fields. By
integrating magnetic resonance with scanning and optical microscopy, individual
NV centers near a sample surface will be manipulated and detected, providing
chemical information about the sample surface. A unique aspect of this approach
is that, unlike mainstream MRI, bulky superconducting magnets and strong field
gradients are unnecessary.

The work promises broad scientific and technological impact, with potential
applications including nanoscale imaging of single cells at virtually zero
magnetic field, high-resolution NMR spectroscopy of microorganisms under ambient
conditions, sensing of molecular diffusion in nanoporous or membranous systems,
and the monitoring of cell activity in single muscle cells or neuron networks.
Accompanying this effort is a broad educational plan, which, besides graduate
student training, includes activities aimed at improving instructional
laboratories and various research opportunities for underprivileged students
through summer activities within CCNY and in host laboratories of partner
institutions.