* 1111397
* Collaborative Research: Sourcing Interaction in the Woodland Period Southeast U.S.:  Integrated Approaches to Swift Creek Ceramics
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2015
* Neill Wallis, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 08/31/2015
* USD 55,673.00

With National Science Foundation support, Dr. Neill Wallis and Dr. Thomas
Pluckhahn will use a unique form of pottery to identify patterns of social
interaction across the "Deep South" of the southeastern U.S. during the late
Middle and Late Woodland periods (ca. AD 200 to 800). Termed "Swift Creek
Complicated Stamped pottery" and associated with the Swift Creek and Weeden
Island archaeological cultures it has the potential to provide an unexpected
insight into prehistoric social organization. Before drying and firing, the
vessels were decorated with impressions from a carved wooden paddle. The unique
"fingerprints" of more than 400 individual carved wooden paddles have been
recognized in the impressions on complicated stamped vessels, and the same
paddle stamp can be identified on vessels distributed across multiple sites,
sometimes hundreds of kilometers apart. These "paddle matches" between sites
lend detailed temporal and spatial resolution to social connections.

This research makes a significant contribution to the currently limited body of
anthropological knowledge of social interaction and exchange among non-
hierarchical, foraging, or tribal societies in a precolonial world. It is also
important in delimiting patterns of interaction that may be correlated with
important trends such as village aggregation, mound-building, mortuary practice,
and long-distance exchange.

The project integrates five methods of analysis: (1) Instrumental Neutron
Actication Analysis (INAA), (2) petrographic analysis, and (3) digital imaging
of paddle stamp designs as complementary methods for determining where vessels
were made; (4) technological analysis to identify how vessels were made and
used; and (5) radiocarbon dating to develop a chronology of designs and paddle
matches. Examining collections from 24 sites distributed across nine regions in
northern Florida and southern Georgia, these data will be used to distinguish
between alternative forms of interaction. Broader impacts include facilitating
future collaborative research and presenting results in a public and timely
fashion. Painstaking research has resulted in the identification of hundreds of
Swift Creek paddle designs, but the research potential of these data has been
limited by haphazard data management. The project will develop a searchable
database that links high-resolution images of designs with other vessel
attribute data and absolute dates. This database will integrate multiple
datasets and provide the synergistic foundation for integrating a growing body
of data that can enrich many other research projects, especially regionally-
focused theses and dissertations. Maintained and integrated with the collections
database at the Florida Museum of Natural History, portions of the research
database will also be publicly accessible. The web accessible version of the
database will provide a collaborative forum for the public and an interpretive
synthesis of current research results.