* 1111186
* IOWA AGEP Evaluation Study
* EDU,EES
* 06/01/2011,05/31/2013
* John Keller, University of Iowa
* Standard Grant
* Mark Leddy
* 05/31/2013
* USD 149,617.00

The IOWA AGEP program is an alliance of the three Board of Regents institutions
in the State of Iowa: The University of Iowa (UI), Iowa State University (ISU)
and the University of Northern Iowa (UNI). The IOWA AGEP alliance is aimed at
making institutional changes for a sustained increase in the number of under-
represented minorities (URMs) progressing toward the STEM professoriate. Each
institution made substantial contributions to the success of their alliance
since funding of the original AGEP grant. A key goal was to spread the success
in UI?s Mathematics Department through a strategic partnership in Mathematics
and Statistics at both ISU and UNI. That initial success gained momentum, and
the concepts were disseminated to and adopted by several disciplines across all
three institutions.&lt;br/&gt;Specific programmatic approaches included: 1)
collectively fostered faculty driven relationships with undergraduate
institutions and institutional consortiums; 2) initiation and/or expansion of
summer research program opportunities; 3) building programs and fostering a
culture of personalized attention and mentorship with meaningful and
comprehensive professional development programs; 4) establishment and/or
expansion of institutional funding for URM graduate students; and 5) growth of a
partnership between the masters programs at UNI with PhD programs at ISU and UI
in order to facilitate smooth transition between the institutions. The results
have been an increase in the number of URM STEM graduate students with some
evidence for their students entering STEM postdoctoral positions that have or
will lead to faculty positions.&lt;br/&gt;The institutionalization of these
practices has been proven by their sustained AGEP efforts. The collective
approaches being undertaken by their institutions make the IOWA AGEP alliance an
appropriate consortium to investigate best practices in not only recruiting,
matriculating and graduating high quality doctoral students, but also developing
postdoctoral programs to foster career progression to the
professoriate.&lt;br/&gt;Their proposed evaluation study will rigorously review
their past efforts and lay a solid foundation for determining how they can more
effectively advance postdoctoral trainees to the professoriate and cultivate a
faculty environment that will more readily accept hiring URM faculty candidates.
This grant is designed to provide clear evidence for the impact of the overall
program, and specific program elements are targeted to improve the progression
of URMs to the professoriate. The project?s three goals are to: 1) evaluate the
career paths of URM STEM graduate students, comparing AGEP and other students;
2) identify the most impactful AGEP practices; and 3) develop compelling
evidence to identify primary paths and barriers to entering the professoriate
after PhD completion. For Goals 1 and 2, they will study academic progression
(types of degree programs, times to degree, percent completion, etc.) of their
students, and they will study the postgraduate employment decisions of their
graduates. For Goal 3, they will also begin to study the hiring practices that
STEM departments/colleges are taking at their Regents institutions through
collaboration with the NSF-funded ISU ADVANCE program. They will leverage the
ISU ADVANCE work that has identified barriers to the faculty search and hiring
process. With the ISU ADVANCE and IOWA AGEP programming having some approaches
with focal departments and some with university-wide approaches, comparison of
outcomes across programs will be evaluated to determine if university wide or
focal departments has a greater impact.&lt;br/&gt;INTELLECTUAL MERIT: The
evaluation studies will generate knowledge supporting the approaches to
broadening participation, the value of an alliance, and the approach of having
focal departments or disciplines. Using multiple data sources (local surveys,
focus groups, and national surveys such as COACHE) and newly developed
instruments, methods to mine and combine these data sources will be investigated
to establish baseline data and approaches for future studies. Analysis of data
comparing the impact of department-focused activities vs. campus-wide
initiatives will provide other programs focused on institutional change with
guidance on how to pursue their changes.&lt;br/&gt;BROADER IMPACTS: The work
will be disseminated in archival publications to provide others with information
and evidence of effective practices developed in the IOWA AGEP alliance for the
recruitment and retention of URMs. The study concerning faculty attitudes toward
postdoctoral programs and faculty hiring will add further evidence to the
literature on the areas where interventions are needed to address barriers in
broadening participation in the professoriate. The results will be used directly
to design new interventions in postdoctoral programs and faculty hiring
practices and provide a basis for future studies.