* 1111044
* Collaborative Research: Programming with Crowds: Models and Tools for General Purpose Crowdsourcing
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2015
* Robert Miller, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 08/31/2015
* USD 369,067.00

Crowdsourcing is a powerful way to marshal small contributions from large
numbers of people to solve real-world problems. Success stories range from
classifying craters on Mars' surface (ClickWorker) to labeling images (the ESP
Game, now Google Image Labeler) to task marketplaces (Amazon's Mechanical Turk).
This project moves towards a vision of crowdsourcing that extends it to support
complex, creative, and interdependent tasks, and embeds it into computing
systems as part of our everyday lives. The project will focus on two application
areas for complex crowdsourcing: science journalism and software development.

The intellectual merits of the project include the uncovering of new scientific
knowledge about how to model online crowd behavior, and the development of new
methods and tools for using crowds as part of computer system designs,
particularly for complex, interdependent, real time work. The project will also
show that these methods can be used for real-world problems.

The potential broader impacts include those specifically having to do with the
two application areas, which could have significant impacts on society.
Crowdsourcing science journalism will directly involve citizens in the process
of science dissemination, making scientific information more accessible to the
general public, and promoting greater awareness of science and the scientific
process. Crowdsourcing software development can transform the way that software
is created, lowering barriers and broadening participation in open source
software development, and helping larger masses of people use and improve their
programming skills. Other impacts will flow from the researchers' plans to
publically share the infrastructure that they develop to facilitate complex
crowdsourcing in many other areas. They also plan to integrate their research
results into undergraduate courses.