* 1111733
* SHF: Large: Phase-Based Logic Realized Using Oscillatory Nanosystems (PHLOGON)
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2018
* Sayeef Salahuddin, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 08/31/2018
* USD 1,600,000.00

Exponential progress in Complementary Metal Oxide Semiconductor (CMOS)
miniaturization (Moore's Law) over decades has increased computing power to the
point that it has transformed science and engineering and touched every aspect
of modern society. Continuing progress in computing at the same rate for several
more decades is likely to have an even greater impact than that seen so far.
Unfortunately, over the last decade, Moore's Law has become increasingly
threatened by fundamental design and manufacturing limitations that are being
reached. In particular, as individual CMOS logic elements have become smaller,
they have also become more sensitive to noise and interference. Moreover, CMOS
elements consume power disproportionate to their size; supplying this power,
dissipating the heat generated, and containing the adverse effects of high
temperatures all constitute serious roadblocks to Moore's
Law.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project on PHase based LOGic using Oscillatory
Nano-systems (PHLOGON) aims to circumvent these problems via a fundamentally
different physical paradigm for computing: the bits and bytes that constitute
digital information are encoded using the phase (or timing) of oscillatory
(i.e., undulating) signals, not as voltage levels as in conventional computing.
Phase encoding has inherent noise immunity advantages over level encoding;
PHLOGON exploits this feature fully within the most basic elements that store
and manipulate data bits. The core of PHLOGON is logic made of self-sustaining
nonlinear oscillators (i.e., elements that generate their own undulating
signals, like pendulum clocks). Such oscillatory logic elements can be realized
easily using not only CMOS transistors, but also devices from biology such as
neurons and intracellular oscillators, from nanotechnology such as Spin Torque
Nano Oscillators (STNO) and Micro/Nano-Electro-Mechanical (M/NEMS) resonators,
and from optics such as lasers. Thus, PHLOGON enables a wide variety of novel
"substrates" for computing. Importantly, several of these (e.g., CMOS and STNOs)
offer the promise of dramatically lower power/energy consumption than
conventional level-based logic. By developing the core knowledge required for
phase-based alternatives to level-based computing to be viable, the PHLOGON
project can have significant and wide-ranging impact, potentially reversing the
slow-down in Moore's Law and enabling progress in the physical mechanisms that
underlie computing for decades to come.