* 1111534
* CGV: Large: Collaborative Research: Analyzing Images Through Time
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2016
* Kavita Bala, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Maria Zemankova
* 08/31/2016
* USD 423,732.00

This collaborative research project leverages expertise of four research teams
(IIS-1111415, Massachusetts Institute of Technology; IIS-1110955, Harvard
University; IIS-1111398, Washington University; and IIS-1111534, Cornell
University). Understanding time-varying processes and phenomena is fundamental
to science and engineering. Due to tremendous progress in digital photography,
images and videos (including images from webcams, time- lapse photography
captured by scientists, surveillance videos, and Internet photo collections) are
becoming an important source of information about our dynamic world. However,
techniques for automated understanding and visualization of time-varying
processes from images or videos are scarce and underdeveloped, requiring
fundamental new models and algorithms for representing changes over time. This
research involves creating systems that enable modeling, analysis, and
visualization of time-varying processes based on image data. These models and
algorithms will form the basis for a new set of tools that can help answer
important questions about how our environment is changing, how our cities are
evolving, and what significant events are happening around the
world.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Analyzing images over time poses fundamental new
technical challenges. This project focuses on developing and demonstrating end-
to-end systems consisting of (1) novel representations necessary to model time-
varying image datasets; (2) algorithms for estimating long-range temporal
correspondence in image datasets; (3) algorithms for decomposing image datasets
into intuitive primitives such as shading, illumination, reflectance, and
motion; (4) analysis tools for deriving higher level information from the
decomposed representations (e.g., trends, repeated patterns, and unusual
events); and (5) tools for visualization of the high-level information and
methods for re-synthesis of image data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This work has the
potential to have significant impact in a broad range of areas where images are
generated over time, e.g., in ecology, astronomy, urban planning, health, and
many others. The results of this research will be broadly disseminated by making
source code and datasets publicly available via the project web site
(https://groups.csail.mit.edu/vision/image_time/) and offering tutorials and
organizing workshops at significant conferences. The project provides
educational opportunities and offers hands-on collaborative research experience
to students at both the undergraduate and graduate levels and the four
institutions.