* 1111896
* RUI: Probing the quantum dynamics of adsorbed molecules in  metal-organic frameworks
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2011,07/31/2015
* Stephen FitzGerald, Oberlin College
* Continuing Grant
* Evelyn Goldfield
* 07/31/2015
* USD 235,000.00

Stephen FitzGerald of Oberlin College is supported by an award from the Chemical
Structures, Dynamics and Mechanisms program in the Chemistry division to use
infrared spectroscopy to study the quantum dynamics of adsorbed gases within a
class of porous materials known as metal-organic frameworks. This research
probes the interaction potential at a particular adsorption site and the
importance of quantum confinement effects, associated with zero-point energy.
The work provides a direct experimental test of recent efforts to model van der
Waals interactions and quantum fluctuations within complex materials.
Undergraduate students are central to all aspects of this work from the design
and construction of the specialized equipment, to the data acquisition, to the
analysis, to the writing of the manuscripts for
publication.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research contributes to the ongoing effort
to develop materials for hydrogen storage critical for the use of hydrogen fuel
cells in automobiles. These materials will also enable the selective capture of
carbon dioxide which is vital to natural gas purification and environmental
efforts aimed at carbon sequestration. The nature of this project is
particularly appropriate to the training of undergraduate students, in that the
topic is well-connected to coursework but broad in its possible applications.
Students will gain extensive hands-on laboratory experience of importance for
graduate school and other technical careers.