* 1111731
* EAGER: Design and synthesis of metal-organic frameworks for efficient hydrogen storage
* ENG,CBET
* 07/15/2011,06/30/2012
* Jianzhong Wu, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Robert M. Wellek
* 06/30/2012
* USD 54,966.00

PI: Wu, Jianzhong&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number: CBET -
1111731&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual merit: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Design of
MOF materials for efficient hydrogen storage requires a good understanding of
hydrogen interaction with the substrate at the atomistic scales. Whereas the
literature on hydrogen storage is now vast, conventional theory and simulation
methods are insufficient to account for the non-classical behavior of hydrogen-
MOF interactions that involve hydrogen dissociation/recombination. Novel
computational methods are needed for successful description of the quantum
effects affiliated with both the local electronic structures of hydrogen atoms
near the active sites of the MOF materials and the weak but long-ranged van der
Waals interactions among hydrogen molecules within the microscopic pores. A
faithful description of the strongly correlated electronic/atomic systems is
extremely challenging and the theoretical difficulty consists of a high risk of
the proposed research. However, if successful, the theory will have tremendous
impact because it provides quantitative connections of chemical reactions or
electronic properties with physiochemical properties for macroscopic
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
exploratory research will contribute to fundamental understanding of multi-body
phenomena entailing strongly correlated electronic, atomic and molecular
interactions. A synergistic combination of theoretical and experimental
investigations may lead to a better design of novel materials for hydrogen
storage. The project will provide graduate and undergraduate students with
opportunities to get first-hand experience on cutting-edge research that entails
both theory and experiments. The PI and co-PI will promote outreach and exposure
of underrepresented minority pre-college students to science and innovations.