* 1111235
* Theoretical Studies of Excess Electrons Interacting with Water Clusters and of Water on Graphitic Surfaces
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2014
* Kenneth Jordan, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Evelyn Goldfield
* 08/31/2014
* USD 468,605.00

Kenneth Jordan of the University of Pittsburgh is supported by an award from the
Chemical Theory, Models and Computational Methods program for research to
develop theoretical methods for understanding hydrated electrons and ions in
water. The work is producing an enhanced understanding of the behavior of excess
electrons in hydrogen-bonding solvents and of the role of weak interactions on
the properties of water at interfaces. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Many important
chemical and biological processes, including electrochemical processes and
electron transfer in photosynthesis, are driven by excess electrons in the
presence of water. Despite the large number of experimental and theoretical
studies of the hydrated electron and of the excess electron attached to water
clusters, a comprehensive understanding of the structures and dynamics of these
species is lacking. The theoretical studies being carried out by the Jordan
group employ state-of-the-art electron-water and water-water potentials to
simulate negatively-charged water clusters of a larger size than has been
possible in the past. The work also includes two projects that advance knowledge
in the area of weak interactions. The first of these involves the development of
new methods of correcting density functional theory for long-range interactions,
while the second involves the development of accurate potentials describing the
interaction between a water monomer and the graphite surface. The ultimate goal
of this project is to perform simulations of water on graphite surfaces and
confined in carbon nanotubes using the newly developed, accurate force fields.
The work is having a broader impact on many fields of science and its impact is
further broadened through the PI's extensive educational and outreach activities
with the Telluride Science Research Center.