* 1111101
* RUI: Pruning Interstellar Weeds with Room Temperature Chirped-Pulse Fourier Transform Microwave (CP-FTMW) Spectroscopy
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2011,06/30/2014
* Steven Shipman, New College of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Lin He
* 06/30/2014
* USD 93,000.00

Professor Steven T. Shipman of New College of Florida is supported by the
Chemical Measurement and Imaging (CMI) Program in the Division of Chemistry
(with co-funding from the Division of Astronomical Sciences) to study the
spectroscopy of "interstellar weeds" - molecules (such as methyl formate or
dimethyl ether) that are relatively abundant in the interstellar medium (ISM).
The dense and unpredictable spectra of these "weeds" generally frustrate
attempts to identify new molecules in the ISM. The objective of this research is
to obtain high-quality rotational spectra of these compounds at room
temperature. These results will lead to better predictions of weed transition
frequencies, significantly aiding astrochemists in the search for new complex
molecules in the ISM.

Undergraduate students involved in this project will be directly participating
in research addressing fundamental questions about the origins of complex
molecules in the universe. As part of this work, they will gain experience in
molecular spectroscopy, computational chemistry, and the construction of
scientific instrumentation in a tight-knit academic environment that fosters
close interactions between students and faculty mentors. Students will acquire
experience crafting scientific arguments and communicating the results of their
research to the broader scientific community. Educational impact will be
enhanced by making the equipment available via cyber-access.