* 1111518
* Scanning Electrochemical Microscopy and Ultramicroelectrode Studies of the Electrochemistry of Single Molecules and Nanoparticles
* MPS,CHE
* 08/15/2011,07/31/2015
* Allen Bard, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Michelle Bushey
* 07/31/2015
* USD 585,000.00

Professor Allen J. Bard of the University of Texas at Austin is supported by the
Chemical Measurement and Imaging program in the Chemistry Division to study
electrode reactions of single nanoparticles (with dimensions down to 4 nm, or
about 1/250th of the diameter of a human hair). These studies utilize very small
(ultramicro) electrodes as well as the technique of scanning electrochemical
microscopy (SECM) that was developed in the Bard laboratories. The central aims
of this project are to develop techniques to characterize nanoparticles and to
establish a new stochastic approach to study electrochemical reactions.
&lt;br/&gt;Such studies will be of value in understanding the electrocatalytic
properties of materials, important in energy conversion devices (e.g. fuel cells
and solar energy systems), and could provide the basis of analysis at the single
molecule or very low concentration level. These would be useful, for example, in
the detection of chemical and biological warfare (CB) agents or biological
species that are present in blood at currently undetectable levels. Students and
postdoctoral fellows will be trained in advanced electrochemical techniques with
relevance to energy research, electrosynthesis and electroanalysis. Through the
Center for Electrochemistry (CEC) at UT, a number of outreach activities are
pursued, e.g. software exchange via the CEC website, an annual conference
heavily attended by students and post doctoral fellows, periodic chalk talks by
UT or visiting faculty, and training of visitors in SECM at the CEC
electrochemical instrumentation facility.