* 1111563
* Organometallic Chemistry of High Oxidation State Palladium
* MPS,CHE
* 08/15/2011,07/31/2014
* Melanie Sanford, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Carol Bessel
* 07/31/2014
* USD 354,000.00

This award in the Division of Chemistry supports research by Professor Melanie
Sanford at the University of Michigan to investigate the mechanism, scope,
selectivity, and ligand effects in stoichiometric reactions involving Pd(III)
and Pd(IV) intermediates. The reactivity and selectivity profiles discovered
will enable the rational design of new catalytic transformations. Palladium is
an extremely important transition metal that is widely used in homogeneous
catalytic transformations for the construction of carbon-carbon and carbon-
heteroatom bonds. These reactions have found extensive application in the
synthesis of pharmaceuticals, natural products, fine chemicals, and commodity
chemicals. The proposed research will demonstrate the feasibility of diverse
organometallic reactions (including C-H activation, migratory insertion, and
nucleopalladation) at appropriately designed high oxidation state palladium
complexes. Ultimately, the novel reactivity and selectivity profiles established
herein will enable the rational design of new catalytic
transformations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI and coworkers will expand an
outreach program for high school students called "Science Saturdays", which
promotes broader participation in the physical sciences by exposing students to
an authentic research-like experience, to another site in Michigan. This
laboratory trains a diverse set of students (29 total PhD students and post-docs
since 2003), of whom 17 are women and 3 are members of underrepresented minority
groups. Graduate and undergraduate students working on this project will receive
interdisciplinary training in inorganic synthesis, inorganic reaction
mechanisms, and synthetic organic chemistry.