* 1111739
* Actively Controlled Transport with Molecular Assemblies
* MPS,CHE
* 09/15/2011,08/31/2014
* Paul Bohn, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* Lin He
* 08/31/2014
* USD 435,000.00

Professor Paul W. Bohn of the University of Notre Dame is supported by the
Chemical Measurement and Imaging Program in the Division of Chemistry to develop
multifunctional nanoscale fluidic devices. The project investigates how devices
can be constructed so that a single structure can simultaneously switch fluid
flow, sense the presence of specific molecules and subsequently subject these
molecules to treatment - perhaps remediation of an environmental pollutant or
destruction of a harmful biomolecule circulating in the body. Electrical
potentials applied to different regions of the device cause small volumes of
fluid to move through specific channels for sensing and treatment. The projects
seek to combine this electrically-activated fluid flow with electrochemical
reactions and with sensitive methods of chemical sensing - based either on the
luminescence of the molecules after electrochemical reaction or the interaction
of high frequency excitations in metals with the surrounding fluid. One critical
challenge in carrying out the electrochemical reactions is that they must occur
far from ground potential, where such reactions routinely are carried out. Thus,
the project aims to develop new ways to perform electrochemical transformations
at arbitrarily large voltages. The second challenge is that because the
structures are so small, only a tiny number of molecules may react at any given
time. Thus, the project seeks to develop new highly sensitive methods of
following electron transfer reactions that are applicable to ultrasmall samples,
even to single molecules.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact of this
program on society is felt in three ways. First, the scientific work addresses
the control and manipulation of fluid flow in miniature analytical devices, a
problem of growing interest to the international scientific community. Second,
the scientific work contributes to scientific human resource development through
the involvement of a diverse range of students with participation from under-
represented groups and women. The third area lies in helping students learn
about the international dimension of science through a student exchange with one
of the world's leading bioelectrochemistry laboratories at Cambridge University,
Cambridge, UK.