* 1111040
* NeTS: Large: Collaborative Research: Network Innovation through Choice
* CSE,CNS
* 09/15/2011,08/31/2015
* Kenneth Calvert, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Darleen Fisher
* 08/31/2015
* USD 697,527.00

Computer networks, in particular the Internet, represent critical infrastructure
for business, government, military, and personal communication. Several recent
trends in technology and network use have pushed the capabilities required of
the Internet beyond what can be provided by the currently deployed
infrastructure. This project develops a new architectural design for the
Internet of the near future that represents a transformative shift to enable
sustained innovation in the core of the network, using economic principles. The
core idea of this new network architecture is to support choice as the central
aspect of the architecture. A network built on these principles will be able to
adapt to emerging solutions for current and future challenges. The network
architecture designed and prototyped in this work aims to (1) encourage
alternatives to allow users to choose from a range of services, (2) let users
vote with their wallet to reward superior and innovative services, (3) provide
the mechanisms to stay informed on available alternatives and their
performances. Solutions are approached from different directions, reflecting the
team's multidisciplinary expertise in computer networking, network systems,
management science, and network economics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader
impact of this project contributes to enhancing the functionality and usability
of the next-generation Internet, which is expected to become an important piece
of infrastructure. The project also integrates research and education of
graduate and undergraduate students at the participating organizations, where
current efforts to integrate underrepresented minorities are continued. Results
from this work are disseminated in the form of an open-source prototype and
publications.