* 1111317
* Advanced Studies Institute: High Energy Physics and Cosmology; Vietnam; July 25-31, 2011
* O/D,OISE
* 08/01/2011,12/31/2014
* Qaisar Shafi, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* Sonia Ortega
* 12/31/2014
* USD 32,900.00

This award supports the participation of U.S. researchers and graduate students
in an Advanced Studies Institute (ASI) in particle physics and cosmology to be
held in Hue, Vietnam in July 2011. It will be hosted by the University of Hue
and is supported by BCVSPIN (Bangladesh, China, Vietnam, Sri Lanka, Pakistan,
India, Nepal) a group that supports this area of science. The U.S. organizer is
Professor Qaisar Shafi at the University of Delaware in Newark. Other sponsors
are the University of Virginia in Blacksburg; Hue University College of
Education in Vietnam; the Institute of Physics in Hanoi, Vietnam and the Abdus
Salam International Centre for Theoretical Physics in Trieste, Italy. In
addition to participation from the countries mentioned above, it will also
include scientists and graduate students from Indonesia, Malaysia, Laos and
Thailand. The scientific motivation for this Institute is based on the premise
that the Large Hadron Collider (LHC) now operating at CERN in Geneva,
Switzerland will be able to unlock some of the deepest secrets of the universe.
There are many experimentalists and theoretical physicists racing to discover
new laws of physics. Such discoveries could greatly alter the face of physics.
The main research areas to be discussed include: 1) the origin of mass; 2) the
origin of matter in the universe; 3) the nature of dark matter particles; and 4)
supersymmetric nature. In addition, they will discuss if there may be
complimentary ground-breaking satellite and terrestrial experiments that are
helping lay the foundations of modern (post big-bang) cosmology. Each of the
above topics will be discussed in depth by leading experts from the U.S. and
Europe. The principle lectures will be held during the morning and afternoon,
and the evenings will be reserved for discussion and support sessions.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;It is anticipated that this Institute will facilitate the
creation of global scientific networks among physicists from the U.S. and Asian
institutions. It also provides an exceptional opportunity for interaction
between U.S. scientists and students with their counterparts. U.S. researchers
could select Asian graduate students and postdocs to work at their home
institutions and invite faculty members for short research stays in order to
engage in new collaborative projects. It will also provide the young Asian
scientists and students, who often lack access to conferences, journals and
scientific exchange, the opportunity to interact with world class
experimentalists and theorists in particle physics and cosmology thereby
allowing them to keep abreast of the most recent developments and perhaps even
provide them a venue for presenting their ideas and work as well.