* 1111557
* Coherent spectroscopy and coherent control of collective modes through shaped optical fields
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2011,07/31/2016
* Keith Nelson, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Colby Foss
* 07/31/2016
* USD 600,000.00

In this project supported by the Chemical Structure, Dynamics and Mechanisms
Program of the Chemistry Division, Keith Nelson of MIT will develop and use new
methods for optical control over molecules and materials. Electromagnetic pulses
in the terahertz frequency range will be tailored to drive coherent rotational,
vibrational, and electronic responses of polar molecules in order to understand
structural and chemical dynamics in molecular gases, liquids, and solids. The
terahertz fields will be accompanied by infrared and optical pulses to achieve
coherent control over multiple responses that together can lead to structural
and chemical change. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research is based on recently
developed methods that have had broader impact as they have been taken up by
basic and applied research groups around the world. The methods to be developed
are likely to have similar impact and may enable novel applications in ultrafast
light-driven switching and signal processing, generation of ultrahigh-frequency
acoustic waves, and optical control over molecules and materials. Some aspects
of the research are shared in a dedicated outreach lab in which high school
students spend up to ten afternoons conducting experiments and analyzing their
data, usually followed by presentations of their results in their school classes
or science fairs. The students learn about modern optics and advanced materials
as they fabricate thin-film samples and make optical measurements involving
crossed laser beams that they align to generate and monitor surface acoustic
waves that propagate in the films. The noncontact optical measurements are the
same as those conducted in one of our labs and in a commercial instrument that
is used in the microelectronics fabrication industry for metal film thickness
determination.