* 1111916
* RUI: Synthesis of Single Geometric Isomers of N-Substituted Ketimines:  Starting Materials for the Synthesis of Asymmetric Amines
* MPS,CHE
* 09/15/2011,08/31/2015
* Kevin Shaughnessy, Southeastern Louisiana University
* Standard Grant
* Tingyu Li
* 08/31/2015
* USD 218,000.00

In this project funded by the Chemical Synthesis program of the Chemistry
Division, Professor Debra Dolliver of the Department of Chemistry &amp; Physics
at Southeastern Louisiana University, in collaboration with Professors Kevin
Shaughnessy and Professor Timothy Snowden from the University of Alabama,
Tuscaloosa, will study synthetic methodology to produce N-heteroatomic imines in
single geometries and applying these compounds for the synthesis of asymmetric
amines. There are three specific aims: 1) to investigate the palladium-catalyzed
coupling of N-heteroatomic-substituted imidoyl halides with a variety of
coupling partners; 2) to initiate studies to reverse the role of the imine
species in Pd-catalyzed coupling reactions from that of the organohalide to that
of the organometallic reagent by synthesizing an N-heteroatomic imidoyl metal
compound; and 3) to synthesize geometrically-controlled N-heteroatomic imine
derivatives containing an asymmetric center in the heteroatomic group attached
to nitrogen and investigate facial selectivity of these compounds to
nucleophilic addition.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project has significant impacts
on fundamental biological sciences, pharmaceutical and agricultural industries,
as it would provide ready access to chiral amines important in the chemical
synthesis of complex molecules of potent biological activities. The project also
provides trainings for undergraduate students in preparation for careers in the
physical science fields, which is very significant considering the high
percentage of first generation college students and groups underrepresented in
the physical sciences at the PI's institution.