* 1111929
* Collaborative Research: Development of New Methodologies in NMR Spectroscopy of Small Organic Molecules in Anisotropic Media
* MPS,CHE
* 09/15/2011,08/31/2016
* Nicolay Tsarevsky, Southern Methodist University
* Continuing Grant
* Colby Foss
* 08/31/2016
* USD 184,500.00

In this collaborative project co-funded by the Chemical Structure, Dynamics and
Mechanisms (CSDM) and by the Macromolecular, Supramolecular and Nanochemistry
(MSN) Programs of the NSF Chemistry Division, Roberto R. Gil of Carnegie Mellon
University (Pittsburgh, PA) and Nicolay V. Tsarevsky of Southern Methodist
University (Dallas, TX) will develop new Nuclear Magnetic Resonance (NMR)
methodologies for the constitutional, configurational and conformational
analysis of small molecules in anisotropic media. By absorbing small molecules
into stretched or compressed specially designed polymer gel matrices swollen in
organic solvents, NMR parameters that provide relevant structural information
can be revealed and measured. These NMR parameters can help to solve challenging
structural problems when traditional solution NMR experiments fail to provide a
unique solution. The results of this research will benefit a variety of fields
that employ precise structural data, and will be particularly useful in the
analysis of complex natural products and in the biopharmaceutical sciences. The
analysis of the experimental data will be aided with computer simulations.
&lt;br/&gt;The work is interdisciplinary and will enable both graduate and
undergraduate students to learn several different disciplines, such as synthetic
polymer/materials chemistry, NMR spectroscopy and computational chemistry. The
program is open to all students but members of underrepresented groups in the
sciences will be particularly encouraged to participate. The NMR and the
computational part of the project are suitable for students with disabilities.
Due to the interdisciplinary character of this project including an
international collaboration with a researcher in Spain, the participating
students will learn to work comfortably in culturally and scientifically diverse
environments. An important outcome of the project is the implementation of the
residual dipolar couplings (RDCs) analysis in the analytical chemistry
curricula. The introduction of an RDC module in analytical undergraduate or
graduate laboratory courses is planned.