* 1111529
* TC: Large: Collaborative Research: Privacy-Enhanced Secure Data Provenance
* CSE,CNS
* 08/01/2011,07/31/2018
* Murat Kantarcioglu, University of Texas at Dallas
* Continuing Grant
* Nina Amla
* 07/31/2018
* USD 912,068.00

Data provenance refers to the history of the contents of an object and its
successive transformations. Knowledge of data provenance is beneficial to many
ends, such as enhancing data trustworthiness, facilitating accountability,
verifying compliance, aiding forensics, and enabling more effective access and
usage controls. Provenance data minimally needs integrity assurance to realize
these benefits. Additionally, provenance data may need assurances of
confidentiality (e.g., protect the identity of a reviewer in a blinded paper
review process from the authors but not from the editor) or of privacy (e.g., do
not disclose identity of a source without the source's consent). In the past
decade there has been significant progress regarding the structure and
representation of provenance data as a directed acyclic graph. However,
currently there is no overarching, systematic framework for the security and
privacy of provenance data and their tradeoffs with respect to the utility of
provenance data. The development of such a framework is recognized as one of a
handful of promising thrusts in recent reports on Federal game-changing R&amp;D
for cyber security, particularly aligned with the theme of Tailored Trustworthy
Spaces.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is to develop a comprehensive
technical and scientific framework to address the security and privacy
challenges of provenance data, and the attendant tradeoffs, so that our society
can gain maximum benefit from applications of provenance data. Detailed
foundational research is to be performed on security enhanced data models,
access control and usage models, privacy including annonymization and
sanitization, integrity, accountability and risk management techniques for
provenance data. This foundational research is complemented by data provenance
case studies in scientific and cyber security information sharing, and
construction of prototype data provenance systems at the operating systems and
data layers. Moreover, reference architectures and definitions of corresponding
provenance management services are to be defined, identifying how these services
can be effectively deployed in enterprises, and developing a risk-management
framework to guide application architects, designers and users to effectively
embed data provenance in their specific context. The project results will
beneficially impact society at large by increasing trustworthiness of data
acquired, transmitted and processed by computer systems. From the educational
side, both theory and practice of data provenance are to be integrated in the
undergraduate and graduate training of students, including underrepresented
minority and female students, in all the collaborative institutions of this
project.