* 1111672
* NeTS: Large: Collaborative Research: Measuring and Modeling the Dynamics of IPv4 Address Exhaustion
* CSE,CNS
* 08/01/2011,07/31/2017
* Vern Paxson, International Computer Science Institute
* Continuing Grant
* Darleen Fisher
* 07/31/2017
* USD 800,000.00

Today's Internet has some 1.7 billion users, fosters an estimated $1.5 trillion
in annual global economic benefits, and is widely agreed to offer a staggering
array of societal benefits. The network sees enormous demand---on the order of
40 Tbps of inter-domain traffic and an annual growth rate of 44.5%. Remarkably,
in spite of the Internet's importance and rapid growth, the core protocols that
support its basic functions (i.e., addressing, naming, routing) have seen little
fundamental change over time.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;However, the Internet is now
in the midst of its first fundamentally disruptive modification: a phase
transition imposing extensive changes throughout the network's vast set of
components. On the 3rd of February, 2011 the Internet Assigned Numbers Authority
(IANA) allocated the five remaining blocks of IPv4 address space to the five
Regional Internet Registries (RIRs). This event was a watershed moment for the
Internet, in that it represented the exhaustion of the Internet's pool of
unallocated IPv4 addresses. While eliminating poor utilization of existing
allocated IPv4 address space and application of techniques for IPv4 address re-
use (i.e., Network to Address Translation (NAT) and Dynamic Host Configuration
Protocol (DHCP)) will likely provide short term relief, the eventual scarcity of
this critical Internet resource will be a strong catalyst for
change.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project seeks to validate the hypothesis that
the scarcity of IPv4 addresses and accompanying solutions will have profound
effects on the Internet and many of its vital properties, including
heterogeneity, openness, security, scalability, reliability, availability,
concurrency and transparency. This project's efforts to understand these impacts
are divided into three broad areas: (i) studies of the dynamics by which IPv4
addresses are allocated and how these address resources are subsequently used,
(ii) understanding the near-term coping mechanisms and transition technologies
(e.g., carrier grade NAT, tunneling), and (iii) observing the adoption of
longer-term solutions (i.e., the new version of the Internet Protocol, IPv6). To
pursue the above goals this project has formed a cross-organizational team of
researchers with a long history of scientific Internet measurement (University
of Michigan, International Computer Science Institute). The project is bolstered
by a substantial supporting team that includes ISPs (AT&amp;T, Merit Networks,
Inc.), Internet number resource registries (APNIC, ARIN, AFRINIC, RIPE NCC, and
LACNIC), and infrastructure providers (Verisign, Packet Clearing House, Arbor
Networks) who will provide access to massive, often unique
data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: Such measurement---at-scale and
across numerous core Internet protocols---presents not only a technical
challenge in itself, but offers a once-in-a-generation opportunity to view
massive, distributed systems under scarcity and transition. The behaviors
observed will inform not only the development of global distributed systems, but
also the sciences of network architecture and design, network protocols, and
mobile networks. Specific areas of study in these domains potentially include:
address transfers, address reclamation, address pollution, address allocation
policies and allocation policy abuse, new address space topologies, addresses
and identity, dynamic addressing, addressing and routing, addressing and
mobility, transition strategies, adoption incentives, adoption tipping points,
balkanization in transition, adoption measurement, negative adoption
incentives.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: For many the Internet has
become a ubiquitous aspect of everyday life. A major impact of this work will be
directly ensuring the availability and reliability of the Internet through
instrumentation, data sharing, and problem diagnosis with operators and networks
throughout the global network as it undergoes this singular phase in its
functioning. Further, in the spirit of scientific exploration commensurate with
this unique phenomenon and measurement, this project will make available the
extensive data collected as a means to spur scientific research beyond the
specific research of the project team. Finally, based on the observations and
studies, this project will develop principles guiding the development of new,
more resilient network architectures and protocols.