* 1111496
* Synthesis of Polynuclear Transition Metal - Heavy Main Group Metal Carbonyl Complexes for Use as Next-Generation Multimetallic Heterogeneous Nano-Catalysts
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2015
* Richard Adams, University South Carolina Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Tingyu Li
* 08/31/2015
* USD 435,000.00

In this project funded by the Chemical Synthesis Program of the Chemistry
Division, Professor Richard D. Adams of the Department of Chemistry and
Biochemistry at the University of South Carolina will continue to develop new
procedures for the synthesis of multimetallic mixed-metal cluster complexes
containing combinations of precious transition metals, e.g. ruthenium, rhodium,
iridium and platinum with heavy main group metals, such as tin, antimony and
bismuth. These new mixed-metal cluster complexes will be converted into bi- and
multimetallic nanoparticles on supports to be used as new next-generation
heterogeneous nanocatalysts for the selective hydrogenation of unsaturated
hydrocarbons and the ammoxidation and partial oxidation of hydrocarbons.
Emphasis will be placed on combinations of metals that can function
cooperatively to perform difficult organic transformations and reactions with
high selectivity. The conversion of these complexes into supported multimetallic
nanoparticles will allow access to a new generation of multimetallic
nanoclusters for applications in catalytic transformations and reactions of
hydrocarbons. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts involve training of
graduate and undergraduate students in research and to provide the experience
required for them to compete in the highly technological professional
environment of the U. S. chemical industry. They will learn to formulate and
perform useful and intellectually challenging research and to solve chemical
problems. The research experience will require both teamwork and independence,
and will stimulate motivation, creativity and leadership. Students will be
trained in the synthesis and characterization of organometallic compounds and
heterogeneous catalysts. The project includes national and international
collaborations that will broaden the education and experience of the students.
The proposed heterogeneous multimetallic nanocatalysts may have an impact on
areas that rely on the efficient organic transformations within pharmaceutical,
chemical, and agricultural industries.