* 1111490
* Chiral Porous Metal-Organic Frameworks as A Tunable Platform for Asymmetric Catalysis
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2011,12/31/2013
* Wenbin Lin, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Continuing Grant
* Timothy Patten
* 12/31/2013
* USD 508,000.00

The Chemical Catalysis Program of the Chemistry Division of the National Science
Foundation will support the research program of Professor Wenbin Lin of the
University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill. Dr. Lin and his students are
exploring the synthesis of enantioselective catalysts using strategies to
incorporate active homogeneous catalysts into metal-organic framework materials.
These "heterogenized" homogeneous catalysts are characterized for activity and
selectivity, and information about the catalyst structure obtained from dye
absorption/spectrometry and X-ray diffraction are used to design improved
catalytic materials. New methodology, specifically the use of dye sensitized
optical probes to determine pore size, and new synthetic approaches, which
include functional framework members in the MOF synthetic routes, will result
from this work. In addition, active enanatioselective catalyst materials will be
produced. These catalytic materials will be useful for the synthesis of fine
chemicals, medicinal chemistry intermediates, and for the design of
stereospecific process routes for pharmaceuticals. High school students will
work alongside undergraduate and graduate students in this broadly
multidisciplinary research program.