* 1111570
* Optimizing the Molecular Structures, Mechanisms, and Energetics of Electron Transfer for Catalytic Production of Solar Fuels
* MPS,CHE
* 10/01/2011,09/30/2016
* Dennis Lichtenberger, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Colby Foss
* 09/30/2016
* USD 400,000.00

The Chemical Structure, Dynamics and Mechanisms Program and the Chemical
Measurements and Imaging Program in the Chemistry Division at the National
Science Foundation support Professor Dennis Lichtenberger of the University of
Arizona, for photoelectron spectroscopy studies of Fe-S clusters as related to
solar fuels (H2) production. The goal of this work is to understand the
fundamental principles of electron transfer reactions of such catalysts,
synthesized in the PI's laboratory and in others. Evaluation of Marcus theory
parameters for these reactions will lead to a better understanding of catalyst
structure and function at the molecular level, and develop criteria for higher
efficiency solar fuels generators. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts of the
research include driving innovation in solar energy applications, and
contributing to scientific infrastructure by developing next-generation
instrumentation and methods for photoelectron spectroscopy of large molecules.
The Lichtenberger laboratory will provide access to these capabilities for other
researchers, and develop curricula for undergraduate education. This laboratory
has had significant success in recruiting undergraduate students, women, and
underrepresented minorities into the program, including those from the Hispanic
and Native American populations in the Tucson area.