* 1111205
* Workshop on Ecosystem Impacts of Geoengineering in San Diego, CA; Jan. 31 - Feb. 2, 2011
* GEO,AGS
* 01/15/2011,06/30/2012
* Lynn Russell, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Standard Grant
* Eric DeWeaver
* 06/30/2012
* USD 30,000.00

This grant provides funds to support a workshop on the potential impacts of
geoengineering on aquatic and terrestrial ecosystems. Geoengineering refers to
techniques proposed to counteract the global warming produced by anthropogenic
emissions of greenhouse gases. For example, a commonly discussed "solar
radiation management" technique involves the injection of reflective aerosols
into the stratosphere to cool the earth. Many proposed geoengineering schemes
may have important and unexplored consequences to the ecosystems that populate
our planet. These consequences result from intentional and unintentional changes
to regional climates in ways that affect sensitive species. However, the
geoengineering-research and ecosystem-research communities have only minor
overlaps, and it would benefit each community, as well as society at large, to
strengthen research interactions by involving ecosystem experts in predicting
the potential hazards of geoengineering schemes. This workshop brings the two
communities together to address four objectives: (1) to build connections
between the ecosystem research and geoengineering-research communities, (2) to
evaluate scientific uncertainties that affect the potential impacts of
geoengineering on ecosystems, (3) to expose ecosystem researchers to current
geoengineering research, and (4) to generate feedback for geoengineering
researchers on potential ecosystem hazards of geoengineering. The first day of
the workshop will be devoted to public lectures, and the remaining two days will
be used to write a synthesis report on the topic of ecosystem impacts of
geoengineering. The synthesis report will be presented to the International
Geosphere-Biosphere Programme (IGBP), which is providing partial support for the
workshop.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The scientific intellectual merit and broader
impacts of the workshop are closely connected. Scientifically, geoengineering
poses a challenge to our understanding of the climate system and the global
ecosystem. On a practical level,geoengineering has been proposed as a response
to the threat posed by global warming, and a better understanding of the
consequences of geoengineering would be a valuable input to decision makers
considering the implementation of geoengineering schemes.