* 1111192
* Purification of Synthetic Peptides Using a Catching by Polymerization Approach
* MPS,CHE
* 08/15/2011,07/31/2015
* Shiyue Fang, Michigan Technological University
* Standard Grant
* Tingyu Li
* 07/31/2015
* USD 260,000.00

In this project funded by the Chemical Synthesis Program of the Chemistry
Division, Professor Shiyue Fang of the Department of Chemistry at Michigan
Technological University will explore the development of inexpensive and readily
scalable methods for the purification of synthetic peptides. Besides wide
applications in biological research, peptides are becoming more and more
important in drug development. As a result, large quantities of peptides are
needed. The most convenient method for peptide synthesis is to assemble amino
acid monomers stepwise on a solid support using a synthesizer. In each monomer
addition step, however, generation of truncated failure sequences is
unavoidable. These failure sequences have similar physical properties as the
full-length sequence and are therefore difficult to remove. The most widely used
peptide purification method is reverse-phase HPLC. This method is labor
intensive and consumes large volumes of organic solvents. In this project, two
inexpensive and readily scalable peptide purification methods will be developed.
In both methods, the desired full-length peptide will be modified with a
polymerizable group. The failure sequences will not. After synthesis, the full-
length peptide will be copolymerized into an insoluble polymer. The failure
sequences will be removed by washing. Pure peptide will then be cleaved from the
polymer.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Once developed, these purification technologies
could be widely used for peptide drug purification. The price of many peptide
drugs including those already on the market and the ones to be developed in the
future could be lowered substantially. The project is interdisciplinary,
requiring skills in organic synthesis, solid phase synthesis, peptide chemistry,
and polymer science and provides a diverse training platform for students at all
levels. Undergraduate students will be recruited from Finlandia University,
which does not have an active research program.&lt;br/&gt;