* 1111209
* Excellence in Graduate Polymer Research Symposium: An Interdisciplinary and International Forum for Future Leaders in Polymeric Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 02/01/2011,01/31/2012
* Chris Ellison, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Freddy Khoury
* 01/31/2012
* USD 4,000.00

TECHNICAL ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;Advances in polymeric materials continue to
catalyze the nation?s future critical technologies ranging from charged polymers
in biomedical devices and water purification membranes to conducting polymers
for sensors and alternate energy solutions. Functional polymeric materials
require fundamental understanding at length scales ranging from nanometers to
centimeters. Constant attention to fundamental structure-property-performance
relationships is critical for continued success and societal impact, and
research strategies demand an interdisciplinary and teamed vision for both rapid
and integrated solutions. It is this interdisciplinary strategy that will enable
new discoveries in polymer science and engineering. This proposal will allow
future leaders, who are currently graduate students from leading universities
across the United States, to assemble in a unique international forum of polymer
science and engineering . Oral presentations and interactive poster sessions at
the intended "Excellence in Graduate Polymer Research Symposium" under the
auspices of the American Chemical Society, will address key research areas
including theory and molecular modeling, polymer design and synthetic strategy,
polymer characterization using state-of-the-art techniques, engineering of
polymer-based devices, and fundamental understanding of the interface of polymer
chemistry, physics, biology, and engineering. Moreover, this forum will
encourage scientific network building and raise the awareness of the necessity
for interdisciplinary research to younger polymer scientists and engineers. The
symposium will occur at the 2011 spring national meeting of the American
Chemical Society in Anaheim, California. The proposed NSF funding will permit
the attendance of leading graduate students, ensure diverse participation, and
showcase the importance of interdisciplinary research for solving some of the
more complex questions that face our scientific
community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NON-TECHNICAL ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;University and
commercial laboratories recognize the importance of interdisciplinary research;
however, the opportunities for university students to truly experience an
interdisciplinary meeting of polymer science and engineering remain limited. The
encompassing symposium entitled "Excellence in Graduate Polymer Research" will
provide an open forum for international scientists and engineers at the graduate
level to cultivate an appreciation of interdisciplinary research and an
international spirit of collaboration. The forum will serve to recognize leading
graduate student researchers and provide a mechanism for research partnerships
to evolve in a grass-roots fashion. The symposium will offer an educational
experience where students will be able to benchmark their research strategies
and presentation skills, and participants will raise their awareness of emerging
topics at new boundaries of polymer science and engineering.