* 1111357
* Synthesis Using Group 15 Elements
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2011,07/31/2015
* Christopher Cummins, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Tingyu Li
* 07/31/2015
* USD 600,000.00

This award in the Chemical Synthesis (SYN) program supports work by Professor
Christopher C. Cummins at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology to carry out
fundamental studies on the chemistry of compounds containing group 15 elements,
with emphasis on nitrogen, phosphorus, and arsenic. Methods for the direct
incorporation of atmospheric nitrogen into organic molecules will be sought in
order to bypass the ammonia intermediate that is generated in the traditional
energy-intensive ammonia synthesis process. This could remove the requirement
for fossil fuel-derived hydrogen in the synthesis of organonitrogen compounds.
Elemental phosphorus is the industrial precursor to specialty chemicals that
contain this element, including those required as flame-retardants and lithium
battery electrolytes. The present technique of initial phosphorus chlorination
is wasteful, most obviously when chlorine is not present in the synthetic
target. Methods are sought for a more direct incorporation of phosphorus into
value-added materials. Modern technology benefits from advanced semiconducting
materials including gallium phosphide and indium arsenide. Methods will be
developed for the controlled and selective incorporation of nitrogen,
phosphorus, and arsenic into advanced materials.

Nitrogen and phosphorus are biogenic elements whose global cycles impact life on
Earth directly, as they are required in large amounts for the synthesis of both
DNA and proteins. These elements also have indirect impact, as nitrogen fixation
for fertilizer manufacture is energy-intensive, and the loss of phosphorus to
the oceans in ground water causes blooms of eutrophication. Efficient processes
for incorporation of group 15 elements into essential compounds are required
technology for responsible stewardship of our precious elemental resources.