* 1111201
* Collaborative Research: Supporting Newcomer Socialization in Online Production Communities
* CSE,IIS
* 08/15/2011,07/31/2016
* Loren Terveen, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* William Bainbridge
* 07/31/2016
* USD 301,135.00

The goals of this research are (1) to understand ways of recruiting and
socializing volunteers to online production communities like Wikipedia, (2) to
design processes and tools that assist the newcomers' information-seeking as
part of their socialization, and (3) to build processes and tools to support the
interpersonal processes of socialization, including peer mentorship and
mentorship with more senior community members. Online production communities are
becoming increasingly important, because they are creating the software that
drives the Internet, generating valuable scientific data and building history's
largest encyclopedia. In the face of inevitable turnover, every online community
must incorporate successive generations of newcomers to survive. Newcomers are a
source of content, labor, new ideas, and audience. However, attracting and
incorporating newcomers into existing communities can be difficult.
Socialization is the process of teaching newcomers the behaviors and attitudes
essential to playing their roles in the group. Communities have available a
variety of socialization tactics. Research from offline organizations shows that
organizations' use of institutionalized socialization tactics and newcomers'
active information seeking are effective in increasing newcomers' commitment to
the organization, their satisfaction and their productivity. However, those
tactics are not commonly used in online communities and seem to have different
effects when they are used.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project pursues theory-
guided design. The findings from the research will extend existing theories on
socialization in groups and organizations by supplementing findings primarily
based on self-report measures with ones based on behavioral measures, and by
providing evidence on socialization in online communities, where constraints on
newcomers are radically different than they are offline. The research will
develop processes and tools for solving important problems of newcomers'
socialization, which will be evaluated in the context of socializing newcomers
in Wikipedia and especially in the Wikipedia initiative of the Association for
Psychological Science, which seeks to improve the scientific quality of articles
in psychology. These tools will be made freely available to other scientific
associations and other online production communities more
generally.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project supports NSF's mission to inform
the public about science by improving Wikipedia as a vehicle for disseminating
scientific knowledge about psychology in particular, and by developing a model
for how other scientific societies could partner with Wikipedia or similar
efforts to better generate and assess scientifically up-to-date and accurate
information meant for the public. It will directly involve many college
students, who will be assigned to write or improve psychology articles; they
will get feedback from the broader community on their performance. As such it
directly supports teaching and learning psychological science and will help
increase students' involvement with their scientific societies.