* 1111176
* Computational Facilitation of Online Deliberation in Complex Policymaking.
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2011,09/30/2015
* Cynthia Farina, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* William Bainbridge
* 09/30/2015
* USD 766,000.00

This research seeks to develop socio-computational approaches to improve citizen
participation in rulemaking, using a pilot online participation platform,
RegulationRoom. Rulemaking, the process through which federal regulatory
agencies make new regulations, is an unusual method of federal decision-making
because it formally incorporates a period of peer knowledge creation, the
"notice-and-comment" process. Agencies proposing new rules must seek input from
stakeholders, experts, and the general public, and consider all criticisms,
questions, new data, and alternative ideas received. Yet only a limited segment
of individuals and groups participate, and these participants engage in
adversarial position-taking rather than collaborative deliberation. Neither of
these shortcomings has been remedied by putting the process online. It is
reasonable to hypothesize that broader, better public engagement requires
purposefully designing e-rulemaking systems to provide norm enculturation and
deliberation priming. This project will explore strategies for each, drawing on
expertise in law, conflict resolution, natural language processing (NLP),
machine learning, and recommender systems.

This research provides unique contributions in at least four areas: (a)
advancing the state-of-the art in NLP by developing discourse analysis
techniques to facilitate deliberative dialogue and collaborative knowledge
production; (b) advancing recommender system and online community research to
support mentoring activities and engagement with alternate points of view; (c)
advancing the field of conflict resolution by adapting face-to-face moderation
techniques to the online environment; and (d) extending legal understanding of
how to increase transparency and participation by supporting broader, better
public participation in rulemaking and other complex policymaking domains. It
will also generate annotated datasets of comment and deliberation quality that
will be released to other researchers. The results will extend the techniques
and assessment measures available to moderators of online group discussion and
provide new computational tools for improving the quality of individual
contributions and for interpreting and synthesizing information during the
knowledge production process.

Learning how to design effective Rulemaking 2.0 systems will strengthen the
democratic process by expanding the range of individuals and groups who
understand, engage with, and meaningfully contribute to federal policymaking. In
addition, better policy outcomes should result from socio-computational
techniques that enable meaningful participation by important but traditionally
absent stakeholder groups, such as small business owners. State and local
governments that use public comment processes will benefit similarly from this
work as will non-governmental groups trying to increase effective participation
in complex collaborative content creation online.