* 1111873
* Spin Chemistry and Radical Dynamics in Confined Environments: From Nanocrystals to Nanobubbles
* MPS,CHE
* 07/15/2011,06/30/2016
* Matthew Redinbo, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Continuing Grant
* Colby Foss
* 06/30/2016
* USD 636,190.00

The Chemical Structure, Dynamics and Mechanisms Program supports Professor
Malcolm D. E. Forbes at the University of North Carolina- Chapel Hill who seeks
to continue his exploration of radical chemistry and dynamics in confined
environments. Using time-resolved and steady-state magnetic resonance
techniques, he will carry out spectroscopy on free radicals, extracting
g-factors, hyperfine coupling constants, and fine structure splittings. From
line shape analyses and modeling of time-dependent spectra he will obtain
dynamic information such as diffusion coefficients, rotational correlation
times, and spin relaxation rates. His interests are broadly based in polymers
and in nano-environments such as micelles and reverse micelles. In this work,
activities are expanded to the study of nano- and microbubbles, nanocrystals,
and polymer nanoparticles. The underlying theme is the control of radical
reactions, not just in terms of reaction rates but also the control of radical
location in organized assemblies. The results of this study will have potential
utility for nanomedicine (photodynamic therapy), polymer synthesis (adhesion and
coatings), polymer degradation (light pipes) and the development of new
catalytic reactions (glycolization, water splitting, and CO2
reduction).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With the support of the Chemical Structure,
Dynamics and Mechanisms Program in the Chemistry Division at the National
Science Foundation, Professor Malcolm D. E. Forbes will pursue a strategy of
maintaining core competencies in spectroscopy and physical organic methodology
as applied to kinetics, structure and mechanism. Professor Forbes' laboratory
trains researchers in small molecule and polymer synthesis, structural analysis,
photochemistry and laser spectroscopy, magnetic resonance (including microwave
engineering), molecular and macromolecular dynamics, surface and colloid
chemistry, and catalysis. The broader impacts of the proposed work are
exemplified by continuing efforts in community outreach for science education,
scientific interactions with the general public, international collaborations,
and by addressing diversity in the field of chemistry.