* 1111227
* Assessment of Success of the Mississippi AGEM Program: Charting the Direction for the Future
* EHR,HRD
* 07/01/2011,06/30/2013
* Donald Cole, University of Mississippi
* Standard Grant
* Mark Leddy
* 06/30/2013
* USD 149,998.00

This two-year study will evaluate the overall effectiveness and broader impacts
of the Alliance for Graduate Education in Mississippi (AGEM), an NSF-funded
program to enhance the success of minority students in doctoral programs in
science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM). The project builds upon
AGEM successes in the recruitment, retention, graduation, and placement of
minority doctoral students in STEM faculty roles within a variety of
institutions, and especially Historically Black Colleges and Universities
(HBCUs), to explore the long-term student outcomes of AGEM participation. This
study will explore change over time in various components of institutional
culture and climate, including policies, programs, and faculty behaviors that
promote or prohibit the successful transition of minority doctoral completers to
the STEM professoriate. This project involves a combination of quantitative and
qualitative assessment studies and builds upon recently performed surveys of
faculty and students in participating institutions. These studies will be
extended to include in-depth interviews with AGEM program faculty,
administrators and graduates from Mississippi?s AGEM institutions: Jackson State
University (JSU); Mississippi State University (MSU); University of Mississippi
(UM); University of Mississippi Medical Center (UMMC); and University of
Southern Mississippi (USM). In the first year, interviews will be conducted with
AGEM graduates who have taken faculty roles. With at least 60 AGEM graduates who
have already entered the professoriate, there is a group of significant size for
these interviews. Reports from graduates about their experiences of job
placement and transition as well as their advance towards tenure and promotion
will be used to characterize students? long-term outcomes. In the second year,
graduates? reports, along with quantitative data and results from state-wide
surveys, will be used to conduct a series of individual interviews and focus
groups with current AGEM program administrators, faculty, and students on each
campus to further identify and explore areas of strength and weakness within the
Alliance and to chart the direction for future activities. Intellectual Merit.
Successful placement of STEM underrepresented minority (URM) graduates in
faculty positions is an important program metric. However, this study goes
beyond a simple metric to gather, from former program participants, descriptions
of their own experiences of transition from student to the professoriate.
Because many AGEM graduates take faculty roles at HBCUs, this study will inform
the larger community about graduate student socialization and preparation for
the professoriate. Furthermore, because a significant portion of AGEM graduates
study in mainstream institutions, the research will advance our understanding of
institutional responsiveness to preparing graduates for the demands of distinct
institutional contexts within the state and region. Broader Impacts. AGEM was
created to achieve the following goals: enhancing entry into and ensuring
successful completion of URM students in doctoral programs in STEM areas;
increasing the number of URMs pursuing academic careers; and bringing about a
systemic change in attitudes and practices of faculty, administrators, and
students with regard to minority pathway issues. Because of AGEM successes in
placing minority doctoral students in STEM faculty roles within HBCUs, in
particular, AGEM has the capacity to reach an increased number of URM STEM
students enrolled at these institutions. Thus, the broader impact of this
evaluation is to better prepare, establish, and maintain a diverse professoriate
in STEM departments and programs across the state and region and to enhance the
teaching and learning of URM undergraduates and other students from diverse
backgrounds.