* 1111489
* The Investigation of a Semasiographic Recording System
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2014
* Gary Urton, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 08/31/2014
* USD 61,849.00

With National Science Foundation support, Dr. Gary Urton, will address the
problem of how to interpret information stored in 500+ year-old knotted cord
records - the Inka khipu. Khipus were the knotted-string devices used for record
keeping in the Inka Empire of Pre-Columbian South America. Beginning in 2002,
Dr. Urton and colleagues began collecting and recording detailed observations on
khipu samples in museum collections in Europe and North and South America. With
observations on hundreds of khipus in hand, Urton set about building a
searchable database -- the Khipu Database (KDB) -- which currently holds
information on some 520 of the 850+/- extant khipus in museums around the world.
Samples in the KDB pertain to at least a dozen "archives" that were retained at
different locales within Inka territory. This is the first time an entirely
searchable khipu database has existed in the history of the study of this
enigmatic recording system. The khipu was said by Spanish chroniclers of the
16th century to have been used for recording information on state
administration, histories, songs and other forms of narratives that were
performed by cord-keepers. While students of the khipu have succeeded in
determining how numerical data were recorded by state administrators (for
census, tribute records, etc.), we lack a basic understanding of how personal
names, place names, identifiers of events, etc., were recorded in the cords,
knots and colors of the khipu. Decipherment of the latter is the principal
objective of this project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of this
research will be realized in the investigation of what was the unique,
alternative communication technology and intellectual traditions whereby peoples
living in the high Andes before the time of European contact communicated across
frontiers separating speakers of multiple different languages as they succeeded
in building the largest empire of the ancient New World in what was one of the
most challenging and inhospitable environments on earth. The research will
advance our understanding of human sign production and manipulation in early,
pre-modern societies and should, if our efforts prove successful, result in the
decipherment of the khipu. This project will hopefully allow us to interpret, or
"read" the knotted-cord records left by the Inkas - the lords of the last great
empire of Pre-Columbian South America.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The method of
analysis to be followed is based on the hypothesis that khipu recording signs
were registered in the form of semasiographic (meaning sign) units of
information stored on the cords and arrayed in the form of cord structures,
knots and patterned arrays of colors according to standardized formatting and
encoding principles constituting conventionalized sign values. Focus will be on
the study of what are termed "cord types" -- standardized configurations of cord
structure, colors and numbers -- found within individual samples and across the
entire khipu corpus. "Translation" values for cord patterns will be sought in
Inka political, social, economic, ritual, and calendrical institutions and
practices that are structured and organized in patterns similar to those
identified in the khipus.