* 1111350
* Excited State Electronic Structure and Dynamics in Branched Conjugated Molecules Using Exciton Scattering Approach
* MPS,CHE
* 08/15/2011,07/31/2015
* Vladimir Chernyak, Wayne State University
* Continuing Grant
* Evelyn Goldfield
* 07/31/2015
* USD 420,000.00

Vladimir Chernyak of Wayne State University is supported by an award from the
Chemical Theory, Models and Computational Methods program for research to
develop efficient quasiparticle methods for excited states electronic structure
in conjugated molecules, with the special focus on the coupling between
electronic and vibrational motions. The main goal will be achieved by: (i)
introducing reduced tight-binding (lattice) models, where excitons for ideal
geometries are represented by the states of a quantum particle that resides on
an effective irregular lattice, (ii) accounting for geometry distortions via the
dependence of the tight-binding parameters on molecular geometry. The proposed
research will improve the microscopic insights into photoinduced dynamics and
develop efficient models of the energy transfer processes in branched conjugated
structures, including those related to solar energy conversion in organic and
hybrid photovoltaic materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Organic conjugated
photovoltaic materials as well as organic-inorganic hybrid composites form a
promising new direction towards development of cost-effective solar cells. The
proposed exciton scattering can be used as basis for a modeling tool for
efficient design of organic-based low-cost materials with prominent
photophysical and transport properties. This will benefit society at large by
contributing to modern technologies including solar energy conversion, organic
light-emitting diodes, imaging devices, and chemical and biological sensors. The
quasiparticle insight is likely to lead to new developments in statistical
inference, algorithms, quantum/stochastic dynamics in networks, including a very
important application to the design of smart power grids. Chernyak is
collaborating with the Department of Mathematics at WSU to expose math graduate
students to research in physical chemistry, and with LANL to increase the impact
of the NSF-funded research on nanotechnological developments, as well as to
provide students with a first-hand and broad picture of the nanotechnological
needs in terms of fundamental research.