* 1111433
* SHB: Large: Collaborative Research: From the Ground Up -- Mobile Tools for Grassroots Programs in Public Health
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2015
* Beth Kolko, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 08/31/2015
* USD 2,000,926.00

Innovation in public health is often bottom up: new processes and technologies
are often identified by grassroots and non-governmental organizations and
deployed locally before achieving broader use. Mobile technologies have a vast
potential to strengthen health systems for under-served populations, but
innovation is hindered by the difficulty and expertise required to create robust
and deployable solutions. This work seeks to change this state of affairs by
providing a set of tools based on commonly available mobile devices that will
permit these organizations to easily deploy new health services, supervise their
delivery, improve logistics, evaluate their programs' effectiveness, and
disseminate their learning and tools to others around the world. The approach is
based on cost-realism, namely, the appropriate mix of technology elements to
tackle a problem based on a realistic assessment of the solution's
sustainability in the community where it will be deployed. Thus, the focus is on
using a mix of communication devices that are already likely to be in the
possession of a large percentage of the target population such as mobile phones.
There will also be experimentation with adding new sensor devices to mobile
phones for physiological measurements. This collaborative work includes PATH, an
organization uniquely suited to realizing scalable technology solutions in the
public health space.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of the research is to
understand how mobile and cloud software can be constructed to make it easier to
deploy modular applications that take advantage of components designed by a
large community rather than a monolithic solution that is difficult to extend.
In this way, a flourishing ecosystem will be created, much like application
markets today, with the added capability of composing modules into larger
systems. Evaluation will include both the use of the tools in a public health
context as well as the ease with which new information services and systems are
built and deployed. Given the wide range of potential applications students will
be recruited from a wide variety of disciplines including the University of
Washington Medical School, School of Public Health, and Information School and
inter-disciplinary projects will be introduced into undergraduate capstone
courses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As the work is multi-disciplinary, research
results will be as well. The focus is on human-computer interaction, mobile
systems, communication, and software engineering. The primary technical
challenges are in management of mobile data collection, expanding the
sensing/perception capabilities of mobile phones for health, and architecting
distributed information services. Improved methods for organizing data
collection campaigns and their sustainable management in terms of both the
deployment of instruments on mobile devices and tools to supervise the data
collectors themselves will be foremost. Connecting mobile phones and their
sensors in a structured arrangement that will allow use of everything from paper
and cheap voice/SMS phones on one end of the spectrum to smartphones and tablets
on the other will be a significant contribution to data collection methods.
Exploiting standard interfaces and internet protocols between cloud-based
modules will formalize the development of data architectures (above basic
databases) that embody work processes and sustain management feedback loops.