* 1111218
* New Methods for Construction of Enantiomerically Enriched Tertiary Alcohols via Nucleophilic Reactions of Enediolates
* MPS,CHE
* 09/15/2011,08/31/2015
* John Wolfe, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Suk-Wah Tam-Chang
* 08/31/2015
* USD 395,000.00

Professor John P. Wolfe of the University of Michigan is supported by the
Chemical Synthesis Program in the Division of Chemistry to carry out research on
the development of new chemical reactions for the stereocontrolled assembly of
tertiary alpha-hydroxy esters. These functional groups are found in many
biologically active molecules as well as important building blocks for complex
molecule synthesis. The research is focused on the invention of new techniques
to generate reactive enediolates and the investigation of new nucleophilic
reactions of enediolates for the preparation of molecules that contain 1-2
quaternary stereocenters. In addition, the research is also directed towards the
utilization of new carbon-carbon bond-forming reactions between nucleophilic
enediolates and carbon-centered electrophiles for the synthesis of complex
carbocyclic and heterocyclic molecules. These new reactions will provide access
to valuable organic compounds that cannot easily be prepared in a
stereocontrolled fashion with existing methods. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
development of new reactions allows chemists to shorten synthetic sequences,
saving time, money, and natural resources. This ultimately benefits society by
providing important chemicals such as pharmaceuticals at an affordable cost and
in an environmentally friendly manner. This research will lead to streamlined
routes to compounds with known utility, and will also give access to new
compounds that cannot be easily prepared with existing methods. This will afford
many opportunities for the discovery of new, useful molecules with applications
in fields such as pharmaceuticals, agrochemicals, or materials. The research
described above will also provide excellent training to both graduate and
undergraduate students, who will master concepts and skills in organic synthesis
and synthetic methods development. Upon completion of their training, these
students will be well positioned to enter the workforce as productive scientists
in industrial, government, or academic laboratories.