* 1111702
* Energy Resolved Studies of Dynamics, Reactivity and Mechanism at the Gas-Surface Interface
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2011,07/31/2015
* Arthur Utz, Tufts University
* Standard Grant
* Colby Foss
* 07/31/2015
* USD 575,000.00

In this project supported by the Chemical Structure Dynamics and Mechanisms
Program of the Division of Chemistry, Prof. Arthur Utz of Tufts University will
study how the motions (dynamics) of atoms and molecules can promote chemical
reactivity at the gas-surface interface. Gas-surface reactions underlie
industrial processes ranging from heterogeneous catalysis to materials
deposition and semiconductor fabrication. The proposed studies will combine
quantum state-resolved laser excitation of a gas phase reagent with ultra-high
vacuum surface science techniques to show how specific molecular motions (bond
stretches, bends, and surface vibrations) promote reactivity. Another line of
inquiry will explore the rates and pathways for energy redistribution processes
that dictate reactivity. The experiments will reveal how vibrational energy in
the gas-phase reagent and in the surface impact reactivity. The study of surface
vibrations will be a particularly significant focus as it has the potential to
inform our understanding of the unique catalytic activity of nanoparticles. The
ultimate goal of this work is to develop a better understanding of the important
variables that influence gas-surface reactivity, with an aim towards designing
better theories, identifying new strategies for chemical control, and revealing
new practical applications. The results of this study will provide theorists
with much useful data to test the latest theories. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
results of this research will also provide important guidance in designing
practical catalytic reaction schemes, which are important to industry. Students
and postdoctoral research associates who participate in this research acquire
new knowledge and skills in preparation for advanced studies or entrance into
the scientific/technological job market. The PI will also guide departmental
efforts to incorporate active citizenship into the undergraduate and graduate
curriculum at Tufts. These efforts will better prepare Tufts students engage in
public discourse, participate in outreach activities, and incorporate the
principles of active citizenship in their professional careers.