* 1111762
* Water Organization at Environmental Interfaces by Phase-Sensitive Sum Frequency
* MPS,CHE
* 07/15/2011,06/30/2015
* Heather Allen, Ohio State University
* Continuing Grant
* Anne-Marie Schmoltner
* 06/30/2015
* USD 565,000.00

The Environmental Chemical Sciences (ECS) program of the Division of Chemistry
will support the research program of Prof. Heather Allen of Ohio State
University. Prof. Allen and her students will develop and apply phase sensitive
vibrational sum frequency generation (PS-VSFG) spectroscopy to investigate water
organization and orientation as a function of vibrational frequency at
air/aqueous salt interfaces. Research will encompass air-aqueous interfacial
investigations of mono- and divalent ions which have not been investigated
previously using PS-VSFG. These studies will elucidate how and to what extent
these ions organize water at the air-aqueous interface.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
chemical systems to be studied have direct relevance to atmospheric aerosol
chemistry of marine and continental regions. The study will increase our
understanding of the aging processes of aerosols. Additionally, these same
systems have direct correlation with understanding the surface of the ocean at a
molecular level where the ions investigated are common constituents of the ocean
surface waters. The study will provide an excellent educational opportunity for
undergraduate and graduate students to carry out a fundamental research project
at the interface of chemistry and atmospheric sciences.