* 1111262
* SUNY AGEP:  Best Practices for Institutionalization
* EDU,EES
* 05/15/2011,05/31/2013
* Eric Kaler, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Mark Leddy
* 05/31/2013
* USD 150,000.00

The State University of New York Alliance for the Graduate Education and the
Professoriate (SUNY AGEP) started in 1999 as a minority graduate education
program that included four major SUNY institutions: Stony Brook University as
lead institution and its strategic partners University at Albany, Binghamton
University, and University at Buffalo. Since the program?s inception, these
institutions have supported the career and professional development of 116 Ph.D.
graduates and have provided direct support to over 500 students and 80 graduate
programs. The broader goal of the AGEP Alliance is to catalyze institutional
change to increase the number of underrepresented minority faculty at American
universities and colleges. Working towards this goal, each Alliance partner has
developed an individualized program for its campus population. The diversified
activities at each institution cover financial, academic, social, and
professional development aspects of the graduate student experience; areas that
are critical for the successful degree completion of underrepresented minority
doctoral students and their future advancement into the professoriate. The goal
of this evaluation project is to analyze the conditions required for the
institutionalization of the most effective policies and practices that emerged
through the project. In pursuit of this goal the PI will conduct an in-depth
analysis of the project's measurable outcomes through a summative evaluation
that will provide evidence of project impact in key areas of recruitment,
retention and career advancement. The findings will reveal best practices for
institutionalization and opportunities for future exploration and programming.
&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: Most of the studies of academic support focus on
the K-12 and undergraduate levels, thus there is a critical need for more data
and analysis from the perspective of graduate school and career advancement. The
findings of the evaluation component of this project will contribute to the
knowledge base on effective strategies for STEM graduate persistence and
graduation. &lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The NSF AGEP project is a pioneer
program that has introduced effective models for engaging and supporting
underrepresented minority graduate students towards success. The findings of the
Alliance?s ten year history will reveal useful procedures and strategies for
recruitment, retention and career advancement that will be transferable to other
graduate programs within the SUNY AGEP Alliance and beyond. Ultimately, this
research will support efforts to increase race/ethnicity representation in the
science and engineering workforce as well as in the Academy. The evaluation will
conclude with a report for publication.