* 1111539
* TC: Large: Collaborative Research: Facilitating Free and Open Access to Information on the Internet
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2018
* Roger Dingledine, The Tor Project
* Continuing Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 08/31/2018
* USD 749,884.00

This project develops methods to provide citizens information about technologies
that obstruct, restrict, or tamper with their access to information. Internet
users need an objective, independent, third-party service that helps them
determine whether their Internet service provider or government is restricting
access to content, specific protocols, or otherwise degrading service. Towards
this goal, we are (1) monitoring attempts to block or manipulate Internet
content and communications; and (2) evaluating various censorship circumvention
mechanisms in real-world deployments}. The project develops a large-scale
measurement and monitoring service that measures network reachability and
performance from a variety of access networks to various Internet services;
infers whether ISPs or governments are restricting or otherwise throttling
access to various applications and services; and detects attempts to tamper with
information presented to users. The project also studyies the policy
ramifications of making information about censorship and information tampering
available to Internet users. It will provide up-to-date information about both
the extent of censorship and information tampering in countries around the world
and technologies countries are using to implement censorship and thwart
censorship circumvention tools. Discoveries are disseminated through real-time
portals and through regular written reports and academic publications.