* 1111558
* Asymmetric Synthesis of Strychnos and Aspidosperma Alkaloids
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2014
* Rodrigo Andrade, Temple University
* Continuing Grant
* Tingyu Li
* 08/31/2014
* USD 360,000.00

In this project funded by the Chemical Synthesis Program of the Chemistry
Division, Professor Rodrigo Andrade of the Department of Chemistry at Temple
University will apply novel synthetic methods toward the synthesis of various
complex alkaloid natural products. While many methods exist for the preparation
of complex alkaloids, there is a need for step-efficient, asymmetric
methodology. Professor Andrade's research involves the discovery and development
of novel methods to efficiently and selectively prepare complex natural products
in an asymmetric manner, which is essential if they are to be employed as
chemical probes in molecular biology. Professor Andrade's group recently
reported a sequential one-pot bis-cyclization method that has enabled the
concise syntheses of several Strychnos alkaloids; this method will be employed
in the syntheses of novel Strychnos and Aspidosperma alkaloids.

Alkaloids have a rich history in medicine, as many synthetic and semi-synthetic
drugs such as Naloxone are structural modifications of alkaloids. Therefore,
more efficient synthetic approaches to this class of molecules will have
significant impact on the pharmaceutical industry. Some of the methodology
developed in this proposal is also applicable to other classes of molecules.
Therefore, it will impact other areas of research (e.g., biochemical and
agricultural sectors) in which the synthesis of these molecules is needed. In
terms of educational impacts, this project will provide excellent training of
students, including those from groups historically underrepresented in the
sciences.