* 1111777
* Negative Ion Photoelectron Spectroscopy Studies of Spin-State Dependent Substituent Effects on Aromatic Nitrenes
* MPS,CHE
* 10/01/2011,09/30/2015
* Paul Wenthold, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Tyrone Mitchell
* 09/30/2015
* USD 429,000.00

The Chemical Structure, Dynamics and Mechanisms Program in the Chemistry
Division at the National Science Foundation supports Professor Paul Wenthold of
Purdue University for the measurement of spin state energies of nitrenes using
negative ion photoelectron spectroscopy. The two main goals of this research are
to understand the role of radical stabilizing moieties, such as furanyl and
pyridinyl-N-oxide, on the ground and excited state energies, and to study the
effect of geometrical constraints on these measurements through the use of
angular groups.

Broader impacts of the research include the advanced experimental apparatus in
the Wenthold laboratory for making measurements of high spin state energies,
providing a unique training ground for scientists at all levels. Gas-phase
studies of reactivity and structure can impact all areas of chemistry, as well
as other disciplines such as material science and engineering, and aromatic
nitrenes have been proposed to have applications in cross-linking experiments,
photolithography, as light-sensitive agents in photographic processes and in
photoresist technology. The work also has the potential to impact the
development of new photoaffinity labels for identifiying the binding sites of
proteins involved in biological mechanisms. The Wenthold laboratory has a strong
reputation for training female scientists, and they will launch a new effort
with this grant to mentor graduate students with families, whose particular
challenges in higher education are often overlooked.