* 1111965
* SHB: Large: Collaborative Research: Integrated Communications and Inference Systems for Continuous Coordinated Care of Older Adults in the Home
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2016
* Ruzena Bajcsy, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* John Cozzens
* 08/31/2016
* USD 1,250,000.00

This research project addresses the important problem of improving and
maintaining peoples' healthy lifestyles by inventing smart technology based on
fundamental scientific principles. The approaches are economically feasible and
socially compelling approaches, with a focus on maintaining the health and
independence of older adults in a home environment. The project uses a mix of
networking and monitoring technologies to connect older adults with a remote
health coach (real person facilitated by a semi-automated program) and remote
family members. One of the key design issues is how best to preserve privacy and
enable the participants to control the distribution and sharing of their data.
The intervention is designed to provide coordinated and continuous health
management.

The research for this project uses the integration of data from a variety of
sensors in the home, yielding information for activity monitoring, sleep
monitoring, gait and movement analysis, socialization measures, as well as a
variety of cognitive metrics derived from computer interactions with adaptive
games. Rigorous computational engineering models of the cognitive and physical
functions of the patient, as well as context and environment, are used to infer
patient state and provide feedback for the patient and the remote health coach.
The modeling techniques include Partially Observable Markov Process and Hybrid
Control Modes. User models that incorporate behavior change principles are then
used to drive algorithms to optimize automated feedback and recommendations that
serve as prompts for a health coach managing a large number of patients. These
approaches to remote health management are evaluated by leveraging an existing
prototype platform with the capability of collecting data from the homes of
elderly participants.