* 1111092
* Collaborative Research: Using Multi-Modal Digital Footprints to Infer Public Sentiment
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2015
* Bing Liu, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Tatiana Korelsky
* 08/31/2015
* USD 449,808.00

Social science takes as axiomatic that agents act on beliefs: however, teasing
out the correlations between belief and action is no simple feat. Traditionally,
social scientists relied on survey data to measure sentiment that might indicate
changing economic trends, and on lab experiments to test actions given
manipulated beliefs. Surveys, however, are notoriously expensive to scale,
difficult to conduct frequently, and possess bias; lab experiments artificially
constrain decision-making and thus fail to capture the complex dependencies of
real-world actions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will generate
measurements of public sentiment directly from the actions of people, using one
of the largest datasets of human behavior ever studied: online opinions
expressed on platforms like Twitter or comments posted on news websites, time
series representing the volume of search queries on Google, and call detail
records. Using these digital footprints, the project will develop new social-
computational measures of public sentiments related to the state of the economy,
expected unemployment, and concerns about national priorities.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts: The project will offer new alternatives
to surveys as a measure of public sentiment, and will also generate
unprecedented insight into the online and onsite behavior of the American
population. This research also has the potential to help public and private
organizations better understand the dynamic behaviors of customers and
constituents, and to make business and policy decisions informed by economic
trends derived from data. The project will enhance education through the
interdisciplinary training of graduate students. Both graduate and undergraduate
students from underrepresented groups will be actively encouraged to participate
in the project. A public website will also be set up detailing the project
results.