* 1111698
* TC: Large: Collaborative Research: High-Level Language Support for Trustworthy Networks
* CSE,CNS
* 08/01/2011,07/31/2016
* Emin Sirer, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Ralph Wachter
* 07/31/2016
* USD 1,615,999.00

Computer networks are now, arguably, the United States' most critical
infrastructure. They control all communication amongst our citizenry, our
businesses, our government, and our military. Worryingly, however, today's
networks are remarkably unreliable and insecure. A significant source of
vulnerability is the fact that the underlying network equipment (e.g., routers
and switches) run complicated programs written in obtuse, low-level programming
languages, which makes managing networks a difficult and error-prone task.
Simple mistakes can have disastrous consequences including making the network
vulnerable to denial-of-service attacks, hijackings, and wide-scale outages.

The goal of this research is to transform the way that networks are managed by
introducing a new class of network programming languages with the following
essential features: (i) network-wide, correct-by-construction abstractions; (ii)
support for fault-tolerance and scalability; (iii) coordination with end-hosts
and independently-administered networks, as well as mechanisms for establishing
trust between them; (iv) formal verification tools based on rigorous semantic
foundations; and (v) compilers capable of generating efficient and portable code
that runs on heterogeneous equipment. To demonstrate how to build a language
with these features, the researchers are designing a language for OpenFlow
networks called Frenetic, and evaluating it on several novel security
applications. This project will have broad impact by (i) discovering key
techniques for increasing the reliability of our networks, (ii) opening up the
interfaces used to program networks, thereby enabling grass-roots innovation
where it was previously not possible, and (iii) educating a new community of
researchers with advanced skills in both networking and programming languages.