* 1111449
* NeTS: Large: Collaborative Research: Exploring the Evolution of IPv6: Topology, Performance, and Traffic
* CSE,CNS
* 05/01/2012,04/30/2016
* Kimberly Claffy, University of California-San Diego
* Continuing Grant
* Darleen Fisher
* 04/30/2016
* USD 1,352,436.00

The impending exhaustion of available IPv4 address space is finally motivating
network operators to begin deploying to IPv6. There are two possible outcomes
from this transition. IPv6 may be widely adopted and embraced, causing many
existing methods that measure and monitor the Internet to be ineffective. In
this transition scenario, the Internet will be even less well understood, and
data even more scarce, than the existing, poorly instrumented IPv4-based
network. A second possibility is that IPv6 languishes, transition mechanisms
fail, or performance suffers. Either scenario demands new research on rigorous
large-scale IPv6 measurement to inform technical, business, and policy
decisions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project, researchers from CAIDA and from
the Naval Postgraduate School are engaged in measurements and data analysis
exploring the evolution of IPv6 deployment. First, they are focusing on
improving the fidelity, scope, and usability of IPv6 measurement technology as
necessary for providing a comprehensive view of the IPv6 topology from core to
edge. To attain this objective, the researchers are building new tools that will
measure the characteristics of IPv6 adoption at the edge and developing new
methodologies to compare characteristics of IPv4 and IPv6 connectivity. The
resulting data sets will serve as input to the next task: correlating these
observations with other available technical and socioeconomic data, such as
address allocation, geographic and traffic data, ISP organizational structure,
and political/regulatory factors potentially influencing IPv6
deployment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Finally, CAIDA and NPS researchers are going to
conduct quantitative assessment of IPv6 performance, including the impact of
transition technologies and traffic characteristics. This study will improve the
state of quantitative modeling of the IPv6 transition by gathering rigorous
empirical data on the extent and effectiveness of converter technologies,
investigating prevailing concerns over IPv6 performance and path inflation, and
analyzing actual IPv6 traffic workloads on a major U.S.
backbone.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of this project includes
solid empirically grounded understanding of the most difficult architectural
transition ever attempted on the Internet, while simultaneously advancing the
state-of-the-art in network measurement science and technology. A rigorous
approach to the study of IPv6 deployment represents a compelling case study for
the current Internet, with applicability to technology transfer challenges in
other domains. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To maximize their broader impact, the
results will be widely disseminated to research, commercial, and government
sectors, informing communications and technology policies. Data, tools, and
methodologies will be available to researchers and used to create accessible
educational materials for future generations, who will be even more dependent on
a robust Internet than we are today.