* 1111691
* CSR: Large: Collaborative Research: Kali:  A System for Sequential Programming of Multicore Processors
* CSE,CNS
* 08/01/2011,07/31/2015
* Ahmed Sameh, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Anita La Salle
* 07/31/2015
* USD 259,000.00

Most computers today are 'multicore' parallel computers that are capable of
executing several independent threads of computation simultaneously.
Unfortunately, most existing programs are not parallel and cannot take advantage
of this hardware capability. Furthermore, writing parallel programs using
current notations like OpenMP is more difficult than writing sequential programs
and, as a result, increases development costs and the likelihood of program
defects.

The Kali project is building a software system that will permit most application
programmers to write sequential programs and still obtain good performance on
multicore processors. Parallelism will be hidden within object-oriented class
libraries written by expert parallel programmers and it will be managed by a
sophisticated runtime system that uses a range of parallel execution strategies
customized to the needs of the application. Applications programmers can take
advantage of the benefits of sequential programming such as familiarity,
readability, maintainability, and debuggability. They will also be able to tune
program performance and power without having to drop down to a lower abstraction
level. In addition, the Kali project is studying the use of innovative hardware
to facilitate the development of efficient programs. Finally, the project is
producing a suite of application benchmarks that will be useful for performance
evaluation of similar systems.