* 1111395
* Paleoindian Adaptations in Eastern Beringia: Prelude or Postscript to the Early Settlement of the Americas
* GEO,OPP
* 06/15/2011,05/31/2014
* Jeff Rasic, University of Alaska Fairbanks Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Anna M. Kerttula
* 05/31/2014
* USD 149,807.00

Archaeologists will undertake a two-year program of archaeological
investigations at the late Pleistocene age Raven Bluff site in interior
northwestern Alaska. The site contains the oldest and best preserved collection
of faunal remains from the American Arctic, and an assemblage of stone tools
that includes fluted projectile points. Fluted projectile points are a type of
stone weapon tip associated with the initial phase of human settlement in most
regions of the New World. They have not, however, been reliably dated in eastern
Beringia (Alaska and unglaciated portions of Yukon), a region of critical
importance for thinking about the colonization of the Americas since it was a
presumed waypoint for the initial settlers of North and South America as they
expanded from their Asian homeland. In the absence of secure dating Beringian
fluted points have yet to be situated in a historical or ecological context, and
there is little known about the behavior of the people who used this technology
or their relationship to fluted point users in the midcontinent.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will address these issues through
interdisciplinary studies at Raven Bluff and analyses of existing fluted point
assemblages found in museum collections. At Raven Bluff a research team will:
establish a chronological and stratigraphic framework for the archaeological
deposits; reconstruct the late Pleistocene and early Holocene environmental
setting; describe strategies of faunal exploitation and resource use; and
characterize the stone tool production and maintenance activities conducted at
the site, including methods of fluted point manufacture and repair. Building on
insights from our detailed studies at Raven Bluff we also plan to reexamine
existing fluted point assemblages from Alaska, as well as published data from
selected fluted point assemblages from the midcontinent, in order to evaluate
hypotheses about the transmission and development of fluted point technology
within Beringia, and its transmission between Beringia and the
midcontinent.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Insights resulting from this work will help
resolve longstanding questions about the timing of the fluted point occupation
in Beringia, and the subsistence and technological adaptations of the people who
made fluted point in an extreme, high latitude environment. It will also fill a
major geographic and temporal gap in our knowledge of Paleoindian dispersals
throughout the Americas. These issues are important because they are connected
to the general process of first entry and adaptive radiation of people in all
parts of the world, and shed light on the means by which small scale societies
adapt to diverse environmental challenges. The broader impacts of this study
include training and mentoring of high school, undergraduate and graduate
students. Education and outreach efforts through the PolarTREC program will
bring an issue of great public interest and scientific importance?the earliest
period of cultural development in the New World ?into classrooms across the
country.