* 1111694
* Design and Development of 1,3-diaza-Claisen Rearrangements
* MPS,CHE
* 09/15/2011,08/31/2015
* Jose Madalengoitia, University of Vermont & State Agricultural College
* Continuing Grant
* Suk-Wah Tam-Chang
* 08/31/2015
* USD 345,000.00

In this project funded by the Chemical Synthesis Program of the Chemistry
Division, José Madalengoitia of the University of Vermont will investigate the
1,3-diaza-Claisen rearrangement as novel method for the synthesis of guanidine
compounds. The overall reaction involves the addition of a tertiary allylic
amine to a carbodiimide to afford a zwitterionic intermediate that in turn
undergoes a 1,3-diaza-Claisen rearrangement. The goals for this project are 1)
to determine the optimal carbodiimide reactivity and to then explore optimal
carbodiimides in ring expanding and intramolecular rearrangements, 2) to develop
a rearrangement that proceeds through a cationic intermediate instead of a
zwitterionic intermediate, 3) to develop a palladium-catalyzed rearrangement,
and 4) to develop rearrangements in which a new stereocenter is formed
stereoselectively. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts involve the
training of graduate and undergraduate students in the area of organic
synthesis. In addition, high school students in collaboration with Project SEED
will be trained the PI's lab during the summer. Guanidine compounds are
important as they have been used as catalysts for a number of reactions and
guanidine derivatives have been reported to have a range of biological
activities including anti-bacterial and anti-HIV activities. This work will
expand the ways in which guanidine compounds can be made and will broaden the
range of guanidine compounds that can be easily made. Societal benefits should
come from the application of this work to the synthesis guanidine catalysts,
guanidine natural products and guanidine pharmaceuticals.