* 1111525
* Photochemistry of Petroleum from the Deepwater Horizon: Products, Mechanisms, and Toxicity
* MPS,CHE
* 10/01/2011,09/30/2015
* Matthew Tarr, University of New Orleans
* Continuing Grant
* Tyrone Mitchell
* 09/30/2015
* USD 481,218.00

The Environmental Chemical Sciences Program in the Chemistry Division at the
National Science Foundation supports Professor Matthew Tarr of the University of
New Orleans to study the effects of sunlight, photooxidant particles, and
dispersants on crude oil in seawater, using a variety of analytical methods
under different, environmentally relevant conditions. The goal of this work is
to understand the photochemical transformation of Deepwater Horizon oil as a
function of irradiation time, dispersant loading, and the presence or absence of
photocatalysts. This work will help to understand the fate of oil from the
Deepwater Horizon spill, improve the predictive power of different models used
in preparing for future spills, and provide greater overall insight into the
photochemical processes affecting crude oil in marine systems.

Broader impacts of this research are centered in the societal benefit of
learning, at the molecular level, the fate of crude oil after exposure to the
harsh conditions present in salt water with light exposure. Crude oil inside a
bore well, which has been preserved for millions of years in the dark, has a
very different chemical composition almost immediately upon reaching the surface
of the ocean after a spill. This research will provide detailed information
about the changes in the general composition of the oil as well as specific
changes to the structures of the major components that take place after
excitation from visible and ultra-violet light from the sun. This work is
critical to our understanding and prevention of environmental damage from
aquatic oil spills such as Deepwater Horizon. Professor Tarr's research group
will actively engage high school students and teachers, including
underrepresented groups, in this research program.