* 1111997
* 2011 Gordon Research Conference and Seminar on Nuclear Chemistry.  Conference to be held June 12-17 in New Hampshire
* MPS,PHY
* 03/01/2011,02/29/2012
* Nancy Gray, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* Bradley D. Keister
* 02/29/2012
* USD 7,500.00

This award provides partial support for young scientists from US institutes to
attend the 2011 Gordon Research Conference on Nuclear Chemistry and the
associated Gordon Research Seminar. This conference, subtitled "Intersections
between Structure and Reactions: Pushing the Frontiers of Nuclear Science",
focuses on the interplay between nuclear structure and reaction dynamics. Twelve
topics have been selected at the frontier of the two fields and at the forefront
of the present research. They include: nuclear structure close to the driplines
and its coupling to the reactions, nuclear molecules and nuclear clusters,
nuclear equation of state and effective interaction, nuclear astrophysics,
dissipation and fragmentation, level densities and thermal properties, quantal
and thermal phase transitions, fusion and fission, synthesis and spectroscopy of
super-heavy elements, and research and development for the new facilities. The
conference topics address key questions stated in the NSAC Long Range Plan for
Nuclear Physics, particularly concerning the science associated with the next-
generation rare-isotope accelerator facilities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The main
goal of this conference is to provide the international community of nuclear
scientists with a unique forum in which the latest developments and ideas at the
frontier of nuclear research can be presented, thoroughly discussed and
criticized. To these ends, much time is reserved for discussion. The chosen
conference setting is particularly conducive to promoting interactions between
junior and senior scientists, to provoking new concepts for future research, and
to seeding new research collaborations. The high reputation of GRC in general
and of the Nuclear Chemistry GRC in particular has always guaranteed a select
audience including the best worldwide experts of the two subfields. For the
first time in 30 years, the 2011 Nuclear Chemistry GRC brings together the two
communities, offering a variety of topics at the frontier of the two fields and
at the forefront of the present research. Scientific exchanges and
collaborations between the two subfields are particularly crucial at a time when
ties between nuclear science and astrophysics are growing and next-generation
rare isotope accelerators are coming online. The participation of young
scientists is essential in addressing the future manpower needs of this rapidly
developing field and in educating a technical workforce for the nation competent
in nuclear techniques. The addition of the Gordon Research Seminar to the
Conference is designed to stimulate the growth of connections among young
scientists and also between young scientists and experts in the field.
Participation of under-represented minority groups, women, and young scientists
in the conference will be encouraged. The discussion leaders, who play an
essential part in selecting speakers, are a diverse group of internationally-
known experts in the field, including women and minority scientists. Both the
chair and the vice chair are women.