* 1111348
* Experimental Probes of Nonadiabatic Dynamics and Novel Reaction Pathways in Polyatomic Molecules
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2011,07/31/2014
* Arthur Suits, Wayne State University
* Standard Grant
* Colby Foss
* 07/31/2014
* USD 474,768.00

In this project funded by the Chemical Structure, Dynamics and Mechanisms
Program of the Chemistry Division, Professor Suits of Wayne State University
will conduct investigations of the dissociation of polyatomic molecules using
laser techniques that are sensitive to the electronic and spin angular momentum
of the products. The findings can then be used to unravel the detailed dynamics
of these dissociation events. A key aspect of the proposed work is development
of an approach for efficient detection of electron spin polarization in hydrogen
atom photo-fragments, a principal product of the dissociation of a great many
polyatomic molecules. A second aspect of the proposed studies is a strategy to
control the novel "roaming radical" reaction mechanism identified in
formaldehyde and acetaldehyde decomposition. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
impacts of the proposed work include development of a new high-resolution image
acquisition system that will be freely distributed to other groups. In addition,
recruitment and training of a diverse group of undergraduate students, graduate
students and post-docs in methods in ion imaging, laser spectroscopy and data
analysis is a core aspect of the group activity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;An
important question in the decomposition of photoexcited molecules is the
sequence of electronic states that are encountered in the course of
dissociation, and the ways in which they influence the final outcome. This
question has direct bearing in many diverse areas from solar energy capture to
vision to atmospheric chemistry: almost anywhere that molecules interact with
light.