* 1111000
* Molecular Level Studies on Phthalates at Interfaces Using Nonlinear Optical Spectroscopic Techniques
* MPS,CHE
* 07/15/2011,06/30/2016
* Zhan Chen, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Anne-Marie Schmoltner
* 06/30/2016
* USD 420,000.00

The Environmental Chemical Sciences (ECS) program of the Division of Chemistry
will support the research program of Prof. Zhan Chen of the University of
Michigan. Prof. Chan and his students will employ sum frequency generation (SFG)
and coherent anti-Stokes Raman scattering (CARS) spectroscopy to reveal
segregation and molecular structures of phthalates, which are commonly used
plasticizers, on polymer surfaces and on environmentally important model
surfaces/interfaces. The study aims to increase our understanding of degradation
mechanisms of phthalates on surfaces and in bulk media, and to elucidate
molecular mechanisms of various surface modification methods to prevent/reduce
phthalate leaching from polymer systems. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
study will probe for the first time the interfacial behavior of phthalates at
environmentally important surfaces and interfaces in situ. It will provide
molecular correlations between phthalate structure on environmentally relevant
surfaces and interfaces and their leaching and degradation properties. The
project will ultimately aid in the design and development of methodologies to
reduce and minimize phthalates' negative impacts on the environment and human
health. The study will provide an excellent educational opportunity for
undergraduate and graduate students to carry out a fundamental research project
of great societal importance.