* 1111016
* Collaborative Research: Social Diffusion in Online Media for Reaching Hidden Communities and Underrepresented Groups
* SBE,SES
* 09/15/2011,08/31/2016
* Christopher Homan, Rochester Institute of Tech
* Standard Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 08/31/2016
* USD 215,215.00

The goal of this project is to use peer-driven recruitment to sample from and
send information to hidden, underrepresented, or underground online communities.
Specifically, the project will examine how social media can be used to extract
information from and distribute information to hidden communities, determine
whether the framework to be developed can provide new insights into the behavior
of community members, advance the science of peer-to-peer sampling techniques,
and determine whether trust in social media affects the peer-to-peer recruitment
process.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit&lt;br/&gt;This project will
serve to answer the following questions. How can we best apply computational
resources that are associated with online social media to improve processes for
collecting information from and distributing information to hidden populations?
To what degree do the known deficiencies in state-of-the-art bias estimators
impact the effectiveness of peer-to-peer-based sampling and how well can these
deficiencies be corrected by new estimators and/or sampling design? To what
extent do individuals invest trust in various social media (particularly
Facebook and email) and how much does degree-of-trust affect peer-to-peer
recruitment processes, especially with respect to identification with a hidden
or marginalized group? These are important questions, and answers to them will
serve to advance the both the social and computational sciences, and their
synergistic combinations. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts&lt;br/&gt;This
project will provide an open source system for remotely interacting with online
communities, particularly but not limited to hidden communities. The project
will have a substantial education component in that the proposed system will
have a simulation mode that will enable it to be used for class projects. By
providing a way to address problems that impact underrepresented groups, it will
also provide meaningful research and educational opportunities in computing to
members of those groups. In addition, it will establish an interdisciplinary,
intercollegiate laboratory in online social network research that will
institutionalize preexisting working relationships and provide a home for an
ongoing seminar series in network science.