* 1111025
* Theoretical Frameworks and Socio-Technical Systems for Fostering Smart Communities in Smart Grid Environments
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2011,09/30/2016
* Hal Eden, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 09/30/2016
* USD 749,708.00

Energy sustainability is a theme of national and worldwide importance. Smart-
Grid environments are focused on creating and using information and
communication technologies to support new and potentially more sustainable ways
of producing, transmitting, distributing, and consuming electricity. This
project focuses on creating a socio-computational system that enables citizens
to make informed choices about their energy consumption, share their decisions
with others and visualize the consequences of their own actions.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;New social-computational systems are needed to facilitate
this sort of citizen engagement with the energy economy because (1) most
citizens are unaware of these new technological developments; (2) information
presentation is poorly designed; and (3) the social context of individual energy
use is ignored resulting in few social interactions and collaborations. All of
these challenges lie at the intersection of human behavior (both individual and
social levels) and technology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: The two
overarching goals of this project are (a) the creation of transformative
theoretical frameworks for understanding social-computational foundations for
these settings, making our methodologies, components, architectures,
requirements, and guidelines applicable to a large number of other social-
computational systems (for example, smart cities and health-care) and (b) the
development of human-centered systems for fostering smart communities in Smart-
Grid environments that will turn passive consumers of energy into informed,
active decision makers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The project will
lead to new tools and strategies to increase the use of Smart-Grid technologies,
thereby reducing overall national energy usage and dependence on foreign energy
sources. In addition, the project will make strides in including and supporting
the ability of marginal and underrepresented populations to use these
technologies, thereby avoiding a digital-energy divide. The Principle
Investigators are working with the El Pueblo MÃ¡gico after-school effort at
Sanchez Elementary School in Lafayette, Colorado, to engage students and their
families in fostering energy awareness and responsibility, providing broader
views on end-user energy concerns.