* 1111173
* High-5 STEM Collaborative for the Diversification of the Professorate
* EDU,EES
* 07/15/2011,06/30/2013
* C. Dianne Martin, George Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Mark Leddy
* 06/30/2013
* USD 150,000.00

The High-5 STEM Collaborative proposes an Alliance for Graduate Education and
the Professoriate (AGEP) that brings together five Metro-linked universities in
the national capital region, around the common purpose of diversifying the
professoriate in science, technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM). Led
by The George Washington University, High-5 includes American University,
Gallaudet University, Marymount University, and the University of the District
of Columbia. The vision for the High-5 STEM Collaborative is to become a
sustainable model Alliance, reproducible in other urban environments, to enable
talented students reflecting the demographics of the nation overall to prepare
for and enter the STEM professoriate in large numbers. The overall goal of the
Collaborative is to build a vibrant five-campus community with climate and
structures, faculty, curriculum, and students purposefully aligned to enable
diverse individuals to achieve academic and career success in STEM with
significant numbers entering the STEM professoriate.&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this
planning proposal is to lay the groundwork for the implementation phase and
accomplishment of the overall goal. During the planning phase, the project will
(1) identify barriers and challenges within its institutions that limit the
attraction, retention, persistence, attachment, and progression into the
professoriate of underrepresented minorities in STEM; (2) identify and
understand best practices within its institutions and from successful AGEP
alliances that enable the inclusion and advancement of underrepresented
minorities in STEM; (3) design the structures, incentives, and feedback systems
that can create the alignment and become the framework for institutional
transformation during the implementation phase; (4) pilot one or two community-
building components to launch the Collaborative and engage departments, schools,
faculty, and students at all member institutions; and (5) generate information
that will inform a future AGEP model.&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit. The High-5
Collaborative will transcend campus boundaries and transform institutional
cultures to prepare significant numbers of URM, including deaf individuals, for
STEM faculty positions at the full range of institutions of higher education.
The Collaborative is innovative in its full integration of deaf faculty and
students as part of the URM population; the extent to which students at all
levels will cross-enroll, collaborate, and teach across the Alliance; and the
extent to which quality STEM academic programs that cross institutional
boundaries will be fostered. STEM undergraduate majors will have access to
additional and varied research experiences across the five institutions, and
become part of a diverse, multidisciplinary, STEM peer group with peer and
faculty mentors from other campuses. The Collaborative will also expand and
strengthen STEM research at the Alliance institutions through shared access to
facilities, equipment, resources, and the creation of a community of faculty and
student collaborators&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact. Course and curriculum
coordination will allow talented URM and deaf undergraduates to take advanced
STEM courses and join research groups at the research institutions, thereby
becoming pre-acclimated to graduate study. Further, new 3-2 programs will be
created to allow students to enter majors not available at their home
institution. Sharing of graduate teaching assistants (TAs) across the Alliance
will have three broader impacts: (1) provide a talented pool of instructors; (2)
provide undergraduate students with role models close to their age, who are
doing research in these disciplines; and (3) provide the TAs with experience
teaching different types of students in different institutional contexts and
settings. Another broader impact of this proposal is the planning of an exemplar
model alliance in an urban setting with intentional pathways between multiple
institutions to provide greater access for all students in the alliance to
provide maximum opportunity for them to participate in the STEM workforce and
professoriate. This model will include an assessment plan with metrics that can
be adopted and adapted by other potential alliances to help them develop their
change strategies.