* 1111495
* Molecular Theory and Simulation of Vibrational and Electronic Relaxation and Spectra in Liquid Solution
* MPS,CHE
* 07/15/2011,06/30/2015
* Eitan Geva, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Evelyn Goldfield
* 06/30/2015
* USD 440,000.00

Eitan Geva of the University of Michigan is supported by an award from the
Chemical Theory, Models and Computational Methods program to carry out research
on the development of theoretical and computational tools that would provide an
atomistically detailed description of a wide range of nonequilibrium electronic,
vibrational and conformational processes and their spectroscopic signature. This
study involves method development in the context of recent experimental
measurements of vibrational energy relaxation rates of polar and ionic species
in polar and protic solvents, multidimensional infrared spectra of the hydroxyl
stretch in alcohols and of the carbonyl stretch in metal-carbonyl complexes and
solvent effects on isomerization rates in liquid solution. These studies also
involve collaborations with experimentalists and theorists who are colleagues in
Geva's department. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Vibrational and electronic relaxation
is inherent to nearly all processes that are important in chemistry, including
many that have relevance to biological systems. Nonlinear optical spectroscopic
techniques are powerful probes of the structure and dynamics of complex systems.
Theoretical methods, such as those developed by the PI and his research group,
are indispensible for interpreting these spectra. The work is having a broader
impact through the training of students at all levels, curriculum development
and the dissemination of computer codes.