* 1111544
* SHB: Large: Collaborative Research: Companionbots for Proactive Therapeutic Dialog on Depression
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2015
* Daniel Bolanos, Boulder Language Technologies
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 08/31/2015
* USD 282,389.00

This collaborative research investigates a new class of dialog-based, home
robotic healthcare assistants to facilitate a new level of in-home, real-time
care to elderly and depressed patients, providing lower total costs and higher
quality of life. An emotive, physical avatar, called a companionbot, which
possesses the ability to engage humans in a way that is unobtrusive and suspends
disbelief will be built in this project. The companionbot will be an integration
of human language technology, vision, other sensory processing and emotive
robotic technology to proactively recognize and dialog with isolated and elderly
patients suffering from depression. The companionbot will utilize proactive or
companionable dialog based on the context with users suffering from depression.
This will require the first multimodal integration of a user model, environment
model, and temporal processing with spoken dialog understanding and generation
to produce dynamic dialog and emotive interaction, beyond the traditional
scripted dialog and emotion. Object recognition, facial expression recognition,
and human activity recognition will augment natural language processing to
provide current and historical context important to dynamic dialog.

A team of skilled researchers, assembled from the University of Colorado
Boulder, University of Denver, CU Anschutz Medical Campus, and Boulder Language
Technologies, will work together to achieve the project goals. The investigators
will use the companionbots as a tool to run clinical trials to monitor and
dialog with their partners to detect signs of physical and emotional
deterioration. The companionbots can then notify remote caregivers, as
necessary, provide warnings, reminders, life coaching and therapeutic dialog,
extending independence and quality of life, and even saving lives. The other
benefits of such a system include continuous, annotated data to improve doctor-
patient interaction and analysis, real-time monitoring of mental state for
remote healthcare providers and, ultimately, real-time intervention as part of a
comprehensive treatment strategy.

In addition, this research will promote both STEM practice and research
education at the graduate and the undergraduate levels of the affiliated
institutions. The companionbots are ideal for teaching the next generation of
engineers and scientists in critical emerging technologies, as they permit
either a deep focus on specific topics or an interdisciplinary perspective while
providing a simple high-level interface to manage everything else. Furthermore,
the project will develop related educational material to support others and will
provide public outreach to K-12 classes in the area.