* 1111257
* AF: Large: Collaborative Research: Algebraic Graph Algorithms: The Laplacian and Beyond
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2016
* Nicholas Read, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Tracy Kimbrel
* 08/31/2016
* USD 772,845.00

This project will exploit algebraic properties of operators associated with
graphs in an integrated set of research and educational activities designed to
develop new mathematical and algorithmic techniques; apply these to the solution
of real-world problems and longstanding theoretical questions in mathematics,
computer science, biology, and physics; and make these techniques broadly known
and accessible to students, researchers, and practitioners in many fields.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research has its origins in spectral graph theory,
which studies how the eigenvalues and eigenvectors of the graph Laplacian (and
other related matrices) interact with the combinatorial structure of the graph.
Spectral graph theory has been one of the great success stories in both the
theory and practice of algorithm design. It has led to fundamental advances in
graph partitioning, web search (notably including Google's PageRank algorithm),
the understanding of random processes and the algorithms derived from them, the
construction of error correcting codes, derandomization, convex optimization,
machine learning, and many others. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;While the eigenvalues
and eigenvectors of the Laplacian capture a striking amount of the structure of
the graph, they certainly do not capture all of it. Recent work by the principal
investigators and other researchers suggests that theoretical computer
scientists have only scratched the surface of what can be done if they are
willing to broaden their investigation, extending it to study more general
algebraic properties of the Laplacian than just its eigenvalue structure, and
more general operators than just the Laplacian. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Under this
award, the principal investigators will build a research program across the
three universities involved in this proposal to develop such a theory and its
applications. This initiative has the potential to provide transformative
advances in a range of theoretical and applied areas of computer science,
including: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;* Faster algorithms for fundamental graph
problems, such as Maximum Flow, Minimum Cut, Minimum Cost Flow, Multicommodity
Flow, approximating Sparsest Cut, generating random spanning trees, and
constructing low-stretch spaning trees. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;* Better
algorithms for the analysis of data, with potential applications to the Unique
Games Conjecture. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;* Faster algorithms for solving broad
classes of important linear systems, both sequentially and in parallel.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;* Faster distributed algorithms for information
dissemination in networks. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;* A spectral and algebraic
graph theory for directed graphs, based on ideas from differential geometry.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;* Novel quantum algorithms for a large class of problems
that appear to be hard for classical computers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;* New
techniques for problems in Quantum Physics based on ideas developed in Computer
Science and Combinatorics. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The principal investigators
will also work to disseminate these techniques by developing courses, training
undergraduate and graduate students, and introducing these ideas to scientists
in other fields.