* 1111530
* Multidimensional Incoherent Spectroscopy for Measuring Condensed-Phase Dynamics
* MPS,CHE
* 08/15/2011,12/31/2014
* Mark Berg, University South Carolina Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Lin He
* 12/31/2014
* USD 427,000.00

With support from the Chemical Measurement and Imaging program in the Division
of Chemistry, Prof. Mark Berg and his group at the University of South Carolina
are developing and applying new methods to assess the rates of chemical
processes (including peptide conformational dynamics) in heterogeneous
materials. Traditional "one-dimensional" spectroscopic methods use a single
excitation source and measure rates over a single time period. Prof. Berg is
developing multidimensional methods that use more than one excitation source and
measure rates over multiple periods. By using three excitation pulses, both the
distribution and rates of conformational change will be measured.
Multidimensional methods are also being broadened to include light pulses of
variable polarization and thereby measure the distribution of local viscosities
within bulk polymers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Kinetic measurements are used
throughout chemistry, biology, physics and engineering. The fundamentally new
approaches to kinetics developed in this program will provide new tools to all
these areas. Training in advanced spectroscopy will be done at the University of
South Carolina, which is both geographically underserved and has a large
population of students from underrepresented groups. In addition, Prof. Berg is
collaborating with Prof. Peter Chen of Spelman College, an HBCU for women, to
adapt the technological development from this project to an undergraduate
research environment.