* 1111182
* SoCS: Collaborative Research: Social Media Enhanced Organizational Sensemaking in Emergency Response
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2015
* John Flach, Wright State University
* Standard Grant
* Maria Zemankova
* 08/31/2015
* USD 517,608.00

This collaborative research leverages expertise of researchers at Wright State
University (IIS-1111182) and Ohio State University (IIS-1111118). Online social
networks and always-connected mobile devices have created an immense opportunity
that empowers citizens and organizations to communicate and coordinate
effectively in the wake of critical events. Specifically, there have been many
isolated examples of using Twitter to provide timely and situational information
about emergencies to relief organizations, and to conduct ad-hoc coordination.
However, there are few attempts that try to understand the full ramifications of
using social networks in a more concerted manner for effective organizational
sensemaking. This project aims to conduct multidisciplinary research involving
computer and social scientists fill this gap.

This project seeks to leverage Twitter posts (tweets) as the primary source of
citizen inputs and couple relevant content and network information along with
microworld simulations involving human role players to measure effectiveness of
various organized sensemaking strategies. To arrive at meaningful summaries of
citizen input, tweet content is analyzed using a semantic content analysis by
combining natural language techniques that are suitably fused with existing
knowledge bases (GeoNames, Wikipedia). Content analysis is further enhanced by
innovatively combining it with the dynamic analysis of the twitter network to
realize concise and trustworthy information nuggets of potential interest to
organizations and citizens. The resulting summaries will be fed to a suitably
designed microworld simulation involving human actors to derive realistic
settings for modeling disaster situations and typical organizational structures.

This project is expected to have a significant impact in the specific context of
disaster and emergency response. However, elements of this research are expected
to have much wider utility, for example in the domains of e-commerce, and social
reform. From a computational perspective, this project introduces the novel
paradigm of people-content-network analysis whose application is not just
limited to organized sensemaking. For social scientists, it provides a platform
that can be used to assess relative efficacy of various organizational
structures using microworld simulations and is expected to provide new insights
into the types of social network structures (mix of symmetric and asymmetric)
that might be better suitable to propagate information in emergent situations.
From an educational standpoint, the majority of funds will be used to train the
next generation of interdisciplinary researchers drawn from the computational
and social sciences. Research activities will also be integrated with graduate
course work. Participation of underrepresented groups will be encouraged.
Datasets and software developed as part of this project will be made available
to the broader research community via the project page
(http://knoesis.org/research/semspc/projects/socs).