* 1111676
* SHF: Large: Collaborative Research: PXGL: Cyberinfrastructure for Scalable Graph Execution
* CSE,CCF
* 08/01/2011,11/30/2011
* Thomas Sterling, Louisiana State University
* Continuing Grant
* Almadena Chtchelkanova
* 11/30/2011
* USD 525,000.00

The most powerful computing systems in the world have historically been
dedicated to solving scientific problems. Until recently, the computations
performed by these systems have typically been simulations of various physical
phenomena. However, a new paradigm for scientific discovery has been steadily
rising in importance, namely, data-intensive science, which focuses
sophisticated analysis techniques on the enormous (and ever increasing) amounts
of data being produced in scientific, commercial, and social endeavors.
Important research based on data-intensive science include areas as diverse as
knowledge discovery, bioinformatics, proteomics and genomics, data mining and
search, electronic design automation, computer vision, and Internet routing.
Unfortunately, the computational approaches needed for data-intensive science
differ markedly from those that have been so effective for simulation-based
supercomputing. To enable and facilitate efficient execution of data-intensive
scientific problems, this project will develop a comprehensive hardware and
software supercomputing system for data-intensive science.&lt;br/&gt;Graph
algorithms and data structures are fundamental to data-intensive computations
and, consequently, this project is focused on providing fundamental, new
understandings of the basics of large-scale graph processing and how to build
scalable systems to efficiently solve large-scale graph problems. In particular,
this work will characterize processing overheads and the limits of graph
processing scalability, develop performance models that properly capture graph
algorithms, define the (co-design) process for developing graph-specific
hardware, and experimentally verify our approach with a prototype execution
environment. Key capabilities of our system include: a novel fine-grained
parallel programming model, a scalable library of graph algorithms and data
structures, a graph-optimized core architecture, and a scalable graph execution
platform. The project will also address the programming challenges involved in
constructing scalable and reliable software for data-intensive problems.