* 1111882
* The Greenland GPS Network (GNET):  Geodetic characterization of water vapor, climate cycles, climate change and ice mass balance
* GEO,OPP
* 09/01/2011,02/28/2017
* Michael Bevis, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Mercer
* 02/28/2017
* USD 1,096,395.00

This project would continue operation of the Greenland GPS Network (GNET) for
four years. GNET has proven highly successful in "weighing" the Greenland ice
sheet by tracking the earth's elastic response to changing surface loads. The
PIs propose to extend the life of GNET so that it can continue to sense space-
time changes in ice mass, including spatial shifts in the position of the
centers of ice loss, and accelerations in mass change rates. GNET is now
resolving seasonal oscillations in the vertical position of the earth's crust as
well as longer-term trends. These oscillations reflect seasonal changes in the
loads placed on the solid earth by both the atmosphere and the ice sheet. The
atmospheric pressure signal will be removed, using state-of-the-art weather
models, in order to isolate the signal due to changes in the ice sheet. As part
of the proposed pressure analysis, they would also produce a time series of
integrated water vapor for each station in GNET, with benefits for weather and
climate predictions. Broader impacts include the training of a graduate student
and support of a postdoctoral researcher as co-investigator. Scientifically,
GNET is addressing a problem of great interest and also considerable societal
importance: the trajectory and magnitude of Greenland mass balance. With current
and potential additional gaps in satellite geodesy coverage of Greenland, GNET
is a cornerstone of our observations of the cryosphere. The data are openly
accessible and are available in near real-time through UNAVCO.