* 1111541
* CSR: Large: Collaborative Research: Integrating Circuits, Sensing, and Software to Realize the Cubic-mm Computing Class
* CSE,CNS
* 08/15/2011,07/31/2017
* Dennis Sylvester, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 07/31/2017
* USD 2,573,800.00

Applications of wireless sensor nodes are evolving at a previously unimaginable
rate. But current technology is limited because devices are bulky - measuring
one cubic centimeter or more - and hampered by short lifetimes. This project is
producing a one cubic millimeter sensor node. This ultra-miniaturized device is
a complete sensing platform that includes transducers (for imaging, temperature
sensing and other signal detection), wireless communication, a high accuracy
timer, processor, memory, a battery and energy harvesting that provides the node
with an extended lifetime.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The central challenge in
reducing the form factor for sensor nodes is to reduce power consumption and
&lt;br/&gt;densely package discrete components (crystals, inductors, etc.). To
this end, this team's innovations involve research and development
of:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1. A novel processor that operates at a supply voltage
near the threshold voltage of the transistors for optimal energy
consumption.&lt;br/&gt;2. A new ultra-low-leakage memory system.&lt;br/&gt;3. An
Ultra Wide-Band (UWB) transmitter and receiver that can communicate with other
nodes over a distance of three meters with an integrated antenna. &lt;br/&gt;4.
A 100pW timer that is temperature compensated and designed for reduced jitter to
allow accurate synchronization between sensor nodes and enable short, low energy
radio communication windows.&lt;br/&gt;5. A new CMOS imaging approach capable of
ultra-low power motion detection and image-acquisition, and, reconfigurable to
act as a solar energy harvesting unit. &lt;br/&gt;6. An energy-aware software
development environment to control the node&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;These PIs
implemented early versions of several of these technologies in silicon,
demonstrating the potential to package them as sensor nodes. The team's track
record of producing ultra-low power circuits, and other sensing components,
position them to deliver the needed 1000Ã— form factor reduction. This research
team will assemble and package 100 first- and second-generation of these sensor
node platforms and disseminate them to the broader community for trials in a
wide range of uses. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The development of cubic-millimeter
sensor nodes will enable applications that have long been envisioned but were
unachievable. For example, sensory skins could cover surfaces with a dense
deployment of nodes that monitor the properties of the manifold itself or its
surroundings. Implantable intelligence can enable deeply embedded physical and
biological processes, e.g., malignant tumor growth monitoring or intra-ocular
pressure sensing to determine the risk for retinal detachment. Applications such
as these, and a myriad of other "Thinking and Linking" applications, can give
everyday objects sensing, computing, communication, and tracking ability,
allowing, for example, research ranging from the social network patterns of
small insects to asset tracking in dynamic environments like hospitals. By
shrinking sensor node size to one cubic millimeter, with potentially perpetual
lifetime, the concept of "smart dust" can be taken from fiction to
reality.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;By disseminating the first generation of these
sensors to members of the sensor network community, this project will
dramatically accelerate the adoption of cubic-millimeter-class computing
devices. This will have immediate impact on a wide array of research programs
for intelligently sensing, tracking, measuring and optimizing physical
processes. This research in turn will have a fundamental and long term impact on
a diverse set of applications with critical societal import, ranging from energy
conservation, environmental quality management, and health care.