* 1111231
* SNAAP: Strengthening Native American Access to the Professoriate
* EDU,EES
* 05/15/2011,04/30/2014
* Antonette Logar, Idaho State University
* Standard Grant
* Mark Leddy
* 04/30/2014
* USD 140,897.00

This project establishes a new strategic alliance, the Strengthening Native
American Access to the Professoriate (SNAAP) program that will research
activities to improve STEM doctoral degree completion and access to academic
careers for Native American STEM students in the Great Basin and Great Plains
regions of the United States. All located in EPSCoR states, the program?s
partner institutions, Idaho State University, South Dakota School of Mines and
Technology, Lewis-Clark State College (ID), Black Hills State University (SD),
and Little Big Horn College (MT), are geographically situated and have
relationships that position them to serve tribes in the Great Basin region of
Idaho and neighboring states and the Great Plains region of South Dakota and
neighboring states. The SNAAP program will greatly expand the geographic impact
of the NSF AGEP program in the upper Midwest and Intermountain West, as it
capitalizes on historic ties among Native American tribes in this East-West
corridor. &lt;br/&gt;Funded initially through an AGEP planning grant, SNAAP will
lay the foundation for a larger program that fulfills the broader goals of AGEP.
Ultimately, the alliance aims to increase the diversity of the scientific
workforce, by developing innovative models to recruit Native American doctoral
students, mentor these students to doctoral degree completion, and place
graduates who desire an academic career in STEM faculty positions. The planning
grant is a necessary step to reaching these goals and will enable the alliance?s
members to forge stronger links so that current relationships are formalized
into a lasting alliance. In this way, the schools will develop methods for
communicating and working together effectively to support each institution?s
continuing pursuit of shared SNAAP goals. &lt;br/&gt;In addition, planning grant
activities will focus on developing innovative models (within and across
institutions) to recruit, mentor, and retain Native American doctoral students
and assist graduates as they begin academic careers in STEM disciplines.
Finally, to foster program sustainability, alliance members will prepare and
submit, in July 2011, a second AGEP proposal that, if funded, will enable the
SNAAP program to implement its models under the cycle of full AGEP grants
beginning in October 2011. &lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit. The project assumes
that the most effective recruitment and mentoring programs are those that
situate scientific inquiry and instruction within the ways of knowing that all
students, including Native American students, bring to higher education.
Researchers from a variety of disciplines have examined the methods, effects,
and importance of connecting STEM-based knowledge to cultural knowledge. Whether
viewed from the perspective of education (Hainline, Gaines, Long Feather,
Padilla, &amp; Terry, 2010; Tsui, 2007), sociology (Latour, 2004),
economics/forestry (Trosper, 2007), or anthropology and the Traditional
Ecological Knowledge [TEK] movement (Nadasdy, 1999, 2003), researchers agree
that dominant Western knowledge is itself ?encapsulated within social
institutions and worldviews? (Trosper, 2007, p. 2). Researchers contend that to
better understand how cultural knowledge enables or hinders discovery in the
STEM disciplines, we must explore the ways that non-Western knowledge systems
connect to or diverge from the dominant Western tradition and how, if at all, we
can ?bridge or combine? these ?knowledge areas? (Trosper, 2007, p. 2). SNAAP
will address these issues and add to the literature of the field and the body of
successful practices for connecting STEM learning and research to culture.
&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts. The proposed SNAAP alliance aims to increase the
diversity of the scientific workforce, by developing innovative models to
recruit Native American doctoral students, mentor these students to doctoral
degree completion, and place graduates who desire an academic career in STEM
faculty positions both within and beyond the Great Basin and Great Plains.
Through its planning activities, SNAAP will lay the foundation for a lasting
program that fulfills the broader goals of AGEP. Funded by AGEP, SNAAP will
provide a geographically isolated and economically disadvantaged region the
chance to develop the resources needed to bring more Native American students
into doctoral education and the professoriate. Finally, when fully implemented,
SNAAP will foster a generation of Native American faculty who will serve as role
models for future Native American STEM students. Perhaps more than any other
aspect of the program, this new STEM faculty will perpetuate the work of SNAAP
for generations to come and ensure that Native American students, their
communities, and society as a whole reap the benefits of a vital and diverse
STEM workforce.