* 1111811
* NeTS: Large: Collaborative Research: Closing the loop between traffic/pollution sensing and vehicle route control using traffic lights and navigators
* CSE,CNS
* 09/15/2011,08/31/2015
* Badri Nath, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Darleen Fisher
* 08/31/2015
* USD 789,543.00

Today, most urban traffic control is rudimentary: in smaller cities, many
traffic signals remain isolated, and while most larger cities have integrated
systems of signals, they are still not dynamically timed in response to real-
time vehicle information. Congestion fees, which are increasingly popular as a
traffic management tool, are usually based on historical traffic data rather
than varying dynamically to reflect instantaneous conditions. Recent advances in
communication, navigation, and sensor technologies present far more
opportunities to increase the intelligence and efficiency of metropolitan
streets than are in place today.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project focuses on
designing a real-time networked sensing and actuation platform for future
'intelligent' metropolitan traffic management with the aim of simultaneously
reducing congestion, pollution, and traveler delays. The pivotal element of the
proposed Green City intelligent transport architecture is the ability to 'close
the loop' between traffic/pollution sensing and traffic control; a system
achieved through an incentivized collaboration between the central traffic
management and the drivers. In this collaboration, the 'intelligent' traffic
signals and the on-board navigators play key roles. Traffic signals sense
traffic characteristics and vehicular emissions, collect data from vehicle
sensors, and broadcast traffic advisories, routings, and restrictions to on-
board navigators. The on-board navigators choose optimal routings taking into
account drivers' preferences, local perceived traffic, and signal timing. All
this is enabled by efficient vehicle to roadway infrastructure communications
from 3G channels to DSRC radios.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: This
project is highly interdisciplinary; it benefits from the collaboration and
expertise of computer science, atmospheric science, and urban planning faculty
and students. New education opportunities will result from the multidisciplinary
nature of the project.