* 1111480
* SBIR Phase I:  Multiplexed Single Cell Analysis
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2011,12/31/2011
* David Johnson, GigaGen Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 12/31/2011
* USD 150,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project will enable a
completely new approach to biology. The fundamental unit of biology is the
single cell, and each cell contains complex genetic machinery. Many fundamental
questions could be answered if biologists could perform genetic analysis on
large numbers of single cells derived from tissues. The vast majority of useful
applications would require detection of multiple genetic loci in single cells.
For example, immunologists would like to measure co-expression of multiple T
cell receptors and inflammatory molecules in hundreds of thousands of single T
cells circulating in human blood. Currently, biology lacks elegant tools to
perform this type of analysis. The current project aims to solve this problem
with an innovative approach for analysis multiple genetic loci in hundreds of
thousands of single cells analyzed in parallel. The technology uses a device to
isolate single cells into aqueous-in-oil picoliter microdroplets, amplifies and
links two or more genetic loci by intermolecular hybridization, and then
sequences linked loci in reversed emulsions by next-generation sequencing. This
enables far more complicated biological analysis than is possible if analyzing
only a single locus in a single cell, or a single locus across many single
cells.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact/commercial potential of this
project includes commercial applications in genetics and immunology research as
well as molecular diagnostics and pharmaceutical development. Immunology
researchers worldwide are eager to understand T cell and B cell immune
repertoires. Immune repertoires respond to factors such as infectious disease,
age, and obesity, so immune repertoire profiling is of great interest worldwide.
The innovation of this proposed research is to link subunits of antibody genes
to reveal a more complete immune repertoire profile. A similar method could be
used to link subunits of T cell receptor genes. The platform will also enable
unique and innovative approaches to a number of currently intractable problems
in molecular diagnostics, including noninvasive prenatal diagnosis, noninvasive
molecular typing of solid tumors, and inflammatory response to allograft
procedures. Finally, T cells and antibodies are increasingly used as therapy for
disease, and immune repertoire profiling technology will be critical to the
development of such therapies. In summary, the technology developed in this
project will be marketed to research immunologists, leading to fundamental
improvements in our understanding of immunology. Eventually, the technology
could be extended to the fields of molecular diagnostics and immune therapy,
which could help cure intractable diseases.