* 1111239
* Participation on the Town Square in the Era of Web 2.0
* SBE,SES
* 09/15/2011,12/31/2015
* Manuel Perez-Quinones, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Continuing Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 12/31/2015
* USD 749,999.00

The researchers will develop, implement, and then study a comprehensive site for
collective decision making. Their project is motivated by recent foundational
changes in democratic society due to advances in information and communication
technology and in network analysis and data mining. Their proposed system, which
they call a Virtual Town Square (VTS), both automates the collection of locally
relevant online content (generated elsewhere by others) and facilitates social
interaction and discussion. They will design, build and investigate VTS for
geographic communities, and they will model communication behavior and effects
related to the use of VTS social software by diverse users in multiple contexts
such as civic participation, social interaction, and collective deliberation. In
addition, they will conduct computational analyses on complex data derived from
VTS content and related uses of social software to identify and analyze implicit
social and information networks, and to track and model the flow of information
throughout the community. They expect the use of VTS and related social software
to promote an increase in social interaction and discussion among an
increasingly diverse set of users. The resulting activity is expected to broaden
civic participation, and to widen the distribution and increase the flow of
information throughout the community. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual
merit of the VTS project research is multifaceted. The project builds on more
than a decade of interdisciplinary research on the social, civic, and political
uses and impacts of community computer networking, network analysis, and data
mining. The results of this project are expected to contribute to an
understanding of social media use by local government, community organizations
and citizens, and the community-wide effects of such use. It will also
contribute to knowledge about the role of social networks and software in civic
engagement, and to the tools that support and foster such engagement. The final
design of VTS will inform the design of future community computer networking,
especially for collective long term planning and problem solving both at the
individual and the organizational levels. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The potential
broader impacts are also quite substantial. Previous findings from a
longitudinal study of Blacksburg, VA, and environs were transferred to similar
towns, and to mixed lower and middle class rural areas in the US. The
researchers will facilitate the transferability of the following impacts by
making the VTS software available as an open source project. One impact that the
results of this project are expected to promote is a substantial increase in
broad-based participation in local democratic processes due to the game-changing
role that is likely to be played by social software, as well as network analysis
and data mining. Also anticipated are changes in civic awareness, political and
collective efficacy, civic engagement and information sharing among diverse
users, including underrepresented groups (such as young adults and adults with
lower socioeconomic status).