* 1111133
* Multiple Metal-Carbon Bonds, Metallacycles, and Catalytic Olefin Metathesis Reactions
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2014
* Richard Schrock, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Tingyu Li
* 08/31/2014
* USD 570,000.00

This award in the Chemical Synthesis (SYN) program supports work by Professor
Richard R. Schrock at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology to carry out
fundamental studies on olefin metathesis catalysts based on molybdenum or
tungsten. Olefin metathesis is a catalytic reaction that consists of breaking
and rearranging carbon-carbon double bonds in organic molecules. The benefit of
the reaction to mankind was recognized through the 2005 Nobel Prize in Chemistry
to Schrock, Grubbs, and Chauvin. New developments in the last two years have led
to new types of molybdenum and tungsten catalysts that are much more reactive
and selective than any previous catalysts. The proposed work includes an
investigation of the interconversion and relative reactivity of syn and anti
alkylidene isomers and devising routes to new MonoAlkoxide Pyrrolide (MAP)
catalysts and related species, including selective catalysts supported on silica
or alumina.

The olefin metathesis reaction has revolutionized the synthesis of organic
molecules relevant to natural and unnatural products for treatment of diseases
such as cancers and AIDS, as well as the synthesis of specialty polymers. Newly
developed applications include the synthesis of organic molecules from renewable
resources such as seed oils and the selective synthesis of organic molecules
that contain only a cis carbon-carbon double bond, the type that is most common
in natural products and the most useful in organic synthesis.