* 1111918
* Taking Supramolecular Assembly to the Next Level: Assembly of Flexible Molecules with Complex Internal Structure and Chemistry
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2011,06/30/2015
* Karl Freed, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Evelyn Goldfield
* 06/30/2015
* USD 511,000.00

Karl Freed of the University of Chicago is supported by an award from the
Chemical Theory, Models and Computational Methods program in the Chemistry
Division to investigate equilibrium self-assembly of molecules into non-
covalently bonded ordered supramolecular structures. This phenomenon is
pervasive in chemistry, materials science, and biology, and its control has
numerous applications in industry and medicine. Earlier studies elucidated
general underlying principles of this spontaneous and reversible organization
based on models that ignored details of the internal structure of the molecules.
The current work is extending those theoretical advances to account for the
strong and often subtle influence of the chemical structure of the assembling
units, their geometrical shapes, and their mutual (often directional)
interactions. The Lattice Cluster Theory formalism developed earlier is being
generalized to include (i) strong and/or attractive interactions and (ii)
flexible/deformable molecules. The goal is to describe five qualitatively
different types of self-assembly of structured units, including assembly into
chains and network structures. The intramolecular and intermolecular structure
and thermodynamics contributions are nonadditive, adding computational challenge
but also relevance to realistic chemical association. This new class of self-
assembly theories enables examination of the ubiquitous enthalpy-entropy
compensation phenomenon, where modification of a system by what is anticipated
to produces large changes in the enthalpy (of a reaction) is largely compensated
by a corresponding change in the entropy (and vice
versa).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The bottom-up manufacture of materials for
applications in industry and medicine is made possible when molecules in
solution come together and organize spontaneously. The circumstances under which
this occurs have become clearer from the work of Freed and his group, who are
developing computational tools describing the chemical association of
neighboring molecules in this process of equilibrium self-assembly. Different
structures may result, for example, chains and network structures, and the
outcomes can be influenced by the shapes and vibrating and rotating behavior of
the individual molecules. The goals of the work are to understand how different
outcomes occur for different molecules and to use this knowledge to control
self-assembly so that it can be fully exploited in bottom-up material design.