* 1111053
* RUI: Dynamic Net Analyte Signal Modeling for Multivariate Calibration and Maintenance
* MPS,CHE
* 09/15/2011,02/29/2016
* John Kalivas, Idaho State University
* Standard Grant
* Kelsey Cook
* 02/29/2016
* USD 334,720.00

With support from the Chemical Measurement and Imaging Program, and co-funding
from the Office of Cyberinfrastructure "Venture Fund," Professor John Kalivas of
Idaho State University is developing five pioneering calibration tools to
advance chemical analysis. Calibration generally involves forming a mathematical
relationship between chemical concentration and an instrumental response such as
spectroscopic data. It is critical to numerous disciplines, including process
analytical technology for the pharmaceutical and chemical industries,
environmental and agriculture monitoring, and medical diagnostics. The Kalivas
group seeks to design calibrations which eliminate chemical analysis
interferences and offer less costly and more accurate and precise chemical
analyses. Two statistical/analytical tools are used: Tikhonov regularization and
net analyte signal. The improvements targeted by this project should benefit
many disciplines by enabling better calibrations that are stable over extended
periods of time.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;By participating in this research,
undergraduate students learn state-of-the-art calibration and become proficient
at performing collaborative scientific research. Education of undergraduates in
these advanced methods prepares them for subsequent scientific professional
pursuits. Another key impact of this project is development of classroom
software tools for use in the curriculum at Idaho State University and other
institutions. Additionally, disseminating the innovative calibration and
curricular software through Professor Kalivas' web site allows newcomers and
practitioners direct access, assuring software re-use. Co-funding from the OCI-
Venture Fund specifically seeks to enhance such efforts in CI-reuse and long
term software sustainability.