* 1111627
* Experiencing Evolution: Integrating Mobile Gaming And Multimedia To Extend Informal Evolution Education
* EDU,DRL
* 10/01/2011,09/30/2014
* David Reznick, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Paul Jennings
* 09/30/2014
* USD 149,990.00

This CRPA project will develop a game for mobile devices called the
"RapidGuppy". It provides users (students 12-21 years of age) with an
interesting and fun way to learn details about biological adaptation and genetic
change. The game teaches users about the environmental factors that lead to
adaptation. More than 30 years of research on the Trinidadian Guppy that
"rapidly" evolves (over 3-5 years) is the basis for the game. The research,
databases, and mini-documentaries that support the "RapidGuppy" game are linked
to allow users to easily delve deeper into these materials. An extensive social
media campaign will be used to market the game and the public facing website.
Partners in this endeavor include: University of California-Riverside, Habitat
Seven, Magmic Inc., and Edu, Inc.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project, the
mobile device game will be backed by a sophisticated website that contains
detailed research results from the field and mini-documentaries showing real
fish and the actual research processes as well as researchers and scientists to
promote role model development. Interested individuals may also directly access
the videos and research results via the website. The target audiences are youth
who are prone to play electronic games and the general public. The comprehensive
evaluation plan will assess the learning outcomes resulting from the mini-
documentaries, in-game content, and website, as well as the playability of the
game and website functionality. Impacts resulting from the social media campaign
and outreach to underserved audiences will also be measured.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Because of the major social media campaign, this project
may increase the level of interest in the science of evolution and genetic
change, and raise awareness of STEM careers. If the user groups become excited
about the game and the inherent messages, it is anticipated that the public will
gain a better understanding of the factors responsible for genetic change.