* 1111129
* TX BRIDGE (Texans Building Robust, Innovative &amp; Diverse Graduate Education)
* EHR,HRD
* 05/15/2011,04/30/2013
* Austin Cunningham, University of Texas at Arlington
* Standard Grant
* Mark Leddy
* 04/30/2013
* USD 150,000.00

TX BRIDGE, led by UT Arlington, is a new alliance of 7 University of Texas
System components--UT Arlington (UTA), UT Brownsville (UTB), UT Dallas (UTD), UT
Pan American (UTPA), UT Permian Basin (UTPB), UT San Antonio (UTSA), UT Tyler
(UTT)--and Texas Southern University (TSU). The institutions united because of
their diversity and synergies in location, size, strengths, and student
demographics. Each member of the alliance has strong outreach, recruiting and
support programs that enable underrepresented minority (URM) students to succeed
in campuses where they feel welcome and included. UTA, UTD, and UTSA all have
extensive and successful experience in STEM and STEM URM doctoral education.
Members of the alliance are also governed by similar academic and administrative
policies and procedures that minimize institutional barriers to coordinating
cross-university programming. Thus they have an excellent foundation on which to
build a program that will attain AGEP goals. The proposed one-year planning
process will create the infrastructure for an innovative AGEP program that 1)
encourages URM interest in graduate STEM education; 2) integrates mentoring,
academic and professional support across baccalaureate, master's, doctoral and
postdoctoral training; 3) makes research and mentoring opportunities at doctoral
institutions available to master's students studying at comprehensive
universities; 4) creates a cost and time efficient bridge for those master's
students to enter doctoral studies at research-high activity universities and 5)
provides postdoctoral and visiting assistant professor positions that prepare
students for faculty positions. They propose to achieve this by focusing on
development of a broad and responsive program management structure, cross-
institution coordination of curricula, and credit-earning summer research
opportunities. They will also focus on expanding support of student success by
creating mechanisms for faculty from different institutions to jointly mentor
and advise students and by developing and disseminating other innovative
outreach, admissions, academic, and professional and career programming. To
achieve these ends, best practices will be identified through consultation with
programs that address issues of URM STEM graduate education successfully. An
external evaluator will be hired to help identify barriers to access and
success. Critical input from faculty, administrators and external constituencies
will assure that the program is responsive to each university?s local academic
and professional concerns. These groups will shape coordinated admission
procedures, curricular requirements and research opportunities across TX BRIDGE
institutions, creating a seamless path leading to doctoral study and entry into
the professoriate. Outreach, program growth and program quality enhancement are
difficult to attain especially in challenging state and national economic
climates. The proposed planning will lay the groundwork for a full AGEP proposal
that will coordinate efforts and pool resources to bring more URMs into the
professoriate while providing an extremely cost-effective approach to improving
the quality of STEM programs in the TX BRIDGE alliance. &lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
Merit: TX BRIDGE institutions united because of their diversity and synergies in
location, size, strengths, student demographics and their similarity in academic
and administrative policies that minimize difficulties coordinating inter-
institutional activities. Project leadership has extensive experience working
collaboratively on matters related to graduate education in Texas. Further, the
participating institutions are committed to improving URM participation in all
levels of higher education and have committed considerable resources to help
improve the quality of research activity to serve all Texans. These factors
provide an excellent foundation for an AGEP program. Key planning steps and
objectives have been identified for building a sustainable program that will
encourage more URMs to consider advanced STEM degrees, prepare them to succeed
in their studies, and prepare them to enter the professoriate. Institutional,
programmatic and social barriers to URM student admission, retention and
completion will be identified by external assessment and consultation and
addressed. Data collected during this process will provide a baseline for
assessing the impact of program activities when the full program is implemented.
Faculty and administrative participation and enthusiasm are critical to
sustainable success. Their planned involvement in the design and implementation
of the program and the program's ability to provide new and exciting
professional opportunities for participants will help assure their long-term
commitment. &lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: Outreach, program growth and program
quality enhancement are challenging under the best economic conditions. The
proposed planning will create an alliance that increases the number of URM STEM
students who graduate in a timely fashion, transition to doctoral studies, and
go on to successful careers in the professoriate. TX BRIDGE presents a new model
for inter-institutional collaboration at the graduate level for building a
scalable bridge infrastructure in which many universities and individual
departments may participate. Through coordinated efforts and pooled resources
that expand outreach, promote growth, and improve program quality for all of its
members, TX BRIDGE also provides a model for other universities seeking to
strengthen and improve the quality of their STEM doctoral and master's programs
in a cost-effective manner.