* 1111107
* SOCS: Socially Intelligent Computing for Coding of Qualitative Data
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2015
* Nancy McCracken, Syracuse University
* Continuing Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 08/31/2015
* USD 779,831.00

This project will develop and evaluate an innovative research tool, based on
Natural Language Processing (NLP) and Machine Learning (ML), to support
qualitative social science research, specifically content analysis. Content
analysis is a qualitative research technique for finding evidence of concepts of
theoretical interest using text rather than numbers as its raw data. The process
of identifying and labeling significant features in text is referred to as
"coding," and the result of such an analysis is a text annotated with codes for
the concepts exhibited. This technique has become increasingly popular and more
applicable as the volume of available "born-digital" text has exploded. However,
the reliance on manual analysis of the text limits the scale and scope of
content analysis research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project, the problem of
coding qualitative data is conceptualized as an information extraction problem
amenable to automation using NLP. However, rather than seeking to automate the
process, the technologies will be used in a supporting role, creating a human-
computer partnership. ML will be used to induce NLP rules from examples of coded
text, avoiding the need to develop rules manually. To reduce the amount of
training data needed from the human participants, an active learning process
will be employed, in which a few hand-coded examples are used to create an
initial model that can be further evolved through interaction with the user.
These approaches will be combined in a prototype tool to support qualitative
content analysis. As a demonstration and test of the tool, it will be applied to
current and novel studies of cyber-infrastructure-supported distributed groups,
specifically free/libre open source software development teams, and then to a
broad range of social science research problems. This broad usage will also
provide a test of the generalizability of a socio-computational approach to this
problem.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of the research is four-
fold. First, the proposal seeks to develop a novel socio-computational system
that supports a human-computer partnership through the integration of
information extraction and active learning. Second, a validation study will
apply the tool to a diverse set of codes, providing evidence of the generality
and limits of a socio-computational approach. Third, the demonstration studies
using the tool will contribute to research on distributed groups. Finally, the
project addresses a fundamental methodological problem in the broad domain of
qualitative research, namely dealing with large quantities of unstructured
qualitative data, by applying innovative computer-support. By avoiding the need
for hand-written rules and reducing the required amount of hand-annotated
training data, this partnership will make practical the use of a system for
coding large quantities of qualitative data in various
domains.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project has numerous broader impacts. It will
benefit society by providing useful infrastructure for research in the form of a
content analysis tool for scientific research and in for the form of corpora of
annotated data for use in future Natural Language Processing research. The
demonstration studies will provide generalizable knowledge to improve the
effectiveness of distributed groups, an increasingly important mode of
organization. Finally, the project contributes to the education and training, of
women and minority group members in particular.