* 1111750
* HCC: Large: Collaborative Research: Large-Scale Human-Centered Coordination Systems to Support Interdependent Tasks in Context
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2014
* Linda Argote, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Crowston
* 08/31/2014
* USD 741,831.00

In the face of the vast scale of software-intensive systems needed today, modern
development environments fail dramatically, typically leading to information
overload, an inability to deal with the highly dynamic nature of both the
systems and the organizations that develop them, and failure to support
collaboration across organizational boundaries. The overarching aim of this
project is to provide a scientific foundation for human-centered environments
that make large-scale and distributed project awareness, communication, and
coordination as effortless as in a small team. It accomplishes this by (a)
performing empirical studies of real-world large-scale high-complexity software
projects to understand how task coordination occurs in and contributes to
organizational context, (b) developing an underlying theory of coordination in
context, which will motivate and guide (c) the design of new coordination
technology that explicitly addresses information overload, dynamism, and
organizational boundaries. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual merit: The
research will result in four contributions: (a) a sound theoretical basis that
captures how task coordination and organizational context interplay at scale;
(b) theory-driven empirical studies of in-context coordination; (c) knowledge
about how to achieve improvements in productivity, quality, and development
speed; and (d) a suite of design principles, tool prototypes, and interaction
techniques for collaboration at a very large scale. These outcomes will
transform the landscape of coordination technology by squarely addressing the
issue of scale, moving from coordination within a team to coordination across
many developers, across many teams, and across multiple geographical and
organizational boundaries.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: As society
enters the era of "ultra large scale" software-intensive systems, coordination
at such scales is a major unsolved problem, persistently hampering development
and advances in vital domains such as healthcare, security, defense,
eGovernment, and energy. The outcomes of this project will not only provide
major economic benefits, but also major societal benefits in the form of the new
systems that now can be developed. Through close collaboration with industry
partners, the results will quickly find their way into practice. The project
will also increase involvement of women in computer science through workshops
and mentoring activities.