* 1111900
* A Coordination Chemistry Approach to the Synthesis of Single-Molecule Magnets
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2014
* Jeffrey Long, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Timothy Patten
* 08/31/2014
* USD 450,000.00

This award in the Macromolecular, Supramolecular & Nanochemistry Program to
Professor Jeffrey R. Long of the University of California, Berkeley, involves
the synthesis and detailed characterization of a number of complexes as single-
molecule magnets. The project consists of the following studies: (a) synthesis
and characterization of new cyano-bridged coordination clusters and chain
compounds featuring high-anisotropy rhenium-based building units, with emphasis
on establishing what factors contribute to high magnetic anisotropy barriers;
(b) incorporation of iron(II) complexes known to exhibit spin crossover behavior
into such compounds, possibly leading to the first examples of photoswitchable
single-molecule and single-chain magnets; (c) synthesis of high-symmetry,
multinuclear imidazolate-bridged clusters in which vanadium(II/III) or
iron(II/III) mixed valence leads to an energetically well-isolated high-spin
ground state via a double exchange mechanism; (d) synthesis of lanthanide and
actinide complexes with rigorous axial symmetry, which could provide a means of
generating a large relaxation barrier; (e) manipulation of the ligand field, and
consequently the zero-field splitting parameters, of selected trigonal pyramidal
iron(II) complexes.

In sum, Dr. Long and his group will develop general strategies for the synthesis
of new single-molecule magnets that are expected to reveal new types of magnetic
behavior of potential interest for high-density information storage and spin-
based molecular electronics.

The broader impacts of this research include a legacy of synthetic techniques,
the creation of new materials of potential technological importance, and the
education and training of postdoctoral, graduate, and undergraduate students in
the synthesis and characterization of inorganic materials. As a related
educational activity, Dr. Long will continue to lead an effort to create a
materials chemistry major within the Department of Chemistry at UC Berkeley.