* 1111188
* PNW-AGEP: Pacific Northwest Alliiance for Graduate Education and the Professoriate
* EHR,HRD
* 05/01/2011,04/30/2013
* Nilsa Bosque-Perez, Washington State University
* Standard Grant
* Mark Leddy
* 04/30/2013
* USD 149,575.00

The Pacific Northwest Alliance for Graduate Education and the Professoriate
(PNW-AGEP) will be a strategic alliance of five doctoral-granting institutions
in a geographically and culturally unique area of the United States that has an
exceptionally high Native American population and is not currently served by an
NSF-funded AGEP program. The long-range goals for the PNW-AGEP are to increase
the number of students from traditionally under-represented minority (URM)
populations who complete doctoral programs in STEM disciplines and to facilitate
their successful transition into faculty positions at US colleges and
universities. Washington State University in Pullman will be the lead
institution, working in close collaboration with Oregon State University,
University of Idaho, The University of Montana, and Montana State University.
The PNW-AGEP will initially focus on development of URM student programs in
support of STEM disciplines at each institution that are broadly related to the
area of Energy, Agriculture, and the Environment. This planning grant proposal
addresses four project goals: (1) to determine factors affecting enrollment and
successful completion or attrition of students from URM groups in doctoral
programs in STEM disciplines at participating institutions; (2) to identify
strategies for increasing URM enrollment in STEM doctoral programs; (3) to
determine existing strengths, challenges, and barriers related to the movement
of URM students from STEM doctoral programs to faculty positions in U.S.
colleges and universities; and (4) to develop a strategy that will maximize the
collaborative benefits of existing strengths and minimize the impact of existing
barriers and challenges to recruitment of URM students into doctoral programs in
STEM disciplines and to the transition of those URM doctoral students into
faculty positions. Each project goal will be accomplished with four general
strategies: (1) collection and analysis of institutional data; (2) surveys of
stakeholders in URM doctoral education (undergraduate students, graduate
students, recent doctoral graduates, faculty, administrators, and tribal
officials); (3) identification of successful strategies of similar AGEP
programs; and (4) visits to potential partner institutions.&lt;br/&gt;The
intellectual merit of this proposal is derived from its evidence-based approach
to program design. Scientifically valid quantitative and qualitative data
collection methods will be used to assess strengths, challenges, and barriers
related to URM doctoral student training at participating institutions. These
methods will become the baseline for a strong formative assessment plan for the
PNW-AGEP. The establishment of communication networks between stakeholders will
facilitate rapid implementation of the student-centered and faculty-driven PNW-
AGEP as a strategic alliance with great synergistic potential. The development
of a ?best practices? document for faculty, which describes successful
strategies for mentoring URM doctoral students in STEM disciplines, will be an
immediate outcome of this project.&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of the PNW-AGEP
will include increased numbers of URM professionals with PhDs in STEM
disciplines beginning their careers as university faculty who are passionate
about the possibilities inherent in their career choice. This planning project
will set the stage for enhancing collaborative linkages, institutional
capabilities, and knowledge base required for the successful implementation of a
full AGEP project. Other broader impacts of the PNW-AGEP include: increased
participation of individuals from URM groups; greater integration of research
with teaching, training, and learning by students and faculty at participating
institutions through introduction of best practices for mentoring doctoral
students; and improved training of doctoral students in non-technical
competencies, including teaching, communication, and leadership skills.