* 1111508
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant: Archaeological Research in the Central Yucatan
* SBE,BCS
* 04/15/2011,03/31/2012
* Donald Slater, Brandeis University
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 03/31/2012
* USD 20,000.00

With National Science Foundation support and under the direction of Dr. Javier
Urcid, Mr. Donald Slater will build on his past field reconnaissance in the
Central Yucatan, Mexico, to map and excavate a series of caves utilized by
prehistoric Maya peoples. The work will shed light on a poorly understood aspect
of Maya culture and will increase understanding of the mechanisms used by this
traditional society to bind together large numbers of individuals into
functioning social units.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;During fieldwork in 2009 and
2010, Mr. Slater and colleagues identified over 70 previously unrecorded caves
in the region - virtually all of which exhibit signs of ancient ritual activity
including the presence of petroglyphs, offerings, and sacrificial implements
dating from 500 BC to 1600 AD. Under the current award he will map and excavate
eight of those caves. The research seeks to develop a better understanding of
the concepts of sacred landscape and cosmology among the ancient Maya, and how
such notions were used by the elite class for the production and maintenance of
social and religious power. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Caves held a significant role
in ancient Maya ideology and cosmology as early as the Late Pleistocene (c.
10,000 BC). In the Maya belief system caves were viewed as the underworld, the
point of emergence during creation, the locus of rain production, and the abode
of powerful deities and ancestors. Thus, caves would have been viewed as places
of potent spiritual energy and would have been ceremonially utilized by the
ruling class.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Mr. Slater's research will test two
hypotheses concerning the ritual use of space. First, he will examine the notion
that the elite class had the ability to control access to caves both within the
core of settlements and in hinterland areas. Secondly, Slater postulates that
naturally diverse areas within caves were used for diverse forms of ritual. He
will compare and contrast artifact assemblages and non-portable culture
materials (e.g. petroglyphs) from caves located within settlements versus those
outside, as well as from spaces located within caves, particularly open areas
such as mouths versus constricted dark alcoves. This analysis will serve to
develop a better understanding of the reach of elite control over hinterland
areas, while simultaneously leading to greater insight into the differential use
of ritual space based on both natural cave properties and culturally constructed
notions of their importance. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In addition to contributions
to the field of anthropology, the project will have impact in terms of
education. Mr. Slater has served as an educator at Phillips Academy since 2002
and has used his research as a pedagogical tool in both classroom and field
settings with students from high school age to the graduate level. The project
has and will continue to train workers in skills that render them marketable to
future projects, and to empower locals by offering them a scientific education
that complements traditional knowledge of their Maya heritage.