* 1111152
* The Versatility of Integrability
* MPS,DMS
* 03/15/2011,02/29/2012
* Samuel Grushevsky, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Joanna Kania-Bartoszynska
* 02/29/2012
* USD 30,000.00

Ideas and methods of integrable systems played a key role in many celebrated as
well as recent advances in algebraic geometry, mathematical physics,
probability, and many other areas of pure and applied mathematics. As a
particularly striking example one may mention Krichever's recent proof of the
famous Welters' conjecture, characterizing Jacobians of algebraic curves among
all principally polarized abelian varieties. The conference will bring together
experts and young researchers, mathematicians and physicists, people with
different backgrounds and different takes on integrable systems, to discuss the
latest achievements in this very dynamic field. This conference will be held at
at Columbia University in New York, NY, on May 4-7, 2011.

A differential equation is called integrable if its solutions may be given by a
closed formula, without a recourse to numerical or other approximations. Many
highly nontrivial integrable equations were discovered and analyzed both
classically and recently. They describe important phenomena in both classical
(e.g. certain water waves) and modern theoretical physics and connect to some of
the deepest mathematical structures known in pure mathematics. In applied
mathematics, they form a basis of perturbative understanding of nearby problems
and give a powerful calibration tool for numerical investigations. This
conference will bring together the experts working on various aspects of
integrability, and will aim to advance our understanding of integrable systems
and their applications in algebra, geometry, and physics.