* 1111349
* Conference Support for 6th Annual Energy Harvesting Workshop and 8th International Workshop on Piezoelectric Materials and Applications (IWPMA) Aug. 7-11, 2011
* ENG,ECCS
* 03/01/2011,07/31/2012
* Shashank Priya, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Anupama Kaul
* 07/31/2012
* USD 10,670.00

Intellectual Merit: 8th The International Workshop on Piezoelectric Materials
and Applications&lt;br/&gt;(IWPMA) 2011 meeting is scheduled to be held from
August 7 - 11, 2011, in Roanoke, Virginia. This&lt;br/&gt;meeting will be held
in conjunction with 6th Annual Energy Harvesting Workshop, and 3rd
Annual&lt;br/&gt;Center for Intelligent Material System and Structures (CIMSS)
Conference. The focus of the meeting is on energy. The workshop will provide in-
depth information on the application of smart materials with a focus on energy
related issues. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: The support from NSF will
be mostly used for (i) enhancing student participation&lt;br/&gt;targeting
underrepresented minority participants, women, and high school teachers and
students, (ii)&lt;br/&gt;registration and travel support for lecturers providing
tutorial and plenary speakers, and (iii) registration&lt;br/&gt;fees for
returning veterans to enhance their educational experience. The participation of
small business&lt;br/&gt;companies at this meeting will be supported through NSF
I/UCRC: Center for Energy Harvesting&lt;br/&gt;Materials and Systems (CEHMS).
The meeting will serve as both a recruiting tool and as
graduate&lt;br/&gt;leadership training. The tutorials provided at the meeting
will have strong emphasis on the involvement of&lt;br/&gt;high school African-
American students in higher research and education in Blacksburg, Virginia.