* 1111149
* TC: Large: Collaborative Research: Practical Secure Two-Party Computation: Techniques, Tools, and Applications
* CSE,CNS
* 08/15/2011,07/31/2018
* Steven Myers, Indiana University
* Continuing Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 07/31/2018
* USD 500,000.00

Many compelling applications involve computations that require sensitive data
from two or more individuals. For example, as the cost of personal genome
sequencing rapidly plummets many genetics applications will soon be within reach
of individuals such as comparing one?s genome with the genomes of different
groups of participants in a study to determine which treatment is likely to be
most effective. Such comparisons could have tremendous value, but are currently
infeasible because of the privacy concerns both for the individual and study
participants. What is needed is a way to produce the result of the comparison
without exposing either party's private inputs. The ultimate aim of this project
is to make privacy-preserving computation practical and accessible enough to be
used routinely in applications such as personalized genetics, medical research,
and privacy-preserving biometrics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Theoretical solutions to
this problem, known as secure multi-party computation, have been known for
several decades, including a general solution developed by Andrew Yao based on
garbled circuits. Because of its extensive memory use and computational cost,
however, the garbled circuits approach has traditionally been considered more of
a theoretical curiosity than a practical mechanism for building privacy-
preserving applications. Recent developments in cryptographic techniques and new
implementation approaches are beginning to change this, however, and admit the
possibility of scalable, practical secure computation. This project is designing
methods for avoiding the memory bottleneck associated with garbled circuit
evaluation by aggressively pipelining circuit generation and evaluation, and
exploring a variety of techniques for reducing the size of garbled circuits.
Another issue the limits the use of secure computation in practice is the need
for standard protocols to assume an honest-but-curious adversary who always
follows the specified protocol. This project is developing new techniques for
dealing with malicious adversaries, improving the standard cut-and-choose and
commit-and-prove approaches by using new cryptographic tools and exploring an
alternate model in which a verifiable trusted party generates the circuit but is
not trusted with any private data. The project is also developing techniques to
audit the information that can be inferred from the result of a secure
computation. Another goal is to make secure computation more accessible to
developers by developing programming tools for defining secure computations at a
high level, based on information-flow analysis and program partitioning.