* 1111761
* Development of First-Pinciples Electronic Structure Approach for Studying Molecular Structures, Properties, and Reaction Mechanisms in Solution
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2016
* Chang-Guo Zhan, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Evelyn Goldfield
* 08/31/2016
* USD 291,607.00

Chang-Guo Zhan of the University of Kentucky is supported by an award from the
Chemical Theory, Models and Computational Methods program, co-funded by the
EPSCoR office of NSF, to develop a first-principles electronic structure method
accounting for solvent effects. This is very commonly modeled as a dielectric
continuum reaction field while the solute is treated quantum mechanically. Many
practical reaction field implementations represent the solvent polarization
through an apparent surface charge distribution on the boundary of the solute
cavity. However, quantum mechanical calculations usually lead to a tail of the
wave function penetrating outside the cavity, which produces an additional
volume polarization to the reaction field. The PI and his research group are
developing a generalized implementation of a unique reaction field method, known
as the fully polarizable continuum model (FPCM), capable of accurately
determining volume polarization, in addition to the commonly treated surface
polarization, for a general, irregularly-shaped solute cavity. In particular,
they are developing the analytic energy derivatives with respect to the nuclear
coordinates of the solute for the FPCM method so that the FPCM implementation
can be used for geometry optimization and vibrational frequency calculations of
molecules in solution. In addition, they make use of the generalized
implementation together with other available computational methods to study some
representative chemical problems involving molecular structures, properties, and
reaction mechanisms. Students will be involved in the project and trained in
these computational methods.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This generalization of the
FPCM method is of interest in a wide range of disciplines such as inorganic
chemistry, organic chemistry, biochemistry, environmental chemistry, medicinal
chemistry, and pharmaceutical sciences. In recent years the calculation of
energies and geometries of isolated molecules has grown much more reliable. With
the ability to determine molecular geometries of molecules in a crowded solution
environment in much the same way, it is becoming possible to computationally
investigate biomolecules in aqueous environments, chemical reactions in various
solvents, charge redistribution for molecules in liquids, and so on.