* 1111640
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant: Spatial Formation of a Complex Middle American Society
* SBE,BCS
* 03/15/2011,02/29/2012
* Takeshi Inomata, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 02/29/2012
* USD 20,000.00

Under the supervision of Dr. Takeshi Inomata, Kenichiro Tsukamoto will examine
the spatial formation of a peripheral architectural group at the Maya site of El
Palmar, Mexico. This regional center is situated at the intersection of three
competing political spheres, Tikal, Calakmul, and Río Bec (A.D. 400-800). With
only traditional technologies and neither wheeled vehicles or domestic animals
the Mayans were able to construct complex societies in an inhospitable lowland
environment. Social scientists wish to understand how such systems functioned
and what links served to bind large numbers of individuals together. Many
traditional societies exist in the world today and knowledge gained about the
past is relevant in a contemporary context.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;El Palmar is
located in southeastern Campeche, Mexico and it consists of the civic-ceremonial
core or the Main Group and seven peripheral architectural groups surrounding the
Main Group. The proposed research specifically focuses on the Guzmán Group, one
of these peripheral groups located 1.3 km north of the Main Group. The previous
survey identified a hieroglyphic stairway adjoined to a small pyramidal temple
along with six other structures around a plaza in this group.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will assess the evidence for the social
status of residents at the Guzmán Group and their political and ideological
relationships with ruling elites at the Main Group. Specifically, this study
evaluates five alternative hypotheses: the Guzmán Group was inhabited by 1) sub-
royal or higher elites; 2) intermediate or lower-status individuals; 3)
commoners with a temple sponsored by El Palmar rulers; 4) no residents; the
group was a purely ritual place representing the northern part of the cardinal
worldview, and 5) people resided after the collapse of the El Palmar polity.
These hypotheses will be tested through extensive excavations, surface survey,
and laboratory analyses. The excavations of the plaza and six structures around
it are designed to uncover inscriptions of a hieroglyphic stairway, construction
materials of all the buildings, and their associated artifacts. Surface survey
will examine the presence of a causeway that connects both groups, which will
serve to assess whether the Guzmán Group was symbolically connected to the core
area. The analysis of artifacts will focus on the quantity and distribution of
prestige and exotic materials. The results will be compared with data from the
Main Group to discern the nature of power and ideological relations between both
groups. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Hieroglyphic stairways were usually constructed at
the civic-ceremonial core to legitimize the political power of ruling elites,
and the case of El Palmar stands as exceptional to this general tendency. A
detailed examination of the social processes resulting in the construction of a
hieroglyphic stairway in a peripheral area may reveal the dynamic nature of
power struggles and ideological negotiations in Classic Maya society.
Furthermore, this study will highlight the relationship between the formation of
center-periphery relations within a polity and changing broader geopolitical
relations among neighboring regional centers during the period of political
upheavals (A.D. 400-900). New evidence about the social group and their
practices at a peripheral architectural group will broaden our current knowledge
on varying strategies of rulers and other social groups in response to external
political dynamics. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will provide important
collaborations among U.S., Mexican, and Japanese students and academic
professionals. The substantial results from this project will be disseminated
broadly through publications and presentations at scholarly conferences as well
as through public outreach in U.S., Mexico, and Japan. The recovered materials
and information will be available for other researchers and students at the
laboratory of the National School of Anthropology and History (ENAH) in Mexico
City.