* 1111383
* NeTS: Large: Collaborative Research: HyperFlow - A Hybrid IP/Optical Flow Network Architecture
* CSE,CNS
* 08/01/2011,01/31/2017
* Vincent Chan, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Ann Von Lehmen
* 01/31/2017
* USD 1,080,075.00

This project will create and demonstrate experimentally key features of a new
optical network architecture, 'HyperFlow' which is a hybrid future Internet
architecture that include key designs for both hardware and algorithms. The
network is designed to be dynamic (both agile and adaptive), and significantly
more cost effective and power efficient for future growth in data volumes and
number of users. The architecture relies on a novel optical network
infrastructure comprising new transport mechanisms and a new comprehensive
control mechanism including the physical hardware, algorithms and applications.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Between locations that exchange large volumes of data -
say, Los Angeles and New York City ? the flow switching mechanism of HyperFlow
would establish a dedicated path across the network. The allotment of bandwidth
would change constantly. As traffic between New York and Los Angeles increased,
new, dedicated wavelengths would be recruited to handle it; as the traffic
tailed off, the wavelengths would be relinquished. The goal is to develop
network management protocols that can perform new session allocations in a
matter of sub-seconds. HyperFlow can easily increase the data rates of optical
networks 100-fold with the new network management scheme to be addressed in this
program, with corresponding decrease in cost per bit and power consumption as
well.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: HyperFlow creates a complete
hybrid flow/IP network architecture spanning local to wide areas, sharing the
same unified control plane. The network provides both guaranteed end-to-end
multi-Gbps flow service and conventional Internet Packet services throughout the
network down to individual users. To achieve that goal, HyperFlow includes novel
access and long haul core network technologies designed to support end-to-end
flows as well as conventional IP network services. This approach achieves a
breakthrough with respect to previous approaches by providing both services end-
to-end with a unified control plane. HyperFlow includes major innovations based
on highly efficient, agile and control of pools of shared tunable lasers and
passive optical devices, a fast MAC, partitioned routing strategy and a new
transport protocol for flows. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impact: If
successful the proposed HyperFlow technology will have a profound influence on
the way the future Internet is designed and perceived by the society, as the new
on-demand cost-effective gigabit service will enable applications that are hard
or costly to support today with existing broadband access, such as instantly-
available 3D distributed virtual-reality systems, cloud computing and instant
file transfer services including telemedicine, education, 3D movies, concerts,
sporting events, and government services. The concept of the new Hyperflow
development will be brought into industry forums such as IETF/IRTF during the
project, so that the best minds of the industry can be leveraged for conceptual
validation.