* 1111219
* NEAGEP Summative Evaluation:  Identifying Effective Strategies for Paving the Pathway to the Professoriate
* EHR,HRD
* 06/01/2011,05/31/2013
* Julian Tyson, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Mark Leddy
* 05/31/2013
* USD 149,929.00

The Northeast Alliance for Graduate Education and the Professoriate (NEAGEP) is
a highly interactive group of Research I and minority-serving institutions that
includes private and public, as well as large and small schools. By piloting and
sharing novel strategies, the Alliance has made a large contribution to
diversifying science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM) Ph.D.
programs in the Northeast. The number of URM students earning STEM doctorates
from these institutions has nearly doubled. Unfortunately, there has been
neither sufficient numbers of students nor funds to meaningfully evaluate what
strategies are most effective for recruiting and retaining URM STEM doctoral
students. Even more relevant to the goal of the NSF AGEP program, there has been
no assessment of what factors influence career choices of URM STEM Ph.D.s and
what factors ensure their success in academia. To address these issues, the PI
group will work with external evaluators at TERC, a STEM education organization,
to conduct a NEAGEP-wide summative evaluation. The evaluators will conduct
personal interviews with current STEM doctoral students and Ph.D. graduates of
NEAGEP institutions, and also solicit input from all NEAGEP coordinators to
develop two on-line surveys. One survey will be administered to approximately
565 URMs who obtained STEM Ph.D. degrees during the 10 years of NEAGEP, and the
other to the over 550 current URM STEM doctoral students. The results will be
important for developing new programs in the next phase of NEAGEP. Intellectual
Merit: There is now a sufficiently large population of students at different
points in their careers so that an external team can conduct a very informative,
large-scale evaluation of NEAGEP programs. The team will objectively assess what
types of activities are most effective at diversifying the STEM professoriate.
The focus will be on recruitment and retention activities, but, more
importantly, on what activities influence these students to pursue careers in
academia. This evaluation will provide new insights important for increasing
diversity in the professoriate, a goal that must be achieved in order to engage
a broader portion of the U.S. citizenry in STEM. Broader Impacts: The results
will generate information that will inform the design and revision of programs
to recruit URM undergraduates into STEM graduate programs. In addition, these
data will also promote institutionalization of programs that increase
participation of both URM and non-URM U.S. students in STEM. Finally, the
evaluation findings will be published so that other institutions and alliances
can conserve and/or better direct resources by learning what does and does not
work in large and small, as well as public and private, universities that
comprise NEAGEP. Integration of Research with Teaching and Learning: Many of the
NEAGEP strategies involve integration of research with teaching and learning. By
formally evaluating the impact of these strategies, it will be determined which
are most effective. The effective strategies will then be expanded to integrate
research and teaching initiatives across NEAGEP and publicized through the AGEP
network.