* 1111028
* Central Florida AGEP: Broadening Pathways to the Professoriate
* EDU,EES
* 05/15/2011,11/30/2012
* Patricia Bishop, The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Standard Grant
* Mark Leddy
* 11/30/2012
* USD 149,996.00

This planning grant will allow the creation of an AGEP alliance among the
University of Central Florida (UCF, Orlando), the University of South Florida
(USF, Tampa), Hillsborough Community College (HCC, Tampa), Valencia Community
College (VCC, Orlando), and the Florida Education Fund (FEF, Tampa) in
developing a formal AGEP proposal that will broaden the pathways to the
professoriate. Broader pathways will include under-represented minority (URM)
students in Associate in Arts (AA) programs at community colleges in addition to
first time in college (FTIC) students at major universities. The community
college transfer pathway is a major conduit by which Floridians enter the state
university system. Furthermore the alliance will ascertain the feasibility of
developing a pathway that encourages URM faculty at community colleges who lack
terminal degrees to enter and successfully complete STEM doctoral programs.
These are pathways that have been largely over-looked by recent AGEP
initiatives. &lt;br/&gt;An integrated academic/social support network will be
planned at three levels: level one promotes fundamental skills needed for
success in STEM disciplines for freshmen and sophomore-level students at both
community colleges and universities; level two develops more advanced skills for
juniors and seniors at UCF and USF which includes both CC transfer students and
FTIC students; and level three focuses on the success of doctoral URM students.
A thread of preparing future faculty programming will weave throughout the three
levels. &lt;br/&gt;Survey and focus group data from both CC transfer and FTIC
under-represented students and current URM doctoral students in STEM programs
will be collected. These data will assess their perceptions, concerns, and
social factors that may impact their success in both STEM baccalaureate and
subsequent STEM graduate programs. A course performance analysis will be
conducted to identify key areas where the support net should be strengthened.
&lt;br/&gt;The planning grant will also examine the many academic support
programs that already exist at the alliance institutions for effective
approaches that could be expanded to include the AGEP students or tweaked to
better serve the needs of AGEP students. Of particular interest are the
innovative and successful academic/social support net programs currently in
place at the Florida Education Fund (FEF) that can be adapted to both
undergraduate and graduate levels. &lt;br/&gt;Intellectual merit of the proposed
activity. This planning grant will provide a comprehensive look at the
perceptions, concerns, and social factors of STEM URM students in AA programs at
community colleges, transfer students in STEM baccalaureate programs at state
universities, and FTIC students in baccalaureate programs at state universities.
In addition it will examine the perceptions of URM students in STEM doctoral
programs as they reflect back on their undergraduate experience. The analysis
will offer insight into the social and academic challenges and barriers the
students face as they progress along their different educational paths.
Furthermore, since it is anticipated that approximately 60% of the URM students
being surveyed will be Hispanic with the remainder being African American and
Native American, it is possible that cultural differences may emerge. These
findings will be most important in planning an effective AGEP academic/ social
support net leading to the professoriate. &lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts resulting
from the proposed activity. This planning grant will allow the development of an
AGEP that will increase the number of URM students entering the professoriate.
The greatest impact of this grant will be on developing a support model for URM
community college transfer students as they complete their baccalaureate degrees
and move into doctoral programs with an eye on entering the professoriate. This
component of the grant could have a substantial impact since an increasing
number of students across the nation are choosing to enter higher education
through the community colleges.