* 1111389
* Vapor Treatment of Charged Droplets for Enhanced Electrospray Ionization Performance
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2015
* Scott McLuckey, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Kelsey Cook
* 08/31/2015
* USD 390,000.00

Prof. Scott McLuckey at Purdue University is supported by the Chemical
Measurement and Imaging Program for investigations aimed at expanding analytical
capabilities of mass spectrometry via novel approaches to gas-phase ion
formation and transformation. Mass spectrometry is a powerful means of
characterizing the mass and structure of gaseous ions. Dr. McLuckey is exploring
novel approaches for generating gaseous ions based on exposing charged droplets
and/or clusters to reactive vapors. Altering the chemical environment in charged
droplets can have dramatic effects on the observed mass spectra, with respect
both to ionization efficiency and ion-type. This work will add to the range of
options available to manipulate analyte species for subsequent mass
spectrometric analysis because it represents an approach that is intermediate
between the bulk condensed-phase and the gas-phase. &lt;br/&gt; This work has
significant potential for expanding and improving the performance and
applicability of mass spectrometry. The work is highly multi-disciplinary, and
exposes students to ion physics, ion chemistry, instrumentation, and analytical
chemistry, in addition to issues specific to the measurement challenge (e.g.,
pharmaceutical analysis, biomarker detection, protein interaction research,
etc.).