* 1111567
* New Cycloaddition and Annulation Strategies for Organic Synthesis
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2011,04/30/2015
* Rick Danheiser, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Suk-Wah Tam-Chang
* 04/30/2015
* USD 435,000.00

In this project supported by the Chemical Synthesis Program of the Chemistry
Division, Professor Rick L. Danheiser of the Department of Chemistry at the
Massachusetts Institute of Technology will develop new methods for the efficient
synthesis of cyclic organic molecules. The goal of this research program is the
development of new strategies with the power to dramatically streamline the
synthesis of carbocyclic and heterocyclic organic compounds. Pericyclic
reactions serve as the primary vehicle to be exploited in this research, with
most efforts focused on the design of convergent benzannulation strategies based
on cascades of pericyclic reactions. In the proposed research, the development
of a "tandem strategy" will be investigated in which a vinylketene based
benzannulation reaction is employed in conjunction with various
heterocyclization processes to provide efficient access to highly substituted
polycyclic benzo-fused heterocyclic systems including indoles and carbazoles.
The application of this chemistry to the synthesis of the antioxidant alkaloid
antiostatin A1, the antifungal antibiotic carbazomycin A, the marine alkaloid
herbindole C, the redox cofactor pyrroloquinoline quinone (PQQ), and an
electronically interesting pentacyclic heteroaromatic system will be
investigated.

Carbocyclic and heterocyclic ring systems are incorporated in the structures of
numerous biologically important compounds, and the development of highly
efficient methods for their synthesis has great value in providing improved
access to molecules with important applications in medicine, materials
chemistry, and many other areas. Synthesis is often described as the "enabling
technology" of chemistry. The synthetic methods developed in the proposed
research will provide researchers in both academia and industry with new tools
for the synthesis of important heterocyclic compounds with applications in
medicine, agriculture, electronics, and other areas. The graduate students
supported under this program will receive training to develop their skills as
synthetic chemists, and will also receive training in scientific ethics and
training to develop their oral and written communication skills. The graduate
students will also serve as coordinators for the MIT Outreach Program which each
year visits ca. 25 high schools in the New England region providing
presentations on chemistry and careers in science. Approximately 1200 high
school students attend these presentations each year, with ca. 35% of the
students being members of underrepresented minority groups.