* 1111027
* Conference: Keystone Symposia meeting on Evolutionary Developmental Biology; Tahoe City, CA
* BIO,IOS
* 03/15/2011,02/29/2012
* Andrew Robertson, Keystone Symposia on Molecular and Cellular Biology
* Standard Grant
* Leslie Pick
* 02/29/2012
* USD 6,000.00

The purpose of the Keystone Symposia meeting on Evolutionary Developmental
Biology is to gather the leading researchers across the discipline to share
recent progress on understanding the genetic and developmental basis of the
evolution of plant and animal diversity, and to stimulate research in new,
emerging, and interdisciplinary approaches to current challenges in evolutionary
developmental biology. The prospective speakers include the most notable
contributors to the field as well as emerging new investigators who, together,
constitute an exceptionally broad representation of this highly
interdisciplinary research field. Research in the field of evolutionary
developmental biology advances knowledge by using a cross-disciplinary approach
to investigate the molecular and genetic mechanisms underlying the evolution and
diversification of multicellular organisms. This meeting will provide a unique
forum for researchers with different perspectives, and from different career
stages, to identify the most significant recent advances and discuss paths to
addressing as yet unanswered questions. Keystone Symposia provides an
internationally recognized platform as well as resources to ensure the success
of this meeting, and the organizers are well-recognized leaders in the field of
evolutionary developmental biology. To our knowledge, this will be the first
discussion-focused meeting to bring researchers using population genetics and
experimental evolution together with those focused primarily on
macroevolutionary processes. We anticipate that this broader scope will foster
novel ideas for individuals in both groups. We anticipate the following
educational benefits: acquaint trainees and investigators new to field with the
state-of-the-art; critical scientific feedback; and career development for
trainees and new investigators, including opportunities both to see successful
scientists presenting cutting-edge science and to network with prospective
mentors and others who might contribute to their scientific and professional
development.