* 1111682
* 2011 Gordon Research Conference/Seminar on Adhesion Science; Bates College, Lewiston, Maine; July 23-29, 2011
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/2011,09/30/2012
* Chung-Yuen Hui, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* Gary Fischman
* 09/30/2012
* USD 15,000.00

The 2011 Gordon Research Conference (GRC) for Adhesion Science will present
cutting edge research on soft material physics and mechanics, bio-inspired
adhesives and cell adhesion. The invited speakers representing a variety of
scientific disciplines are in the forefront of their field. The format of GRC
(small number of attendees all staying at the same location and attending the
same talks, 1 hr talks with ample time for discussion, free afternoons for
interaction) are designed to stimulate the free exchange of ideas. To achieve
broader impact to education, a Gordon Research Seminar (GRS) on adhesion science
is held one day prior to the GRC at the same location. The GRS provides a
highly-stimulating and non-intimidating environment for graduate students and
postdoctoral fellows to present their research in talks and poster sessions.
There is also a one hour mentorship session on grant writing and career
advancement led by an experienced researcher. The GRC on Adhesion Science will
be held from July 24 - 29 at Bates College, Lewiston, Maine,
U.S.A.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If successful, this GRC will expand adhesion science
into new areas such as cell adhesion and bio-inspired adhesives. It will lead to
new collaborations between adhesion scientists and biologists to solve a new set
of technological and scientific problems. The GRS will allow graduate and
postdoctoral students to build informal networks with their peers that may lead
to a lifetime of collaboration and scientific achievement. Since all GRS
participants are strongly encouraged to attend the GRC, many of these young
researchers will be able to participate in scientific discussions and to
socialize with top scholars in different disciplines. In both conferences,
special effort will be made by the chairs to increase the attendance of
underrepresented groups and people with disabilities.