* 1111474
* RUI:  Understanding how grain boundaries affect preferred proton conduction pathways in doped perovskite oxides
* MPS,CHE
* 09/15/2011,05/31/2016
* Maria Gomez, Mount Holyoke College
* Continuing Grant
* Evelyn Goldfield
* 05/31/2016
* USD 185,000.00

Maria Gomez of Mount Holyoke College is supported by a RUI award from the
Chemical Theory, Models and Computational Methods program in the Chemistry
division for research that aims to understand grain boundary structure and how
it affects preferred proton conduction pathways in doped perovskite oxides. The
proposal is co-funded by the Condensed Matter Materials Theory program in the
Division of Materials Research. A systematic study of the ensemble of proton
conduction pathways across tilt and twist grain boundaries of the most stable
surfaces is being undertaken using a combination of electronic structure methods
and graph theory. With these ensembles, the most probable paths and averages of
the limiting barrier across a grain boundary are found. Further, by combining
graphs for the grain boundary core with graphs for two differently doped bulk
systems, the effect of increasing dopant concentration at the grain boundary are
considered.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Understanding the impact of grain boundaries on
proton conduction can help set goals for the making of efficient proton
conductors. In addition to expanding our understanding of how grain boundaries
affect proton conduction paths, which could impact fuel cell design, this
project has a broader impact on the training of future scientists, and is being
carried out entirely with undergraduate student researchers at Mount Holyoke
College, the oldest continuing undergraduate liberal arts college for women in
the United States. The student participants will present their undergraduate
research at national or regional meetings, and co-author publications. The PI
will plan an Adventure Day about energy and materials in the Passport to
Chemistry Adventure program she runs for parent/child teams who complete a
series of kits at their local public libraries.