* 1111061
* CIF: Large: Collaborative Research: Controlled Sensing, and Distributed Signal Processing and  Decision Making in Networked Systems
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2017
* Mahta Moghaddam, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* John Cozzens
* 08/31/2017
* USD 1,430,710.00

CIF: Large: Collaborative Research: Controlled Sensing, and Distributed Signal
Processing and Decision Making in Networked Systems&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;PIs:
Demosthenis Teneketzis (Michigan) and Venugopal Veeravalli (Illinois)
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Many modern technological
systems are networked systems. Networked systems are informationally
decentralized, comprise many nodes carrying disparate information, and are
subject to constraints on energy, data storage and computational capabilities.
This research project entails a comprehensive study of fundamental issues that
arise in networked systems, pertaining to controlled sensing, distributed signal
processing, and distributed decision making, whose resolution will lead to
substantial improvements in network performance. The project aims at (i)
improving our understanding of the role of information in sensing, signal
processing and decision making for networked systems under various
architectures, in controlled and distributed settings; (ii) improving our
understanding of coordination of networked systems, by evaluating the
performance of the different architectures; and (iii) generating novel
algorithms that will lead to networked systems that exhibit superior performance
over current ones. The problems underlying these objectives cannot be adequately
tackled using standard approaches in signal processing or stochastic and
deterministic control theory. The investigators use key tools from stochastic
optimization, distributed computation, and probability theory to develop novel
methodologies that address the underlying challenges. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project has broader impact on several fronts. It provides systematic design
methodologies that are essential in many modern networked systems, and in
particular, in systems for environmental (e.g., soil moisture) monitoring with
distributed sensors. In addition, the research output of this project is
expected to be useful to NSF's NEON program, to NASA's earth science program,
and to NOAA's monitoring program. The research activities are expected to have
an impact on technology transfer and graduate education through course
development and training of students, with a special emphasis on including women
and under-represented minority students through a strong mentorship
program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;