* 1111030
* EAGER: Collaborative Research: Defined Band Gap Materials by Fractionation of Graphene Oxide
* MPS,DMR
* 06/15/2011,05/31/2013
* Hannes Schniepp, College of William and Mary
* Standard Grant
* Michael J. Scott
* 05/31/2013
* USD 46,000.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;Graphene and its derivatives are very important
materials for electronic and photonic applications. While the physics and
applications of these materials is being explored world-wide at a rapid pace,
the reproducibility of materials properties is very difficult because of the
poorly controlled chemical procedures used to isolate graphene and graphene
oxide (GO) sheets. GO has been recently shown to have different photoluminescent
properties depending on the extent of surface oxidation. This EAGER project,
funded by both the Solid State and Materials Chemistry and Electronic and
Photonic Materials Programs, aims to exploit this surface functionality and
separate fractions of GO according to oxidation level and correlate that
oxidation level in a more controlled manner with the electronic and photonic
properties. Standard oxidation methodologies will be applied but in a systematic
and controlled way. Surface chemistries will be matched with appropriate
surfactants for optimizing the sheet separations. Samples will be analyzed using
an AFM technique that allows visualization of the arrangements of surfactants on
the surface of GO. This will provide feedback about how to design better
surfactants for the separation. This work is important because it will not only
provide important information about the chemical oxidation graphite , but it
will also provide a procedure for isolating better chemical defined GO materials
for physical property (especially photonic)
applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;The goal of
this work is the development of a new optoelectronic material with an adjustable
electronic band gap. Optoelectronic materials are used to convert light into
electric currents or vice versa. Typical applications are solar cells, photo
detectors, digital cameras, light emitting diodes or solid state lasers. The
size of the band gap largely determines which wavelengths of light are involved
in these processes. An existing problem is that there are only a limited number
of optoelectronic materials available, and their band gaps are fixed. For
instance, this determines the colors that are available for light emitting
diodes, or the fraction of sunlight which can be efficiently converted to
electricity using solar cells. In this project graphene oxide (GO) is
investigated as a new material with adjustable band gap; broader impacts of this
work will include developing materials that will enable the design of solar
cells with higher conversion efficiency, or energy-efficient light sources of
many different colors. While GO can be made from graphite economically, the
obtained material is not very pure and thus has a great variety of many
different band gaps. In this project new separation approaches will be explored
to purify this material to the level needed for electronic applications.