* 1111162
* Piloting an Inter-Ivy League Alliance for Graduate Education and the Professoriate
* EHR,HRD
* 08/01/2011,09/30/2012
* Medeva Ghee, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* Mark Leddy
* 09/30/2012
* USD 150,000.00

To increase the number of graduate students and postdocs entering the
professoriate in STEM disciplines, the Leadership Alliance, a national
consortium of higher education institutions, in conjunction with its member
institutions, Brown University and Columbia University, and in collaboration
with four minority serving institutions - Dillard University, Howard University,
Morgan State University, and Spelman College - will design, pilot, and
rigorously evaluate activities to foster professional development, skills-
building, mentoring, and career training. The activities of this project consist
of (i) conducting a baseline needs analysis of the diversity efforts at Brown
and Columbia to better understand issues and barriers to establishing a
sustainable institutional culture of diversity; (ii) investigating incentive
mechanisms to promote the engagement of participating departmental faculty and
administrators in the proposed mentoring and professional development activities
to provide a supportive environment that fosters successful outcomes; (iii) and
identifying effective strategies to develop and implement mentoring, skills-
building and professional development opportunities for underrepresented
graduate students and postdoctoral fellows. Intellectual Merit This project will
provide the first systematic effort to: (i) identify the professional
development and career training needs of STEM graduate students and postdocs
from underrepresented groups at leading research institutions; (ii) evaluate
best practices in training of doctoral students and postdocs; (iii) assess the
effectiveness of a comprehensive program of professional development workshops
on the mentoring and skills-building of STEM graduate students and postdocs from
underrepresented groups. The comprehensive, multi-faceted evaluation efforts of
these interventions that employ the expertise of STEM faculty members, senior
administrators, an external evaluator, graduate students and postdocs from both
research-intensive and minority-serving institutions will provide a foundation
upon which to design novel, relevant and effective best practices, resources and
initiatives that will prepare underrepresented minority STEM graduate students
and postdocs for the 21st century professoriate. Broader Impacts This project
supplements earlier efforts to expand the pipeline of scholars from
underrepresented groups in STEM disciplines, which focus on pre-collegiate and
undergraduate students. By firmly focusing on graduate students and postdocs,
who have already firmly committed their professional lives to STEM fields, this
project's overarching goal is to give them the skills to ensure professional
success. The larger objective is to encourage the creation of sustainable
institutional cultures and programs that will increase the diversity of the
professoriate in STEM disciplines, not simply at Brown and Columbia but across
the 32 members of the Leadership Alliance consortium and at other institutions
of higher learning. This project's broad impact will take five specific,
measurable forms. First, it will provide research universities nationwide with a
review and evaluation of existing professional development, career training,
skills-building,and mentoring programs for graduate students and postdocs from
underrepresented groups at institutions across the United States. Second, this
project will design, pilot, and assess replicable workshops in areas essential
to the professional success of future STEM faculty. Third, the project will
create and test instructional resources that will be readily available to
institutions of higher learning via project website. Fourth, the project will
provide postdocs from underrepresented groups authentic teaching experience to
be better positioned for a future career as a professor. Fifth, this project
will alter institutional cultures at leading research institutions by placing a
greater emphasis on mentoring, professional development, skills-building, and
career training to prepare students and postdocs to progress successfully along
the academic pathway. All best practices in professional development and
evaluations of the practices' effectiveness will be disseminated through the
Leadership Alliance consortium, the project website, and public presentations
and other outreach efforts. Through these activities this novel and potent
Inter-Ivy AGEP will contribute to the societal goal of increased representation
of underrepresented scholars as research leaders of the 21st century
professoriate.