* 1112391
* Assembly and spectroscopic interrogation of large atomic and molecular clusters in helium droplets
* MPS,CHE
* 08/15/2011,07/31/2014
* Andrey Vilesov, University of Southern California
* Continuing Grant
* Colby Foss
* 07/31/2014
* USD 507,780.00

Through this award, funded by the Chemical Structure, Dynamics, and Mechanisms
Program of the Division of Chemistry, Prof. Andrey Vilesov from the University
of Southern California, along with his graduate student researchers, will study
the assembly of atoms and molecules into clusters at the ultralow temperatures
achievable in superfluid droplets of helium. These studies will focus on such
species as metal atoms and hydrocarbon molecules, among others. The experiments
will be carried out in the droplets themselves by employing laser methods in
conjunction with mass spectroscopy. Many of the assembled clusters will also be
imaged by way of electron microscopy. The clusters to be studied will range in
size from just a few atoms/molecules to tens of millions and vary in composition
from single-species clusters to mixed, core-shell metal-molecule clusters. The
goal of these studies is to investigate the mechanisms of low temperature
aggregation and to elucidate the structure and excitations in such clusters with
size. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The large helium droplets that Prof. Vilesov
proposes to use may be useful vehicles for making new and interesting materials.
The assembly and study of nanometer-sized clusters in droplets of helium will
not only extend the variety of the nanomaterials available to researchers today
but will also contribute toward the establishment of novel physical methods of
low temperature fabrication. Students working with Prof. Vilesov have and will
continue to receive extensive training in such cutting-edge technologies
including, but not limited to, fast electronics, high vacuum methods, laser
methods, and high resolution microscopy. Prof. Vilesov has a strong history of
international collaboration and this will likely continue through this work.