* 1112250
* Photochromic Ruthenium Sulfoxide Complexes:  Ultrafast Spectroscopy and Photomechanical Effects
* MPS,CHE
* 10/01/2011,09/30/2015
* Jeffrey Rack, Ohio University
* Standard Grant
* Colby Foss
* 09/30/2015
* USD 330,000.00

The Chemical Structure, Dynamics and Mechanisms Program of the Chemistry
Division supports Professor Jeffrey Rack at Ohio University for studies into the
development of photochromic ruthenium sulfoxide complexes. Photochromism in
these compounds arises from conversion between isomers in which the sulfoxide is
bonded to the ruthenium through sulfur and ones in which the sulfoxide is
attached to the ruthenium through oxygen. New examples of these compounds will
be synthesized to test the role of sterically-hindered ligands on the excited
state rate constant for the isomerization. Femtosecond transient absorption
spectroscopy will be employed to determine the rate constants along with their
wavelength, solvent and temperature dependence. Identification of intermediates
on the femtosecond and picosecond timescale is an important goal. Complexes that
feature two-color reversible photochromism will be incorporated into polymers
that will feature photomechanical effects. Such effects are exceptionally rare
and a new procedure for measuring strain in polymers featuring photomechanical
effects will be developed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Students associated with this
project will be trained in the areas of inorganic, physical, analytical and
organic chemistry. The multi-disciplinary nature of the project will demand that
the student be aware of literature contributions in disparate research areas.
Involvement of underrepresented groups is also a genuine goal of this project.
Ohio University is located in Athens, OH a rural, chronically economically
depressed area in Appalachia. Ohio University is deeply committed to the
education and training of a student population with a significantly higher than
national prevalence of low-income, first generation college students. Indeed, of
those undergraduate students performing research in the Department of Chemistry
and Biochemistry, 40% are from one of the 29 counties in Appalachia. The
students associated with this project will be involved in a number of
divisional, departmental, College, University and Community outreach and
interactive programs.