* 1112442
* Non-empirical density functional theory for computational chemistry and materials science
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2011,07/31/2015
* Kieron Burke, University of California-Irvine
* Continuing Grant
* Evelyn Goldfield
* 07/31/2015
* USD 444,000.00

Kieron Burke of the University of California, Irvine is supported by an award
from the Chemical Theory, Models and Computational Methods program to carry out
research on the development of improvements to density functional theory (DFT).
The improvements focus on the development of new functionals including a kinetic
energy functional, which would eliminate the need to compute orbitals, and the
exchange-correlation functional to improve its reliability and accuracy. Density
functional theory has become an essential tool of electronic structure
calculations in many fields of chemistry, but there now exist so many empirical
functionals that users are often bewildered about which one to choose, and
experts regard the theory as highly empirical. The primary objective of this
project is to develop an entirely new methodology for developing approximate
density functionals by extending the semiclassical approximations on which the
original theories were based. The approach uses a simple principle, that of
asymptotic exactness as the number of electrons becomes large.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The impact of Burke's work is expected to be broad and to
have application in chemistry, materials science, nanoscience, and many other
fields. The impact of the work will be further broadened by the development of
tutorials and distribution of "DFT in a nutshell", a new and improved version of
Burke's "ABCs of DFT" online notes.