* 1112637
* The 4th International Conference on Women in Physics in Stollenbosch, South Africa
* MPS,PHY
* 05/15/2011,04/30/2013
* Luz Martinez-Miranda, American Association of Physics Teachers
* Standard Grant
* Kathleen McCloud
* 04/30/2013
* USD 120,000.00

This award supports the United States delegation to the Fourth International
Conference of Women in Physics in Stellenbosch, South Africa in April 2011. The
purpose of the Stellenbosch conference (ICWIP 2011) is three-fold: (i) to
provide an opportunity to view and analyze the current status of and progress in
promoting women in physics in each country and internationally; (ii) to provide
an arena for women in physics to share their scientific accomplishments and
create international scientific collaborations; and (iii) to build capacity in
each participating country to design and implement changes that improve the
participation and advancement of women in physics. In collaboration with
conference organizer Dr. Igle Gledhill at the Center for Science and Industry
Research in Pretoria, South Africa, the U.S. delegation will provide support for
the conference as well as continue the advancement of women and girls in the
U.S. physics enterprise. The series of international conferences on women in
physics is proving to be an effective mechanism for sharing best practices
internationally, empowering action in numerous countries and regions including
the US, nucleating networking in research, strengthening accountability through
the International Union of Pure and Applied Physics(IUPAP), and increasing the
numbers and advancement of women in the field. The U.S. delegates will be able
learn about and take advantage of successful initiatives piloted in ~70 other
countries. This award is co-funded by the Division of Physics, the Division of
Astronomical Sciences, and the Office of Multidisciplinary Activities within the
Directorate for Mathematical and Physical Sciences, and by the Office of
International Science and Engineering.