* 1112906
* ABR: Toward Seismic Tomography Based Upon Adjoint Methods
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2011,06/30/2016
* Jeroen Tromp, Princeton University
* Continuing Grant
* Robin Reichlin
* 06/30/2016
* USD 709,986.00

The primary goal of this project is to use seismic data to image Earth
&lt;br/&gt;structure and seismic sources based on modern numerical methods and
&lt;br/&gt;imaging techniques. We will further develop and enhance software for
the &lt;br/&gt;simulation of 3D seismic wave propagation, with a particular
emphasis on &lt;br/&gt;computing on Graphics Processing Units, rather than
traditional Central &lt;br/&gt;Processing Units, potentially providing an order
of magnitude increase &lt;br/&gt;in simulation speed. The broader impacts of the
proposal include &lt;br/&gt;open-source software packages for the simulation of
seismic wave &lt;br/&gt;propagation. Simulations based on these packages may be
used to &lt;br/&gt;investigate seismic hazard and aid in the determination of
tomographic &lt;br/&gt;images of Earth's interior and earthquake source
parameters. All &lt;br/&gt;software developed during the course of the proposed
research period &lt;br/&gt;will be made freely available via the Computational
Infrastructure for &lt;br/&gt;Geodynamics
(geodynamics.org).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The simulations of seismic wave
propagation account for heterogeneity in &lt;br/&gt;Earth's crust and mantle,
topography&amp; bathymetry, seismic anisotropy, &lt;br/&gt;attenuation, fluid-
solid interactions, self-gravitation, rotation, and &lt;br/&gt;the oceans. The
main intellectual merit of this project revolves around &lt;br/&gt;harnessing
the power of the forward modeling tools to enhance the &lt;br/&gt;quality of
images of Earth's interior and the earthquake rupture &lt;br/&gt;process. The
approach is to minimize remaining between simulated and &lt;br/&gt;observed
seismograms based on so-called adjoint techniques in &lt;br/&gt;combination with
conjugate gradient methods, an approach we refer to as &lt;br/&gt;"adjoint
tomography". Specifically, following a successful application &lt;br/&gt;in
southern California, we will 1) develop open-source GPU-based forward
&lt;br/&gt;and adjoint spectral-element solvers, 2) perform adjoint tomography
of &lt;br/&gt;Europe, 3) further develop noise cross-correlation tomography
based on &lt;br/&gt;adjoint methods, 4) move towards adjoint tomography of the
entire &lt;br/&gt;planet, and 5) extend the southern California and global
"ShakeMovie" &lt;br/&gt;cyber infrastructure.