* 1112301
* RUI:  COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH:  High Resolution Absorption and Emission Spectroscopy of Diatomic Metal Halides, Nitrides and Dimers
* MPS,CHE
* 08/15/2011,01/31/2015
* Leah O'Brien, Southern Illinois University at Edwardsville
* Standard Grant
* Colby Foss
* 01/31/2015
* USD 60,000.00

In this award, the Chemical Structure, Dynamics, and Mechanisms Program supports
the collaborative research projects of Professors Leah O'Brien, of Southern
Illinois University Edwardsville, and James O'Brien, of the University of
Missouri, St. Louis. They and their students will develop an instrument (ILS-
FTS) that will integrate intracavity laser absorption spectroscopy with high
resolution Fourier transform detection, and will operate in the 9,500-25,000
cm-1 region. The proposed ILS-FTS instrument will utilize the improved
resolution and wavelength accuracy made possible with FTS detection, enabling
the acquisition of high-resolution spectra of diatomic molecules over a very
wide spectral range. The ILS-FTS instrument will be used in: (i) rovibrational
electronic studies, such as for PtCl, where lines closer to rotational bandheads
can be resolved and utilized in the rotational analysis than is possible
currently using traditional methods; and (ii) rovibrational electronic spectra
of metal dimers, such as Pt2 and Pd2, where the rotational constants for the
molecules are too small to be examined using traditional approaches. The ILS-FTS
configuration may be capable of sub-Doppler Lamb-dip (saturation) spectroscopy,
allowing detection of molecules with hyperfine interactions and those with
smaller rotational constants. Emission studies are also possible with the FTS,
which will assist in the search for new metal-ligand molecules. The metal-
containing diatomic radicals to be studied are characterized by open shell
structures, which give rise to a host of interactions between nuclear,
electronic, vibrational, and rotational angular
momenta.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The work will lead to deeper understanding of
metal-ligand interactions and potentially provide insight on metal-catalyzed
reactions. The proposed research will foster development of a successful inter-
institutional collaboration of faculty and students at a primarily undergraduate
institution and a research university. The proposed work will open new areas
research, enhance the research infrastructure at both Universities, and will
further develop students and faculty with skills in contemporary spectroscopy
and instrument development. The project also contains an outreach program that
will allow talented high school students to participate in the research.