* 1112436
* Derivatization of Pristine Graphene with Well-Defined Chemical Functionalities
* MPS,CHE
* 10/01/2011,09/30/2016
* Mingdi Yan, University of Massachusetts Lowell
* Standard Grant
* George Janini
* 09/30/2016
* USD 372,104.00

In this project funded by the Macromolecular, Supramolecular and Nanochemistry
Program of the Chemistry Division, Mingdi Yan of the University of Massachusetts
at Lowell will develop a general method to derivatize graphene and potentially
achieve spatial selectivity. The potential of graphene to revolutionize
electronics, photonics, and nanocomposite materials has been hampered by the
availability and processability of graphene materials. The approach is to
photolyze/thermalyze perfluorophenyl azide and its derivatives in the presence
of graphene. The transient singlet perfluorphenyl nitrene will undergo a [2+1]
cycloaddition with graphene pi-bonds to form aziridine groups on the graphene
surface, and there is the potential for selectivity towards pi-bonds at the edge
of the graphene sheet. The location of the functional groups will be determined
by further derivatization with nanoparticles or C60 and imaging using AFM and
TEM. The broader impacts include training female undergraduates and high school
girls by engaging them in research, introducing them to strong role models, and
dispelling myths surrounding careers for women in STEM. A new science course
will be established at a local high school, targeting female students who may
not otherwise take STEM courses in high school.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This work
would advance fundamental knowledge about attaching chemical species to
graphene, a sheet-like material composed of a single layer of carbon atoms. The
methods developed would allow the preparation of unique electronic materials
that could have significant impacts on the fields of electronics and composite
materials.