* 1112500
* Large Scale Nanopolaritonics
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2011,07/31/2016
* Daniel Neuhauser, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Evelyn Goldfield
* 07/31/2016
* USD 435,000.00

Daniel Neuhauser of UCLA is supported by an award from the Chemical Theory,
Models and Computational Methods program for work to develop a theoretical
methodology to explore molecular nanopolaritonics with a large number of
molecules. Molecular Nanopolaritonics intends to unify the treatment of
radiation and matter on the nano scale. A previous award on this subject has
introduced the concept of a unified treatment of matter and radiation on the
nanoscale with arbitrary geometries and predicted that molecules will have large
designed responses which can manipulate at will the transport of radiation in
plasmon carrying structures. The present research unifies molecular and
electromagnetic treatments on a larger scale through the development of theories
that handle multitude of molecules with explicit time-dependent treatments and
study the interaction with, and effects of, molecules and electromagnetic
plasmons. The proposal tackles the difficult problem of embedding molecules
directly on top of plasmon carrying structures, necessitating the development of
multi-scale approaches that employ a detailed time-dependent orbital or density-
matrix treatments in an inner region, supplemented by orbital-free or Maxwell
studies on outer scales. The approaches use a time-dependent analogue of
complex-Poisson descriptions, thereby significantly increasing the time-step of
FDTD and making it commensurate with that of electronic dynamics. Further, new
embedding techniques allow for designed orbital-free descriptions of plasmonics
structures with the correct frequency response, thereby allowing large-scale
embedding.

There are two disparate phenomena associated with radiation on the small scale.
Metal structures support propagating plasmons, and molecules, whether few
separate ones or large clusters, interact by dipole-induced fields.
Nanopolaritonics is a recent name for the field which aims to unify the
treatment. A well known direction is the effect on the molecules due to the
interaction with the strong fields generated by the metal plasmons (which can be
magnified by orders of magnitude in specific geometries, especially involving
corners). However, Nanopolaritonics also includes the equally important and
little-explored other direction, whereby molecules influence the propagation of
plasmon waves. The PI with his group have shown in simulations that the effects
are strong in both directions. At present they develop embedding approaches
whereby adsorbed molecules are described quantum mechanically as well as the
underlying adsorbing structure. Bigger regions are described by more approximate
methods, such as orbital-free methods or Maxwell treatments, modified to
concentrate on small scales. Applications of the methodology will be plenty:
gating of plasmonics transport, sensing of individual molecules individually and
through their effects on plasmons, non-linear phenomena and their effects on
localized radiation transfer and absorption by adsorbed molecules. The most
important feature is that this research unifies the two disparate fields of
radiation and electronic dynamics, which taken together with realistic
treatments, can exhibit novel physical features beyond perturbative or model-
type treatments.