* 1112416
* Relaxation Dynamics in Selenide-Based Chalcogenide Glasses:  Characterization of the Intermediate Phase
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2011,07/31/2015
* Sindee Simon, Texas Tech University
* Standard Grant
* Colby Foss
* 07/31/2015
* USD 300,000.00

In this project funded by the Chemical Structure, Dynamics, and Mechanisms
Program of the Chemistry Division, Sindee L. Simon and Gregory B. McKenna of
Texas Tech University will investigate the relaxation dynamics in selenide-based
chalcogenide glasses using calorimetry, dynamic heat spectroscopy, shear and
bulk rheology, and nanorheology. Three important scientific issues are
addressed: the stability of the glasses with respect to aging near and in the
intermediate phase region, the effects of nanoconfinement and pressure on the
dynamics, and the origin of the unusual mechanical stiffening of ultrathin
films. Of particular interest is the measurement of enthalpy recovery and creep
during aging as a function of composition, temperature, and aging time aimed at
a more complete understanding of the composition dependence of the stability of
these glasses. Broader impacts include training of two graduate students,
incorporation of new material into courses taught by the PIs, and outreach to
young students, from fifth through eleventh grades, through a "Super Saturdays"
enrichment program for grade-school children and a summer "Science - It's a Girl
Thing" program for junior-high and high-school girls.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
physical and chemical stability of chalcogenide glasses are important in many of
their potential applications, including as memory devices, optical waveguides,
and solar cells. By increasing understanding the Boolchand intermediate phase,
which has enhanced stability, the results are anticipated to facilitate
synthesis of stable chalcogenide glasses for such applications.