* 1112369
* Alkane Activation at Catalytic Metal Surfaces: A Coupled Experimental and Theoretical Study of Reaction Dynamics and Energy Transfer at the Gas-Surface Interface
* MPS,CHE
* 09/15/2011,02/29/2016
* Ian Harrison, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Colby Foss
* 02/29/2016
* USD 450,000.00

The Chemical Structure, Dynamics and Mechanisms Program of the Chemistry
Division supports Professor Ian Harrison, University of Virginia, for studies of
Alkane Activation at Catalytic Metal Surfaces: A Coupled Experimental and
Theoretical Study of Reaction Dynamics and Energy Transfer at the Gas-Surface
Interface. A heated effusive molecular beam doser will be used to impinge C1-C9
alkane molecules at variable gas temperature onto a surface such that activation
barriers for dissociative chemisorption can be surmounted. Dissociative sticking
coefficients will be measured and the multidimensional experimental data will be
used to test and develop theoretical models of gas-surface reactivity. Using the
combination of the effusive molecular beam results to be measured here, existing
supersonic molecular beam dissociative sticking measurements, electronic
structure theory calculations, and kinetic modeling the effects of molecular
rotation, vibrational efficacy, alkane complexity, surface structure, gas and
surface temperatures, early/late transition state barrier position, and gas-
surface energy transfer on dissociative sticking will be
addressed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will experimentally characterize
and theoretically model the activation of C1-C9 alkanes at catalytic metal
surfaces. The research will be directed towards gaining a molecular-level
understanding of the activated dissociation of alkanes at surfaces, which is
oftentimes believed to be the rate limiting step in the catalytic
transformations of alkanes into more valuable chemicals such as hydrogen,
synthesis gas, alkenes, or fuels. Alkanes are a targeted product of biomass
reforming and more energy efficient and selective catalysis of alkanes is
desirable in the quest to efficiently convert renewable biomass to fuels.
Importantly, a diverse group of young graduate and undergraduate students will
be educated in the interdisciplinary fields of surface science, catalysis, and
reaction dynamics through coupled experimental and theoretical work on basic
science relevant to a key societal goal, namely, engineering a sustainable
energy future. Minority undergraduates will be taught and hosted as part of a
summer science encouragement program at the University of Virginia whereby
students will learn about renewable energy research. Graduate students will be
encouraged and continue in their outreach laboratory demonstrations at local
elementary schools.