* 1112550
* Glycopolymers for Protection of Protein Conjugates
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2011,08/31/2014
* Heather Maynard, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing Grant
* Timothy Patten
* 08/31/2014
* USD 495,000.00

In this project funded by the Macromolecular, Supramolecular and Nanochemistry
Program in the Division of Chemistry, Heather Maynard of the University of
California at Los Angeles will synthesize and study trehalose-containing
polymers for the stabilization of proteins to environmental stressors and
proteolytic degradation. Protein-reactive trehalose side chain monomers and
polymers will be synthesized using controlled radical polymerization techniques.
These polymers will be conjugated to proteins, and the stabilization of the
proteins by the glycopolymers will be quantified. The broader impacts of the
project involve training undergraduate and graduate students, educating
kindergarten through high school girls about chemistry, polymers, and
biomolecules through partnership with the Girl Scouts of Los Angeles, and
participating in outreach to the general public via UCLA Parents Weekend and
UCLA Alumni Day.

Proteins are important reagents in chemical and pharmaceutical industry;
however, many proteins are unstable and require specialized conditions such as
cold temperatures during storage, transport, and use. Proteins that are attached
to trehalose polymers are expected to have significantly increased lifetimes and
bioactivities compared to unmodified versions. This research is expected to
significantly broaden the use of proteins by academic researchers and industry
by reducing the costs of storage and transportation, and it should also enable
the use of proteins where storage would be difficult or impossible. This work
will contribute to the synthesis of active and stable proteins for a wide range
of applications and could impact the polymer, chemical, biomedical and materials
communities.