* 1112370
* New Methods for Natural Product Synthesis
* MPS,CHE
* 10/01/2011,09/30/2014
* Nancy Totah, Syracuse University
* Standard Grant
* Suk-Wah Tam-Chang
* 09/30/2014
* USD 240,000.00

Professor Nancy I. Totah of Syracuse University is supported by the Chemical
Synthesis Program of the Chemistry Division to develop new methods for the
efficient preparation of compounds that contain functionalized tetrahydropyrans
and their derivatives. This research is focused on the use of exocyclic enol
ethers for the formation of carbon-carbon bonds. Specifically, this research is
directed towards the use of 2-methylenetetrahydropyrans in carbonyl ene and
related processes. In addition, it explores the direct addition, tandem, and
two-directional manifestations of this process and the development of efficient,
enantioselective protocols. Carbon-carbon bond forming reactions that capitalize
on the nucleophilic nature of exocyclic enol ethers have been underutilized.
These studies will provide fundamental knowledge about the chemistry of
2-methylenetetrahydropyrans, and will provide a basis for the further
manipulation of these interesting substrates in complex molecule synthesis.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Tetrahydropyrans and their derivatives are common
components of molecules that have useful biological activity and interesting
structural features. The exploration, development, and application of the
chemistry proposed in this application will provide new methods and strategies
for the introduction and manipulation of tetrahydropyrans. Such efforts benefit
society at large by providing improved access to molecules with important
applications in medicine, agriculture, and materials chemistry. Further, this
project will provide training for graduate students, postdoctoral associates and
undergraduates, including those from groups historically underrepresented in the
sciences.