* 1112714
* US - Peru Planning Visit:  Planning a Collaborative Program of Vertebrate Paleontology in Northwestern Peru
* O/D,OISE
* 08/01/2011,01/31/2013
* Jessica Oswald, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Anne-Marie Schmoltner
* 01/31/2013
* USD 21,296.00

This U.S. - Peru planning visit award will establish a collaborative program of
vertebrate paleontology in northwestern Peru by forming a partnership between
University of Florida (UF) and Universidad Nacional de Piura (UNP). The program
will support one senior researcher and two U.S. graduate students under the
direction of Dr. David Steadman from UF and they will collaborate with Dr. Jean-
Noël Martinez, Director of the Institute of Paleontology at UNP, and his
students. Students and professors from both schools will plan a research program
for which larger-scale funding will be pursued in 2012-13. Researchers have long
been interested in the distribution and diversity of animals in the American
tropics, and how changing climates (glacial-interglacial cycles) have affected
these phenomena. The planning visits will focus on field and laboratory research
at the Talara Tar Seeps (TTS), an asphaltic natural trap with abundant 20,000
year old fossils of amphibians, reptiles, birds, and mammals. There have been no
formal excavations at the TTS since the 1950s and 1960s. However, evidence of a
wetter past climate comes from previously excavated TTS fossils, indicating a
richer plant community must have existed once at TTS. Dr. Martinez, a leading
authority on Peruvian fossil mammals, and his students have discovered
vertebrate fossils in many localities within 500 kilometers of Piura. The UNP
team will study the resulting mammal fossils, whereas the UF team will study the
bird fossils, and both teams will study the amphibian and reptile fossils. The
analyses of fossils will vastly improve the understanding of past climate change
in this climatically sensitive region.&lt;br/&gt;This international
collaboration will provide opportunities to train, educate, and bring together
students and researchers from the United States and Peru. In addition to
establishing collaborations with their Peruvian colleagues, UF scientists will
give lectures at UNP while two U.S. graduate students will receive an
international research experience from this award. Furthermore, Peruvian
undergraduate students will be given the opportunity to travel to UF and develop
directed research projects with UF students. Finally, these visits have the
potential to generate a larger international program that will expand our
knowledge of how changing past climates in the American tropics have affected
the biodiversity of the region.