* 1112067
* Nonequilibrium Molecular Dynamics Simulations of Structured Colloidal Particles
* MPS,CHE
* 09/15/2011,08/31/2015
* Rigoberto Hernandez, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Evelyn Goldfield
* 08/31/2015
* USD 430,000.00

Rigoberto Hernandez of Georgia Institute of Technology is supported by an award
from the Chemical Theory, Models and Computational Methods program in the
Chemistry Division to investigate the study of the microscopic dynamics within
far-from-equilibrium colloidal suspensions and liquid crystals, and the
implications on new approaches for the control and design of materials within
driven colloidal suspensions. The study integrates computational and theoretical
tools to characterize the complex dynamics of both the molecular systems
undergoing chemical change and the nonequilibrium environments in which they
function. Specific chemical systems (such as soft core-shell microgels,
heterogeneously charged colloids, and assemblies of fd-virus particles) whose
nonequilibrium dynamics can be directly tested and predicted by experiment will
be used to guide the development and as platforms for future design.

Colloidal particles are used routinely as the basis for making new materials,
for molecular delivery systems, and/or as agents to perform a function directly
such as catalysis. Their characterization presents a challenge to physical
chemists because these materials can be viewed either as a heterogeneous
composition of molecular assemblies within a molecular solvent at the nanometer
scale, or as an assembly of uniform macroparticles interacting in an effective
uniform solvent at the micrometer scale. This duality has many consequences in
terms of device characteristics and the requisite methods used to study them.
Professor Hernandez and his research group are developing the theoretical and
computational methods that are helping to resolve this interplay across length
scales that will be indispensable in the molecule-based design of next-
generation materials. The work is having a further broader impact through the
extensive efforts by Professor Hernandez in public outreach activities for
science and in programs for the recruitment and mentoring of students from
under-represented minority groups into science.