* 1112984
* Chemotaxis Models in Biology and Texture Development in Materials: Numerical Methods, Analysis, and Modeling
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2015
* Yekaterina Epshteyn, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 08/31/2015
* USD 149,581.00

The focus of the proposed project is to develop new numerical and analytical
techniques to study problems in Biology and Materials Science. These problems
give rise to challenging issues for analysis, modeling, and simulations. In this
project two areas have been selected for the research directly from potential
applications: chemotaxis and chemotaxis models in Biology and texture
development and evolution of microstructure in Materials. Chemotaxis refers to
mechanisms by which cellular motion occurs in response to an external stimulus,
usually a chemical one. Chemotaxis is an important process in many medical and
biological applications, including bacteria/cell aggregation and pattern
formation mechanisms, as well as tumor growth. Mathematical models of the
biological systems are an important tool used in the study of these patterns.
Although there is an extensive literature on this subject, only a few numerical
methods have been proposed for chemotaxis models. Chemotaxis systems are usually
described by highly nonlinear time-dependent partial differential equations.
Therefore, development of accurate and efficient numerical methods is crucial
for the modeling and analysis of the chemotaxis. Furthermore, a common property
of all existing chemotaxis systems is their ability to model a concentration
phenomenon that mathematically results in solutions, which rapidly grow in small
neighborhoods of concentration points/curves. The solutions may blow up or may
exhibit a very singular, spiky behavior. This blow-up represents a mathematical
description of a cell concentration phenomenon that occurs in real biological
systems. In either case, capturing such solutions numerically is a very
challenging problem. The goal of the first project is to design, implement and
analyze novel accurate and efficient numerical methods, as well as develop new
analytical methods to study chemotaxis models along with closely related
problems in physics and biology. The goal of the second project is to study
texture development and evolution of microstructure in Materials. Cellular
networks are ubiquitous in nature. They exhibit behavior on many different
length and time scales and are generally metastable. Most technologically useful
materials are polycrystalline microstructures composed of a myriad of small
crystallites, called grains, separated by interfaces, called grain boundaries.
The energetics and connectivity of the grain boundary network plays a crucial
role in determining the properties of a material across a wide range of scales.
A central goal of research in materials science is to develop technologies
capable of producing an arrangement of grains -a texture- appropriate for a
desired set of material properties. The main objective of the second project is
to understand the role of energy in material texture development. For this, a
recently discovered Grain Boundary Character Distribution is introduced and
investigated by the use of a large scale simulation and mathematical analysis.
Grain Boundary Character Distribution is a new characterization of the texture
which is found to be strongly correlated to the interfacial energy. This
research will lead to new analytical/computational tools to study grain
networks, along with a better understanding of grain boundary distributions,
grain boundary properties, and how they evolve during materials
processing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The path to new scientific discoveries lies
through new areas of research, interdisciplinary collaboration, and new
opportunities. The proposed projects will involve interdisciplinary research and
will enhance infrastructure through the development of new analytical and
computational tools. The first part of the proposed work, will make fundamental
contributions to the development of new numerical and analytical methods which
will be used in solving biomedical problems, for example in developing a better
understanding of cancer, as well as initiating new collaboration among
disciplines. In the second part of the proposal, both new knowledge and new
tools will emerge from this part of the project, which will be used to increase
the reliability of materials used, for example in aircraft, microprocessors, and
many other devices. Educational activities for the proposed projects include the
mentorship of graduate and undergraduate students and the development of new
modeling course.