* 1112456
* Formation, Activation and Functionalization of Carbon-Element Bonds by Late Transition Metal Complexes
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2011,07/31/2014
* Karsten Krogh-Jespersen, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Continuing Grant
* Timothy Patten
* 07/31/2014
* USD 409,500.00

This award in the Division of Chemistry to Alan Goldman at Rutgers University
centers on the oxidative addition and reductive elimination of C-H bonds by late
transition metal complexes. The factors that govern the thermodynamics, kinetics
and selectivity of C-H, C-C, C-X and X-H bond addition and elimination with such
complexes will be elucidated. As the insertion of unsaturated substrates into
M-C, M-H, and M-X bonds is likely the most difficult step in many potential
catalytic cycles related to C-H activation, these insertions will also be
investigated. The approach will be based on the extensive integration of: 1) The
synthesis of new late metal complexes, particularly pincer-ligated metal
complexes, which offer high stability together with the ability to explore
variation of ancillary coordinating groups in a well controlled fashion, while
leaving open coordination sites for substrate activation and subsequent steps.
2) Mechanistic studies of addition/eliminations and insertion/de-insertions. 3)
Screening new complexes for a broad array of stoichiometric and catalytic
reactions. The latter will include additions of CH and X-H to unsaturates
(olefins, alkynes, CO), and dehydrocoupling. When the potential for asymmetric
catalysis exists, chiral pincer complexes will be investigated. The reactivity
of C-H addition products will be investigated with respect to functionalization
of the resulting M-C and M-H bonds (e.g. insertions) and for the effect of C-H
addition on remote sites (e.g. increased susceptibility toward nucleophilic
attack on homo- and heteroaromatics as a result of metallation). 4)
Computational (DFT) studies will be used to provide leads for synthesis.
Computational methods will be tested and calibrated by mechanistic and screening
studies. New functionals and basis sets will be investigated to increase
predictive value, and thus the ability to design and improve new
catalysts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The development of catalytic C-H bond
transformations, as well as reactions in which C-O and C-F bonds are broken or
formed, has vast potential impact in areas ranging from the synthesis of fuels
to pharmaceuticals. Students and postdoctoral associates will receive broad
training in synthesis, analysis, and in the principles and strategy of catalyst
design and development, including the use of computational methods. Graduate
students, postdoctoral associates and undergraduates will gain industrial
perspectives through collaboration with Chevron. Every summer, through the
Project SEED program, high school students from under-represented backgrounds
are exposed to research in this area and come to view of science as a portal to
opportunity rather than a body of knowledge to be received.