* 1112097
* Semi-stochastic Diagonalization Approach to Quantum Chemistry
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2011,07/31/2015
* Cyrus Umrigar, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* James Lisy
* 07/31/2015
* USD 360,000.00

Cyrus Umrigar of Cornell University is supported by an award from the Chemical
Theory, Models and Computational Methods Program in extending a high-level
algorithm for electronic structure including configuration interaction. Strongly
correlated systems, for example, molecules with stretched bonds, pose a
particularly severe challenge for high-level quantum chemistry methods, and this
is an area where the new method may have considerable impact. The Alavi group
has already performed full configuration interaction (FCI) calculations in a
space of 10^16 (ten to the sixteenth) determinants, well beyond the 10^10
determinants feasible with traditional iterative diagonalization techniques. The
diffculty posed by a problem depends not only on the size of the space but also
upon distribution of wave function weights and the severity of the sign problem.
The work centers around improvements to enhance the range of applicability of
the method. A hybrid deterministic-cum-stochastic approach is being developed
that preserves the desirable features of both approaches (reduced statistical
error from having a deterministic component as well as the ability to explore
very large spaces made possible by a stochastic approach). Preliminary work has
demonstrated that improved trial wavefunctions can yield a large reduction in
the statistical errors of the computed expectation values. Since the walk is
done in determinant space, the Fermion sign problem, which is severe in
competing methods due to the exponential growth of the Bosonic wavefunction
relative to the Fermionic wavefunction, is absent in the present method. The
method does have a less severe form of the sign problem and practical ways are
demonstrated for keeping that under control. A procedure for improving the
convergence with respect to basis size is also being developed. These
improvements are to make possible highly accurate calculations on molecular
systems that were hitherto not feasible with existing quantum chemistry methods,
such as the dissociation curves for transition metal dimers. The general
mathematical problem being addressed extends well beyond the realm of quantum
chemistry, namely that of finding the dominant eigenvalue of a matrix that is so
large that even a single column of the matrix cannot be stored in computer
memory.

Although the basic equation of quantum mechanics, the Schroedinger equation, has
been known for almost a century, efficient methods for finding accurate
solutions to this equation continue to be an active area of research. Such
methods are essential for making useful predictions about a variety of
properties of molecules and materials of technological interest. It is the
purpose of this work to improve upon a method recently developed by the Alavi
group at Cambridge University that uses probabilistic techniques to effectively
employ orders of magnitude more basis functions (to get less error) than was
hitherto possible.