* 1112455
* Polymer Semiconductor Crystallization: The Oligomer "Bottom-Up" Approach
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2011,07/31/2014
* Alejandro Briseno, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 07/31/2014
* USD 350,000.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY

Polymer semiconductors such as the alkyl-substituted polythiophenes have been
the focus of interest because of their solution-processable nature and
application in devices such as transistors and solar cells. Their carrier
mobilities, however, are significantly lower than small-molecule semiconductors
such as pentacene and rubrene. The lower mobility is attributed to the
structural disorder associated with entangled polymer chains which result in
smaller and less-aligned crystals that form grain boundaries in thin films. In
order for polymer semiconductors to outperform small-molecule semiconductors and
make their way to real world applications, a protocol for fabricating highly
crystalline films must first be developed. The objective of this study is to
develop a crystallization protocol by employing low molecular weight polymers,
or oligomers. Our intent is to develop a structure-property relationship from
these materials and determine the electronic and molecular properties of this
class of oligomers. The approach to this project is to synthesize a series of
oligomers from the benchmark building block, didodecylquaterthiophene, and then
employ coupling chemistry to produce low molecular weight oligomers with well-
controlled conjugation lengths and narrow polydispersities. The PI will also
utilize oligomer single-crystalline films as test structures for measuring
intrinsic carrier mobilities in field-effect transistors. The scientific outcome
of the program will be a fundamental understanding of chain packing in low
molecular weight polymers. This knowledge will help one to understand and
ultimately control crystallization in higher molecular weight polymers. This
work will also impact on how one can design polymers with controlled molecular
weights and narrow polydispersities for growing highly crystalline films.

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY

Fundamental knowledge of how molecules are arranged in polymer semiconductor
crystals will be critical for the understanding of electrical transport in
polymer thin films and devices. The approaches described in this project combine
creation of new materials by chemical means, expertise in crystal growth, device
fabrication, and an interdisciplinary way of solving problems, and are aimed
toward understanding and optimization of how polymeric/organic electronic
devices operate. The success of the proposed research program would be of
importance toward our fundamental understanding of polymer crystallization on
both the nano- and bulk length scales. The proposed studies will offer
opportunities to train postdoctoral, graduate, and undergraduate students in
synthesis, polymer science, and device fabrication. Principal Investigator (PI)
Briseno will also be engaged in professional activities that have broader impact
on society, the scientific community, and underprivileged students across the
nation.