* 1112825
* Theoretical studies of coherent energy transfer in photosynthetic systems
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2011,06/30/2016
* Jianshu Cao, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Evelyn Goldfield
* 06/30/2016
* USD 420,000.00

Jianshu Cao of the Massachusetts Institute of Technology is supported by an
award from the Chemical Theory, Models and Computational Methods program in the
Chemistry Division to computationally investigate how efficient and robust
coherent energy transfer arises in photosynthesis and how structure-function
relations observed in light-harvesting systems can help the design of artificial
energy devices. The steps involved in the current project will involve (1)
characterizing quantum coherence in light-harvesting systems, (2) using the
stochastic wave-function method to realistically explore spatial-temporal
correlations in the presence of disorder and noise, and (3) applying optimal
design theory to maximizing energy transfer and thus exploring the importance of
connectivity and symmetry in donor-acceptor arrays. Understanding the
microscopic mechanisms of energy transfer in photosynthetic systems is of larger
significance since it is reasonable to expect that coherent transfer within
collaborative protein environments may become a pervasive theme in the future.
This work will, in addition to providing cutting-edge training for students and
postdocs, be incorporated in the MIT curriculum, public-access MIT
OpenCourseWare and public lectures on photosynthesis and basic energy sciences.

Photosynthesis in plants starts with the absorption of light by proteins in
chlorophyll-containing photosynthetic reaction centers. The absorbed energy is
rapidly transferred elsewhere in the complex protein environment by transfer of
electrons to be stored as chemical energy. A mystery of much interest is how the
electron transfer events occur in such a way as to avoid randomizing the energy
before storage occurs. These ultrafast events are increasingly able to be
studied by new laser-based experiments, but modeling the proteins by classical
ball-and-spring models cannot reproduce the coordinated, or coherent, energy
transfer. Coherence is usually regarded as requiring a description by quantum
mechanics, and the PI is therefore developing quantum mechanical approaches to
understanding the microscopic mechanisms underlying extremely efficient energy
transfer in photosynthesis. The fact that nature has found a way to establish
this collaboration in complicated protein environments raises the hope, to be
explored in this project, that we can learn to control and optimize energy
transfer efficiency for application in future man-made light-harvesting devices.