* 1112200
* New Ideas in Statistical Seasonal Forecasting:  Application to North American Temperature and Precipitation
* GEO,AGS
* 08/01/2011,07/31/2017
* Daniel Wilks, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Ming Cai
* 07/31/2017
* USD 406,959.00

The project will develop and compare, alone and in combination, several recently
suggested ideas for further improvement in statistical seasonal forecasts, with
specific application to northern hemisphere surface temperature and
precipitation. These ideas are: 1) use of sea surface temperature (SST) training
data from the 19th century rather than from the mid-20th century only (which is
conventional ), in order to improve statistical stability of the fitted models;
2) use of additional low-frequency surface predictors in addition to SSTs,
specifically predictors derived from North American snow cover; 3) exploration
and comparison of Canonical Correlation Analysis, Maximum Covariance Analysis,
and Redundancy Analysis as statistical prediction frameworks; 4) modeling and
accounting for nonstationarity in predictand means due to ongoing climate change
and potentially other low-frequency variations through a time-dependent "hinge"
mean function; and 5) exploration of a novel approach to filtering apparently
unpredictable intraseasonal variations from predictand seasonal means, through
computation of potentially more predictable "slow" patterns onto which gridded
predictand values can be projected. Fully out-of-sample retrospective forecasts
constructed using various combinations of these five elements will be evaluated
and compared in an experimental setting that simulates real-world constraints in
the operational production of seasonal forecasts.

Broader impacts of this project include the potential to 1) produce practical
results leading to improved seasonal forecasts based on a consensus of dynamical
and statistical forecast tools, in order to better support long-range decision
making in a variety of enterprises sensitive to seasonal climate variations; 2)
have a significant impact on weather and climate risk management, potentially
benefiting businesses, consumers and public policy makers. The project will
contribute to the training of a Ph.D. student in the area of statistical climate
diagnostics and prediction.