* 1112969
* SBIR Phase I:  Improvement of the Biofuel Fermentation Process by the Phage-mediated Reduction of Contaminating Lactic Acid Bacteria
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2011,12/31/2011
* Elizabeth Summer, Phage Biocontrol Research, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Prakash Balan
* 12/31/2011
* USD 150,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project will be used to
optimize biofuel production. The fermentation of biofuel ethanol is frequently
disrupted by the growth of competing lactic acid bacteria (LAB). LAB compete for
the feedstock, produce undesirable acids and inhibit fermentation. Currently,
the LAB control method of choice is to apply antibiotics. Phage Biocontrol is
proposing to develop an entirely new, alternative treatment for controlling LAB
in the biofuel fermentation industry, based on formulations of bacteriolytic
phage. Phage are natural, harmless, ubiquitous bacteriolytic agents that can be
found in fermented foods. This project is focused on developing phage as a
treatment to control LAB contamination during production of bio-fuels. The
broader/commercial impacts of this research are to increase efficiency and
profitability of biofuel production while eliminating the industrial use of
antibiotics. The most significant commercial impact will be to decrease costly
fermentation failure events caused by LAB, thus increasing both ethanol yields
and profits. The broader societal impacts are arguably even more significant.
First, phage treatment has the potential to increase biofuel yields, a necessary
goal as fossil fuel levels diminish. Second, while there is a general agreement
that widespread, non-medical antibiotic use should be curtailed, antibiotics are
currently the most effective control measure available. Phage formulations have
real potential to replace antibiotics for non-medical applications. Thus, the
innovative application of phage to control LAB in the fuel ethanol fermentation
industry will lead to positive economic and societal impacts.