* 1112572
* High-field Dynamic Nuclear Polarization using Spin Probes and Intrinsic Defects at Local Interfaces of Polymers and Solids
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2015
* Song-I Han, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Lin He
* 08/31/2015
* USD 527,030.00

With support from the Chemical Measurement and Imaging program in the Division
of Chemistry, Prof. Song-I Han and her group at the University of California -
Santa Barbara are developing new instrumentation and methodologies for high
magnetic field nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) to probe the detailed
microstructure of complex and heterogeneous materials, e.g. of multiphase block
copolymers or amorphous silicon. The sensitivity of conventional NMR
spectroscopy is insufficient to probe the microstructural properties at the
surface or interface at the necessary sub-nanometer length scale. Prof. Han
addresses this challenge by developing novel dynamic nuclear polarization
(DNP)-amplified NMR instrumentation and methods at 7 Tesla that enhance signals
by up to five orders of magnitudes through cryogenic cooling and polarization
transfer from polarized electron spins to nuclear spins. A unique and crucial
aspect of the approach is utilization of strategic electron spin probes
specifically located through chemical functionalization, or intrinsic
paramagnetic defects that are critical to the function or malfunction of the
materials. Prof. Han is adding concurrent continuous wave and pulsed electron
paramagnetic resonance (EPR) detection capabilities to a home-built spectrometer
to provide complete materials characterization through the nuclear and electron
spin probes. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The high field DNP approach may have high
impact on the study of a wide range of functional and heterogeneous materials,
e.g. a variety of multiphase polymer systems or amorphous and crystalline Si
based photovoltaic materials, whose interfacial properties or intrinsic
paramagnetic centers lie at the core of their function or malfunction.
Educational impact is enhanced by provision of research opportunities for
undergraduate students and by supporting professional development for women
scientists pursuing high level science careers.