* 1112918
* PFI:  Nanotechnology Innovations for Clean Energy - Innovative Partnerships (NICE-IP)
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2011,06/30/2014
* Pradeep Haldar, SUNY at Albany
* Standard Grant
* Sara B. Nerlove
* 06/30/2014
* USD 600,000.00

This Partnerships for Innovation project from the University at Albany a.k.a.
SUNY Albany (College of Nanoscale Science &amp; Engineering (CNSE)), in
collaboration with key players from the private sector and government, focuses
on the area of silicon nanowire (SiNW)-related nanotechnology innovations and
discoveries to optimize the properties of energy devices through the integration
of SiNW materials with controlled interfaces and desired physical and chemical
properties that will allow more widespread implementation of this platform
technology. CNSE's unique fabrication capabilities of nanostructured materials
will enable the production of interface geometries, defect structures, and
atomic arrangements not otherwise possible in materials produced by traditional
methods. In turn, the investigation of carrier generation, charge distribution,
surface migration and charge transfer on uniquely tailored surfaces leading to
better understanding and processing of these materials will be enabled.
Additionally, new shared knowledge will determine how to best integrate one- and
three-dimensional Si-based nanostructures and how such processes can be
appropriately scaled economically.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of
this research are on energy efficiency and clean energy technology. The project
proffers advances in energy devices, including solar cells, thermoelectric
devices, and batteries through improvements in SiNW architectures and
nanostructured materials. This activity will build on the work of CNSE's broader
incubation, commercialization, and "partnerships for innovation" efforts; which
focus on connecting university-based research and development activities with
private enterprise funding and expertise, which, in turn, will help increase the
rate and scale of clean energy technology market penetration across the region
and country. This program is expected to develop and ultimately commercialize
innovations and create economic development opportunities, resulting in green
jobs in the U.S., as well as ensuring independent and secure energy resources
for the nation. In addition to technology development outcomes of this project,
for the first time, three small business industrial partners at CNSE will get to
experience and contribute to the power of leveraging the circular open
innovation model. The knowledge sharing within this technology platform will
result in a pipeline of new capacity with new and existing industry partners.
This approach will make CNSE's new technology capabilities openly accessible to
external users, allowing these outsiders to expand on and remix the core product
in surprising new ways. Anticipated to arise out of input from external users
will be improvement on the innovations and creation of new value that CNSE and
its partners may ultimately be able to use in other industry segments.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Partners at the inception of the project include the
Knowledge Enhancement Partnership (KEP) unit, consisting of University of Albany
(College of Nanoscale Science &amp; Engineering), and three small businesses:
Magnolia Solar Corporation (Woburn, MA and Albany, NY), Hi-Z Technology (San
Diego, CA), and B.E.S.S. Technologies (Albany, NY). In addition, there are other
core partners (from the state of New York unless otherwise indicated). They
include private sector organizations: CG Power, EYP/Energy, New Energy New York,
and Salem Financial; these partners will provide market deployment
opportunities, assist in network building and strategic partnerships, and help
define specifications for renewable energy products developed by the KEP; public
sector organizations: including the National Renewable Energy Laboratory (NREL)
(Golden, CO), New York State Energy Research and Development Authority
(NYSERDA), and New York State Empire State Development (NYSESD); these partners
will support technology development, technology transfer assistance and
competitive economic development assistant grants to the KEP; and other partner
organizations: ECG Consulting, Heslin Rothenberg Farley Mesiti, and the Hudson
Valley Center for Innovation; these partners will provide business mentoring and
business planning support to the KEP.