* 1112646
* CONFERENCE: 2011 Chromosome Dynamics Gordon Research Conference to be held July 10-15, 2011 in West Dover, VT
* BIO,MCB
* 05/15/2011,04/30/2012
* Susan Lovett, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* Karen Cone
* 04/30/2012
* USD 8,000.00

Intellectual Merit &lt;br/&gt;The biennial Gordon Research Conference on
Chromosome Dynamics will be held at Mount Snow Resort, West Dover, VT from July
10-15, 2011. This conference brings together researchers studying different
aspects of chromosome biology. It is unusual in its broad scope, including
genome structure, chromosome interactions and segregation, chromatin,
telomere/centromere biology, epigenetics, DNA replication and repair. Unlike
more specialized conferences, it seeks to foster communication among diverse
investigators studying different aspects of chromosome dynamics. In addition to
covering diverse areas of chromosome biology, the conference has traditionally
featured biophysical approaches to structural and functional aspects of
chromosome biology and this year's session, "Views of Chromosomes and
Chromosomal Proteins" features speakers on state-of-the-art microscopy and
single-molecule studies and other emerging technologies. For the first time, the
2011 conference will feature a session on "Genomic Structure and Evolution", an
important feature of chromosome biology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts
&lt;br/&gt;The Gordon Research Conferences stress a highly interactive scale and
format, with ample opportunity for intense discussion of current findings and
ideas. This conference format allows new investigators, postdoctoral fellows and
graduate students to have the opportunity to present their work in several
venues (platform talks and poster sessions) and to interact with the many of
leaders of the field. Two talks in each session have been reserved for speakers
to be chosen from the submitted abstracts, allowing postdoctoral fellows and
graduate students the opportunity to present their work, some for the first
time. The program has been designed to represent the diversity of the field and
44% of the confirmed speakers are women. The conference will benefit both
established and new investigators by providing an exposure to areas outside
their specific fields and by providing interactions with some of the most
thoughtful and innovative members of the field.