* 1112433
* Collaborative Research: Advancing In-vivo Chemical Imaging by Merging Synchrotron-Based Infrared Data, Rapid Spectral Image Analysis, and Quantitative Chemometrics
* MPS,CHE
* 09/15/2011,08/31/2018
* Carol Hirschmugl, University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee
* Continuing Grant
* Lin He
* 08/31/2018
* USD 750,000.00

Professors Carol J. Hirschmugl and Roshan M. Dsouza of the University of
Wisconsin-Milwaukee and Professor Frank Vogt of the University of Tennessee
Knoxville are supported by the Chemical Measurement and Imaging (CMI) Program in
the Division of Chemistry to conduct a collaborative project to advance in-vivo
chemical imaging and analysis. The research will be conducted by combining
synchrotron-based infrared data obtained with the hyperspectral imaging
spectrometer (IRENI) at the Synchrotron Radiation Center at Madison, WI with
rapid spectral image analysis using graphics processing units and quantitative
chemometrics. The research involves high resolution imaging of live cells,
scattering corrections, chemometric methods for concentration measurement in
complex systems and application to algae growth studies.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If successful the project will improve the performance of
IRENI, the premium facility of its kind, and enable the chemical imaging and
analysis of samples that were previously considered to be too complex to handle,
such as live cells. The project will have a broad impact in chemistry and
biology. Students will be trained on a state-of-the-art infrared imaging
instrument in a Synchrotron Radiation Center. Undergraduate students from
diverse groups and their teachers will be involved in the project through
existing REU and RET programs, and workshops will be conducted to familiarize
the community with IRENI and to broaden its technical user base.