* 1112560
* Dynamics of Excited Electronic States in DNA
* MPS,CHE
* 08/15/2011,07/31/2016
* Bern Kohler, Montana State University
* Standard Grant
* Colby Foss
* 07/31/2016
* USD 470,887.00

In this project, funded by the Chemical Structure, Dynamics, and Mechanisms
Program of the Division of Chemistry, Professor Bern Kohler of Montana State
University, together with his graduate and undergraduate students, will conduct
a bottom-up investigation of excited electronic states created in single- and
double-stranded DNA by the absorption of UV light. These excited states are the
source of damaging photochemical reactions in living organisms. Widely tunable
femtosecond lasers will be used to measure transient electronic and vibrational
spectra of various DNA model systems in order to determine how the evolution of
electronic energy is modified by base stacking and base pairing. Experiments
will be performed on modified oligonucleotides in order to understand the
effects of structural disorder on nonradiative decay pathways. Charge transfer
excitations will be characterized by time-resolved vibrational spectra of DNA
model systems containing modified and natural nucleobases and by comparison of
experimental results with electronic structure calculations to be performed by
collaborators. By probing vibrational modes that are sensitive to hydrogen
bonding, mechanistic understanding of proton-coupled electron transfer in
double-stranded DNA will be targeted.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Apart from its
biological significance, DNA is an important model system for studying how
energy deposited by light in a complex molecular structure evolves in time and
is dissipated. By understanding how the response of the DNA double helix to UV
light differs from the response of much smaller DNA building blocks, the
research will benefit efforts that seek to predict and tailor the optical
properties of other complex assemblies of light-active components, including
nanomaterials. Prof. Kohler will also participate in a pilot project to deliver
top-quality science education to rural Montana school children. Interactive
science kits will be developed and mailed to select Montana teachers in
underserved areas of the state. The goal is to give teachers and their students
a richer learning experience through immersive, hands-on activities and to
foster relationships with scientist role models from Montana?s land grant
university through interactive videoconferencing.