* 1112105
* RUI: Hyphenated Surface Plasmon Resonance Techniques for Enhanced Biomolecular Interaction Studies and Biomarker Detections
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2016
* Feimeng Zhou, California State L A University Auxiliary Services Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Kelsey Cook
* 08/31/2016
* USD 270,000.00

Professor Feimeng Zhou of California State L A University is supported by the
Chemical Measurement and Imaging (CMI) Program in the Division of Chemistry to
interface surface plasmon resonance (SPR) with various analytical and separation
techniques and use the hyphenated analytical tools to study molecular binding
events and to identify biomarkers of relevance to neurological disorders. Three
related projects are proposed. Electrochemical flow-injection SPR will be used
to determine ligand-receptor binding; imaging SPR will be used for high-
throughput screening of potential inhibitors of beta-secretase, which is
relevant to the pathology of Alzheimer's disease; and label-free SPR will be
combined with size-exclusion chromatography for the separation and detection of
Alzheimer's disease-related peptides and protein fragments.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If successful, the proposed research will lead to the
development of new hyphenated analytical tools which may positively impact the
diagnosis and therapy of Alzheimer's disease and other neurological disorders.
Undergraduate students in a minority serving institution will be trained in
analytical instrumentation, device fabrication, surface chemistry, biosensor,
and neurochemistry, and will be motivated to pursue advanced studies in
chemistry.