* 1112126
* RUI: Halogen bonding between organic acceptors and transition-metal complexes
* MPS,CHE
* 08/15/2011,07/31/2015
* Sergiy Rosokha, Roosevelt University
* Continuing Grant
* Suk-Wah Tam-Chang
* 07/31/2015
* USD 280,000.00

Professor Sergiy Rosokha of Roosevelt University is supported by the
Macromolecular, Supramolecular and Nanochemistry Program in the Division of
Chemistry to conduct research of the halogen bonding between organic molecules
and transition-metal complexes. This work includes spectral (UV-Vis, FT-IR,
NMR), electrochemical and X-ray crystallographic measurements, as well as
computational analysis of the supramolecular association between halogen-
containing organic acceptors and inorganic complexes with diverse
stereochemistry and electronic properties. It intends to establish: 1) the
nature of this intermolecular bonding involving halogen atoms, 2) the main
factors which determine formation and structural, spectral and thermodynamic
characteristics of halogen-bonded complexes, and 3) the effects of this
intermolecular interaction on the reactions of halogen-containing molecules.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Fundamental understanding of halogen bonding will
facilitate preparation of hybrid conducting, magnetic and optical materials
combining advantageous features of organic and inorganic counterparts. It will
also clarify the interaction of halogenated molecules with biological substances
which is a critical aspect for the rational design of new pharmaceuticals.
Elucidation of the role of halogen bonding in reactivity will contribute to the
development of more effective chemical and petrochemical syntheses. Two features
of this project make it optimal for the training of undergraduate students and
maximize its educational impact. First, it includes a variety of essential
synthetic and instrumental techniques at moderate levels of complexity
accessible to novice chemists. Second, it requires testing of several series of
complexes, which permits involvement and close collaboration of many students.
The participation in the project will advance problem-solving ability and
experimental expertise of these students, as well as will improve their teamwork
and communication skills. The research experience leading to publications and
presentations at professional meetings will encourage students, many of whom are
from the underrepresented in science groups, to explore career in science. It
will also create a strong foundation for their subsequent contributions and
success in industrial and academic settings.