* 1112704
* Impact of Nonmigrating Tides on the Thermospheric Energy Budget and Constituents
* GEO,AGS
* 06/01/2013,05/31/2018
* Yongliang Zhang, Clemson University
* Continuing Grant
* Carrie E. Black
* 05/31/2018
* USD 297,956.00

This project aims to delineate and understand the impact of non-migrating tides
on parameters important to the aeronomy of the ionosphere-thermosphere system,
such as constituents, infrared emission rates and the thermospheric energy
budget. Non-migrating tides are pervasive and known to occur in neutral winds,
temperature, neutral density, and ionospheric parameters such as plasma
densities and electric fields. They manifest themselves in longitude and local
time variability, which recent observations from ground and space have shown to
be significant. Based on these new findings, significant non-migrating tidal
variations may also be present in thermospheric composition and in the infrared
emission of energy to the lower atmosphere and to space. This variability will
affect the ionosphere-thermosphere system in various ways, including its
photochemistry, energy budget, and neutral-plasma coupling. The investigation
will examine the tidal variability in [O]/[N2] column density ratio and in
nitric oxide and carbon dioxide volume emission rates of energy, connect it
quantitatively with the tides in temperature and winds and provide an assessment
of the relative importance for neutral-plasma coupling and the thermospheric
energy budget as function of season and solar cycle. Towards this goal, the
project will synergistically employ data from the GUVI and SABER instruments on
the TIMED satellite and an existing, observation-based model of temperature and
wind tides in the thermosphere. GUVI will provide the [O]/[N2] column density
and SABER nitric oxide and carbon dioxide volume emission rates of energy
emitted at 5.3 microns and 15 microns, respectively. The project will support a
Ph.D. student and involve summer undergraduate students in the research. Non-
migrating tides largely originate in the troposphere as heat is released by
evaporation and condensation near the surface. The effects to be investigated
are thus a measure for the geospace response to tropospheric weather and how
energy and momentum are transported from the lower into the upper atmosphere.
The study will provide observational constraints for an important neutral-plasma
coupling process, tidal [O]/[N2] variations, that is predicted by current
mechanistic and first principles models. It will provide first insight into the
weather impact on Earth's "natural thermostat", the nitric oxide 5.3 micron
emissions, by which heat and solar energy are efficiently lost from the
thermosphere to space and to the lower atmosphere.