* 1112966
* SBIR Phase I:  Vibration Harvesting for High-Temperature Wireless Sensors
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2011,12/31/2011
* Brian English, EngeniusMicro LLC
* Standard Grant
* Juan E. Figueroa
* 12/31/2011
* USD 149,925.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project investigates the use of
environmental vibrations to increase the interrogation distance between wireless
sensors and their readers. The utilization of free vibrations, themselves, for
increased performance is a paradigm shift away from existing approaches that use
vibrations purely for energy harvesting. Using vibrations to avoid material
limitations of semiconductors has broad applicability to sensing, control, data
storage, and communications. Currently, wireless sensors achieve usable
interrogation ranges through the use of electronics and/or batteries, but this
approach adversely impacts operating temperature, cost, and reliability of the
sensor node. To address these problems, this project investigates continuous and
cycled vibrations to increase interrogation distance in passive wireless
sensors. This demonstration will be simulated and then experimentally validated
using room-temperature devices. Next, the vibration harvester and sensor will be
designed for high-temperature operation. Then, an affordable fabrication process
will be developed using electronic packaging techniques. Finally, a prototype
sensor will be fabricated to harvests ambient vibrations and operate at
temperatures in excess of 300Â°C. If successful, this will identify usable sensor
materials and vibration parameters for high-temperature operation at a broad
range of wireless interrogation frequencies. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader
impact/commercial potential of this project includes fundamental advances in
vibration utilization and wireless sensors and applied advances in high-
temperature wireless sensing for condition-based maintenance and structural
health monitoring. The broader impact to science and education include a novel
advance in existing sensor technology, as well as funding for continued research
and education in RF sensors, RF power transfer, and high-temperature
fabrication. This project includes fundamental analysis and experimentation that
will increase scientific and technological understanding of mixed-signal sources
for communications and mechanical frequency behavior at high-temperatures. The
broader societal impact and commercial potential of this project will be the
ability to remotely monitor high-temperature machinery and processes to increase
lifetime and efficiency while reducing operating costs. The technology areas of
interest for this project include wireless sensors and condition-based
maintenance. The wireless sensor market is expected to grow 50-fold between 2008
and 2012, even with existing temperature limitations, because of 20-80% cost
savings over traditional monitoring techniques. This project demonstrates a path
to increase this growth by enabling monitoring in a wide range of high-
temperature industrial and aerospace applications, such as injection molding,
gas turbines, oil drilling, and composite manufacturing, among others.