* 1112188
* Develop Conditionaly Charged Residues for the Design of Peptide Channels
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2015
* Jianmin Gao, Boston College
* Continuing Grant
* David Rockcliffe
* 08/31/2015
* USD 330,000.00

With this award, the Chemistry of Life Processes program is supporting the
research of Professor Jianmin Gao of the Department of Chemistry at Boston
College. Professor Gao will develop and test a novel class of unnatural amino
acids that change their ionization states upon interacting with lipid membranes.
These amino acids are designated as "Conditionally Charged Residues" (CCRs) as
they are designed to be positively charged in aqueous solution, but neutral when
placed in a nonpolar environment such as a lipid membrane. It is expected that
such CCRs will have broad application in bioorganic and medicinal chemistry. In
this project, the synthesized CCRs are to be incorporated into the well
characterized channel forming peptide, gramicidin A, as a model system.
Professor Gao will examine the structural determinants of peptides that enable
their efficient folding into transmembrane channels. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
Broader Impacts of this project include the development of a set of widely
applicable non-proteinogenic amino acids for use in chemical biology and their
deployment toward advancing our understanding of peptide-membrane interactions.
Of equal importance is the education and training of graduate and undergraduate
students in interdisciplinary research. The training program includes an
outreach component through the intern program that the PI has initiated with
Roxbury Community College (RCC).