* 1112360
* Volatile Transition Metal Compounds with New Ligand Archetypes: Exploratory Synthesis, Small Molecule Reactivity, and Use as Molecular Precursors
* MPS,CHE
* 08/15/2011,07/31/2014
* Gregory Girolami, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Tingyu Li
* 07/31/2014
* USD 390,000.00

In this project funded by the Chemical Synthesis Program of the Chemistry
Division, Professor Gregory S. Girolami of the Department of Chemistry of the
University of Illinois will explore the synthesis of several classes of
molecular precursors for electronic materials. The project involves the
synthesis of new compounds, investigations of their chemical reactivities, and
studies of their volatilities and utilities as thin film precursors. Some of the
specific objectives of the current project are the development of volatile two-
coordinate amido complexes of the late transition elements, and mechanistic
studies of dealkylation reactions that are relevant both to chemical vapor
deposition (CVD) and to the chemistry of dialkylamide ligands. In parallel,
investigations of new CVD precursors for both metal borides and metal oxides
will be carried out, using a new class of chelating borohydride ligands of the
general formula NR2(BH3)2-.

The broader impacts involve training undergraduate students, graduate students,
and postdoctoral researchers, and broadening participation through the inclusion
of researchers from underrepresented groups on the project. This work could lead
to the development of better molecular precursors for chemical vapor deposition
(CVD) and atomic layer deposition (ALD) growth of thin films. Such chemistry
will have an impact on critical problems in the microelectronics industry, and
could lead to faster and more capable microprocessors for computers and other
electronic equipment. In addition, this project will provide excellent training
of students, from pre-undergraduate to post-doctoral, including those from
groups historically underrepresented in the sciences.