* 1112181
* Main Group and Lanthanide Elements in Controlled Coordination Environments: Synthesis, Structures, and Applications to Catalysis
* MPS,CHE
* 09/15/2011,08/31/2014
* Timothy Hanusa, Vanderbilt University
* Standard Grant
* Tingyu Li
* 08/31/2014
* USD 261,750.00

In this project funded by the Chemical Synthesis Program of the Chemistry
Division, Professor Timothy Hanusa of the Department of Chemistry at Vanderbilt
University will explore the relationships between early main-group elements and
the lanthanide (rare earth) metals. This study will help establish the extent to
which inexpensive and abundant early main group metals such as calcium,
strontium, and barium can supplement or substitute for the increasingly
expensive rare earth elements, which are of enormous importance to modern
society. Multidentate ligands with unconventional bridges such as phosphonium
groups will be designed so that the metals can be placed in coordination
environments that will compensate for differences in oxidation states. Their
structures and reactions with polar molecules can then be studied both
experimentally and computationally. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As the relationship
between the rare earth metals and comparable main group elements is clarified,
this research could lead to new uses of the latter in organic transformations
and catalysis. Such reactions are potentially broadly applicable in the chemical
and polymer industries, especially where inexpensive and non-toxic reagents are
required. Furthermore, the proposed research involves the professional training
of students, both in instruction in research skills, and in oral and written
communications of their findings. In addition, educational efforts are being
directed at broadening the participation of women and members of tradtionally
underrepresented groups in chemistry and at reaching out to both middle and high
school students.