* 1112019
* Novel M-C Bond Functionalization Reactions in Aqueous and Hydrocarbon Media Involving M(II)/M(IV) Redox Couples (M = Pd, Pt)
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2011,07/31/2015
* Andrei Vedernikov, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* George Janini
* 07/31/2015
* USD 456,000.00

This award to Professor Andrei Vedernikov at the University of Maryland at
College Park is to study the reactivity of a number of new organoplatinum(II)
and organopalladium(II) compounds that activate alkynes and arylimines with
oxygen and hydrogen peroxide in aqueous media. This study focuses on the
structure-reactivity relationships for organometallic oxidation and C-X
reductive elimination, which are of fundamental importance for developing
selective platinum- and palladium-mediated catalytic reactions. The reactivity
of some monohydrocarbyl platinum(IV) and monohydrocarbyl palladium(IV) complexes
with respect to C-X bond reductive elimination will be characterized in detail
in aqueous media, including kinetics studies and DFT modeling. New chelating
semilabile ligands will be developed for the catalytic selective aerobic
oxidation of olefins and alkynes in aqueous media. A recently discovered
catalytic reaction involving Pd- catalyzed CH- hydroxylation of arylimines with
hydrogen peroxide, will be subjected to a detailed mechanistic analysis and its
substrate scope expanded. The feasibility of new catalytic processes, such as
oxidative CH fluorination with O2 as the oxidant and oxidative coupling of
ethane and benzene, will also be explored. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Knowledge of
structure-reactivity relationships for reactions involving oxygen and hydrogen
peroxide as oxidants, water as solvent and organopalladium(II) and
organoplatinum(II) complexes as substrates will be valuable for the development
of new selective and efficient "green" synthetic protocols. An important outcome
of this research is the professional training of graduate, undergraduate and
high school students. Summer research students from the ACS SEED program and
local high schools will be involved. Undergraduate and graduate students from
underrepresented groups in Maryland and at the University of Maryland will
participate.