* 1112147
* EAGER: Collaborative Research: Attention, (Re)Action, and Perception: Measuring Presence in Collaborative Virtual Environments
* CSE,OAC
* 04/01/2011,03/31/2014
* Anne Massey, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Crowston
* 03/31/2014
* USD 197,736.00

Current communication and collaboration technologies fall short of providing the
highly interactive and multi-modal capabilities that can transform team
performance. Collaborative virtual environments present an entirely new way for
distributed collaborators to interact and work. A metric of the quality of a
collaborative virtual environment is the degree to which it creates a sense of
presence described as the feeling of ?being there? in the virtual place, but
there is limited empirical evidence regarding the link between presence and
performance, particularly in the context of collaborative teamwork.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Establishing the link between presence and performance is
complicated by the challenge of capturing objective, appropriately sensitive
behavioral indicators of collaborative virtual presence and exploring various
environmental and individual influences. This project will: (1) develop a
measurement methodology for assessing attention and (re)action as behavioral
(non-subjective) indicators of collaborative virtual presence in collaborative
virtual environments; (2) examine the relationship between behavioral and
perceptual measures of collaborative virtual presence in a collaborative virtual
environment; and (3) explore the sensitivity of the collaborative virtual
presence measures to varied environmental conditions and individual
characteristics. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research is fundamental to the
development and evolution of potentially transformative collaborative virtual
environments for organizational work. Given the central role of presence in the
utility of collaborative virtual environments, we must have reliable measures
and measurement instruments in order to enable the manipulation of presence as a
design variable. This research will result in a measurement methodology for
capturing behavioral indicators of collaborative virtual presence and an
assessment of the predictive capability and sensitivity of the collaborative
virtual presence measures.