* 1112292
* Hydrogen molecules in nanoscale confinement: A combined eigenstate-resolved/path integral study of the quantum translation-rotation dynamics, spectroscopy, and diffusion
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2011,06/30/2015
* Zlatko Bacic, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Evelyn Goldfield
* 06/30/2015
* USD 545,000.00

Zlatko Bacic (PI) and Mark E. Tuckerman (co-PI) of New York University are
supported by an award from the Chemical Structures, Dynamics and Mechanisms
program of the Chemistry Division for a computational study aimed at achieving a
fundamental understanding and a comprehensive theoretical description of the
quantum dynamics, spectroscopy, and diffusion of hydrogen molecules inside the
nanoscale cavities of diverse host materials, such as clathrate hydrates,
fullerenes and carbon nanotubes, and metal-organic frameworks (MOFs). This will
provide a broad theoretical framework, as well as quantitative predictions,
indispensable for the planning, analysis, and interpretation of various types of
spectroscopic measurements of these systems presently carried out by groups
around the world. An array of robust theoretical approaches, ranging from high-
dimensional quantum bound state and scattering methods to diffusion Monte Carlo
and path integral simulations, will be brought to bear on these objectives.
Another goal of this proposal is the accurate determination of multidimensional,
anisotropic and anharmonic interaction potentials of the nanoconfined hydrogen,
and in certain cases H2O, with the host materials. Accomplishing this will
involve the combination of sophisticated quantum dynamics and ab initio
electronic structure calculations. The eigenstate-resolved calculations will be
complemented by path integral simulations directed at elucidating the
temperature and concentration dependence of the energetics, free-energetics,
spatial distributions, and diffusion of molecular hydrogen, especially in bulk
clathrate hydrates and MOFs.

A major hurdle for the large-scale use of hydrogen as a clean and efficient
energy carrier is developing ways to store it safely and economically. One
possibility currently under intense investigation worldwide absorption in
nanoporous materials. Quantitative understanding of the properties of molecular
hydrogen under such conditions, and characterization of the interactions of
hydrogen with various host environments is essential in joint experimental and
theoretical efforts aimed at rational design of new media for hydrogen storage.
If met, the challenge of developing efficient hydrogen-storage materials will
have an enormous impact on emerging energy technologies. This research will be
carried out by graduate and undergraduate students at NYU, including those from
traditionally underrepresented groups. In addition, one of our experimental
collaborators, Prof. Stephen FitzGerald, is at an undergraduate institution
(Oberlin), and his students will be directly involved in the project.