* 1112035
* Nickel-Oxygen Chemistry: Synthesis and Reactivity
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2011,01/31/2015
* Charles Riordan, University of Delaware
* Continuing Grant
* Tingyu Li
* 01/31/2015
* USD 441,811.00

This award in the Chemical Synthesis (SYN) program supports work by Professor
Charles G. Riordan at the University of Delaware to carry out fundamental
studies on the reaction of nickel complexes with dioxygen. Using ligand design
and chemical synthesis strategies, new nickel-superoxo, -alkylperoxo and
-hydroperoxo complexes are sought. The geometric and electronic structures will
be defined by applying a range of spectroscopic methods. Reactivity of the new
molecules with exogenous substrates susceptible to oxygen atom transfer and C-H
activation will be explored in an effort to correlate structure with reactivity.
Complementary efforts are aimed at garnering evidence for high-valent oxonickel
intermediates. These studies require that student coworkers develop intellectual
breadth in synthetic and mechanistic inorganic chemistry and molecular
alternative energy. They further afford students the opportunity to collaborate
on advanced spectroscopic measurements with colleagues at the Universities of
Wisconsin-Madison and California-Davis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Metal-mediated
oxygen activation is a central process in Nature as well as the chemical and
pharmaceutical industries. The development of new reagents using abundant, i.e.
cheap metals, for stoichiometric and catalytic oxidation of organic molecules
remains a significant challenge. The fundamental studies of this project will
provide insight into how to harness the redox attributes of nickel for these
chemical transformations.