* 1112569
* Using Self-Organization to Control Nanometer-Scale Architecture in Semiconducting Polymer-Based Solar Cells
* MPS,CHE
* 10/01/2011,03/31/2016
* Yves Rubin, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* George Janini
* 03/31/2016
* USD 915,695.00

In this project funded by the Macromolecular, Supramolecular and Nanochemistry
Program of the Chemistry Division, Sarah Tolbert, Yves Rubin, and Benjamin
Schwartz of the University of California at Los Angeles will develop methods for
the solution-phase self-assembly of fullerene derivatives and conjugated
polymers into films for organic solar cells. The research has three
complementary components. In the first part, the research will focus on the use
of molecular assembly in self-complementary fullerene derivatives to optimize
network architecture for increased electron mobility. In the second part,
carrier mobility in the semiconducting polymer will be examined and optimized,
this time using self-assembly of amphiphilic semiconducting polymers in aqueous
solution. Finally, to facilitate the use of high mobility electron acceptors
such as titania, fullerenes with surface binding groups will be prepared and the
performance of solar cells incorporating nanostructured titania covered with
fullerene monolayers will be studied. The broader impacts involve training
graduate and undergraduate students, enhancing research infrastructure by
bringing together a collaborative group, conducting high school teacher
workshops on solar cells/solar energy, and the potential societal benefits of
inexpensive organic photovoltaic devices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Solar cells made
from electrically conducting plastics show great technological promise but have
significant drawbacks in terms of low efficiencies and irreproducibility in
processing. This research seeks to solve some of those problems by enhancing our
fundamental understanding of how to integrate various organic compounds to
capture light and turn it into electrical energy. The specific focus is to find
robust ways to create nanometer sized structures that can efficiently generate
electricity and then transport that electricity out of the solar cell for usage.
Through development of new chemical components and processing strategies, this
research could lead to easier to produce and less expensive solar cell
technologies.