* 1112861
* A mineral-physics based model of mantle electrical conductivity
* GEO,EAR
* 06/01/2011,05/31/2016
* Steven Constable, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Continuing Grant
* Robin Reichlin
* 05/31/2016
* USD 357,177.00

Many of the tectonic processes expressed at Earth's surface are
the&lt;br/&gt;manifestation of processes rooted deeper within the planet.
Variations in&lt;br/&gt;temperatures and composition of the upper mantle (the
layer below the&lt;br/&gt;crust) combined with the forces that drive motion
contribute to the&lt;br/&gt;deformation patterns at the surface and/or melt
generation (possibly&lt;br/&gt;resulting in volcanoes). Models of the mantle
further our understanding&lt;br/&gt;of the evolution of these processes, but
these models require accurate&lt;br/&gt;estimates of temperature and composition
of the upper mantle---neither&lt;br/&gt;of which can be measured directly. To
estimate the state of the mantle,&lt;br/&gt;geophysical models of a physical
property sensitive to temperature and&lt;br/&gt;composition are typically used
as a proxy (e.g. seismic velocity and electrical&lt;br/&gt;conductivity). Using
electrical conductivity as a proxy requires&lt;br/&gt;laboratory measurements on
minerals at a range of conditions expected&lt;br/&gt;for the mantle. Most
interpretations of upper mantle&lt;br/&gt;electrical conductivity are based only
on the mineral olivine,&lt;br/&gt;which comprises 60-70% of the mantle, and
often ignore the possible&lt;br/&gt;influence of the remaining mineral
components. While olivine typically&lt;br/&gt;dominates the electrical
conductivity, there are cases, particularly&lt;br/&gt;when bound water content
is high, where electrical conductivity&lt;br/&gt;contributions from
orthopyroxene and clinopyroxene, the next most&lt;br/&gt;abundant upper mantle
minerals, may be disproportionate to their volume.&lt;br/&gt;This project will
involve the collection of electrical conductivity on&lt;br/&gt;mantle pyroxenes
in a laboratory controlled setting over a wide range of&lt;br/&gt;physical
conditions, leading to an improved model of dry pyroxene&lt;br/&gt;conductivity.
This model will help improve current,&lt;br/&gt;and aid in future,
interpretations of mantle conductivity models and the&lt;br/&gt;processes that
potentially drive melt generation and surface dynamics.&lt;br/&gt;This project
will also include the building of a conductivity apparatus&lt;br/&gt;than can be
used in future studies as well as the training of a
postdoc.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There have been few electrical conductivity
studies on orthopyroxene and&lt;br/&gt;fewer on clinopyroxene. While they
suggest anhydrous conductivity of&lt;br/&gt;orthopyroxene is similar to that of
olivine, with clinopyroxene about one&lt;br/&gt;order of magnitude lower, they
were conducted along predetermined oxygen&lt;br/&gt;fugacity paths, thus
limiting their application to specific conditions. This project&lt;br/&gt;will
focus on the collection of electrical conductivity and
thermopower&lt;br/&gt;measurements on mantle derived pyroxenes over a wide range
of&lt;br/&gt;temperatures and oxygen fugacities relevant to the mantle.
By&lt;br/&gt;collecting thermopower measurements in tandem with
electrical&lt;br/&gt;conductivity at several oxygen fugacity states and
temperatures it&lt;br/&gt;will be possible to estimate the concentration and
mobility of the&lt;br/&gt;various charge carriers and build point defect models
that extend&lt;br/&gt;conductivity estimates to a much larger range of mantle
conditions. A&lt;br/&gt;similar model for olivine has become a standard for
comparison with&lt;br/&gt;laboratory experiments and repeatedly verified in
recent experiments.&lt;br/&gt;In the past few years there has been a great deal
of attention paid to&lt;br/&gt;the effect of water on olivine conductivity.
However, water partitioning&lt;br/&gt;experiments show that pyroxenes may hold
ten times as much bound H2O as&lt;br/&gt;olivine. Apart from contributing to
bulk composition, pyroxenites (rocks&lt;br/&gt;with &gt;50% pyroxene) are found
regionally in veins which are important to&lt;br/&gt;the geochemical budget, and
may be responsible for the "garnet&lt;br/&gt;signature" in mid-ocean ridges and
ocean island basalts. If such veins&lt;br/&gt;form interconnected networks they
would have a disproportionate effect&lt;br/&gt;on mantle conductivity. A
reliable anhydrous pyroxene conductivity&lt;br/&gt;model developed as part of
this study will aid interpretation of future&lt;br/&gt;electrical conductivity
experiments on hydrous pyroxenes, as well as &lt;br/&gt;improve the
interpretation of mantle conductivities inferred from&lt;br/&gt;electromagnetic
sounding.