* 1112579
* US-Japan Workshop on Bioinspired Sensing and Bioinspired Actuation (BSBA) Technologies; Hawaii; March 18 and 19, 2011
* ENG,CMMI
* 03/01/2011,02/29/2012
* Masayoshi Tomizuka, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* george hazelrigg
* 02/29/2012
* USD 35,860.00

This grant provides partial funding for a joint US-Japan Workshop on Bioinspired
Sensing and Bioinspired Actuation (BSBA) Technologies, to be held in Japan on
March 18 and 19, 2011. Society is reliant on the use of sensors and actuators to
monitor and control its engineering systems, and new paradigms to their design
are urgently needed to ensure sensors and actuators continue to improve in
functionality, reduce in cost and shrink in size. An entirely new approach to
design next-generation sensors and actuators is through the mimicking of the
highly efficient sensing and actuation mechanisms found throughout nature.
Toward this end, a joint US-Japan Workshop is organized to identify a research
and education roadmap for bio-inspired engineering of sensors and actuators. The
objectives of the US-Japan Workshop on Bio-inspired Sensing and Bio-inspired
Actuation (BSBA) are to: (a) evaluate the current status of research and
education in the topic area in the United States and Japan, (b) identify
critical and strategic research and educational issues of mutual interest, (c)
identify joint research projects and potential research teams for collaborative
research activities, and (d) formulate a strategy for securing funding for them
in both the US and Japan. The workshop will be jointly supported by NSF and
Japan Technological Agency (JST).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research of BSBA is
newly emerging and multi-disciplinary, and vigorous research efforts are
beginning to be undertaken in various disciplines including
aerospace/civil/electrical/mechanical engineering, bioengineering, biology and
chemistry. It is expected to bring transformative changes to the design of many
engineering systems. As USA and Japan are two technological giants in the world,
joint BSBA research can be expected to create breakthroughs that will lead to
novel bio-inspired technologies that could impact every facets of our living
society. The workshop will invite and include the participation of students,
post doctoral researchers and other junior researchers as well as
underrepresented groups of researchers to enhance diversity and broad
contribution. The workshop will also promote the international collaboration to
leverage resources, and share technical data and research ideas for the mutual
benefit of the two countries. The outcomes of the workshop will point to and
guide the major collaborative directions of future sensor technology research
between US and Japan.