* 1112990
* SBIR Phase I:  High-speed Low-cost Spectral Domain Optical Coherence Tomography System for Intravascular Imaging Applications
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2011,06/30/2012
* William Brown, Wasatch Photonics, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 06/30/2012
* USD 179,506.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project seeks to
demonstrate that 840 nm spectral domain optical coherence tomography (OCT) can
provide images equal to or better than those currently available from swept
source OCT, with the added advantages of higher imaging speeds and lower cost.
Intravascular OCT is poised for commercial growth, but is still limited by
technical complexity, availability, and cost. This Phase I SBIR proposes a
complete prototype system based on a very high resolution (0.02 nm/pixel)
spectrometer, capable of imaging 5 mm deep with a resolution of &lt; 10 microns.
A novel fiber probe will be designed and prototyped. Proof of principle data
will be collected from tissue phantoms and waste animal tissue. Pending
successful completion of a Phase I, a Phase II project would complete system
engineering, decrease system cost, and target first in-human
imaging.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact/commercial potential of this
project is an increase in performance and availability of intravascular OCT (IV-
OCT). Intravascular OCT provides detailed imaging information for plaque
assessment, stent implantation, and stent monitoring over time. Identification
and treatment of unstable plaques and other intravascular conditions can reduce
the morbidity and mortality rate from coronary artery disease (CAD). CAD is the
primary cause of heart attacks and strokes, which killed over 631,000 and
137,000 people, respectively, in the U.S in 2006. The market size for
intravascular OCT is estimated at more than $1B annually, but there is currently
only one commercially available IV-OCT system. By increasing system speed and
reducing cost, this project will accelerate clinical use of IV-OCT.