* 1112326
* COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH: HYPERBRANCHED GLYCOPOLYMERS VIA CONTROLLED RADICAL POLYMERIZATIONS
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2011,07/31/2015
* Coleen Pugh, University of Akron
* Continuing Grant
* George Janini
* 07/31/2015
* USD 225,000.00

In this project funded by the Macromolecular, Supramolecular and Nanochemistry
Program of the Chemistry Division, Andrea Kasko of the University of California
at Los Angeles and Coleen Pugh of the University of Akron will develop synthetic
methodologies to prepare biomimetic glycopolymers. A series of sugar-based
initiators, monomers, and inimers (initiator/monomer)s will be synthesized using
readily available and inexpensive starting materials and procedures. A new class
of hyperbranched biomimetic glyco(co)polymers will be synthesized via controlled
radical (co)polymerization of the inimers, in which the saccharide residues can
be incorporated not only pendant to the polymer backbone, but also within the
polymer chain in their native ring form. Controlled polymerizations will allow
the production of complex structures, including random and block copolymers with
end-functionalization. The branched structure of these materials will be
characterized by MS-MS, 2-D NMR spectroscopy, and light scattering analysis, and
the biological activity of the polymers will be characterized by evaluating the
sequestration of growth factors and determining lectin binding affinity. The
broader impacts involve training undergraduate and graduate students, enhancing
research and education infrastructure through the collaboration between the two
universities, participating in outreach to K-12 students via a Science Olympiad
Polymer Detective activity and via an interactive website and blog with a high
school chemistry class, and the potential impact of this research on science and
technology that utilizes glycopolymers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This work addresses
a longstanding issue in the chemical synthesis of polysaccharides (long chain
molecules comprised of sugar units): developing methods to rapidly access large
quantities of polysaccharides with control over their compositions and
structures. These types of polymers could have multiple applications in
biomedicine, and may find use as therapeutic agents, drug carriers, materials
for regenerative medicine, or materials for diagnostic devices.