* 1112783
* EAGER: Engineering Molecular Sensors Of Endoplasmic Reticulum-Associated Degradation (ERAD)
* ENG,CBET
* 05/01/2011,04/30/2013
* Laura Segatori, William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* Friedrich Srienc
* 04/30/2013
* USD 100,047.00

This NSF award by the Biotechnology, Biochemical and Biomass Engineering program
supports the development of novel tools that will aid researchers in the
discovery of enhancers of degradation of misfolded proteins that are processed
by cells. The degradation of misfolded proteins is important both in
bioprocessing and in medicine, as one of the biggest problems in expression of
certain recombinant therapeutic proteins is the intracellular aggregation of
these proteins. Proteins which are targeted for secretion that accumulate as
aggregated or misfolded proteins inside cells cause cellular stress and
eventually cell death via apoptosis, leading to loss of productivity in
bioprocessing applications. In diseases such as Alzheimer's or Parkinson's, the
presence of an aggregated protein appears to lead to neurodegeneration. In
protein misfolding diseases, endoplasmic reticulum or ER stress may play a role
in cell death. The enhancement of mechanisms which would lead to degradation of
those proteins might slow down the progression of disease. In this project, the
investigators propose to develop a novel fluorescence based assay for the
detection of the activation of a specific protein degradation pathway (ER-
degradation). This assay is the first step in being able to develop high
throughput screens for molecules that will enhance intracellular degradation of
misfolded proteins. The assay will have applications both in the bioprocessing
industry and in biomedicine. The PI will integrate research and education at the
graduate and undergraduate levels, and work to increase the diversity of the
biotechnology field.