* 1112016
* Vibrational Spectroscopy and Dynamics of Reaction Intermediates
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2011,07/31/2014
* Marsha Lester, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Evelyn Goldfield
* 07/31/2014
* USD 560,400.00

Marsha Lester of the University of Pennsylvania is supported by the Chemical
Structures, Dynamics and Mechanisms program to carry out a series of fundamental
experimental studies of chemical reaction dynamics, many of which are based on
chemical systems of significance in the atmosphere. The experiments utilize
state-of-the-art spectroscopic and dynamical methods, but with the unique
approach of initiating the studies from stabilized intermediates that lie along
the reaction coordinate. Specifically, the planned studies focus on weakly bound
species produced by association of OH and CN radicals with molecular partners on
reactive potential energy surfaces. In each of these studies, fundamental or
overtone excitation of the CN radical or hydride stretch of the intermediate
will provide sufficient energy to initiate dynamics on a reactive potential
energy surface. Experimental observables include spectroscopic parameters that
characterize the reaction intermediates in high detail, for example molecular
structures, vibrational frequencies, and thresholds for dissociation and/or
reaction. In addition, dynamical information on dissociation and/or reaction
dynamics will be obtained from the internal and/or kinetic energy release to
products, yielding bond energies and enthalpies of formation for the
intermediates. Experimental outcomes will be compared with theoretical
calculations of the analogous properties derived from ab initio potential energy
surfaces.

In this project, young scientists at the undergraduate, graduate, and
postdoctoral levels will participate in forefront scientific research,
developing skills, experience, and confidence required to move into the
scientific and technical workforce. The participants -- many of whom are women
-- use technologically advanced laser equipment as they work on basic research
projects, which are also relevant to broader issues in atmospheric chemistry.