* 1112547
* Chemistry and evolutionary conservation of a naturally occurring metalloantibody
* MPS,CHE
* 07/15/2011,06/30/2016
* Tom Huxford, San Diego State University Foundation
* Standard Grant
* David Rockcliffe
* 06/30/2016
* USD 400,000.00

With this award, the Chemistry of Life Processes program is supporting the
research of Professor Tom Huxford of San Diego State University to study
fundamental questions in metal-mediated protein-ligand interactions. It is
estimated that one third of all proteins are metalloproteins. The use of metals
by antibodies to recognize and bind to antigens is a recent finding. In this
context, Professor Huxford and his students have provided concrete evidence that
the murine antibody LT1002 uses two bridging Ca2+ ions in binding to its
antigen. Furthermore, they discovered that the amino acids involved in metal
coordination by LT1002 are encoded in the germ-line sequences of antibody genes
within the genomes of diverse mammalian species and are also present in several
antibodies that have been previously analyzed. The experiments to be performed
under this award are designed to characterize the metal binding potential of the
LT1002 antibody and to test the hypothesis that the use of metals by antibodies
to recognize their antigens is evolutionarily conserved within the mammalian
immune system.

The Broader Impacts of this proposal center upon the design of experiments that
can be carried out by undergraduate and Master's degree candidates in
collaboration with local industrial scientists. The overall educational goal of
Dr. Huxford's research program is to expose a broad number of diverse students
to principles of structural biochemistry at an early stage in their academic
careers. The Structural Biochemistry Laboratory, in which the proposed research
will be carried out, has established and continues to maintain the SDSU
Macromolecular X-ray Crystallography Facility that serves biological and
chemical researchers across campus. Dr. Huxford has organized the SDSU
Structural Biology Program, an informal association of SDSU molecular biology
students, faculty, and researchers who meet together and host lectures and
seminars aimed at improving their understanding of experimental approaches that
link biomolecular structure and function.