* 1112682
* Conference: Keystone Symposia meeting on "AAA+ and Related ATP-Driven Protein Machines" being held at the Granlibakken Resort, Tahoe City, CA
* BIO,MCB
* 04/01/2011,03/31/2012
* Andrew Robertson, Keystone Symposia on Molecular and Cellular Biology
* Standard Grant
* Gregory W. Warr
* 03/31/2012
* USD 9,600.00

Intellectual merit. The goal of this Keystone Symposium on "AAA+ and Related
ATP-Driven Protein Machines: Structure, Function and Mechanism" is to stimulate
the development of novel concepts and approaches directed at a deep
understanding of the molecular mechanisms underlying a set of complex cellular
processes. The conference focuses on processes that require mechanical work
powered by the AAA+ (ATPases Associated with diverse cellular Activities) family
of molecular machines. These protein assemblies belong to a special class of
enzymes that are involved in key biological processes including transcription of
RNA from DNA, the replication of DNA preceding cell division, the biosynthesis
and turnover of proteins, the highly regulated processes associated with
trafficking of membranes from one part of the cell to another, and remodeling of
the dynamic protein scaffolding or "cytoskeleton," which gives the cell its
shape and mobility. This meeting will bring together researchers with very
diverse backgrounds and perspectives: physical scientists, who are applying
biophysical approaches to complex systems, and biologists, who seek deep
mechanistic understanding of fundamental cellular processes. This meeting aims
to foster innovation by bridging methodological and disciplinary boundaries.
Indeed, the meeting program will bring together speakers from diverse fields who
typically have had few opportunities to interact but have elucidated critical
aspects of different AAA+ proteins. Speakers will also include those who have
made breakthroughs in the understanding of proteins that do not belong to the
AAA+ family but are either functionally or structurally related. The
perspectives transcend both molecular scales, from the cellular to the atomic
level, as well as methodologies, from cell biology and genetics to single-
molecule biophysics. This combination will likely lead to insights into the
common mechanism of these proteins and to novel experimental approaches and
discoveries.

Broader impacts. This conference was conceived and organized around the central
goal to stimulate new ideas and novel approaches in AAA+ protein research. To
attain these goals, speakers were selected who have been pioneers in many
different biological areas or who have achieved recent conceptual or
experimental breakthroughs at different levels of analysis (e.g., structural,
chemical, cellular). This meeting will enhance infrastructure by fostering
networking and collaborations. With regard to the educational benefits to
trainees and new invesitigators in attendance, the meeting will achieve the
following: 1) acquaint these individuals with state-of-the-art information; 2)
encourage critical scientific analysis; and 3) promote their career development
with opportunities to participate in the discussion of cutting-edge science and
to network with established scientists who might contribute to their scientific
and professional development.