* 1112935
* CSR: Small: Collaborative Research: Bridging Reliability Analysis and Reality in Sensor Systems: Theories and Applications
* CSE,CNS
* 08/01/2011,07/31/2015
* Yan Sun, University of Rhode Island
* Standard Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 07/31/2015
* USD 163,384.00

From the viewpoint of researchers, developers, and even consumers, reliability
analysis is recognized as an indispensable step before sensor network systems
can be widely deployed for mission-critical applications. However, there is a
big gap between traditional network reliability analysis theories and realistic
sensor network system environments. The primary objective of this research is to
close such gap through new metrics, analytical models, and approaches for the
reliability analysis of large-scale sensor networks. Specifically, the research
has three major components: 1) concepts, metrics, and models for describing the
reliability behavior of sensor networks, 2) new algorithms and methodologies for
efficient reliability evaluation of sensor networks, and 3) applications/case
studies for demonstrating the practical significance of the proposed theoretical
approaches. The new reliability theories and methodologies developed through
this project are fundamental contributions to the body of knowledge on the
network system reliability as well as to the design of reliable sensor systems.
Additionally, a software tool and a prototype sensor system for railway
monitoring will be built to validate the proposed research, and render the
theoretical research operational and applicable. This project has broader
impacts through graduate and undergraduate education, and through an integrated
outreach and group mentoring program that will promote recruitment and retention
of female students in engineering disciplines.