* 1112902
* Graduate Student and Postdoctoral Conference on Applied Inverse Problems
* MPS,DMS
* 05/01/2011,04/30/2012
* William Rundell, Texas A&M Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* James Alexander
* 04/30/2012
* USD 32,930.00

This proposal seeks funding for junior researchers to attend the large, biennial
meeting on mathematical inverse problems; the Applied Inverse Problems (AIP)
conference. The meeting will be held on the campus of Texas A&amp;M University,
May, 23-27, 2011. There will also be a pre-conference workshop, specifically
tailored to give graduate students and postdocs critical background material. As
expected from the conference title, there is an emphasis on applications and
most talks will be motivated directly by questions in the physical, biological
and engineering sciences. This makes this a "not-to-be-missed" meeting,
especially for the junior researcher, and this proposal seeks travel funding to
permit graduate student and postdoc attendance. This will have significant
broader impact as it exposes US junior researchers to state-of-the-art
applications and mathematical techniques in a rapidly expanding area that has
considerable technological importance for the health, economic welfare and
security of the nation. AIP-2011 is the sixth in a series of biennial meetings
that are intended to be the comprehensive scientific conference for the area of
inverse problems in partial differential equations and applications. In addition
to the 12 plenary talks, there will also be approximately 40 minisymposia plus
contributed sessions and poster sessions. The intent of the meeting is to
achieve a balance among analysis, computation and modeling for
applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The field of inverse problems has grown
enormously within the last decade. While the underlying model may be a partial
differential equation, mathematical, computational and statistical tools are
required that go far beyond this basis. One consequence of this is the demand
put on a researcher to have broad-based expertise and this particularly impacts
beginning researchers. For example, imaging is a ubiquitous tool in the modern
world and the mathematical models arising from various modalities give rise to
inverse problems. While the familiar CAT scan comes from the Radon transform and
gave rise to the field of (x-ray) tomography, modern imaging is extremely
complex. It not only uses different parts of the electromagnetic spectrum (which
have very different absorption and resolution properties) but also can involve
longitudonal waves such as sound, or as is now common, hybrid versions to
optimize against the twin evils of diffusion and lack of resolution. While many
of these methods have differential equations as their basis, reconstruction
techniques require intensive computational analysis and statistical methods to
optimize data use. Even this sub-field has become so broad that no one
individual can be expert on all aspects. For this reason AIP-2011 will feature a
pre-conference workshop primarily intended for graduate students and postdocs
that will take place immediately prior to the main meeting. The workshop will
feature 10 talks from 5 well-known experts and will cover many of the basic
tools that will be required for an understanding of the more in-depth talks of
the meeting itself. These include analytic/geometrical methods, Baysian
techniques, inverse scattering, regularization techniques and tomographic
methods in imaging. Funding from this award will also allow attendance at the
workshop and this in itself will have a broad educational impact in an area that
is critical for the technological growth of the nation.