* 1112636
* Broadening PIRE Success in Southeast Asia to Test Hypotheses of the Origins of Coral Triangle and Sunda Shelf Marine Biodiversity and Build Collaborations in Vietnam and Thailand
* O/D,OISE
* 04/01/2011,03/31/2013
* Kent Carpenter, Old Dominion University Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Nancy Sung
* 03/31/2013
* USD 26,888.00

1112636&lt;br/&gt;Carpenter&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports a planning
visit to enable Professor Kent Carpenter at Old Dominion University in Norfolk,
Virginia to meet with Dr. Si Tuan Vo, Vice Director, Institute of Oceanography
in Vietnam and Dr. Pholpunthin, Director, Center of Excellence for Biodiversity
in Thailand. They will be testing hypotheses of the origins of the Coral
Triangle and Sunda Shelf Marine Biodiversity. The majority of marine species
have a pelagic larval phase with the potential to disperse great distances, yet
the true magnitude of this exchange, the dynamic physical processes that shape
dispersal, and the evolutionary consequences of the interplay of larvae and
their physical environment remain largely unknown. For several years Professor
Carpenter has been undertaking research in the Coral Triangle. His joint field
sampling and laboratory work has been successful in the Philippines and
Indonesia. Results have emerged that show concordant phylogeographic patterns
consistent with physical and oceanographic features in the region, suggesting
additional hypotheses that can be tested with expanded research activity across
the South China Sea and Sunda Shelf to Vietnam and Thailand. This proposal seeks
to develop a program expanding research and education partnerships to enable
U.S. researchers, graduate students and undergraduate students to work closely
with collaborators in residence in Thailand and Vietnam.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There is sufficient overlap of interests between
researchers in the U.S., Vietnam and Thailand to indicate that they can
successfully pursue the activities proposed, and that the interaction will
benefit both sides. In addition, the involvement of a postdoc, two U.S. graduate
students and one undergraduate student will enable them to gain a valuable
international perspective and insight. They will also participate in discussions
on future collaborative activities with the researchers.