* 1112612
* RUI: Large-scale Algorithm Analysis and GPU Implementations for Compressed Sensing and Matrix Completion
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2011,07/31/2016
* Jeffrey Blanchard, Grinnell College
* Standard Grant
* Rosemary Renaut
* 07/31/2016
* USD 160,080.00

This project considers the fusion of two timely research topics: algorithms for
compressed sensing and matrix completion, and their implementation using
graphical processing units (GPUs). Compressed sensing is a relatively new
paradigm in signal processing where the acts of acquiring a signal and
compressing the measurements are combined into a single operation. The number of
compressed measurements acquired is proportional to the information content of
the signal rather than, as is traditional, equal to the ambient dimension of the
signal. Although the number of measurements is significantly reduced resulting
in an undetermined system of equations, low-complexity greedy algorithms can be
guaranteed to reconstruct an accurate approximation to the measured signal
provided that the underlying signal was sparse, i.e. had only a few important
components. Matrix completion similarly exploits the simplicity of the target
matrix having only a few independent columns; in other words, one recovers a low
rank matrix from a limited number of measurements. Typical applications include
compressive radar, geophysical data analysis, medical imaging, and computer
vision. The data sets from these applications are typically, however, at least
an order of magnitude beyond the currently available simulation levels. By
employing the computational power of GPUs this project provides a platform for
overcoming computational barriers and the necessary large-scale testing on
problems up to three orders of magnitude beyond current empirical testing
regimes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Traditionally, a signal is
measured by acquiring every component in the signal and then compressing the
signal with an appropriate computational algorithm. For example, digital cameras
capture an image with a huge number of pixels and then a compression scheme such
as JPEG is used to reduce the size of the digital image for storage or
dissemination. In many cases, the costs and challenges associated with taking
measurements are considerable. In compressed sensing and matrix completion, the
measurement process is altered in order to reduce the number of measurements but
the signal reconstruction process is necessarily more difficult. Compressed
sensing and matrix completion transfer the workload from the measurement process
to computational resources dedicated to the signal reconstruction. A typical
example in medical imaging is magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) where the time
required to obtain a diagnostic level MRI causes unnecessary discomfort for
patients and even pediatric sedation. Compressed sensing MRI has demonstrated
the ability to produce diagnostic caliber images in a fraction of the time. The
increased computational burden requires fast, efficient algorithms and many such
algorithms have been introduced or updated for compressed sensing. The observed
performance of these algorithms is substantially superior to their pessimistic
theoretical guarantees, but testing of these algorithms has been constrained by
their imposed computational burden. In this project, the PI and collaborators
develop software capable of providing near real-time signal reconstruction from
compressed measurements through development of new techniques, and by exploiting
the computational performance gains offered by new architectures with graphical
processing units. The resulting software validation is aimed to provide
practioners with guidance on algorithm choice most appropriate to the
application. Undergraduate students at the PI's institution have the opportunity
to participate in the PI's research and are exposed to the challenges presented,
but gains to be achieved, when exploiting new scientific computing
architectures.