* 1112165
* SBIR Phase I:  Low-Cost Photocatalytic Treatment to Seal Existing Concrete, Stone, Masonry or Other Cementitious Surfaces and Make Them Self-Cleaning
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2011,12/31/2011
* Kevin Robinson, armONx
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 12/31/2011
* USD 150,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project addresses the problem of
organic contamination on porous building materials such as concrete, stone, and
related cementitious materials. Contaminants on these materials range from
automotive fluids to inks to biological agents, such as fungi. This research
explores a unique low-cost (~10 cents/square foot) patent-pending treatment that
achieves significant photocatalytic breakdown of common organic surface
contaminants over a time span of days. This durable, surface-modifying, self-
cleaning nanotechnology both permanently seals pores and makes surfaces
photoactive. This combined effect keeps contaminants at the surface and there
breaks them down, or makes them more accessible to conventional cleaners.
Treated surfaces are consequently inimical to molds - without using a biocide -
and largely "take care of themselves". Our research objectives include
confirming various theoretical predictions of durability and effectiveness. This
project will experimentally test and optimize the following characteristics,
among others: 1) speed of photocatalytic reactions, 2) effectiveness regarding
organic runoff and mold infestation, 3) mechanical and photocatalytic
durability, 4) pot life and 5) shelf life. Pilot research has demonstrated
preliminary success on auto oil-laden roads and moldy walkways; the Phase I
research will result in further confirmation of, and expanded confidence in,
these preliminary data.

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project is large since organic
contaminants inflict hundreds of millions of dollars of damage annually in the
United States alone. These damages are manifested in the form of projects
delayed or cancelled due to projected organic runoff, the defacing of buildings
or other surfaces, or the growth of unsightly molds, to which about 10% of the
general population is allergic. Perhaps $100 million dollars is spent annually
in the United States on concrete sealants that are only partially effective; a
more effective sealant could create millions of dollars of new economic
activity. This "green product" is easy to apply and desirable surface
characteristics, such as wet traction or vapor transmission, are unchanged by
its application. Others have proposed surface-membrane coatings with more-costly
organic excipients that are less compatible with inorganic substrates and less
durable, or are themselves susceptible to photocatalytic breakdown. This new
method ensures both materials compatibility and low cost. This method also
compares favorably with self-cleaning European concretes in both cost (they are
ten times as expensive) and performance (i.e., the competing materials remain
permeable, absorb moisture, and can draw contaminants into the subsurface where
they are more challenging to address).