* 1112908
* SBIR Phase I:Metrology for Precision Machining
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2011,12/31/2011
* Gregory Johnson, Ascentia Imaging, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Juan E. Figueroa
* 12/31/2011
* USD 149,800.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project identifies an
opportunity to advance the state of the art of ultra-precision fabrication
precision by an order of magnitude or more compared to current capabilities. A
significant problem with modern multi-axis ultra-precision fabrication is the
lack of overall system closed loop control, requiring instead calibrated open-
loop control which is unable to reach nanometer precision. The research
objectives in this project open the opportunity for higher precision by
designing and simulating a real time in-situ metrology system, including optics
and algorithms, to achieve 5 nanometer x, y, z root mean square precision over a
6 inch planar substrate. The research is based on jointly designing an array of
wavefront sensors, algorithms, commercially available processing hardware and
specialized cooperating targets to provide real-time position feedback to a
modern diamond turning/milling machine. The anticipated technical results are
optical designs, algorithms matched to hardware, array geometries for wavefront
sensing, specialized reference object designs and system simulations for real-
world performance and proof-of-concept. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
broader impact/commercial potential of this project is demonstrated by a
dramatic increase in the precision of ultra-precision fabrication and the
competitive advantage inherent in such capability. The innovations in this
project will enhance scientific and technological understanding of a wide field
of view nanometer precision metrology system that will be used to enable
fabrication of devices with tolerances not previously achievable. Fabrication of
higher precision devices provides new optic/photonic devices, smaller and more
reliable micro-mechanical systems and more durable yet increasingly inexpensive
consumer goods. Nanometer precision in-situ measurement provides the ability to
work faster and more consistently while also enablingg "re-work". The societal
and commercial impacts of higher precision components produced in less time with
more consistency extends beyond the devices and affects the way people interact
with business opportunity and communication, family needs and education, and
creates new forms of mobility and entertainment. Commercial advantage is
providing ultra-precision fabrication with the highest precision in the world
while also having the ability to remove, re-mount, and re-work components.
Higher precision impacts every technology area and market sector that relies on
technology fabrication, and future unknown markets that are enabled by higher
precision.