* 1112753
* PFI:  Cognitive Signal Processing
* TIP,TI
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2015
* Eric Fossum, Dartmouth College
* Standard Grant
* Sara B. Nerlove
* 08/31/2015
* USD 599,990.00

This Partnerships for Innovations (PFI) project partners Dartmouth College
investigators and students with small businesses in the research and research
translation of novel mechanisms and associated computational platforms for low
power, high throughput signal processing that will translate to new technologies
and products for sensory enhancement and for mobile sensor systems. The
intellectual merit of this project derives from its focus on research and
translation of the novel signal processing mechanisms of neuronal systems to low
power analog and mixed-signal devices and the subsequent use and reuse of these
mechanisms across applications that demand low power and high throughput.
Example applications include a new imaging device that substantially improves
image quality by sensing single photons and moving signal processing functions
close to the sensor; an auditory device for focused listening in noisy
environments; body-worn devices for biomedical monitoring and enhancing
biomechanics performance (e.g., in athletes, disabled, or elderly people);
remote, wireless monitoring of machines and structures (e.g., wind turbines,
aircraft, bridges); and wireless sensor networks. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
broader impacts of this research are the strengthening of Ph.D. level education
to include training in entrepreneurship and new venture creation; the economic
impact on Knowledge Enhancement Partners (KEPs) associated with broadening
markets for their products; and an impact on regional small technology companies
through increased visibility in attracting and hiring technical staff. The
effort builds on a strong foundation in innovation within the academic programs
of the Thayer School of Engineering, Dartmouth College. Thayer School offers the
nation's first doctoral-level Engineering Innovation Program designed to provide
Ph.D. graduates with the entrepreneurial training needed to turn research
discoveries into marketable technologies. Grant funds are leveraged by internal
fellowship funding, providing these students with a five-year opportunity for
collaborative research with partners, for research translation, and for
technology development stemming from PFI activities. Activities with local non-
governmental organizations that support regional economic development focus on
programs, promotional materials, and websites to attract and retain intellectual
capital within New Hampshire and Vermont and to attract new small technology
companies to the region, thereby promoting economic development on both sides of
the Connecticut River. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Partners at the inception of the
project include the Knowledge Enhancement Partnership (KEP) unit, consisting of
Dartmouth College's Thayer School of Engineering and five small businesses:
Forza Silicon (Pasadena, CA), MicroStrain, Inc. (Williston, VT), Neuromorfix,
Inc. (Atlanta, GA), Simbex, LLC. (Lebanon, NH), Sound Innovations Inc. (White
River Junction, VT). In addition, there are other partners. These partners
include a large corporation: Maxim Integrated Products (Sunnyvale, CA) and two
local non-profit, non-governmental organizations: Grafton County Economic
Development Council (NH) and Green Mountain Economic Development Corporation
(VT).