* 1112820
* The Formation and Stabilization of Thickened Lithosphere
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2011,06/30/2015
* Catherine Cooper, Washington State University
* Standard Grant
* Robin Reichlin
* 06/30/2015
* USD 206,372.00

Continents, covering only ~30% of the Earth's surface, are the sole location of
human habitation, yet, unfortunately are also regions of widely distributed
deformation resulting in earthquakes, volcanism, landslides, etc. Ultimately,
these destructive processes are the consequence of the Earth losing heat that is
stored &amp; generated (via decay of radioactive material) within its interior.
How this energy translates into the processes that shape the continent's surface
still remains an outstanding challenge with great significance for understanding
what makes some regions tectonically "safe" versus potentially dangerous.
Fortunately, the Earth provides unique insight into its tectonic evolution via
areas of the continental interior called cratons. Cratons are thick
(~200-300km), old (~3-4 billions of years) regions that have avoided deformation
since their origin. Meaning that for the majority of Earth's history while the
rest of the Earth's surface was being modified by tectonic processes, cratons
resisted being split apart, broken up, compressed or remelted. This longevity
and survivability of cratons provides understanding of the driving forces behind
deformation over Earth's history. This study aims to increase our understanding
of this problem by focusing on mapping out when, how and why thick, stable
continental lithosphere forms as well as assessing the future survivability and
longevity for current tectonically stable regions of the
Earth.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project combines theoretical scalings with two-
and three-dimensional time-dependent numerical models to quantitatively
determine the dynamic conditions required to thicken and stabilize lithosphere.
It will consider two different candidates to make thickened cratonic lithosphere
from - buoyant oceanic lithosphere and island arc material. It will also explore
the role of a secondary process whereupon the removal of a dense layer (such as
eclogite or mafic cumulates) helps promote the stability of cratonic
lithosphere. It will compare the generated rheological and composition structure
within simulations against seismic observations of the interior of deep cratonic
lithosphere. Finally, It will address the size, frequency and nature of drips
potentially arising from the base of cratonic lithosphere. By focusing on a
critical stage in continental evolution, this work will provide new constraints
into the dynamics of the early Earth during which the cores of continental
lithosphere were formed.