* 1112342
* Development of Macrocyclic Organo-Peptide Hybrids for Selective Targeting of Protein-Protein Interfaces
* MPS,CHE
* 09/15/2011,08/31/2014
* Rudi Fasan, University of Rochester
* Continuing Grant
* David Rockcliffe
* 08/31/2014
* USD 330,000.00

With this award, the Chemistry of Life Processes program is supporting Professor
Rudi Fasan at the University of Rochester to investigate the design, synthesis,
and functional selection of macrocyclic organo-peptide hybrids (MOrPHs) as
chemical agents for selectively targeting protein interfaces. This research will
investigate and implement this new methodology for generating organo-peptide
macrocycles via a chemoselective reaction between synthetic precursors and
genetically encoded polypeptides. Library diversity will benefit from the
inclusion of both synthetic organic and encoded peptidyl elements of structural
variation. This versatile strategy for ligand assembly and diversification will
be coupled to a display system in E. coli and a high throughput screening system
for the macrocycle libraries. As a platform to test this approach to chemical
biology, the hydrid cyclic peptide libraries will be screened for the selective
modulation of protein complex formation between the tumor suppressor protein,
p53, and its repressors HdmX and Hdm2. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This approach to
modular organo-peptide library generation and screening, if successful, could
find broad application in the field of Chemical Biology. Moreover, if selective
Hdm2/HdmX-targeting molecules are identified these would likely serve as useful
chemical biological tools for the study of regulation/signal transduction in the
p53 pathway in cell physiology and cancer biology. This cross-disciplinary
research project will expose graduate and undergraduate students to techniques
in organic chemistry, biology, and biophysics. The project will also engage
members of traditionally underrepresented groups in scientific research at the
chemistry-biology interface.