* 1112397
* Novel Asymmetric Routes to 2-Oxetanones and their Application
* MPS,CHE
* 10/01/2011,09/30/2014
* Daniel Romo, Texas A&M Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Suk-Wah Tam-Chang
* 09/30/2014
* USD 425,000.00

Under prior NSF support, the Romo Group at Texas A&amp;M University developed
practical, catalytic asymmetric routes to both bicyclic and tricyclic beta-
lactones from ketoacid substrates employing a nucleophile-catalyzed aldol
lactonization process (NCAL). Building on a growing understanding of the NCAL
process, novel transformations of these beta-lactones and new variants of the
NCAL process including dynamic kinetic resolution are being pursued with the
support from the Chemical Synthesis Program of the Division of Chemistry. The
utility and practicality of these methods will be demonstrated in the context of
natural product total synthesis targeting the completion of spongiolactone and
curcumalactone/curcumanolide A. In addition, specific cellular probes based on
these bioactive natural products will be prepared to serve as basic proteomics
tools in collaborative studies. Mechanistic studies of ammonium enolates
directed toward development of new reaction manifolds involving these versatile
intermediates are being pursued in collaboration with Prof. Dean Tantillo (UC
Davis). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The practice of organic synthesis continues to be
instrumental in propelling significant advances in the areas of human and animal
health among other fields. Successful development of the proposed methods for
beta-lactones will impact the field of organic synthesis pertinent to the
pharmaceutical and agricultural industries as the methods being developed are
robust and "user friendly". In addition, synthesis of the targeted biologically
active natural products by synthetic methods being developed will have broader
impacts in enabling the further understanding of fundamental cellular processes
and enabling collaborations with computational chemists and biochemists/cell
biologists. The Romo Group has initiated a number of outreach initiatives
including a Natural Products Discovery Lab during the Annual Chemistry Open
House, combining NSF-funded research and teaching by importing new experiments
into the chemistry major's laboratory, and developing multimedia presentations
to demonstrate the societal relevance of organic synthesis.