* 1112374
* Optical Analysis and Imaging of Single-Walled Carbon Nanotubes
* MPS,CHE
* 08/15/2011,07/31/2015
* Robert Weisman, William Marsh Rice University
* Continuing Grant
* Lin He
* 07/31/2015
* USD 549,660.00

With support from the Chemical Measurement and Imaging Program in the Division
of Chemistry, Professor R. Bruce Weisman and his group at Rice University are
devising methods to better characterize single-walled carbon nanotubes, which
are among the most promising new materials emerging from nanotechnology
research. These long molecular-sized tubes of chemically bonded carbon atoms
display remarkable physical properties which promise advances in fields
including high performance materials, nano-scale electronics, solar energy
harvesting, and medical diagnostics and therapy. A barrier to realizing these
applications is often the assortment of different nanotube structures - each
with different properties - which result from nanotube synthesis. This project
is developing and enhancing convenient and nondestructive optical nanotube
analysis methods using near-infrared light. Novel instrumentation is being
developed to enhance the speed and effectiveness of analysis, and to improve
capabilities for physically sorting nanotube mixtures by structure. This work
should enable progress in sorting nanotube samples according to length, an
important goal for many applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project provides
valuable research experience to a number of undergraduate and graduate students.
The analysis methods developed and refined will likely be incorporated into
commercial scientific instruments. More broadly, the technical results of the
project will also help overcome some of the obstacles that now hamper commercial
production of nanotube-based devices and products. This may have a positive
effect on the U.S. economy because of the substantial potential value of
nanotube applications.