* 1112988
* Evolving Relationships and Dynamics Between Two- and Four-Year Colleges and Universities
* EDU,DUE
* 03/01/2011,02/28/2013
* Catherine Didion, National Academy of Sciences
* Standard Grant
* Virginia Carter
* 02/28/2013
* USD 369,500.00

The National Academy of Sciences (NAS) is appointing an ad-hoc steering
committee of experts and holding a planning meeting and a summit on Science,
Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics (STEM) education in community colleges
and the evolving relationships between 2- and 4-year institutions in STEM. The
roles of community colleges in STEM have changed profoundly in the last 15
years, and this summit examines changes and their effects on community colleges
(both students and institutions), 4-year institutions, secondary education, and
the workforce. The intellectual merit of this initiative is the National
Academies' role as a neutral convener bringing together a broad spectrum of
experts, policymakers, representatives from business and industry and other
stakeholders who rarely communicate with each other to develop more strategic
approaches to enhance the roles of community colleges in STEM and better
capitalize on the changing relationships and dynamics between 2- and 4-year
institutions of higher education. &lt;br/&gt;This effort is examining ways in
which the NAS might elucidate and communicate to higher education and policy
communities about (1) changing dynamics between 2- and 4-year colleges and
universities in STEM education; (2) issues and policies that inhibit or
facilitate 2-to 4-year articulation; (3) potentially conflicting roles of
community colleges in preparing STEM majors for transfer and to enter the
workforce; (4) programmatic, economic, and intellectual opportunities of benefit
to students, faculty, and institutions from strategic cross-institutional
relationships; and (5) roles of community colleges both as models of excellence
for STEM education in an increasingly global economy and in educating a globally
prepared technical workforce. Additionally, the summit is building on the Summit
on Community Colleges that was hosted by the White House in Fall 2010 by
allowing experts and critical stakeholders to address critical issues in STEM
education at 2- and 4-year institutions. The NAS is producing a summary report.
Broader impacts are expected to result from the publication, broad distribution,
and strategic discussions following the summit in venues such as annual meetings
of the American Association of Community Colleges and other higher education
organizations, STEM disciplinary societies, many of the Academies' participating
standing boards and committees with interests in the roles of community colleges
as well as additional sessions hosted by the NSF and other state and federal
agencies.