* 1112258
* Spin Coherences in Photosystem I Reaction Center Proteins and Model Systems
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2011,12/31/2014
* Michael Wasielewski, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* David Rockcliffe
* 12/31/2014
* USD 360,000.00

This award in the Chemistry of Life Processes (CLP) program supports work by
Professor Michael R. Wasielewski at Northwestern University to carry out
fundamental studies on the nature of multiple pathways for light-induced charge
separation in one of the key light transduction proteins in green plants, the
Photosystem I (PSI) reaction center (RC), which is responsible for providing the
chemical potential necessary to reduce carbon dioxide to carbohydrates. The PSI
RC in oxygenic organisms is unique because it is the only RC for which there is
evidence that both sets of redundant cofactors engage in electron transport. The
electron transfer cofactors in the PSI RC protein are arranged in two symmetric
pathways, A and B, which results in charge transport to a common electron
acceptor, and suggests the possibility that the PSI protein may function as an
interferometer in which electrons traversing the two pathways are in a quantum
superposition state. This project will address two key questions regarding the
role of quantum superposition in PSI function: 1) Does charge transport within
PSI involve independent spin-coherent radical ion pairs using either the A and B
pathways or a quantum superposition state involving both pathways
simultaneously? 2) Does the inherent quantum coherent nature of the dual-pathway
charge separation sense and control excess excitation energy dissipation in the
PSI RC? Time-resolved electron paramagnetic resonance spectroscopy will be used
to probe these mechanisms, while theory and synthetic donor-acceptor systems
will be used to model this behavior.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Understanding excess
energy dissipation in photosynthetic organisms is critical to ensuring the
viability and sustainability of photosynthetic energy transduction in nature, a
process essential to life on Earth. Improved knowledge of this process provides
an important conceptual basis for the design of artificial photosynthetic
systems for solar energy conversion. The results of this research will be
communicated to the public through the extensive outreach network of the
Northwestern-funded Initiative for Sustainability and Energy at Northwestern
(ISEN).