* 1112156
* STM and STS Studies of the Structures and Energetics of Axial Ligand Coordination to Metal Porphyrins at the Liquid-Solid Interface
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2011,07/31/2015
* Ursula Mazur, Washington State University
* Continuing Grant
* Colby Foss
* 07/31/2015
* USD 419,000.00

The Chemical Structure, Dynamics and Mechanisms Program of the Chemistry
Division supports Professor Ursula Mazur at the Washington State University for
studies of axial ligand coordination to metal porphyrins (MPs) at the liquid-
solid interface. Systematic studies will be performed on the reactions of MPs
with an axially coordinated ligand and the electronic orbital structures and
energies in these systems will be mapped using scanning tunneling microscopy
(STM). These studies will measure deviations from planarity of the MP induced by
ligand attachment, identify and map both the metal and the ligand orbitals in
the MP complexes, compare the observed density of states for the MP systems to
model electronic calculations, and measure kinetics in cases where MP ligand
association/dissociation occurs on the time scale of minutes. This research will
contribute information about the structure and electronic state changes
associated with the ligation of planar and non-planar metal porphyrins with
varying occupation of the metal 3d orbitals. Investigations of the connection
between porphyrin conformational flexibility and the structural/electronic
characteristics of an axially ligated complex are generally applicable to
distorted metallo-tetrapyrroles and therefore, relevant to a variety of
biologically and biomimetically important
processes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Metalloporphyrins perform many versatile
functions including light harvesting, electron and energy transfer, catalysis,
and act as receptors in molecular recognition. Many of these functions depend on
some species (called an axial ligand) interacting with the MP. The attachment of
an axial ligand to the MP induces changes in the electronic structure of both
the porphyrin and the ligand. Identifying the structural and electronic behavior
of the MP during ligation/de-ligation processes is crucial for the understanding
of the catalytic and recognition functions of MPs. This project will diverse
graduate and undergraduate students in surface science, surface microscopy and
spectroscopy, and the basic concepts of coordination chemistry. The proposed
research will be used as an educational vehicle for an outreach effort to
underrepresented Native American and Hispanic high school students. Mentoring
relationships with off-campus science and engineering leaders will provide
training, mentorship, and facilitate the formation of collaborative research
efforts.