* 1112957
* SBIR Phase I:  Integrating Electrical Discharge Non-Contact Measurement into Manufacturing Platforms for Precision On-Board Metrology
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2011,12/31/2011
* Jonathan Montgomery, SmalTec, International
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 12/31/2011
* USD 147,130.00

This Small business Innovation Research Phase I project will develop an on-board
micro-electrical discharge circuit, at pico-Joule energy levels, for
manufacturing platforms to act as automated micro-metrology system. This will be
a non-contact, non-destructive metrology process as well as have traditional EDM
capabilities for small holes and de-burring processes. One of the greatest
obstacles in machining micro-parts is inspection. Conventionally, a part is
removed from the machining platform and measured by a dedicated metrology
platform. When a critical dimension is out of tolerance, the part is replaced
within the machining platform for additional work. However, as dimensions and
tolerances are reduced to microns and smaller, it is impossible for these parts
to be re-positioned, once removed. These parts are then scrapped, the process is
modified, and a new part is manufactured in its place, costing time, material
waste, and money. This obstacle will be removed by this development of an
elegant and effective in situ metrology process. Additionally, by using the
abilities of the micro-EDM circuit, sensors can be manufactured on-site, at
little cost, to measure any machined forms. With this technology, anything
machined on the platform can be measured and re-machined on the platform without
losing positional accuracies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact/commercial
potential of this project is the advancement and increased reliability of
miniaturized products with micro-sized features. These products are a rapidly
expanding sector of the medical, automotive, and aerospace industries. As an
example, the minimally invasive medical products market, supported by micro-
metrology, is predicted to be a $19 Billion industry by 2011. These industries
are supplied by the micro-manufacturers that continue to shape it. As this
market shows rapid growth, more conventional machine suppliers are also
introducing equipment into the micro-manufacturing market. However, of all these
manufacturers, micro-EDM suppliers, with their non-contact, high aspect ratio,
and high precision capabilities, are uniquely situated to develop an elegant
non-contact on-board metrology solution for micro-parts. Micro-manufacturing
companies have formed integral relationships with customers in areas ranging
from medical devices to consumer products and government/defense, realizing
their prototyping and production needs. These relationships will mean an
immediate impact on consumer products as the integration of effective micro-
metrology and micro-manufacturing tools will be rapidly put to use. Mounting
this technology on conventional CNC systems will also have a great impact on the
macro-machining industry, as it will also improve process qualification,
increase throughput, and reduce operator time and material waste.