* 1112409
* Surface Patterning of Biomaterials Using the Tetrazine Ligation
* MPS,CHE
* 10/01/2011,09/30/2015
* Thomas Beebe, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* George Janini
* 09/30/2015
* USD 650,000.00

In this award funded by the Macromolecular, Supramolecular, and Nanochemistry
Program, Drs. Thomas Beebe, Joseph Fox (both from the University of Delaware)
and Ryan Mehl of Oregon State University will develop a novel method for the
creation of spatial patterns, including gradients, of biological molecules on
surfaces. The approach utilizes the tetrazine ligation, an extremely rapid
bioorthogonal reaction developed by Dr. Fox. The essential novel component of
the proposed program is the ability to control the presentation of proteins that
are attached to a surface. This will be achieved using a method developed by Dr.
Mehl, in which tetrazine-containing unnatural amino acids are site-specifically
displayed at surface-exposed positions in proteins. Putting these two elements
together results in the ability to create micrometer to centimeter patterns and
gradients using microcontact printing of the clickable trans-cyclooctene on the
surface, followed by reaction with tetrazine-modified proteins and protein
domains. The three main objectives of this proposal are: (a) synthesis and
characterization of gradients and patterns of immobilized proteins on surfaces,
starting from trans-cyclooctene; (b) development of methods for photochemically
patterning surfaces; (c) permissive substrates for neuron guidance with oriented
fibronectin domains. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;All of the award's objectives make
use of the novel element of controlled protein presentation. Since many emerging
biotechnologies rely on the attachment of biomolecules to surfaces, preferably
in a bioactive state, this project can greatly enhance detection limits, readout
speed, shelf-life, and general functionality of these emerging
technologies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award features an education and outreach
plan involving high school students, their teachers, undergraduate students,
graduate students and postdoctoral researchers, all working together between
three different research groups using organic synthesis, surface chemistry and
analysis, and bioorganic chemistry at the University of Delaware and at Oregon
State University. This award will also support outreach efforts to a local
African-American high school teacher, Ms. Loraine Snead of Wilmington Friends
School. Ms. Snead has developed a high school curriculum that teaches students
modern analytical and spectroscopic techniques. Over the past 3 years, Dr. Fox
has worked with Ms. Snead to support her curricular innovations.