* 1112195
* Conjugated Organoboron Oligomers and Polymers: Functional Building Blocks for Supramolecular Structures
* MPS,CHE
* 08/15/2011,07/31/2014
* Frieder Jaekle, Rutgers University Newark
* Standard Grant
* Timothy Patten
* 07/31/2014
* USD 400,000.00

In this project funded by the Macromolecular, Supramolecular and Nanochemistry
Program of the Chemistry Division, Frieder Jaekle of Rutgers University at
Newark will use conjugated organoborane oligomers and polymers for the
development of new rod-coil type amphiphiles, study their self-assembly into
higher order structures, and probe their response to different chemical and
physical stimuli. As a result of their electron-deficient nature, organoboranes
offer a unique set of desirable features including strongly pi-accepting
electronic properties and a pronounced tendency to form Lewis acid-base
complexes. A diverse group of undergraduate and graduate students will be
trained and high school students will be involved through the ACS project SEED.
Their learning experience will be further enriched through international
collaborations and student exchanges. As part of an effort to build bridges
between research and undergraduate education a new experiment on conjugated
polymers will be implemented in the Inorganic and Materials Chemistry
undergraduate laboratory.

This work will generate new fundamental knowledge in the field of main group
element chemistry and in the areas of conjugated polymers and supramolecular
materials. Studying these types of conjugated polymers could lead to novel
functional materials with characteristics beneficial to optical, electronic, and
sensing applications.