* 1112091
* A Supramolecular Chemistry Approach to Precisely Controlled Multi-Porphyrin Arrays in Water
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2015
* Janarthanan Jayawickramarajah, Tulane University
* Continuing Grant
* George Janini
* 08/31/2015
* USD 360,000.00

The research of Professor Jayawickramarajah at Tulane University focusing on the
self-assembly of well-defined multi-porphyrin arrays in competitive aqueous
media is supported by the Macromolecular, Supramolecular, and Nanochemistry
(MSN) program and the Experimental Program to Stimulate Competitive Research
(EPSCoR). This project aims to use hydrophobically driven host-guest
interactions in a coordinated and multivalent manner to (a) develop directional
nanowires composed of multi-porphyrin arrays with precise control over inter-
porphyrin characteristics (such as inter-porphyrin spacing and porphyrin-
porphyrin association constants), and (b) to construct porphyrin arrays with
control over array dimensions and composition, via a combination of solution-
and surface-based assembly methods. Subsequent to preparation, the photophysical
and electronic properties (in particular, photo-induced energy migration) of the
arrays will be explored. This research endeavor is inter-disciplinary involving
collaborations with the photochemistry group of Prof. Schmehl and the surface
physics group of Prof. Diebold.

In addition to advancing fundamental knowledge in molecular recognition and
self-assembly in water, this work is expected to benefit society by laying a
foundation for functional porphyrinic materials, produced in a sustainable and
environmentally friendly manner, with potential applications as components in
artificial light harvesting materials, as sensors, catalysts, and anti-microbial
platforms. Additional broader impacts include advancing the scientific education
of researchers from the undergraduate through post-doctoral levels via their
integral involvement in cross-disciplinary research activities ranging from
synthesis and self-assembly to microscopic and spectroscopic characterizations.
Further, this award will enhance the participation of under-represented groups
in chemistry education and research via (a) their direct involvement in research
projects, and (b) through the continuation of an outreach course developed by
Prof. Jayawickramarajah that involves freshman and sophomore undergraduate
students from Tulane conducting chemistry-centered service learning activities
at an inner-city New Orleans public school.