* 1112627
* 2011 Time-Dependent Density Functional Theory GRC
* MPS,CHE
* 05/01/2011,04/30/2012
* Filipp Furche, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* Evelyn Goldfield
* 04/30/2012
* USD 7,000.00

Filipp Furche of the University of California, Irvine, Nancy Gray of the Gordon
Research Conferences and Troy Van Voorhis of the Massachusetts Institute of
Technology are supported by an award from the Theory, Models and Computational
Methods program in the Chemistry Division to help fund the 2011 Time-Dependent
Density Functional Theory Gordon Research Conference. The award is also
supported by the Condensed Matter and Materials Theory program in the Division
of Materials Research. In recent years, time-dependent density-functional theory
(TDDFT) has emerged as a low-cost, general purpose approach to time-dependent
many-body quantum mechanics. The conference focus is on three questions: (i)
What are the major challenges facing the field, (ii) what can TDDFT learn from
other methods and vice versa, (iii) how can TDDFT be applied in new areas?
Session topics will include fundamentals of TDDFT, electronic excited states
(TDDFT and beyond), density matrix functional theory, photochemistry, solar
energy conversion, functional development, real-time dynamics, optical
properties, and van der Waals interactions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TDDFT has
become an essential tool used by researchers in photochemistry, atmospheric
chemistry, solar energy conversion, materials science, biophysics, laser
physics, physical chemistry and condensed matter physics The 2011 Gordon
Research Conference (GRC) on TDDFT will bring together developers and users of
TDDFT to share the latest theoretical developments and discuss their application
to grand challenge problems in chemistry, physics, and materials science. A
major aim of this conference is to facilitate interaction between established
world leaders in the field of DFFT and younger scientists. NSF support of this
conference is aimed at enabling junior scientists to attend and participate,
including assistant professors, postdoctoral research associates and graduate
students. The selection of speakers and discussion leaders reflects the
organizers' strong commitment to achieve diversity in gender, underrepresented
minorities, state of career, and geographical origin.