* 1112133
* Novel types of stable carbenes and their applications
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2011,04/30/2013
* Guy Bertrand, University of California-Riverside
* Continuing Grant
* Tingyu Li
* 04/30/2013
* USD 444,000.00

With the support of the Chemical Synthesis Program of the Chemistry Division,
Professor Guy Bertrand of the Chemistry Department at the University of
California - Riverside, will prepare several novel classes of carbenes, the
isolation of which have been impeded by the belief that they are inherently
unstable, or have eluded the synthetic skills of investigators. These species
have not only been chosen because they represent exciting synthetic challenges
but more importantly because they should feature interesting electronic and
steric properties, which can lead to important applications. These carbenes will
be used for the activation of small molecules and enthalpically strong bonds,
tasks previously exclusive to transition metal complexes. They will also be
utilized for the stabilization of radicals and triplet diradicals based on main
group elements, especially phosphorus and boron. Imines derived from these
carbenes will allow for the preparation of very strong neutral bases and hydride
donors, compounds that are of great interest for organic synthesis. These
carbenes are original ligands for transition metal catalysts, and over the years
the success of homogeneous catalysis can be attributed largely to the
development of a diverse range of ligand frameworks that have been used to tune
the behavior of the various systems. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;It is of paramount
importance for the future to find catalysts able to transform abundant and cheap
molecules into useful compounds ranging from bulk chemicals to therapeutics. The
activation of small molecules without transition metal centers offers an
alternative paradigm in the continuing search for efficient catalytic systems,
and should allow for considerably reducing the cost of important chemical
processes. Additionally, this project is at the interface between physical,
organic and organometallic chemistry and is therefore well suited to the
education of scientists at all levels. The University of California- Riverside,
classified as a minority serving institution, is well positioned to provide the
highest quality educational experience for students underrepresented in science.
Because of this fact, a diverse group of students will be involved in the
project. This research will also promote collaborative research and the exchange
of undergraduates, and graduates students between UC Riverside and several
French universities.