* 1112033
* Collaborative Research: Ionic Liquids- Cations in the Spotlight and Single Atom Changes with Large Consequences.
* MPS,CHE
* 09/15/2011,08/31/2015
* Claudio Margulis, University of Iowa
* Continuing Grant
* Colby Foss
* 08/31/2015
* USD 359,785.00

The Chemical Structure, Dynamics and Mechanisms Program of the NSF Chemistry
Division supports a Collaborative Research effort by Assoc. Prof. Claudio J.
Margulis (P.I.) at the University of Iowa Dept. of Chemistry and by Prof. Edward
W. Castner, Jr. (co-P.I.) at the Dept. of Chemistry and Chemical Biology,
Rutgers, The State University of New Jersey. The goal is to study in detail the
structural and dynamical properties of ionic liquids using a combination of
theoretical and computational methods from the Margulis group with experimental
investigations done by the Castner group. Ionic liquids consist of flexible,
asymmetric molecular cations and anions. Several reports have shown that very
small modification of either the cation or the anion components of the ionic
liquid can make dramatic changes to its properties. For example replacing the
central nitrogen atom of a tetralkylammonium cation by a phosphorus atom can
lead to a drop in the liquid viscosity by a factor of two. Our current
understanding of these liquids does not provide a straightforward explanation of
these results; our goal is to combine x-ray and NMR experiments on these liquids
with detailed molecular simulations and theoretical analyses to explain this
phenomenon.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The observed x-ray scattering patterns from
ionic liquids that all share the same bis(trifluoromethylsulfonyl)amide anion
are remarkably similar. This is because the anions have more electron-rich atoms
than the hydrocarbon-based cations. Thus, whereas the cations may be the most
important organizational components in many liquids, the information content in
the x-ray scattering provides mostly detailed information about the anions with
information about the cations being obtained only indirectly. We will invert
this circumstance by preparing ionic liquids with smaller anions such as
nitrate, dicyanamide and acetate, so that the observed x-ray scattering patterns
result predominantly from scattering by the cations. This will provide a new
perspective on the structure of ionic liquids. It will also help in testing and
designing better parameters for simulations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;While the
research is of a fundamental nature, the outcomes will inform the design,
testing and selection of ionic liquids for a range of electrolyte applications
and interaction with biological molecules and assemblies. These liquids are
providing solutions to a number of significant challenges in energy storage,
nanotechnology, processing of biomass, and pharmaceutical research.
Undergraduate students, graduate students and postdoctoral researchers will
receive training in the latest experimental methods, including synchrotron-based
x-ray scattering experiments, two-dimensional NMR spectroscopy, molecular
dynamics simulations, and theoretical methods applied to the statistical physics
of complex liquids.