* 1112952
* Paleointensity, morphology, and stability of the Proterozoic geomagnetic field as recorded by mafic dikes in India
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2015
* Aleksey Smirnov, Michigan Technological University
* Standard Grant
* Luciana Astiz
* 08/31/2015
* USD 214,559.00

The Earth's magnetic field is generated by convection of molten iron in the
planet's outer core. This process, or the geodynamo, is powered by density
settling and heat of fusion of the crystallizing inner core. The Earth's
magnetic field can be well approximated by that of a dipole (i.e. bar magnet)
positioned at Earth's center and aligned with the rotational axis. This allows
us to apply the dipole equations to reconstruct past positions of continents
using the direction of ancient magnetic field recorded in rocks (fossil
magnetism). It is well established that the field has had this dipolar geometry
for at least 500 milion years, and that the field has been strong enough to
provide magnetic shielding of the biosphere and atmosphere from solar radiation.
However, our knowledge of the field characteristics for earlier times remains
limited. Current thinking suggests that the solid inner core formed sometime
during the Proterozoic eon (2500 to 542 million years ago). Before the inner
core formation, the geodynamo could have produced a weaker and less stable
magnetic field with large episodic deviations from the dipolar geometry. An
attendant weaker magnetic shielding would allow solar radiation to affect the
life evolution and atmospheric chemistry. Our research seeks to obtain high-
quality data on the Proterozoic field by investigating the fossil magnetism of
several suites of quickly-cooled intrusive Proterozoic rocks in Peninsular
India. This study will provide important insight in our understanding the
mechanism that generates Earth's magnetic field and would have important
implications in how we use the magnetic field records to decipher the geological
history of our planet, including the age of the inner core. Broader implications
of the study include better understanding of a potential link between the
evolution of Earth's magnetic field and the evolution of biosphere and
atmosphere. The project will involve undergraduate students at Michigan Tech in
the laboratory analyses of the samples thus training the next generation of
scientists. This research will also become a part of a Ph.D. thesis. In order to
increase the general public awareness of Earth science, the results will be
disseminated through a series of science exploration sessions.

Data on the long-term behavior and configuration of the geomagnetic field during
the Precambrian are crucial in understanding the nature of Earth's early
geodynamo. These data are also important for investigating potential causative
links between the evolution of geomagnetic field and other components of the
Earth system. For example, a weak or unstable field of an early geodynamo could
result in weaker magnetosphere shielding and, hence, a stronger effect on the
atmosphere and biosphere from solar and cosmic radiation. In addition, long-term
trends in the strength and stability of geomagnetic field may provide insight
into the timing of some important transitions in the Earth's interior such as
the formation and growth of the solid inner core. In the absence of strict
theoretical constraints, paleomagnetic data become a principal source of
information about the Precambrian field. However, our knowledge of the field
characteristics during the first four billion years of Earth history remains
very limited. In particular, the database on the field strength contains only a
handful of reliable data points. In our project, we will investigate the
strength, morphology, and stability of the Proterozoic geodynamo by detailed
paleodirectional and paleointensity analyses of five mafic dike swarms in
Peninsular India, which have been reliably dated and shown to contain pristine
paleomagnetic records. Our proposed targets are the~2.37 Ga and 2.18 Ga swarms
in the Dharwar craton, the ~1.99 Ga swarm in the Bundelkhand craton, the ~1.89
Ga swarm in the southern Bastar craton, and ~0.75 Ga swarm of the Malani Igneous
Suite in the Marwar Terrain. In this study, we will use both traditional and
novel approaches such as single crystal technique for paleointensity
determinations. This study will provide a synoptic view of the Proterozoic
geodynamo, including time-averaged paleointensity values, estimates of the
relative contributions from dipole and non-dipole field components, and
paleolatitude-dependent estimates of paleosecular variation.