* 1112938
* CAREER: Towards a Better Understanding of Turbulence Structures in a Disturbed Atmospheric Surface Layer
* GEO,AGS
* 08/16/2010,04/30/2016
* Heping Liu, Washington State University
* Standard Grant
* Edward L. Bensman
* 04/30/2016
* USD 474,960.00

The Monin-Obukhov similarity theory (MOST) provides numerical weather and
climate models with a basis in formulating the turbulent exchange of momentum,
energy, water vapor, and other scalars between the Earth's surface and the lower
atmosphere. However, several recent studies have identified some features that
are not fully consistent with predictions by MOST and attributed these
departures to the disturbance of outer-layer, large-scale coherent structures
(hereafter referred to as coherent eddies) on locally-generated active
turbulence in the atmospheric surface layer (ASL). Although some studies have
presented alternative theories to describe these discrepancies, turbulence
structures in the disturbed ASL are still poorly understood. The objectives of
this project are to study turbulence structures in the stable and unstable ASL
beneath a convective boundary layer where a strong interaction between coherent
eddies and active turbulence occurs. The datasets from the already completed
Energy Balance Experiment will be used. More specifically, this project aims to:

1. Quantify turbulence structures under the influence of large-scale coherent
eddies and characterize the deviations of turbulence structures from predictions
by MOST under two atmospheric stratifications during the daytime in the
disturbed ASL.

2. Investigate how coherent eddies interact with the ASL turbulence and their
contributions to flux exchange of momentum, heat, and water vapor under two
atmospheric stratifications.

3. Study the spatial structures and temporal evolutions of coherent eddies from
time-series data in the ASL to elucidate the origins and sources of coherent
eddies.

4. Enhance the Jackson State University Micrometeorology Laboratory and enrich
meteorological courses through incorporating research activities and findings of
this project in the classroom and teaching laboratories.

5. Involve a large number of African American undergraduate and graduate
students and encourage them to take part in the research activities.

This program will provide an excellent education and training opportunity for
undergraduate and graduate students and will greatly enhance atmospheric
sciences education in Jackson State University, one of the nation's largest
historically black colleges and universities.