* 1112615
* Expanding Application of Proteomics-based Research in Archaeological Residue Analysis
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2011,12/31/2014
* C. Reid Ferring, University of North Texas
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 12/31/2014
* USD 97,393.00

With National Science Foundation support, Dr Steve Wolverton and a team of
archaeologists, analytical chemists, and proteomic biologists will do burial
experiments with modern cooking pottery and research on archaeological pottery
to evaluate the role of variability in climate, soil, and ceramic paste on the
preservation of food protein residues. This project builds on previous research
funded by NSF in which the same team addressed which types of solvents and
physical conditions work best for extraction of protein residues from cooking
pottery. Protein residues offer distinctive advantages over other types of food
residues in that they bind to clay in pottery walls, which enhances
preservation, and that proteins can often be identified to species or perhaps
even to tissue. An important hurdle is that factors that mediate long-term
preservation of protein residues have not been well studied, the focus of this
project in both experimental and archaeological settings.

This research is important because it will provide a new set of tools which will
allow archaeologists to examine previously inaccessible aspects of past culture.
It will help to reconstruct past subsistence patterns and provide insight into
how populations adapted to the environments in which they lived. Residue
analysis in general has lacked for detailed studies of method development. In
terms of intellectual merit, the high potential of protein residues to provide
precise data on what people cooked in pots in the past makes experimental
replication of methods an essential process. Production of reliable analytical
approaches and knowledge of conditions in which proteins are more and less
likely to preserve will greatly amplify or current knowledge of protein residues
from ancient foods.

This project involves students and professionals from Argentina and the United
States, from a museum (Argentina), a non-profit public-education/archaeological
research firm (US), and universities (US). The nature of the work is highly
interdisciplinary, incorporating professionals with specialties in archaeology,
ceramic petrography, material science, chemistry, and biology. The project will
fund a graduate student for two academic years to work with this
interdisciplinary team. Results will be published in scholarly journals and will
be presented at academic conferences and in classroom settings.