* 1112327
* Testing and Refining Rehydroxylation Ceramic Dating
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2012
* Jaroslaw Drelich, Michigan Technological University
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 08/31/2012
* USD 25,362.00

With National Science Foundation support, Dr. Timothy Scarlett and Dr. Jaroslaw
Drelich from Michigan Tech will purchase equipment in support of their study of
Fired Clay Ceramic Rehydroxylation Dating (RHX Dating), a novel chronometric
(absolute dating) technique for archaeological ceramic. This grant helps Drs.
Scarlett and Drelich collaborate with an international team of researchers,
working to develop this new scientific tool.

This new dating technique, if proven valid and reliable, will effect substantial
changes on archaeological practice. The ability to date ceramics directly can
provide scientific insight into larger questions of human adaptation, cultural
processes and change, colonization, trade and exchange. With a comparatively
minor initial investment, an archaeology lab in the world could set up the
relatively inexpensive instrumentation and produce RHX dates for ceramic
samples. This technique, if proven, will provide an inexpensive tool that can be
widely available for scientists around the world.

Using this grant, the investigators will purchase a Mettler Toledo XP26
Microbalance, which has a capacity of 52 g with 0.001 mg readability, two orders
of resolution and sensitivity higher than the microbalance currently available
in their laboratory. In addition, a Plexiglas exposure chamber will be built in
which researchers can carefully vary and control the humidity and temperature of
samples during rehydroxylation in order to match the environmental conditions to
those of the depositional life of the archaeological samples.

RHX dating works by measuring the mass of water that has bonded with clay
minerals in the ceramic fragment, then measuring the temperature-dependent rate
at which that ceramic sample reabsorbs and bonds with water, and finally using
those measures to calculate each fragment's age (or time since last firing).
Initial experiments by the investigators identified both problems and promise in
the RHX dating technique.

This project will have broad impacts on teaching, training, and learning in
archaeological science. Drs. Scarlett and Drelich have built their research
collaboration by creating discovery-based, hands-on learning opportunities for
multidisciplinary teams of graduate and undergraduate students. This grant helps
strengthen the developing collaborative relationship between the Industrial
Archaeologists in the Department of Social Sciences and the ceramics specialists
in the Department of Material Science and Engineering. Too few students study
archaeology and materials science, and only a fraction of those have any
exposure to the perspectives and interests from industrial archaeology.