* 1112830
* Large- and Small-Scale Dynamics and Comprehensive Meteor Studies with the Southern Argentina Agile MEteor Radar (SAAMER)
* GEO,AGS
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2016
* David Fritts, GLOBAL ATMOSPHERIC TECHNOLOGIES AND SCIENCES, INC.
* Continuing Grant
* John Meriwether
* 08/31/2016
* USD 450,000.00

This study is based on observations made by the Southern Argentina Agile MEteor
Radar (SAAMER), which was installed at Rio Grande on Tierra del Fuego (53.8oS)
in May 2008. Since its installation, SAAMER has performed routine measurements
of large-scale dynamics of the middle atmosphere, determined the monthly-mean
momentum fluxes due to smaller-scale gravity waves (GWs), and characterized
meteor head echoes and non-specular meteor trails in a routine measurement mode.
Previously, routine GW momentum flux measurements were only possible with large
(and expensive) radars, while meteor head echo and non-specular trail studies
were only possible with "high-power, large-aperture" (HPLA) radars that are
likewise large, very expensive, and used only intermittently for such studies.
When employed for experimental studies viewing vertically with different
transmitter phasing, SAAMER promises to contribute significantly to meteoroid
head echo, non-specular trail, and trajectory studies, as well as to Polar
Mesospheric Summer Echoes (PMSE) and related microphysics studies. SAAMER was
installed on Tierra del Fuego (TdF) to provide sensitivity to the large-scale
dynamics, especially the semidiurnal tide, in a latitude band expected to
exhibit large semidiurnal tide amplitudes, but devoid of other instrumentation.
Its location on TdF was also motivated by the occurrence of the major "hotspot"
of GW activity on Earth centered over the Southern Andes, Drake Passage, and
Antarctic Peninsula. This hotspot is due, apparently, to the major GW sources in
this region, believed to include high mountains, strong jet streams, and
vigorous frontal systems. These sources are expected to yield large GWs and
momentum fluxes and strong interactions with the large-scale motion field in the
mesosphere and lower thermosphere (MLT), and SAAMER analyses to date confirm
expectations that the fluxes in this region can be very large. This research
addresses topics that are of high current interest and relevant to diverse
communities. MLT dynamics studies, especially quantification of GW dynamics,
momentum transport, and its deposition, are central needs in defining more
accurate parameterizations of these small-scale dynamics in general circulation,
numerical weather prediction, climate, and space weather modeling. Measurements
of large-scale dynamics likewise serve to constrain models of these dynamics
that are missing key inputs, especially at high southern latitudes. Meteoroid
trajectory studies may provide clues to potential meteor impact risks. SAAMER is
also utilized as an educational and training tool through various NSF programs
devoted to promoting international collaborative activities between U.S. and S.
American researchers and students, including extensive exchanges between the
U.S., Argentina, and Brazil to date, with active collaborations arising from
these.