* 1112903
* Travel Support for the Math in Moscow Program
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/2011,07/31/2015
* T. Christine Stevens, American Mathematical Society
* Continuing Grant
* Jennifer Pearl
* 07/31/2015
* USD 306,941.00

With this grant, the American Mathematical Society (AMS) is requesting funding
for three years to be used primarily to provide ten scholarships ($9,000 each)
per academic year to mathematically talented U.S. undergraduates for a semester
of study at the Math in Moscow program of the Independent University of Moscow
(IUM). The IUM is a small, elite institution of higher learning that focuses
primarily on mathematics. It was founded in 1991 at the initiative of a group of
well-known Russian research mathematicians, who now comprise the Academic
Council of the University. Over the past several years, the National Science
Foundation (NSF) has awarded three continuing grants to the AMS with funds to be
used to support these scholarships. The scholarship will cover a substantial
part of the typical cost for a semester of study in the Math in Moscow program.
The remaining funds will cover the costs of increased administrative support for
the program, which includes a plan to perform a longitudinal survey of
scholarship recipients that will follow each student for eight years to measure
outcomes of the program with regard to students going on to obtain M.A. and PhD
degrees.

The Math in Moscow program provides a unique, intensive research experience for
mathematically talented students, taught in English. This program consists
primarily of courses in mathematics and theoretical computer science, and
provides both an academically enriching experience because it allows
mathematically talented students to meet and work with other students who share
an intense interest in mathematics, as well as the chance to work with some of
the world's leading mathematicians. The program provides an experience of
mathematics that the students would not find in the U.S. This is because
students experience the field of mathematics as it is practiced in the Russian
tradition, the main feature of which has always been the development of a
creative approach to mathematics, with the emphasis being on problem solving
rather than memorizing theorems. Indeed, at the IUM, discovering mathematics
under the guidance of an experienced teacher is the central principle of its
program, and the Math in Moscow program emphasizes in-depth understanding of
carefully selected material rather than broad surveys of large quantities of
material. Many of the students who have received the previous NSF-funded
scholarships to attend the Math in Moscow program have gone on to study
mathematics in highly competitive graduate programs in the U.S. In addition to
providing an academically enriching experience, the Math in Moscow program fills
a gap in study abroad opportunities for mathematically talented undergraduates
interested in studying research-level mathematics, and the scholarship program
provides vital support for such students to take advantage of this unique
opportunity. Finally, there is another strong rationale for supporting such a
program. It is a way to build vital scholarly connections between the Russian
and U.S. mathematics communities, which are certainly in the best interest for
the future scientific research of both countries. Creating ties between
mathematicians in our two communities, both young and old, will promote
scientific cooperation far into the future.