* 1112926
* SBIR Phase I:  SNP Discovery to Identify Candidate Genes for Association Genetics in "Pongamia pinnata", a High-Potential Biodiesel Feedstock
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2011,06/30/2012
* Claire Kinlaw, TerViva BioEnergy Inc
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 06/30/2012
* USD 179,921.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project will test the
feasibility of a ?whole transcriptome? shotgun DNA sequencing approach to
identify candidate alleles that can be associated with agronomically important
traits in Pongamia pinnata, a leguminous tree that produces large quantities of
seed oil suitable for biodiesel refining. This approach looks simultaneously for
specific DNA changes (SNPs) among large numbers of expressed gene variants,
alleles, that may correlate with physical traits. Specific DNA markers of these
alleles will permit the tracking of multiple valuable traits within breeding
populations and accelerate the development of commercial stocks of Pongamia,
This remarkable but undomesticated, biofuel feedstock tree grows on marginal
land unsuited for food production, fixes nitrogen in association with rhizobium,
and requires low levels of water. The broader/commercial impacts of this
research are that commercialization of Pongamia will proceed more readily if
based solidly upon research and breeding to produce a phenotypically stable and
predictable crop. The major issue for the biodiesel refining industry remains
the lack of a scalable, reliable, cost effective feedstock of raw oil, not the
lack of refining capacity. Pongamia provides owners of marginal land with just
such a crop that can yield oil for the biofuel industry at a profit to land
owners and refiners, thus offering a real market solution to renewable
transportation fuel.