* 1112018
* Photorelease of Stable Molecules Through One- and Two-Photon Electron Transfer Mechanisms
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2016
* Daniel Falvey, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Colby Foss
* 08/31/2016
* USD 407,311.00

The Chemical Structure, Dynamics and Mechanisms Program in the Chemistry
Division at the National Science Foundation supports Professor Daniel Falvey of
the University of Maryland- College Park, for the development of new molecular
systems with controllable photochemical release of one or more functional
groups. The goal of the project is to develop donor-acceptor systems that will
undergo electron transfer sensitized reactions that release stable molecules
such as carboxylic acids. An innovative feature of Professor Falvey's approach
is that the molecules will be designed to undergo these reactions after
absorbing two photons, so that low energy visible light can be employed. These
reactions are important to many fields as they allow for both temporal and
spatial control of the movement of molecules. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
impacts of the research include the potential for improved control of 3D
nanofabrication processes, and for imaging and biomedical applications.
Professor Falvey is recognized for his breadth of knowledge across several
disciplines (organic synthesis, spectroscopy, kinetics, and computational
chemistry), which makes his laboratory effective in tackling difficult research
problems. He has been successful in recruiting and mentoring underrepresented
groups to his laboratory at the University of Maryland, and he is an advisor to
the International Chemistry Olympiad.