* 1113569
* Paleointensity of the time-averaged geomagnetic field at the Equator
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2011,09/30/2017
* Dennis Kent, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Robin Reichlin
* 09/30/2017
* USD 245,086.00

The characterization of Earth's magnetic field over a broad range of time scales
is of fundamental importance for understanding the core dynamo generating
mechanism. Recently published results from the Erebus Volcanic Province in
Antarctica at 78Â°S suggested that the high angular dispersion in virtual
geomagnetic poles coupled with apparently anomalously low paleointensities may
result from dynamic effects associated with the tangent cylinder. An alternative
explanation is that the geomagnetic dipole moment of the time-averaged field is
in fact only about 50% of the present-day value, which would imply that
available paleointensity data from elsewhere are seriously biased. The
equatorial belt, which should be least affected by tangent cylinder effects, is
poorly represented by reliable paleointensities. We propose to generate
paleointensity data from 0-5 Myr-old lava flows from the Galapagos Islands and
from Kenya, which have recently provided consistent estimates of low
paleosecular variation. The paleomagnetic, rock magnetic and preliminary
paleointensity results indicate that these rocks have suitable magnetic
properties for Thellier-type paleointensity experiments. Fresh subspecimens are
available from most of these sites but we would like to collect additional
samples from the Loiyangalani area of Kenya, where the limited data show
remarkably coherent and stable magnetizations virtually free of lightning
strikes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Our overall objective is to obtain a robust
paleointensity dataset from the same lavas used to estimate paleosecular
variation in directions and ideally, to produce a full-vector characterization
of the time-averaged field at the Equator. Successful completion of this
proposed work will provide a more accurate description of geomagnetic field
behavior as a benchmark to gauge latitudinal variations, including possible
effects associated with the tangent cylinder, and the underlying character of
paleosecular variation in earlier epochs. The project will directly support
thesis research of a PhD student and include training in laboratory, field and
analytical techniques of general applicability.