* 1113793
* SBIR Phase I:  A Robust Caller-ID Alternative for Securing Telephony Based Transactions
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2011,06/30/2012
* Vijay Balasubramaniyan, Telineage, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Glenn H. Larsen
* 06/30/2012
* USD 175,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I research project will
explore technologies that will enable an improvement in trust in the converged
telephony infrastructure without negatively impacting user experience. Telephony
has long been viewed as a trusted communications medium and a variety of
transactions conducted over the telephone depend on such trust. For example, to
combat credit card and other financial fraud, banks rely on their ability to
securely communicate with their customers via the phone. Unfortunately, while
the convergence of traditional telephony with cellular and IP networks offers
many benefits, it has opened it to additional security threats. Call metadata
such as caller identifier can now be easily manipulated and attacks including
voice phishing have already resulted in financial losses for banks. The
intellectual merit of this research project lies in demonstrating that the
source and intermediary networks in a phone call introduce artifacts in the
audio that can be used to uniquely identify its source. The project will
investigate features that capture key call artifacts and apply machine learning
techniques to fingerprint call sources. A key goal will be the validation of the
preliminary results at the scale that will arise in real-world deployments.

The broader impact of the project will come from the development of a secure
Caller-ID alternative with applicability both in the enterprise setting as well
as at the consumer end. Because the proposed approach only relies on analysis of
audio at the receiving end, it requires no changes to be made to the telephony
infrastructure. This is especially advantageous not only because of the complex
and diverse nature of this infrastructure, but also because unlike a
cryptographic solution both ends of a call do not need to participate in the
process. The ubiquitous nature of the telephone and possible erosion of trust in
this medium will have serious consequences for both businesses and citizens. The
success of this project will help maintain this trust and thus it will have
broad commercial and societal impact.