* 1113631
* SBIR Phase I:  Cost-Effective, High Volume Emitter Wrap Through Manufacturing Process Development for Higher Efficiency Crystalline Silicon Solar Cells
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2011,12/31/2011
* Michelle Stock, Arbor Photonics
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 12/31/2011
* USD 149,966.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project aims to develop a
practical manufacturing process and the key enabling hardware for Emitter Wrap
Through (EWT) solar cells. EWT technology is significant because it can improve
the efficiency of crystalline-silicon solar cells to potentially above 20%
energy conversion efficiency from the current 13-17% today. However, its promise
has not been materialized because of the challenges in processing speed and
cost. This project will utilize a recently developed high-power fiber laser
technology based upon Arbor Photonics 3C optical fibers, along with fast beam
scanning technology to enable the development of an economical and deployable
process for EWT application. The expected outcome of this project is the
development of a detailed baseline laser system that can achieve more than
10,000 holes per second in a cost-effective manner.

The broader/commercial impact of this project will be the potential to enable
the wide adoption of EWT solar cells. The commercialization of EWT solar cells
has not been realized due to the high manufacturing costs resulting from slow
processing speeds that is currently less than 4,000 holes per second. The
currently available commercial lasers cannot achieve the combination of pulse
energy, duration and repetition rate to achieve the target of more than 10,000
holes per second required to make this process economically viable. A
combination of recently developed high-power fiber laser technology from Arbor
Photonics that extends the range of available operating laser parameters and
fast beam scanning technology can enable development of an economical and
deployable process for this application. The resulting process tool has the
potential to address a portion of the $100 million market for laser-based tools
used in Si solar cell manufacturing, a market segment that has seen year over
year growth on the order of 60% per year in the last 5 years.