* 1113998
* SBIR Phase I:  Proposal for Research into Low-Cost Distributed Wireless Sensing of Operational Condition in Industrial Electric Motors
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2011,12/31/2011
* Brian Pepin, Energizing Solutions, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 12/31/2011
* USD 148,471.00

This SBIR Phase I research proposal proposes research to develop an ultra-
compact, low cost&lt;br/&gt;system for wirelessly monitoring motors that will
cost manufacturers less than $300/ motor&lt;br/&gt;to implement. The research
will leverage existing patent-pending energy-efficient&lt;br/&gt;algorithms for
determining motor condition based on vibration and temperature data to
develop&lt;br/&gt;wireless nodes capable of autonomously determining the
condition of any motor to which they&lt;br/&gt;are attached. The research will
result in a prototype system of wireless nodes implemented&lt;br/&gt;at an
industrial partner, which will provide the necessary incentive for future
investment&lt;br/&gt;in the company and technology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
broader impact of this research will be to enable a wireless system to
facilitate&lt;br/&gt;condition-based maintenance of electric motors in
industrial facilities at a cost of less&lt;br/&gt;than $300 per motor to
manufacturers, which is about 10% of the cost of current systems.&lt;br/&gt;At
this price point, tens of thousands of facilities around the United States will
be able&lt;br/&gt;to afford the initial investment to implement condition-based
maintenance on their motor systems.&lt;br/&gt;Since condition-based maintenance
has been shown to maximize up-time and minimize yearly
maintenance&lt;br/&gt;costs, this will increase the competitiveness of American
manufacturing and ultimately&lt;br/&gt;help create more manufacturing sector
jobs. Additionally, the prototype system produced as&lt;br/&gt;a result of the
research will provide an important proof-of-concept for low-cost, low-
power&lt;br/&gt;wireless sensor nodes that should help spur future development
and investment in this field,&lt;br/&gt;which is in turn instrumental for the
development of "smart grids", "smart cities", and other&lt;br/&gt;intelligent
infrastructure.