* 1113996
* Collaborative Research:  Innovative Injection and Extraction Schemes to Enhance Mixing in Aquifers for Improved In Situ Remediation
* GEO,EAR
* 09/15/2011,12/31/2014
* David Mays, University of Colorado at Denver-Downtown Campus
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Torgersen
* 12/31/2014
* USD 98,395.00

In situ remediation of contaminated groundwater often requires the introduction
of a treatment solution into the aquifer in order to promote contaminant
degradation reactions. A significant challenge for in situ remediation is the
inherent difficulty of mixing in porous media. Without sufficient mixing of the
treatment solution and the contaminated groundwater, the degradation reactions
required to achieve in situ remediation cannot occur. This project tests the
hypothesis that in situ remediation of contaminated groundwater can be enhanced
through strategic operation of wells, installed near the contaminant plume,
whose goal is to promote stretching and folding of the interface between the
treatment solution and contaminated groundwater, thereby increasing the
opportunity for degradation reactions to occur. The project involves numerical
simulation and optimization to investigate well operation strategies that will
maximize contaminant degradation. The optimization considers the number of
wells, their locations and the rates at which each well extracts or injects
fluid as a function of time. The study investigates both dissolved contaminants
and those sorbed to the aquifer solids in homogeneous and heterogeneous aquifers
using a suite of modern groundwater models. The interplay of the well placement,
pumping schemes, and aquifer properties will be characterized by a series of
dimensionless numbers that can be used for remediation system design.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Contamination threatens important groundwater resources
that provide the water supply for numerous municipal water utilities and
domestic water wells. Already, billions of dollars have been spent on
remediation of contaminated groundwater in the U.S., and yet at many locations,
the remediation efforts have not met cleanup targets. This project investigates
a method for improving the cleanup of contaminated groundwater by using
injection and extraction wells (an existing technology) in a novel way to
promote in situ groundwater remediation. This project provides an initial
theoretical exploration of the enhanced mixing achievable by these novel methods
that will be compared with existing methods in terms of contaminant degradation
completeness, cost, and groundwater quality improvement. Additionally, this
study provides a new link between established chaos theory and groundwater flow
that will lead to new insights into subsurface contaminant transport. The
project will also create a physical demonstration apparatus and education module
that will be used to engage pre-college students in learning about groundwater
by allowing users to manipulate plumes by injection and extraction. After
completion, the apparatus will be available through an established teaching
laboratory collection at the University of Colorado at Boulder.