* 1113206
* SBIR Phase I:  Improved Cold Thermal Energy Storage for Refrigeration Applications
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2011,06/30/2012
* Sorin Grama, Promethean Power Systems
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 06/30/2012
* USD 176,539.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project proposes the
development of a new type of cold thermal storage system that will help reduce
the energy consumption of commercial and household refrigeration appliances.
Central air-conditioning units and refrigerators account for nearly 30% of U.S.
household electricity consumption. Cold thermal energy storage (CTES) technology
has been proven to increase the energy efficiency of air conditioning and
refrigeration appliances. However, much of the recent developments in CTES
technology have been focused only on large-scale commercial air conditioning
units. These developments have not been successfully translated to smaller scale
industrial and household refrigeration appliances. The objective of this Phase I
work is to overcome each of the major technical risks in the development of a
small-scale cold thermal storage system by systematically studying, modeling and
testing new types of thermal storage components and system configurations which
will be incorporated into future energy-efficient refrigeration
products.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact/commercial potential of this
project is to reduce the energy consumption of power-hungry appliances such as
refrigerators and air-conditioning units. Nearly 70% of all commercial buildings
in United States use some form of refrigeration equipment, ranging from small
refrigerators or vending machines to large refrigerated walk-in units. None of
this equipment is designed to use energy efficiency technologies such as cold
thermal energy storage. Cold thermal energy storage also has enormous market
potential in developing economies where energy storage is not only an efficiency
technology but is the ultimate key to enabling refrigeration in off-grid and
remote locations where grid supply is unreliable or non-existent. In markets
like India, farmers, food processors and public health institutions are
clamoring for energy-efficient, grid-independent refrigeration appliances to
store and preserve agricultural produce and vaccines.