* 1113384
* SBIR Phase I:  Extraction of Lipids from Algal and Collection by Foam Fractionation
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2011,06/30/2012
* Gregory Loraine, Dynaflow Inc
* Standard Grant
* Prakash Balan
* 06/30/2012
* USD 180,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project will develop a method
for lysing algae and recovering the oil without pre-concentrating or dewatering.
A promising feedstock for biofuels is photosynthetic algae, which can produce
lipids in much higher yields per acre then can terrestrial crops. Currently, the
harvesting and extracting of the oil consumes 40%-60% of the energy required to
produce biodiesel from algae. If the lipids and other compounds can be collected
directly from the growth media these expenses would be entirely avoided.
Cavitation is a good candidate as it has been shown to rupture algal cell
membranes and release cell contents. Feasibility of hydrodynamic jet cavitation
as a practical and easily scalable method will be demonstrated. This process
will be inline and will use shear flow and local accelerations to create high
pressure fluctuations in the liquid causing bubbles to grow and collapse using a
fraction of the energy required for ultrasonic cavitation. Hydrodynamic
submerged jet cavitation also creates clouds of fine microbubbles that can
attach to lipids and lift them to the surface. By controlling the creation and
collection of foam, the lipids can be concentrated and recovered from the growth
media with minimal energy input.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader
impact/commercial potential of this project is the development of new fuel
resources that would benefit the nation by providing a stable energy source,
reducing gas imports and dependence on foreign nations, and reducing greenhouse
gas emissions. Commercialization of microalgae for biofuels and nutritional uses
is expanding rapidly in the USA and the world. Eliminating the major energy
requirements of harvesting and extraction will increase the profitability of
biofuel production from algae. Providing a technology capable of achieving this
will be very marketable. This technology could also be applied to other
biotechnologies in which microorganisms are used to produce high value products,
such as pharmaceuticals, nutraceuticals, or biorefining. This process could be
used for more economical and more sustainable use of bioresources. In addition,
greater understanding of the behavior of microorganisms in hydrodynamic flows
would benefit the fields of biotechnology, health care, and water purification.