* 1113189
* SBIR Phase I:  Efficient Separation of Hydrogen From Reformate
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2011,12/31/2011
* Trent Molter, Sustainable Innovations, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Prakash Balan
* 12/31/2011
* USD 149,923.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project investigates the use of
electrochemical devices for separation and compression of hydrogen from low-
pressure mixed gas streams which are being developed for critical industrial gas
and energy applications. Many applications will derive hydrogen from reformation
of hydrocarbons resulting in a product stream rich in CO2, CO and H2. It has
been well-documented that low-temperature electrodes similar to those used in
these devices are often contaminated by carbon monoxide, negatively affecting
their operation. While state-of-the-art solutions rely upon implementation of
advanced catalysts or high temperature membranes, these solutions are not viable
for systems having significant levels of CO in the feed stream. This project
investigates the viability of a system modification that removes CO and other
impurities from the electrode surface during normal operation thereby allowing
the system to operate continually at high efficiency. Research efforts will
leverage results from a fluids transport model to optimize the cell and system
design. Laboratory cells will be constructed and evaluated over a range of
operational parameters to develop a better understanding of the performance
improvement associated with this approach. Finally, durability tests will be
conducted to assess the long-term viability of this design.

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project will help alleviate the
depletion of fossil fuel reserves by advancing the prospect of hydrogen-based
energy. Production, purification, and compression of hydrogen represent key
technical challenges for the implementation of a hydrogen economy, especially in
the transportation sector where new sources and modes of delivery of hydrogen
fuel are needed. These technologies must be robust, efficient, and cost
effective in order to have value in meeting our growing energy needs.
Furthermore, since hydrogen energy markets are emerging, viable product
solutions must meet near-term industrial gas application needs as a commercial
bridge toward low-cost products for a hydrogen economy. The current market for
hydrogen is large and growing, with the vast majority of hydrogen produced from
hydrocarbon sources resulting in gas streams containing appreciable quantities
of CO and CO2 along with hydrogen. Current methods for separation and subsequent
compression of hydrogen are very expensive and these costs are passed to the
end-user. Successful development of the proposed technology will integrate the
separation and compression functions, and expand the applicability of this
device to separation of reformate and other mixed gas streams in a low-cost
configuration.