* 1113523
* SBIR Phase I:  Integrated Thermal Scanning Probe Development
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2011,12/31/2011
* Ami Chand, Applied Nanostructures, inc.
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 12/31/2011
* USD 149,677.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project will develop high
resolution thermal probes with sharp tips, integrated with highly sensitive
thermal sensing elements that are capable of achieving very high lateral thermal
resolution (&lt; 20 nm) for scanning thermal microscopy. These tips will be used
in various applications, such as mapping thermal effects on recording heads, for
applications involving recording technologies which utilize integrated laser
pulsing, and for thermal mapping of small soft and/or self-assembled structures.
Thermal mapping with 20 nm resolution will create paradigm shifts in mapping
molecular self-assembly and soft materials. The core intellectual merits include
the creation of thermal sensor nanofabrication processes using scalable
semiconductor processing techniques to minimize the cost of manufacturing and
ensure repeatability and reproducibility. The probe will be designed to maximize
the heat flow from the sample to the sharp probe and to minimize the background
heat flow from the sample to the cantilever to achieve high spatial resolution.
The position, size, and material of the sensing element will be designed to
achieve high sensitivity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact/commercial
potential of this project will be a new suite of products which will replace
current thermal probe solutions and significantly increase the market potential
of nano-thermal products. These new products will have significant impacts in
industries such as semiconductors and magnetic recording, and will impact the
emerging field of nanotechnology. The innovation will significantly help
generate new research and applications in areas that are not currently being
addressed. New efforts to integrate nanoelectronics with biomolecular self-
assembled structures will be aided by the ability to map thermal conductivity
and temperature with high resolution. Moreover, the measurement of thermal
properties with high spatial resolution and sensitivity is a significant
challenge but increasingly needed for process monitoring, material
characterization, and failure analysis in the semiconductor and data storage
industries, as well as for scientific research in nanotechnology.