* 1113125
* SBIR Phase I:  Epitaxially Grown GaSb Thin Films on GaAs Substrates For Near-Field Conversion of Heat to Electricity
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2011,06/30/2012
* Jose Borrego, MTPV LLC
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 06/30/2012
* USD 149,848.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project aims to develop
strain-relieved GaSb thin films grown directly on GaAs for near-field
thermophotovoltaic (TPV) devices. Thin films of direct low-bandgap materials
will outperform germanium, an indirect bandgap material, in both power density
and efficiency. In this project, TPV devices will be fabricated and tested in
the near-field using thin films of GaSb grown directly on GaAs via molecular
beam epitaxy (MBE). It has been shown that the well-behaved 90-degree misfit
dislocations at the heterojunction result in strain-relieved, low defect density
thin films of GaSb grown on relatively inexpensive GaAs substrates. These
substrates also have the optical and electrical properties required for
fabrication of monolithically integrated TPV devices that are compatible with
operation in the near-field of a hot thermal radiator.

The broader/commercial impact of this project will be the potential to provide
an economically viable solution in waste heat harvesting. Of all power produced
in the world, over half is rejected in the form of waste heat. This has led
research teams worldwide to search for solid state solutions to waste heat
recovery, but with very limited success. This project will develop the TPV
devices, and demonstrate that their operation in the near field of hot objects
may lead to more than a tenfold increase in power density over existing
technologies. This technology is expected to be used for industrial waste heat,
methane flaring, solar, vehicle power, satellite power, and personal portable
power applications.