* 1113085
* SBIR Phase I:  Development of Novel Dendrimer-based Technologies for Phosphorylation Analyses
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2011,12/31/2011
* Anton Iliuk, Tymora Analytical Operations, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 12/31/2011
* USD 150,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project addresses the
unmet needs for effective analysis of protein phosphorylation, a process where a
phosphate group is added to a protein to change its function. Protein
phosphorylation is a crucial modification of proteins; its abnormalities have
been implicated in many diseases. Therefore, assessing the phosphorylation
status of individual proteins or classes of proteins, qualitatively or
quantitatively, has become a routine but extremely important step in the
majority of life science research labs. Existing technologies have glaring
deficiencies, including low reproducibility, poor recovery, high cost, reduced
selectivity and prolonged experiment time. The platform technology to be
developed during this Phase I project will greatly alleviate these shortcomings
by providing lucrative, general approaches for phosphorylation analyses. The
technologies will enable general phosphorylation detection, cost-effective
inhibitor screenings, kinase/phosphatase activity quantitation, and efficient
phosphopeptide enrichment for proteomic experiments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
broader/commercial impacts of this research are the development of platform
technology to improve a set of biochemical assays, and help the discovery of new
therapeutic targets. Protein phosphorylation and kinase inhibitors as drug
targets are currently at the peak of research and development (R&amp;D),
responsible for over 30% of the total drug discovery expenses. These R&amp;D
activities could greatly benefit from the proposed technologies due to their
innovative design and versatile features for optimum efficiency and the ability
to reproducibly explore phosphorylation events in unprecedented depth. These
should provide invaluable tools and address needs of many bioscience research
labs/facilities in academic and industrial settings.