* 1113001
* 2011 Summer School in Statistics for Astronomers, and The Fifth Statistical Challenges in Modern Astronomy Conference
* MPS,AST
* 05/01/2011,04/30/2013
* Gutti Babu, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Nigel Sharp
* 04/30/2013
* USD 34,799.00

AST-1113001&lt;br/&gt;Babu&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Summer School in Statistics for
Astronomers VII; June 6-11 2011; Pennsylvania State University, College
Park&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;and&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Statistical Challenges in
Modern Astronomy V; June 13-17 2011; Pennsylvania State University, College
Park&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award provides primary support both for the
latest in the annual statistics schools aimed at improving the statistical
ability of astronomers, and for the professional conference on statistical
challenges, held every five years.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Astronomical research
often involves imaging, photometric and spectroscopic surveys of the sky that
produce terabyte to petabyte databases and billion-object catalogs. While the
promise is tremendous, achieving the scientific goals depends critically on
extraction of useful knowledge using statistical inference, and especially the
use of advanced statistical methods. Observational astronomers are thus
confronting a wider range of statistical challenges than ever before, while
unfortunately most U.S. astronomers are not well trained in statistics, learning
only elementary methods through books written by and for physical scientists. To
alleviate this educational gap, an annual intensive week-long Summer School was
started in 2005 by the group at Pennsylvania State. The 2011 Summer School
follows the tradition and presents concepts and methodologies at an intermediate
level, accompanied by hands-on software tutorials with application to
astronomical datasets. If maintained at a steady state, these Summer Schools
will train about 10% of the nation's young astronomers, filling a critical
lacuna in the US scientific workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award also
supports the fifth Statistical Challenges in Modern Astronomy (SCMA) cross-
disciplinary conference. Held once every 5 years since 1991, SCMA meetings are
unusual in emphasizing cross-disciplinary interactions between statisticians and
astronomers. This is emphasized by having invited speakers in one field followed
by a commentator from the other field. These meetings have become the premiere
forum for research statisticians and astronomers to discuss methodological
issues of mutual interest.