* 1113964
* SBIR Phase I:  Scalable Computer Clusters Applied to Sensing and Control of Intelligent Manipulators for Agile Manufacturing
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2011,12/31/2011
* Kim Wheeler, RoadNarrows LLC
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 12/31/2011
* USD 150,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project addresses the
effort to design and&lt;br/&gt;prototype a new high-performance but low-cost
integrated robotic manipulator comprising of the tight&lt;br/&gt;integration of
mechanical, electrical, and computational subsystems. A significant part of the
effort is to&lt;br/&gt;address the computational challenges involved in
developing a new generation of intelligent robotic&lt;br/&gt;manipulators. Real-
time general vision processing and dexterous planning, for example, are
not&lt;br/&gt;feasible using conventional embedded processors. The consequence
is that advanced robotic&lt;br/&gt;applications are only possible in
environments where the robotic arm can outsource
computationally&lt;br/&gt;expensive processes to more powerful computers. Low-
power, High-Performance Computing (HPC)&lt;br/&gt;clusters will be used to
extend what is currently possible in autonomous and semi-autonomous
robotic&lt;br/&gt;manipulator systems. Therefore a research effort is to develop
a scalable high-level intelligence&lt;br/&gt;framework applied to robotic
manipulators, and to implement robust and real-time algorithms that
take&lt;br/&gt;advantage of highly parallel computing environments. Application
computations will integrate&lt;br/&gt;seamlessly across wireless and wired
networks of heterogeneous robotic and computer systems. The&lt;br/&gt;goal is a
highly capable, computationally scalable, low-cost intelligent robotic arm
platform for&lt;br/&gt;research and light industry, which can easily be adapted
to a variety of complex applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader
impact/commercial potential of this project is to fill a market niche between
the low-end&lt;br/&gt;robotic manipulators that have little commercial potential
and the high-end robotic arms that are&lt;br/&gt;expensive and have high
operating costs for setup and operation. High-performance
computation&lt;br/&gt;integrated with advanced robotic manipulator systems are
applicable for agile light industry and other&lt;br/&gt;desktop manipulator
applications in unstructured environments. This will have a tremendous impact
on&lt;br/&gt;the future of commercial robotics and make capable robotic systems
affordable to small manufacturing&lt;br/&gt;businesses. Highly parallel
computing power will greatly increase the range of applications
and&lt;br/&gt;environments to which robots are suited. For example, an
intelligent robotic manipulator can be used in&lt;br/&gt;agricultural
applications or autonomously caring for plants in highly unstructured
environments. The&lt;br/&gt;same manipulator could easily be adapted for use in
a classroom setting; with a simple scripting&lt;br/&gt;interface students can
experiment with advanced robotic control, allowing them to concentrate
on&lt;br/&gt;discovering exciting new applications. This creates a broad market
in academic and industrial settings,&lt;br/&gt;both for highly-capable, low-cost
intelligent robotic manipulators for agile manufacturing and for
lowpower&lt;br/&gt;HPC clusters applied to sensor network integration solutions
in general.