* 1113913
* SBIR Phase I:  Laminography-based X-ray Security System for Aviation Security
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2011,06/30/2012
* Colin Charette, XRSciences LLC
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 06/30/2012
* USD 150,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project will develop key
components for a lowcost&lt;br/&gt;3D X-ray security checkpoint system based on
Laminography, a method of taking multiple&lt;br/&gt;projections of an object and
combining these to create three-dimensional (3D) slices of the
object.&lt;br/&gt;Current checkpoint X-ray security systems have limitations
because they provide only a transmission&lt;br/&gt;image of the object being
screened, whereas a 3D image would provide much more relevant
information.&lt;br/&gt;A reasonably priced Laminography system has not been
implemented due to the unavailability of a&lt;br/&gt;reasonably-priced X-ray
source with suitable performance.&lt;br/&gt;This proposed solution overcomes the
limitations of current X-ray sources. By employing a dual-grid&lt;br/&gt;dual-
cathode source, it is possible to produce a low-cost X-ray source that delivers
the cost and&lt;br/&gt;performance required for a low-cost high performance 3D
Laminography-based checkpoint system.&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts Resulting from
the Proposed Activity&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact/commercial potential of this
project is based on the development of suitable X-ray&lt;br/&gt;component
technology that can be used to upgrade the checkpoint security systems to 3D
capabilities at&lt;br/&gt;reasonable prices. The impact is improved security at
the checkpoints. The commercial potential comes&lt;br/&gt;from the potential to
upgrade several thousand checkpoints with this capability.&lt;br/&gt;Although
current aviation security checkpoints provide a strong line of defense,
terrorists continue to&lt;br/&gt;analyze and exploit any weaknesses in these
defenses. For this reason, it is critical to continually improve&lt;br/&gt;the
security checkpoints and security screening equipment, in order to ensure that
terrorists are not able to&lt;br/&gt;defeat these systems.&lt;br/&gt;In addition
to improving the security at airport checkpoints, the new source can be used to
upgrade any Xray&lt;br/&gt;based security system and to improve the performance
of conventional Computed Tomography&lt;br/&gt;systems. The X-ray source will be
unique and can be used in a broad range of fields that
includes&lt;br/&gt;medical imaging, non-destructive testing, X-ray fluorescence,
and so forth