* 1113886
* SBIR Phase I:  Metiri Assessment Portal for 21st Century Learning (AP21)
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2011,06/30/2012
* Jody Britten, Metiri Group
* Standard Grant
* Glenn H. Larsen
* 06/30/2012
* USD 165,026.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project will study the
innovative combination of today?s social/interactive media, online communities
of practice (CoPs), and media-based case studies to engage middle school
mathematics teachers in online professional experiences that develop their
capacity to use rubrics to assess their students? critical thinking and problem
solving (CT&amp;PS) skills. Reports indicate that 15-year-olds in the U.S.
scored 24th out of the 28 OECD nations on the 2006 PISA mathematics tests, and
29th on the 2003 problem solving assessments, clearly indicates there is a
strong need for U. S. middle school mathematics teachers to approach CT&amp;PS
in mathematics in new ways. The research objective is to leverage this online
venue into an interactive, professional community of practice and learning
system where middle school teachers learn to translate the CT&amp;PS in the
Grades 6-7 statistics and probability section of the Common Core Mathematics
Standards into rubrics to guide their everyday lesson design and assessment of
student work. The anticipated technical results are: increased expertise among
middle school mathematics teachers as to how to integrate and assess critical
thinking and problem solving using performance assessments based on rubrics
aligned to the Common Core. In addition, teachers will acquire experience and
expertise in effectively participating in CoPs for professional
learning.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broad impact/commercial potential of this
project lies in its capacity to scale up ? to reach thousands of teachers
through a new venue for professional learning ? AND its innovative, yet
practical approach to a topic of significance to U.S. economic competitiveness ?
critical thinking and problem solving (CT&amp;PS) in mathematics. (To be
expanded to other grade levels, and content areas in subsequent phases.) AP21
provides three critical elements for high impact professional learning: 1)
Research-based professional development on rubrics and CT&amp;PS in mathematics,
2) Practical, collegial, interactive learning based on case studies in real
classrooms, and 3) An open online environment where teachers collaboratively
build their own rubrics, design/critique their own lessons, and collaboratively
assess their own students? work. Thousands of schools are interested in
CT&amp;PS, but few are sure how to implement and assess these skills. What they
do know is that a one-day workshop won?t be sufficient. Potential AP21 customers
include: individual teachers, cohorts of teachers, whole schools/districts
moving toward systemic change, and colleges of education. The project would
contribute to the knowledge base in leveraging online, social networking
environments for large scale professional learning that results in shifts in
classroom practices.