* 1113450
* SBIR Phase I:  One-step Production of Lactic Acid from Lignocellulosic Biomass by Recombinant Cellulolytic Bacillus subtilis
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2011,06/30/2012
* Xiaozhou Zhang, Gate Fuels Incorporated
* Standard Grant
* Prakash Balan
* 06/30/2012
* USD 178,776.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project will develop a new
ultra-low-cost platform for the production of lactic acid directly from
pretreated lignocellulosic biomass in a single step by using a novel recombinant
cellulolytic Bacillus subtilis strain. Lactic acid is the precursor of
polylactic acid (PLA), an environmentally friendly biodegradable plastic.
Currently, lactic acid is commercially produced through bacterial fermentation
based on corn starch or cane sugar, which are food and animal feed. Cellulosic
biomass is the most abundant natural renewable resource, which has great
potential in the production of valuable biocommodities for both short- and long-
term sustainability. However, the process for converting non-food
lignocellulosic material into lactic acid is not feasible yet due to the high
cost of cellulase involved in cellulose hydrolysis and also to the use of
fastidious culture media. Through the systematic genetic engineering and
metabolic engineering, this project will convert noncellulose- utilizing B.
subtilis to an efficient lignocellulose utilizer and to produce lactic acid at
high yield and titer, suitable for industrial fermentation.

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project is that the proposed
recombinant cellulolytic B. subtilis would be an ultra-low-cost platform for
producing lactic acid from non-food biomass, with obvious advantages over other
developing CBP microorganisms. Also, this effort would serve as a model system
to convert other industrially important microorganisms into cellulose utilizers
and result in use of renewable and less expensive substrates for the production
of valuable products. Lactic acid was identified by the U.S. DOE as one of the
top 30 value-added and potential buildingblock chemicals made from biomass.
There are many potential derivatives of lactic acid, some of which are new
chemical products and others represent biobased alternatives to chemicals
currently produced from petroleum. The use of lactic acid for making
biodegradable PLA is growing rapidly, given the rising demand for
environmentally friendly packaging. The production of PLA releases fewer toxic
substances than making petroleum plastic, consumes less energy, and releases an
estimated two-thirds less greenhouse gas. PLA can be composted, incinerated or
recycled. There is no doubt that the consumption of the biodegradable plastic
products derived from lactic acid would decrease the growing environmental
pollution and attract greater consumer interest towards the use of green
products.