* 1113652
* SBIR Phase I:  Low Cost Manufacturing of Pollution Control Substrates
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2011,06/30/2012
* Charles Ramberg, Errcive, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Gregory T. Baxter
* 06/30/2012
* USD 150,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project will investigate the use
of novel manufacturing methods to fabricate porous ceramic substrates for
reducing pollution from large diesel engines, and burners. Currently, these
substrates are extruded, and are thus constrained in size, shape, and gas flow
dynamics. As a result, extruded substrates require expensive catalysts, and do
not easily scale to the largest, most polluting engines. This project will seek
to develop a novel, environmentally benign, low cost manufacturing method to
make large substrates. These substrates will have improved heat transfer and
mass transfer properties, enabling the substrates to reach uncatalyzed operation
temperatures quickly. The resulting exhaust mitigation systems will not rely on
precious-metal catalysts, and thus be much lower cost than currently available
products. This Phase I effort is directed toward testing, developing, and
benchmarking a new manufacturing technology. These fabrication methods will
leverage Errcive?s prior work on ultra-low cost raw materials to create an
entirely new type of pollution mitigation product. The broader/commercial
impacts of this research include: i) reducing air pollution, ii) developing
advanced manufacturing technology, and iii) upcycling industrial waste into high
value products. Criteria pollutants (e.g., particulate matter and NOx), are
health hazards, cause premature melting in Boreal regions, and are strong
climate forcing agents. Reducing the concentrations of criteria pollutants will
result in a variety of positive outcomes, including improved air quality and
overall population health, particularly near cities, rail yards, and ports.
Additionally, recent studies have determined that PM and NOx may be among the
top five global warming species. The atmospheric lifetime of PM (weeks) is much
shorter than that of CO2 (decades). Thus, mitigating PM emissions may yield the
fastest reduction in global warming. PM and NOx are emitted by virtually all of
the world?s ~50 million diesel engines. Appreciably reducing overall emissions
requires mitigating the world?s oldest, largest engines. However, the cost of
currently available technology prohibits wide scale adoption. An economic
exhaust mitigation system must be capable of cleaning these emissions streams at
a cost that does not prevent its adoption. This project is directed toward
creating a revolutionary system that combines high performance and low cost.