* 1113260
* SBIR Phase I:  Development of Physico-Chemically & Biologically Activated Swelling Organosilica-Metal Composites Filter Media in Bioretention Systems for Enhanced Remediation o
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2011,12/31/2011
* Hanbae Yang, Absorbent Materials Company LLC
* Standard Grant
* Prakash Balan
* 12/31/2011
* USD 149,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project will develop bio-
retention soils for the remediation of storm water runoff and common pollutants
using engineered glass materials. Storm water runoff is a major component of
non-point source pollution. The presence of excessive nutrients, metals,
hydrocarbons, herbicides, and pharmaceuticals in surface, ground and drinking
water is of particular concern due to their persistence and toxicity.
Controlling runoff pollutants will be accomplished using engineered glass
(Osorb)-metal composites mixed into bio-retention systems. Osorb physically
absorbs a wide variety of volatile organic pollutants from water. Osorb will
chemically remediate pollutants with embedded particles of catalytic metals.
Breakdown byproducts of pollutants can be biologically mineralized in bio-
retention systems or consumed as foods by the biotic community. It is expected
that Osorb-metal composites amended soils will have significantly improved
removal efficiency of multiple runoff pollutants without compromising hydraulic
performance of the systems. The broader/commercial impacts of this research
include: Substantial reduction of local toxic runoffs, protection from flooding
and property damage by improving plant health and water-retainment of soils,
improvement of aquatic and human health, and facilitation of sustainable water
reuse. It is estimated by US EPA, runoff pollutants result in a multitude of
economic losses in the US annually including; $30 million + annual direct losses
for fishing industries, $2 billion + annual losses for beach tourism due to
toxic closures and $17 million+ extra treatment costs in drinking water
treatment plants. The state and federal governments are mandating local storm
water programs to control storm water pollution and the cost of storm water
runoff treatment is expected to significantly increase with a stricter
regulatory climate. Developing cost-effective and effective storm water best
management practice (BMP) would substantially reduce negative effects of runoff
pollutants on human and aquatic health. The City of Seattle recently released a
2010 study which estimated the economic impact of uncontrolled storm-water
runoffs at $113M. These costs combined the demonstrated losses to wildlife,
human access to water resources, added costs of water treatment and 3 documented
additional costs in human health care. The City of Cleveland and the local area
watersheds have released a preliminary report reaching similar per-capita costs
of pollutants in runoff waters.