* 1113888
* SBIR Phase I:  Secure SMS Transactions for Transit Systems and Mobile Markets
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2011,06/30/2012
* Joshua Cross, Hermes Commerce, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Juan E. Figueroa
* 06/30/2012
* USD 180,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project will determine
the feasibility of using secure text messages (short messaging service, SMS) for
mobile commerce. Mobile commerce - payment and messaging done via a mobile
device such as a smartphone - is technically challenging because of the
competing requirements of security, ease of use, and cost to implement. For mass
market adoption, transaction speed plays an additional, important role. While
mobile devices have tremendous computational power, the challenge is to provide
adequate security at sufficient speed in an application that is convenient and
usable. Costs, such as application costs, infrastructure costs, and payment
clearing system costs are also important for adoption. There are three aspects
of SMS-based mobile commerce technology that Hermes Commerce, Inc. will assess
in this Phase I research project. First, Hermes will assess the security-speed-
usability trade-offs of a secure SMS application. Second, system infrastructure
will be evaluated for technical, deployment, and cost considerations. Last,
Hermes will evaluate security-speed benefits that might be realized through the
transaction clearing system.

If successful, this project will have a broad impact by enabling mobile
commerce. Competing mobile commerce technologies include: Smartcards, Near Field
Communication-enabled cell phones, and Radio Frequency ID-enabled payment cards.
All of these face the challenge of getting customers or equipment manufacturers
to implement hardware retroactively in existing devices or design and sell new
devices. The company?s secure SMS solution requires very little change by the
end user ? only an application downloaded to the mobile device. The simplicity
of the approach has the potential to drive wide-spread adoption.