* 1113191
* NeTS: Small: Computationally Scalable Optical Network Design
* CSE,CNS
* 08/01/2011,07/31/2016
* George Rouskas, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* John Brassil
* 07/31/2016
* USD 429,995.00

Optical networking forms the foundation of the global network infrastructure,
hence the planning and design of optical networks is crucial to the operation
and economics of the Internet and its ability to support critical and reliable
communication services. This research project aims to increase greatly our
ability to solve optimally a range of optical design problems. In particular,
the project will develop compact formulations and solution approaches that can
be applied efficiently to instances encountered in Internet-scale environments.
The ultimate goal is to lower the barrier to entry in fully exploring the
solution space and in implementing and deploying innovative designs. The
solutions to be developed are ?future-proof? with respect to advances in dense
wavelength division multiplexing (DWDM) transmission technology, as the size of
the corresponding problem formulations is independent of the number of
wavelengths.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specific outcomes include: (a) computationally
efficient formulations for the routing and wavelength assignment (RWA) problem,
a subproblem of many design problems; (b) scalable optimal solutions to a suite
of network design problems (including traffic grooming, survivability, and
impairment-aware routing) that can be applied to topologies encountered in
practice; (c) investigation and characterization of limiting solutions and
technology tradeoffs in the ?large W? regime that is consistent with DWDM
technology trends; (d) benchmarking of existing heuristics and development of
new polynomial-time algorithms that leverage the structure of optimal solutions;
and (e) a set of integrated community building, research collaboration, and
technology transfer activities that engage a wide range of students, including
underrepresented groups in computer science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impact: The project will develop new capabilities for the design and operation
of optical networks that form the backbone of the Internet infrastructure. The
proposed framework with its emphasis on scaling optimal solutions to networks of
realistic size will open new directions for network design by permitting
extensive ?what-if? analysis to explore the sensitivity of design decisions to
forecast traffic demands, capital and operational cost assumptions, service
price structures, etc. The research agenda has the potential enable a wide range
of 21st century science, education, and commercial applications through the
design of networks that are better optimized for user and application
requirements and are less expensive to build and
operate.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Optical network design is an interdisciplinary
area of research for students of networking that incorporates techniques from
mathematical programming, discrete optimization, and operations research.
Research results will be disseminated not only through journal and conference
publications, but also through participation in community building and
technology transfer activities and through graduate and undergraduate education,
adding to the impact of the project. Graduate students engaged in this project
will be provided with a collaborative setting that will expose them to
international research environments. New course material and class projects will
be developed to demonstrate the fundamental concepts and to present the results
of advanced research to students taking these courses. The PI will also organize
workshops on specific network design themes, and follow up with an edited book
that will collect the research related to optimization techniques for optical
networks.