* 1113660
* SBIR Phase I:  Developing an Adaptive Compact Fuel Reformer with an Ultra-Fine Homogenous Atomizer
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2011,06/30/2012
* Deyang Hou, QuantLogic Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 06/30/2012
* USD 180,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I Project will investigate
the merits and&lt;br/&gt;feasibility of an Adaptive Compact Fuel Reformer (ACFR)
using an Ultra-Fine Homogeneous&lt;br/&gt;Atomizer based on an autothermal
process. Diesel reformer is the key to provide syngas (H2+CO) for&lt;br/&gt;fuel
cell auxiliary power unit (APU) which can significantly reduce engine idling
fuel cost. Hydrogen&lt;br/&gt;rich syngas with EGR is effective for
simultaneously reducing engine NOx and PM emissions.&lt;br/&gt;However, most
diesel reformers face challenges of auto-ignition control, coking and fuel slip,
size&lt;br/&gt;and weight reduction, and durability issues, etc. The key
innovation of the adaptive compact fuel&lt;br/&gt;reformer is an ultra-fine
atomizer, which has an innovative micro-circular orifice coupling ultra-
thin&lt;br/&gt;layer of fuel spray, steam and air flow simultaneously. The
atomizer can produce very small fuel&lt;br/&gt;droplets (~10 micron) and
homogenous mixture, which can be quickly vaporized and converted
into&lt;br/&gt;syngas in a small space without auto-ignition, coking and slip.
The Phase I work will complete the&lt;br/&gt;key design work for the fuel
reformer and conduct lab bench scale testing for key components.&lt;br/&gt;The
broader/commercial impacts of this research are significant potential benefits
for US&lt;br/&gt;energy security and environment protection. The potential
customers include engine OEMs and auto&lt;br/&gt;makers. The industry-university
collaborated research will help graduate students carry on&lt;br/&gt;fundamental
research while providing deeper understanding of diesel fuel reformation for
commercial&lt;br/&gt;applications.