* 1113202
* SBIR Phase I:  Spray-Formed Soft Magnetic Material for Efficient Hybrid-Field Electric Machines
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2011,12/31/2011
* Martin Hosek, Persimmon Technologies Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 12/31/2011
* USD 150,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project aims to develop a
novel soft magnetic material for electric motor cores, a fabrication process to
make components from the material, and an electric motor configuration
leveraging the benefits of the material and fabrication process. The approach is
to utilize a new single-step net-shape fabrication technique based on uniform-
droplet spray deposition in a reactive atmosphere to produce an isotropic metal
microstructure characterized by small domains of high permeability and low
coercivity with a controlled formation of insulation boundaries that limit
electrical conductivity between neighboring domains. This design is expected to
provide a superior magnetic path while minimizing losses due to eddy currents,
and eliminating design constraints associated with anisotropic laminated cores
of conventional motors.

The broader/commercial impact of this project will be the potential to provide
spray-formed winding cores for hybrid-field motors to increase output, improve
efficiency and reduce material scrap during fabrication, thus lowering the cost
of electric motors. Considering the extensive use of electric motors in numerous
applications, including industrial machinery and automation, robotics, heating,
ventilation and air conditioning systems, appliances, power tools, medical
devices, automotive applications, electric vehicles, military equipment etc.,
there is an increasing need for electric motors with improved performance,
higher efficiency, and lower cost. This project is expected to have a
significant commercial and environmental impact by providing low-cost and high-
efficiency electric motor cores.