* 1113167
* EAGER: Elucidating the Mechanism of Pseudophosphatase MK-STYX as a Regulator of mRNA Stability in the Stress Response Pathway
* BIO,MCB
* 05/01/2011,04/30/2014
* Shanta Hinton, College of William and Mary
* Continuing Grant
* Gregory W. Warr
* 04/30/2014
* USD 311,124.00

When cells are exposed to stress such as high temperature or ultraviolet rays
from the sun, they respond quickly to ensure survival. One of the most rapid
responses is stopping protein production, which allows cells to adapt to stress.
Cells maintain this control by sequestering messenger RNAs, which provide the
blueprint for protein synthesis, to special compartments called stress granules.
A messenger RNA binding protein named G3BP-1 is widely accepted as an important
component of stress granules. Researchers recently reported that another protein
called MK-STYX interacts with G3BP-1 and inhibits stress granule formation.
Although stress granules have been studied extensively for the past eight years,
most studies have focused exclusively on G3BP-1 and other components involved in
regulating stress granule assembly. This research explores the novel role MK-
STYX has in disassembly of stress granules and in blocking their formation. This
study will provide insight into the role MK-STYX plays in the stress response,
as a regulator of messenger RNA stability and in the dynamics of stress granule
formation. The following specific aims will be addressed: (1) Determine the
effect of MK-STYX on the cellular pathway responsible for protein production.
Does MK-STYX indirectly activate or bypass this pathway to block stress granule
assembly? Does MK-STYX stabilize protein production, which would prevent stress
granule formation, or is it required for their disassembly? (2) Determine the
effect of MK-STYX on the G3BP-1 complex required for stress granule assembly.
Does MK-STYX disrupt interactions between G3BP-1 and other scaffold proteins,
which are required for stress granule assembly? (3) Determine the effect of MK-
STYX on the cell cytoskeleton and chaperones required for stress granule
dynamics. Does MK-STYX interact with heat shock proteins required for
disassembly, such as Hsp70?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts. This project
provides the opportunity to integrate seamlessly research and education. It will
allow the investigator to enhance the biology curriculum at the College of
William &amp; Mary and to serve as a positive role model for underrepresented
students. One of the investigator's goals is to design a lecture and laboratory
course in biological chemistry, which will expose students to the study of
protein-protein interactions and their function. Aims and results of her
research will be incorporated into her teaching. The investigator has always
been committed to programs that enhance participation of underrepresented groups
in science. However, she has realized that just being a faculty member is not
enough to retain African-Americans and other minorities in the sciences. It is
imperative to encourage individuals from underrepresented groups to obtain PhDs
become independent investigators themselves. The investigator will also
participate in an HHMI-funded program that provides underrepresented groups with
a unique undergraduate research experience and that and promotes collaborations
with local historically black-serving institutions such as Hampton University,
Norfolk State University, and Virginia State University to foster professional
development and mentoring relationships between faculty and students. The
investigator will continue to provide real research opportunities for her
students so that they may engage in the exciting process of scientific
discovery.