* 1113704
* Mixing and Reactions in Highly Heterogeneous Media - Can Nonlocal Models handle them?
* GEO,EAR
* 09/15/2011,08/31/2015
* Stephen Silliman, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Torgersen
* 08/31/2015
* USD 388,090.00

One of the great challenges in making accurate predictions of reactive
contaminant transport in subsurface flows is accounting for the impact of
geological heterogeneity. For many real life scenarios, prediction using
traditional approaches that are valid in homogeneous environments simply cannot
capture many of the complex features that have been observed in field and
laboratory experiments. For the case of non-reactive contaminants, several
promising theoretical methods have emerged. Predicting chemical reactions in
subsurface flows is by its nature a more complex problem and it is not clear
whether the novel methods put forth for non-reactive contaminants offer the same
potential for success in this area. This project aims to address the
applicability of methods designed for conservative transport to the problem of
predicting non-conservative transport. Specifically, the reasons for lack of
predictive capability and the needed improvement in the mathematical
description(s) is a primary focus of this research. These concerns will be
addressed using theory, numerical simulations and laboratory experiments in a
synergistic manner. The first part of this work will focus on studying mixing,
which is a fundamental driver of reactions. Numerical and laboratory experiments
will be conducted in constructed heterogeneous porous media and comparisons
between theoretical predictions and experimental data will highlight limitations
in one or both of these approaches (modeling and laboratory). The experimental
data will help to identify when and how fundamental assumptions associated with
the theoretical models fail with the ultimate aim of circumventing limiting
assumptions in the theory. The second part of this work focuses on studying
chemical reactions, again via experiments and theory, to determine whether
incorporating mixing, by itself, in a theoretical model is sufficient to improve
prediction of reactive transport, or whether modifications of mixing and
mechanisms related to chemical reactions will be necessary additions to existing
models.

Current predictive tools and methods often provide policy makers, legal
authorities, stakeholders and managers with unreliable information when it comes
to making decisions regarding contaminants that undergo chemical reactions in
groundwater systems. For a resource as valuable as water, which is already
strained in many parts of the world, this can give rise to great concern. One
specific goal of this work is to improve the current theoretical understanding
of reactive contaminant transport in groundwater systems. The successful
completion of this project holds substantial promise to provide the hydrological
and environmental engineering communities with new, substantially improved,
tools. These tools will allow experts to better assess and design strategies for
cleanup and remediation at already contaminated sites. It will also provide more
reliable information to allow for better management and protection strategies of
existing groundwater resources and hopefully help guide decision makers in the
development of future groundwater policies. Finally, this research will involve
research experiences for both undergraduate and graduate students at the
University of Notre Dame.