* 1113770
* SBIR Phase I:  Structural Imaging of High Temperature Furnace Walls
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2011,12/31/2011
* Yakup Bayram, PaneraTech Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 12/31/2011
* USD 149,127.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project addresses a major
need in the glass&lt;br/&gt;manufacturing industry by developing a wireless
sensor for 3?]D imaging of glass furnace walls to identify&lt;br/&gt;refractory
erosion and molten glass leaks. The furnace walls are comprised of insulation
and AZS&lt;br/&gt;(Alumina, Zirconium, Silica) refractories which are highly
lossy and very dispersive at high temperatures.&lt;br/&gt;A conventional
approach would inevitably be constrained by its system dynamic range, and thus
the&lt;br/&gt;most important molten glass?]AZS echo would be virtually invisible
regardless of the sophistication of&lt;br/&gt;digital processing on the measured
results. This project takes a holistic approach from antenna design
to&lt;br/&gt;imaging algorithm to sensor architecture in order to tackle very
demanding requirements of the furnace&lt;br/&gt;wall. It aims to accomplish (1)
accurate characterization of attenuation and dispersive properties of
the&lt;br/&gt;furnace walls (2) optimal antenna design to match with minimum
inter?]coupling, (3) high resolution&lt;br/&gt;imaging algorithm that leverages
prior knowledge of wall properties, and (4) hardware architecture
with&lt;br/&gt;the highest possible dynamic range in such a high temperature
environment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact/commercial potential of
this project is that it offers a 3?]D sensor that will enable
a&lt;br/&gt;maintenance program based upon the real condition of the furnace to
realize longer life span of high&lt;br/&gt;temperature furnaces and make
informed local maintenance without a major interruption in
the&lt;br/&gt;production. This translates to significant financial savings for
the glass manufacturing industry given the&lt;br/&gt;multi?]million dollar
initial capital investment is required to build a furnace, followed by a
multi?]million&lt;br/&gt;dollar spending to maintain it. Further, several
catastrophic accidents have occurred in the past due to&lt;br/&gt;molten glass
leaking from the furnaces. These catastrophic accidents resulted in death of
several&lt;br/&gt;employees, significant financial damage and severe production
disruption. Therefore, this project will&lt;br/&gt;enable safer manufacturing
environment for the glass manufacturing industry since potential areas
for&lt;br/&gt;molten glass leakages and structural health of furnace walls will
be assessed with the 3?]D imaging&lt;br/&gt;technology being developed under
this project. Lastly, this research will also lead to new
design&lt;br/&gt;concepts for sensing through dispersive and high loss media in
extremely high temperature&lt;br/&gt;environment, thus introducing new
approaches for wireless sensing technologies in harsh environments.