* 1113579
* A (mostly) Observational Study of Microearthquakes on a Bimaterial Interface
* GEO,EAR
* 06/01/2011,05/31/2014
* Allan Rubin, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Eva Zanzerkia
* 05/31/2014
* USD 188,524.00

For three decades it has been anticipated that earthquake ruptures along an
interface separating&lt;br/&gt;materials with different elastic properties will
have a favored propagation direction, that being the&lt;br/&gt;direction of
motion of the more compliant material. However, observing this tendency on
natural&lt;br/&gt;faults has been difficult, in large part because of the small
number of significant earthquakes on&lt;br/&gt;faults with a well-characterized
velocity contrast. The PI has used spectral ratios to directly
estimate&lt;br/&gt;directivity in a catalog of over 3,000 small earthquakes
along a 30-km section of the San Andreas&lt;br/&gt;fault with a large and well-
characterized velocity contrast. The spectral ratios were fitted with
a&lt;br/&gt;simple moving point source model in which each modeled earthquake
has four parameters: two&lt;br/&gt;rupture lengths (one to the SE and one to the
NW) and their propagation velocities. Nearly 900&lt;br/&gt;earthquakes, mostly
those larger than 70 m, appear reasonably well resolved. The inversion
results&lt;br/&gt;suggest that 40% of the well-resolved events are roughly
bilateral, although more than 80%&lt;br/&gt;of the 144 events classified as
strongly unilateral rupture to the SE, consistent with the
theoretical&lt;br/&gt;prediction. For those rupture halves that were large
enough for the propagation speed to be&lt;br/&gt;somewhat resolved, that speed
was greater by roughly 10% for those halves propagating to the
SE,&lt;br/&gt;qualitatively consistent with numerical and laboratory
experiments. They find that events with&lt;br/&gt;nearby (in space and time)
foreshocks tend to rupture away from those foreshocks, whether to
the&lt;br/&gt;NW or to the SE, indicating that asymmetry of prior stressing
history can exert a stronger influence&lt;br/&gt;on rupture directivity than the
material contrast.&lt;br/&gt;A major goal of the proposed work is to greatly
increase the size of their database in both&lt;br/&gt;space and time. This will
allow them to explore how the correlation between foreshock&lt;br/&gt;location
and mainshock directivity decays with increasing spatial and temporal distance
between&lt;br/&gt;foreshock and mainshock, whether the apparent lack of
correlation between mainshock directivity&lt;br/&gt;and aftershock asymmetry we
have observed stands up to a larger data sample, and how
these&lt;br/&gt;behaviors correlate with the local across-fault velocity
contrast. The investigators will also undertake a systematic search for
asymmetry in the location of sub-events in compound earthquakes, and
begin&lt;br/&gt;numerical modeling of earthquake nucleation on a bimaterial
interface, with the specific goals of&lt;br/&gt;understanding the aforementioned
decay of the influence of foreshocks on mainshock directivity,&lt;br/&gt;and the
influence of the bimaterial contrast on earthquake nucleation
generally.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Large faults that are capable of producing
damaging earthquakes have also slipped large distances,&lt;br/&gt;and so they
often juxtaposes rocks with different mechanical properties. It has long
been&lt;br/&gt;predicted that earthquakes on such faults could have a preferred
propagation direction. Establishing&lt;br/&gt;whether this is actually the case
is relevant to hazards mitigation because there is much
stronger&lt;br/&gt;ground shaking in the direction that the rupture propagates;
it has even been proposed that building&lt;br/&gt;codes could be altered to
reflect this. This gives the earthquakes we are examining an
importance&lt;br/&gt;which surpasses their small size. Their usefulness lies in
their large number, so that the results&lt;br/&gt;are statistically meaningful,
and in their ability to teach us about connecting numerical models
of&lt;br/&gt;earthquake rupture to real earthquakes generally.