* 1113706
* SBIR Phase I:  Low-cost and Resuable Functional Polyaniline for CO2 Sequestration and Fertilizer Production
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2011,06/30/2012
* Yong Min, Nanomaterial Innovation Ltd.
* Standard Grant
* Prakash Balan
* 06/30/2012
* USD 179,975.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project seeks to develop a novel
and sustainable approach to capture emitted CO2 from the fossil fuel based
electric industry and convert the captured CO2 directly into useful by product,
fertilizer using functionalized conducting polymer in a continuous dual chemical
loop process. Reducing CO2 release to protect our environment is an urgent issue
faced by our society, while world wide food shortage in the near future will
require a lot amount of fertilizer. The objective of this project is to develop
an affordable material/process that can quickly capture emitted CO2 from the
industrial sources and turn it into fertilizer. We utilize functionalized
polyaniline (FPAN), a low-cost material that can be reused repeatedly at harmful
conditions, to capture CO2 at low temperature and high speed. With the presence
of ammonia and water, the process can also easily convert CO2 into nitrogen
fertilizers and allow the re-use of FPAN. If developed successfully, our process
may permanently remove emitted CO2 and generate products valuable for
agriculture, particularly food industry. The broader impact/commercial potential
of this project is to revolutionalize the current CO2 sequestration and storage
approach. Turning environmentally harmful CO2 release into useful fertilizer
production in a low-temperature and low-cost process represents a great
commercialization opportunity in both green energy and food industries in the US
and worldwide. The low-cost fertilizer produced from CO2 release may also impact
the forest and biomass industry. Furthermore, this will significantly grow the
overall share of functional materials in the industry. Successful
commercialization of the proposed novel products will have a significant impact
on global warming, environmental protection and energy generation. This award
will enhance the United States global leadership position in green industry.
Societal benefits include healthier living environment and improved use of
conventional fossil fuels that contribute to global warming. Educational and
scientific benefits relate to the pioneering nature of nanocomposite technology
and the opportunity this project will provide to advance frontiers of knowledge
and the training of future scientists.