* 1113653
* SBIR Phase I:  Novel Algorithms for Automated 3D Building Models and 3D Street Maps
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2011,12/31/2011
* Kevin Williams, ClearEdge3D
* Standard Grant
* Glenn H. Larsen
* 12/31/2011
* USD 148,929.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project proposes to
automate the creation of digital 3D building models and 3D street maps used in
the personal navigation, architecture, engineering, defense and homeland
security markets. It currently requires hundreds of hours to create a 3D model
of an average city building or streetscape using a tripod-mounted or vehicle-
mounted laser scanner and available CAD software. This research will potentially
reduce that time significantly. Automated 3D modeling has been a primary goal of
the CAD industry for a generation. The problem can be divided into two separate
challenges: 1) identifying and extracting observed surfaces, and 2) subsequently
extending those surfaces automatically to form a solid 3D model. The proposed
research involves developing algorithms to extrapolate observed building
surfaces and extend them to correctly intersect other surfaces, completing the
solid 3D model entirely automatically.

The potential to create highly accurate 3D building models and 3D street maps in
minutes will enable cost-effective modeling of entire cities. Accurate 3D city
models made widely available to the public has the potential to have a profound
impact on the mapping and personal navigation markets as well as commercial
architecture, engineering projects, virtual tourism and first responder
effectiveness. In the Architecture, Engineering and Construction (AEC) market
alone, firms spend nearly $800 million per year on manually creating 3D building
models. The proposed effort will not replace the existing CAD programs; rather,
it will work with CAD programs to remove the tedious and expensive manual steps
of model creation from vehicle-mounted and tripod-mounted laser scanners. If
successfully developed, the commercial potential of automated high-definition 3D
building models and 3D street maps is significant.