* 1113090
* SBIR Phase I:  High Resolution Channel Sounding for Indoor TDOA Positioning Using Narrowband RF Transceiver
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2011,12/31/2011
* Gary Sugar, Diani Systems, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Glenn H. Larsen
* 12/31/2011
* USD 150,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project is focused on wireless
Time Difference Of Arrival (TDOA) positioning technology for indoor or cluttered
outdoor environments. Indoor TDOA technologies have had little commercial
success to date primarily because of multipath - signal reflections off of
surfaces that smear the arrival time of the over-the-air signals, making it
difficult to determine the arrival time of the location beacon from the Line-Of-
Sight or shortest distance path. The best way to combat multipath is to use very
wideband beacon signals. The wide signal bandwidth increases the resolution in
the time-domain, allowing the receiver to distinguish between paths. A key
challenge with using such wide signal bandwidths is that it can?t be done with
commercially-available highly-integrated low-cost components. Another constraint
is regulatory restrictions that limit the transmit power of such signals. The
focus of this research is to develop a way to overcome these practical
limitations by defining a special type of narrowband location beacon that gives
the same performance as very wideband signals but that can be implemented using
affordable, off-the-shelf radio components.

A great number of applications could benefit from high-resolution indoor
location technology, including: Indoor floor map positioning and route guidance
for smartphones, indoor location-based advertising, indoor E911, location-based
security, medical staff and asset monitoring and Search and rescue. However,
existing solutions such as nearest Access Point or Received Signal Strength
triangulation are neither accurate enough nor cost-effective due to the high
density required to achieve this accuracy. There are TDOA solutions based on
Ultra WideBand that have better accuracy but these networks have limited range
due to FCC power limitations and limited market success to date. WiFi has
already revolutionized wireless mobility and the solution presented here will
leverage WiFi as a go-to-market strategy. If successful, the solution will not
be limited by regulatory power restrictions and will, because it is based on
WiFi, be affordable.