* 1113991
* CNH: The Complexities of Ecological and Social Diversity: A Long-Term Perspective
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2011,02/29/2016
* Ann Kinzig, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 02/29/2016
* USD 1,425,000.00

Calls for preserving cultural and biological diversity regularly appear in the
news. The preservation of diversity is not just a subject of study by
ecologists, anthropologists, conservationists, and land managers; it is an
explicit goal of social movements and governmental policies. This research
project will examine how social and ecological diversity interact to influence
the resilience of societies facing major changes in their social or
environmental circumstances. The goal of the investigators conducting this
project is to discover configurations of diversity in ecological landscapes and
in forms of social organization that make systems more or less able to cope with
significant environmental or social changes without undergoing an unpleasant
transformation. The researchers will focus on a few important variables
indicating both social diversity (integration, conformity, and hierarchy) and
ecological diversity (diversity of plant and animal species and of patches on
the landscape). To understand the relationships of interest, they will develop
mathematical models of the interactions of key variables and conduct extensive
quantitative analysis of data from empirical studies of millennium-long societal
trajectories. They will examine five archaeological cases from the southwestern
U.S. and northern Mexico as long-term "experiments" to see how diversity in the
social and ecological realms affected these societies' abilities to thrive or
forced them into dramatic transformations when faced with different
environmental or social stimuli. The outcomes of these analyses will provide the
basis for dynamic modeling designed to investigate the broad range of conditions
in which these domains of diversity contribute to varying responses to change
across different time scales. Model analyses conducted using dynamical systems
and numerical techniques will begin with simple social situations coupled with
simple landscapes followed by step-wise modifications designed to "complexify"
both social and ecological modeled landscapes. The project will move iteratively
between archaeological analysis and mathematical modeling. Patterns observed in
the empirical studies will inform the modeling, which will examine those
relationships more abstractly. The effects predicted by the modeling then will
be explored with respect to the empirical details of the case studies.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Insights about diversity in contemporary research on
interacting social and ecological systems have overwhelmingly relied upon
studies and observations over short time spans. This project's emphasis on case-
specific, comparative analysis of long-term, regional-scale archaeological
sequences in the Americas will yield new perspectives regarding important
episodes in human history. This project will demonstrate the value of
integrating insights from ecology and archaeology, the importance of balancing
concerns for social and ecological processes, and the ability of archaeology to
contribute to understanding the role of diversity in the resilience of social-
ecological systems. As societies cope with inevitable change, their actions
generate vulnerabilities. Lack of awareness of these dynamics can contribute to
the need for costly transformations. When made more aware of the complex
dynamics of change as they have functioned in the past, people can better weigh
the implications of their decisions and build resilience to such
vulnerabilities. This project will demonstrate how interactions associated with
social and ecological diversity can inform contemporary policies dealing with
sustainability, robustness, vulnerability, and transformative change. This
project also will enhance education from pre-collegiate through graduate levels
as students and teachers integrate knowledge derived from both the social and
natural sciences and benefit from primary datasets of richly documented social
and ecological analyses of diversity. This project is supported by the NSF
Dynamics of Coupled Natural and Human Systems (CNH) Program.