* 1113506
* SBIR Phase I:  Novel Proteolysis-based Tools for Metabolic Engineering of Amino Acid Producing Strains
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2011,06/30/2012
* Jason Kelly, Ginkgo BioWorks
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 06/30/2012
* USD 150,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project aims to engineer
microbes for the cost-effective production of the amino acid, L-Threonine.
Currently, engineered microbes bear mutations that increase the production of
Threonine of interest by inhibiting the cell?s ability to produce other amino
acids. These mutations are critical as they effectively channel the cell?s
metabolic flux toward Threonine, thereby boosting production efficiency and
easing downstream purification. Unfortunately, these mutations also decrease
cellular fitness and, thus, the growth media must be supplemented with costly
nutrients. Technical research herein will assess the feasibility of applying
novel regulated proteolysis technology to direct metabolic flux toward Threonine
production in the absence of costly media supplementation. The project has 3 key
objectives: 1) generate E. coli strains containing off-pathway metabolic enzymes
tagged for degradation by a growth-phase dependent proteolysis system, 2) test
the ability of these strains to grow on supplement-free media, and 3) assay for
production of Threonine by these engineered strains. We anticipate that our
engineered strains will grow robustly on minimal, un-supplemented media. Upon
induction of our proteolysis system, we expect our strains to specifically
eliminate off-target metabolic pathways, leading to a substantial increase in
production of our target product, Threonine.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader
impact/commercial potential of this project is the generation of more cost-
efficient L-Threonine producing microbial strains. Purified amino acids are
estimated to constitute a U.S. market of $1.30 billion by 2013. These chemicals
are used as animal feedstock supplements, precursors in production of the
artificial sweetener aspartame, and have potential as biofuel precursors.
Currently, key amino acids are produced commercially using highly engineered
microbes that convert low-cost sugar sources (e.g. glucose) to the final amino
acid product. To improve the conversion efficiency and ease downstream
purification, the microbe?s ability to synthesize other, off-pathway amino acids
is often eliminated. However, because these other amino acids are critical for
bacterial growth, they must be added as a supplement to the growth medium,
substantially increasing production costs. The technology proposed here would
allow for efficient, robust production of easily purified amino acids without
the need for media supplementation, dramatically reducing production costs.
Moreover, the regulated degradation technology developed herein will provide
next-generation regulatory tools for other industrial metabolic engineering
applications.