* 1113561
* SBIR Phase I:  Simple Device for Measuring Nanosecond Laser Pulses
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2011,06/30/2012
* Dongjoo Lee, Swamp Optics, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Juan E. Figueroa
* 06/30/2012
* USD 150,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project proposes to
develop a simple, single-shot, inexpensive, and complete laser-pulse measurement
device for ~100ps to ~10ns pulses. While long (>10ns) pulses are easily
measured, and recently developed techniques completely measure ultra-short
pulses (<10ps), intermediate-length ~1ns, pulses remain only partially and
roughly measurable, and, consequently, such pulses generally remain complex and
unstable. This is unfortunate because most commercial pulsed lasers emit pulses
in this intermediate range. The proposed measurement device extends Frequency-
Resolved Optical Gating (FROG), a very successful technique for measuring the
complete intensity and phase versus time of ultra-short pulses, which operates
by measuring the pulse's spectrogram. The main challenge in extending FROG to
much longer pulses is the generation of a many-ns delay range on a single shot -
currently an unsolved problem in general. The proposed innovation solves it by
tilting the input pulse by a remarkable ~89.9° without distorting it in time. As
a result, one side of a ~1cm-wide beam precedes the other by over a meter. The
proposed ns FROG can measure even very complex pulses and will cost about one
tenth as much as the high bandwidth oscilloscopes currently used to only
partially measure such pulses.

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project will extend to most
pulsed lasers, from Q-switched and gain-switched solid-state lasers to fiber
lasers, which emit ~ns pulses and have many applications. All such applications
will benefit from this device. First, ~ns-laser users will now have a device to
test their laser?s performance, and it will be simple, easy to use, single-shot,
and relatively inexpensive. It will be essential in attempts to coherently
combine pulses from multiple fiber lasers, generally regarded as the next
important step in high-power fiber-laser development. Injection-seeded Qswitched
and gain-switched lasers, which endeavor to emit very clean ~ns pulses, are also
in need of such a method for performance confirmation. Finally, laser engineers
in general will be better able to improve the quality of ~ns-laser pulses,
greatly benefitting all ~ns-pulsed-laser experiments and applications. If the
spectacular progress in ultrafast lasers that occurred after complete ultra-
short-pulse-measurement technology was introduced is any indication, such an
inexpensive and simple device for measuring ns pulses should make a huge
difference in the generation of ever more stable ~ns pulses and consequently in
the many fields that use such lasers, from welding to surgery to material
processing to distance measurements to remote sensing.