* 1113692
* SBIR Phase I:  weCompute Content Authoring System: Facilitating User-Created Content in an Intelligent Tutoring System
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2011,03/31/2012
* Christy McGuire, EDalytics, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Glenn H. Larsen
* 03/31/2012
* USD 147,389.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project focuses on the
creation of a Teacher Content Authoring System for an Intelligent Tutoring
System designed for math, science, and computer science education. Intelligent
Tutoring Systems (ITS) are becoming an increasingly larger part of the education
landscape. EDalytics, LLC is developing a Content Authoring System that allows
teachers to integrate their own content into the cognitive modeling architecture
of the ITS for computational thinking. The weCompute ITS (wITS) Content
Authoring System offers a new perspective to the ITS community, and potentially
transform the ways that commercial companies and research institutions approach
content creation. The research plan is constructed to solicit teachers? feedback
throughout the design stages to ensure their needs are met. This SBIR project
focuses on teachers? ability to transform meaningful content that can be easily
integrated with pre-created content models in an intelligent tutoring system. An
iterative development process including user studies will help tie together
content authors and software designers to produce a well-balanced product.
Overall, the wITS Content Authoring System has the potential to make content
authoring a distributed task in tutoring environments.

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project is an educational tool
that will build an effective pedagogical system for STEM educators that is
affordable and accessible to schools and students across the economic spectrum.
A major drawback in developing intelligent tutoring systems (ITS) is the
enormous investment in expert hours required to build a full library of
curriculum content. Ultimately, the customers pay for the ITS publishers to
recoup their investment, yet they have no way to adapt that content to their
specific needs. Our solution - the the weCompute Content Authoring System -
addresses both of these obstacles by improving the weCompute Intelligent
Tutoring System (wITS) with a tool that educators and students can afford and
modify. In addition, the wITS provides more pedagogical support for schools
lacking teachers knowledgeable in the emerging content areas that define 21st
century skills. Students will enjoy effective individualized instruction on
subjects at low cost, since the curriculum development cost is subsidized by
leveraging the power of teachers who already create curriculum materials. The
decreased cost of development coupled with the inexpensive web-based delivery
mechanism will allow for more content hours and wider dissemination of quality
instruction.