* 1113577
* SBIR Phase I:  Multi-Use Moisture Resistant Green Composites
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2011,12/31/2011
* Robert Rasmussen, E2E MATERIALS, INC
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 12/31/2011
* USD 149,786.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project addresses the use of
"green" composite building materials as a replacement for conventional plastics
and wood products. These green composites have the advantage of superior
strength-to-weight ratios over pressed wood products while eliminating use of
the carcinogen formaldehyde. They also offer comparable strength-to-weight
ratios to petroleum-based advanced composites while having the advantages of
being generated from sustainable resources and being biodegradable. However, one
of the significant challenges with composites that use protein-based resins is
poor moisture resistance. This project will investigate the use of accelerants
to produce highly cross-linked soy-protein resins. The Phase I program will
result in the development and characterization of several formulations of the
composite material resin in combination with fibers. The resulting green
composites will be characterized after varying levels of exposure to moisture to
determine their suitability for a variety of commercial applications. The Phase
I research will enable the production of samples for potential customers and
partners based on their application specifications.

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project will involve a shift of
many consumer products away from non-renewable, petroleum-based products to
materials produced from annually-renewable agricultural materials, providing a
cost-effective solution with higher performance. These composites have the
potential to replace formaldehyde-containing pressed wood products and
petroleum-based advanced composites in building applications such as residential
cabinetry and office furniture. They also have the potential to be used in the
automotive industry for auto trimming. These materials do not use hazardous
chemicals and have greater strength-to-weight ratios than pressed wood products
(even without the use of nano-clay and microfibrillated cellulose additives),
enabling weight savings. This reduction in materials results in a cost savings
while having the advantages of being biodegradable and generated from
sustainable resources. Further, existing pressed-wood manufacturing and assembly
facilities can be readily converted to the manufacture and use of these
composite systems without major retooling, enabling companies to shift to eco-
friendly products without job losses or worker displacement.