* 1113057
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant: Risk- Reducing Subsistence Strategies and Prehistoric Population Growth: A Case-study from Santa Cruz Island, California
* SBE,BCS
* 05/15/2011,04/30/2013
* Michael Glassow, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 04/30/2013
* USD 19,900.00

Under the supervision of Dr. Michael Glassow, H.B. Thakar will conduct
archaeological excavations at four prehistoric shell midden sites on Santa Cruz
Island, California, and analyses of resulting collections. These sites contain
the material remains of the prehistoric Chumash who occupied the Northern
Channel Islands and the central coast of California at the time of European
contact. The four contemporaneous midden sites are located in the same watershed
but in distinct microenvironments, at varying distances from the coast and at
different elevations. Hunter-gatherers intermittently occupied each of these
sites during the time period immediately prior to the dramatic population growth
and rapid cultural development in the Santa Barbara Channel Region of coastal
California. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Research focusing on the dynamic
interrelationship of human population growth and social complexity is important
for a number of reasons. Studies worldwide indicate that throughout most of
human history, people have lived in small, relatively egalitarian groups that
moved frequently in order mitigate seasonal and spatial resource variation. The
study of how hunter-gatherer populations reduced risk in accessing essential
food resources provides insight into how modern populations can increase
sustainability and food security. Understanding how risk reduction articulated
with significant population growth contextualizes the demographic boom witnessed
in well-nourished modern populations. Furthermore, elucidating causal and
chronological relationships between human population growth and social
complexity will clarify how modern population growth interacts with the rapid
cultural development evident in contemporary society. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Ms.
Thakar will recover and analyze data that indicate what food resources the
ancient inhabitants of Santa Cruz Island relied upon, how these people managed
environmentally induced variation, and how risk-reducing strategies changed
through time in relation to population growth and social change. Specifically,
she proposes - and will evaluate evidence for - two economic strategies that
prehistoric island inhabitants may have employed to increase food stability:
diversification in exploitation of many types of food resources or
specialization in exploitation of a few key resources. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In
addition to its academic merit, this project will bring many educational and
outreach opportunities to undergraduate students, graduate students and members
of the modern Chumash community. Student assistants will participate in all
stages of the project, from excavation through laboratory analysis. This
opportunity will provide students the chance to engage directly with archaeology
and gain a wide variety of practical skills, from site mapping to flotation to
identification of plant/animal remains. Educational outreach programs for grade-
school Chumash youth will provide the younger generation of Chumash first-hand
experience with archaeology. These efforts will facilitate continuation of the
positive relationship that has developed between archaeologists and the Native
American community in the local area.