* 1113447
* SBIR Phase I:  Method for Genetic Detection Using Interspersed Genetic Elements
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2011,12/31/2011
* Sudhir Sinha, InnoGenomics Technologies, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 12/31/2011
* USD 150,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project proposes to
develop a next generation forensic human DNA typing system. DNA profiling has
gained broad popularity since its first use 25 years ago. Its application has
expanded from criminal and parentage issues to mass disasters and battlefield
forensics. In addition, the desire to rapidly analyze degraded and minimal
samples has also increased exponentially. While DNA analysis of Short Tandem
Repeats (STR) is considered routine, scientists continue to explore ways to
identify smaller segments of DNA for identification purposes. Mitochondrial
sequencing is presently the test of last resort but lacks the discrimination
power of nuclear STR typing. As DNA profiling has increased, so has the need for
quicker, more robust and less costly tests. This project proposes the use of a
microfluidic platform with redesigned primers for the Alu family of Mobile
Interspersed Genetic Elements. Alu primer sets producing amplicons in the
100-200 bp range will be typed for Alu insertion polymorphism. Due to the large
number of Alus available in the human genome and their known ancestral state,
these genetic elements can be a valuable tool for typing degraded DNA samples
and in their ability to infer geographic origin. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
broader impact and commercial potential of this project is to provide a
complete, robust, next generation DNA typing system for human identification.
Successful development of a rapid Alu-based DNA typing system would provide the
human identity testing market with additional and potentially transformational
tools to identify biological samples containing degraded DNA as well as provide
clues to the geographic ancestry of a specimen. Supplemental and next generation
DNA typing systems will result in the production of more genetic information
that can aid society in its search for the truth and justice for victims of
violent crimes. Mass disasters, battlefield forensics, as well as routine DNA
analysis for crime scene and parentage testing will benefit from a next
generation rapid DNA identification system. For forensic applications, a
microfluidic platform in conjunction with an Alu-based DNA typing system will
address the commercial needs of this industry and at minimum could provide
additional information to existing testing methods. Based upon the current human
DNA identification testing market the commercial potential of a supplemental
Alu-based DNA typing system is in excess of 100 million dollars, thus making a
significant commercial impact and positive contribution to the field of human
DNA profiling.