* 1113297
* SBIR Phase I:  Building an Integrated Software Platform for Civic Epistemic Gaming
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2011,12/31/2011
* Lewis Friedland, Community Knowledgebase, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Glenn H. Larsen
* 12/31/2011
* USD 150,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project is to investigate
the feasibility of new game-based software in which youth play the roles of
adult professionals. This approach has demonstrated the potential for raising
knowledge of and interest in civics and the local community for young people,
many of whom are not being reached by traditional curricula. Civic epistemic
games are collaborative, interactive games in which young people use
sophisticated technologies to learn to think in innovative and creative ways
about complex problems. But to realize the potential of these games, the
software requires extensive customization for local conditions and to meet
district and state standards. The approach in this effort is to focus on an
industry-standard social media platform to quickly develop a game that can be
tested for traction among the youth market.

While platforms are currently being developed for the rapid prototyping of
educational multiplayer games for augmented reality, these games involve
limited-duration problem-solving exercises placed in narrative frameworks drawn
from entertainment gaming, and often feature activities that mimic but do not
reproduce professional practice. As well, they are not scaled for large groups
of learners. Epistemic games, in contrast, are based on simulations of complex
thinking practices--they are authentic recreations of the activities by which
professionals learn to solve complex problems. But bringing epistemic games into
classrooms requires development and distribution platforms that can host
integrated curricula up to 15 weeks long and reach potentially millions of
simultaneous users. Early indication from large education-systems providers
indicates that there may be a significant market opportunity associated with
this effort. If successfully deployed, this effort will address the youth market
for educational games and provide a new platform for civic engagement.