* 1113355
* Collaborative Research: Testing the Role of Magma and Related Fluids in Early-Stage Rifting, East Africa
* GEO,EAR
* 08/15/2011,07/31/2016
* Cynthia Ebinger, University of Rochester
* Continuing Grant
* David Fountain
* 07/31/2016
* USD 215,596.00

The goal of the project is to develop an integrative approach to understanding
incipient and youthful rift zones developing in thick continental lithosphere by
targeting a portion of the East African Rift system in northern Tanzania and
southern Kenya. The development of these rifts is a fundamental plate tectonic
process yet the driving forces behind rift initiation and early evolution are
tenuously understood, particularly the feedbacks and trade-offs between strain
accommodation by magmatic and tectonic processes (dike intrusion vs. faulting).
Furthermore, the integrative roles of hydrothermal fluids and preexisting
structure in weakening the lithosphere and focusing deformation and magmatic
activity are virtually unexplored in developing rift systems. This project seeks
to explain the relative roles of magma systems below incipient rifts, the
development of large border faults and systems of distributed normal faults
across rift valleys, and the geochemical influences of hydrothermal fluids in
weakening thick continental lithosphere and promoting the development and
evolution of focused rift zones. This analysis will utilize: (1) field-based
mapping of fault system geometries and dynamics to characterize spatial patterns
of strain in association with magmatic systems; (2) 3D visualization of magmatic
and fault systems in the lithosphere, and crustal and upper mantle structure
along the length of the rift zone segments, using geophysical imaging (a
broadband seismic array); (3) sampling of gas emissions from hydrothermal
springs along border fault systems to determine chemical signatures of fluids
that may contribute to weakening within the lithosphere; and (4) sampling of
volcanic products exposed by fault systems for geochronologic analysis,
providing temporal constraints on faulting events in relation to magmatic
episodes and allowing a quantification of time-averaged strain rates. This study
will result in the development of an integrated model of magmatic and fault
system interactions during the early stages of rifting that can serve as a
benchmark for evaluating continental rift evolution
globally.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Continental rift zones are enigmatic in that they
develop in thick, strong continental lithosphere for reasons that are poorly
understood. Their development is a linchpin of the of plate tectonic process,
however, facilitating continents breaking apart, forming ocean basins by the
process of mid-ocean ridge spreading. Rift zones worldwide are commonly
associated with large magnitude earthquakes as well as volcanic activity, either
focused at discrete volcanoes or erupting from tens of kilometer long fissures.
They thus present geologic hazards that threaten humans living in rift zone
environments worldwide, including the U.S.A. Past work on rift zones in advanced
stages of development (prior to continental breakup) has shown that the
progressive stretching and thinning of the continental lithosphere by rifting
allows the mantle to well up beneath the rift and melt. In young and developing
rift systems, however, magma appears to be important for rifting despite very
little mantle upwelling at that stage. This suggests that, despite the presence
of thick continental lithosphere, magma is able to form and ascend into the
crust, enabling extension and helping to drive the faulting. The lithosphere is
clearly weakened in some manner to allow magmatic activity to be so focused.
This research team hypothesizes that lithosphere weakening is assisted by
focused, deep mantle fluids associated with developing magmatic systems and that
these fluids chemically alter and weaken the lithosphere, allowing magma to
intrude and drive rift development. This work in the East African Rift will
allow researchers to determine the relative roles of these fluids and intruding
magma in weakening the lithosphere and allowing faults to develop. By combining
fieldwork, geophysics, geochemistry, and geochronology, a model for rift
development and evolution will be formulated that is integrated across
disciplines and will capture multiple facets of the rifting processes. The
results of the work will be applicable to rift zone development globally and can
thus be integrated into existing plate tectonic models to provide a rationale
for why continental breakup is possible.