* 1113159
* SBIR Phase I:  High Power, High Efficiency Micropixel Ultraviolet Light Emitting Lamp
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2011,10/31/2012
* Iftikhar Ahmad, Nitek Incorporated
* Standard Grant
* Juan E. Figueroa
* 10/31/2012
* USD 174,987.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project will result in
developing novel high-power, high-efficiency Deep Ultraviolet Light Emitting
Diode (DUV LED) Lamps based on an innovative and new micro-pixel device design.
Deep ultraviolet light sources with emission wavelengths lambda from 250 - 365
nm are used in many applications including water/air purification, analytical
scientific instrumentation, bio-agent detection systems and emerging
miniaturized bio-medical instrumentation. Aluminum-indium-gallium-nitride
(AlInGaN) based DUVLEDs have recently been developed and commercialized. However
at present their external quantum efficiency and output powers are only 1-2% and
1-2 mW in continuous operating mode. One of the primary causes of these low
numbers is current crowding arising from the resistance of the n-AlGaN buffer
layers. To address this challenge large area LEDs with micro-pixel device
geometry with expected output powers of 15-20mW and a stable operation with
lifetime over 3000 hours are being developed. New approaches are being developed
for the n-AlGaN buffer layers and the active layers deposition to increase their
thickness, avoid cracking, and reduce their resistance and defects.

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project represents a new
opportunity for developing semiconductor materials based solid-state deep
ultraviolet light sources. The targeted performance will allow for penetration
into large existing UV market segments such as water purification, medical
instrumentation and UV polymer curing. The deep ultraviolet optoelectronic field
continues to grow each year and the expertise gained through this program will
contribute to the advancement of novel DUV light sources. The project will also
lead to jobs for graduates from local Universities and Technical Institutes
thereby fostering high-tech economic development in the state of South Carolina.
Moreover the project will significantly enhance the knowledge base in high-
aluminum content AlInGaN materials science, their epitaxial deposition and
processing and packaging. There is a very high probability of transitioning the
knowledge base and the developed technology to commercial products for
disinfection/purification and polymer curing markets.