* 1113008
* SBIR Phase I:  Crowd Sourcing Apprenticeship Learning:  A Web Platform for Teaching Entrepreneurial Lawyering
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2011,06/30/2012
* Karl Okamoto, ApprenNet LLC
* Standard Grant
* Glenn H. Larsen
* 06/30/2012
* USD 180,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project is the creation
of a web-based platform for teaching entrepreneurial lawyering skills through
virtual apprenticeships. The skill and experience of an entrepreneur?s lawyer
have a significant impact on the success of the entrepreneur. Lawyers are
critical architects of bringing innovation to commercialization. They organize
entities, structure financings, protect intellectual property and serve as the
nodes of entrepreneurial communities. Too few lawyers have the skills to perform
these functions well. Neither law schools nor law firms offer effective training
in entrepreneurial lawyering skills. As a result, society fails to capitalize on
the full potential of technological innovation. The project is a disruptive
innovation to the existing educational model that shifts its center of gravity
outside of the classroom by reintroducing senior practitioners into the
education of novices. Its essence is ?crowd sourcing? expert participation. By
distributing the work of mentoring, the platform multiplies the opportunities
for higher order apprenticeship learning that previously depended on non-
scalable, face-to-face interactions.

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project is to create a low cost,
leveraged means to improve the ?practice readiness? of recent law graduates in
entrepreneurial lawyering skills. Law schools have launched various experiential
learning initiatives, including clinical offerings and simulations. Law firms
have experimented with similar training programs. While improving learning on
the margin, none of these efforts has had a fundamental impact. All rely at
their core on the traditional, high-cost model of student-teacher interaction.
Various on-line tools offer resources for acquiring substantive knowledge but
lack the interactive component that leads to the development of the cognitive
capacities that make up true expertise. None of the solutions has attempted to
tap the reservoir of expertise found among the community of senior
practitioners. Using social networking and distributed work strategies to
overcome the obstacles to their participation, this project capitalizes on the
desire of seniors to share their expertise.