* 1113830
* PFI:  Autonomous Robotic Rotorcraft for Exploration, Surveillance and Transportation (ARREST)
* TIP,TI
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2015
* R. Vijay Kumar, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Sara B. Nerlove
* 08/31/2015
* USD 600,000.00

This Partnerships for Innovation (PFI) project, Autonomous Robotic Rotorcraft
for Exploration, Surveillance, and Transportation (ARREST), from the University
of Pennsylvania will create a partnership among small-business entrepreneurs in
small rotor-craft and sensors and robotics researchers at the University of
Pennsylvania developing autonomous robots. The partnership will enable the
translation of fundamental, federally-sponsored, research results into products
with societal benefits and commercial impact by implementing a loosely
structured, application-focused, "play-like sandbox" environment among its
partners. The intellectual merit of this project is derived from four projects
aimed at developing products/ technologies enabled by the cross-fertilization of
technologies for robotics and Unmanned Aircraft Vehicles (UAVs) and from the
establishment of a sandbox to encourage exploration of potential applications
and markets for technologies that are being, have been, or can be developed. New
research contributions will include the development of small, autonomous micro
aerial vehicles and the algorithms/software for sensing, perception, control and
navigation without direct human command or intervention. Additionally, the
partnership proposes innovation in doctoral education by adding a new dimension
to student training to encourage "lateral and analogous thinking." It will
consist of structured interactions with technology transfer specialists,
inventors, and venture capitalists; collaborative research at the sites of the
industrial partners; and new mechanisms for spurring innovation that includes an
"inverted X-prize" competition called the "Y-prize," which focuses on the
platform as the solution space (instead of as the problem space), thus fostering
innovation by generating novel application ideas for using or adapting existing
technological solutions and methodologies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader
impacts of the project are the new commercial applications and products that
will be identified in collaboration with the knowledge-enhancement partners,
and, in addition, the leveraging of already developed technologies to create
these products. These products will be of direct use to end-users engaged in
first response and also will provide incremental benefits to homeland security
and to the military. The partnership will lead to the creation of a new robotics
rotorcraft industry and help spawn a new generation of doctoral students,
trained in the fundamentals with a depth that has come to be expected in top-
notch doctoral programs, but also in the "lateral thinking" that is
characteristic of agile, innovative small businesses. The partnership will
establish a model for leveraging Department of Defense investment in basic
research for dual-use applications and a framework for identifying and pursuing
commercial applications that are not directly connected to security, first
response, and defense applications. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Partners at the
inception of the project include the Knowledge Enhancement Partnership (KEP)
unit, consisting of the University of Pennsylvania (GRASP Robotics Laboratory);
two small businesses: Dragon Pictures, Inc. (Essington, PA) and EmergentViews
(San Francisco, CA); and a large private sector organization: Advanced
Technologies Laboratory, Lockheed Martin Corporation. In addition, there are
other core partners. These include public sector partners: the City of
Philadelphia, and the Southeast Pennsylvania Ben Franklin Technology Partnership
and their network of Angel and Venture Investors.