* 1113541
* SBIR Phase I:  Realizing Broadband Frequency Sound Absorption in Micro-Slit Panels
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2011,12/31/2011
* Peter Jackson, Ward Process dba American Acoustical Products
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 12/31/2011
* USD 150,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project is aimed at developing
micro-slit panel (MSP) sound absorbers that are effective over broad frequency
ranges. MSP absorbers are reclaimable, non-combustible, and environmentally
friendly. Traditional absorbers like foams and fibers deteriorate over time and
trap oil and other contaminants. On the other hand, MSP absorbers are made from
aluminum and plastic, with sound being attenuated due to viscous friction in the
sub-millimeter size pores. The panels are separated from a hard surface and are
most effective when the acoustic particle velocity is high in the slits.
Previous work has demonstrated the viability of the materials in particular
frequency bands. However, MSP absorbers will need to be effective over a broader
frequency range in order for them to be used in a wider range of applications.
The goal of the proposed work is to conduct measurement and numerical simulation
studies aimed at improving the MSP performance by varying the slit size and
porosity across a panel, and by designing a substrate that can be placed behind
the panel. It is anticipated that the developed MSP absorbers will replace foams
and fibers in many commercial applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader
impact/commercial potential of this project will be the development micro-slit
panel (MSP) absorbers that are superior to traditional fiberglass and foam
absorbers. Conservative estimates for the potential volume of the product, if it
were to be accepted by the architectural community, would be 20 million square
feet per year. Areas of application would include ceiling deck panels in
airports, train stations, bus terminals, and acoustical ducting in commercial
buildings. These products would be especially advantageous in the health and
food processing industries because they can be sterilized and cleaned. The
materials would also benefit the automotive industry due to their light weight
and reclaimability. Typical automobiles have over 50 kg of sound or vibration
absorbing material. Using MSP absorbers would reduce this weight, improving fuel
economy.