* 1113292
* Collaborative Research: Seismic Waves from Volcanoes: Fully Coupled Time-Dependent Models of Fluid Flow Through Elastic Walled Conduits
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2011,06/30/2014
* Darcy Ogden, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Standard Grant
* Robin Reichlin
* 06/30/2014
* USD 16,379.00

Mitigating the risks associated with volcanoes requires a detailed understanding
of the transport and eruption of magma through cracks and conduits in Earth's
crust. Seismic waves excited by magma flow and its coupling to the elastic wall
rocks can be used to place valuable constraints on parts of the volcanic system
that are otherwise inaccessible. The complexity of observed seismic signals and
the difficulty of modeling the coupled fluid-solid system present a formidable
challenge. The objective of this collaborative proposal is to develop numerical
models describing the high-speed flow of compressible, viscous fluids through
narrow channels in elastic bodies, together with the propagation of seismic
waves through the solid. The fluid and solid response is fully coupled: elastic
deformation changes the cross-sectional area of the conduit through which fluid
flows, and changes in fluid pressure push the conduit walls in and out, exciting
seismic waves.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specifically, the project group will develop
a provably stable and accurate numerical method for time-dependent quasi-one-
dimensional fluid flow through conduits in a solid body, together with the
elastodynamic response of that solid. The model will include changes in
compressibility, sound speed, viscosity, and drag from gas exsolution. The code
will be used first to explore the role of conduit wall deformation on steady
state eruption dynamics. The group will then assess the stability of steady
state eruption solutions. Preliminary analyses indicate that for sufficiently
rapid flows, the fluid-solid system is unstable to long wavelength perturbations
that appear as conduit wall oscillations of growing amplitude. One first focus
will be on seismic waves from basaltic fissure eruptions within the currently
implemented two-dimensional plane-strain framework. The group will then extend
the model to the axisymmetric geometry appropriate for cylindrical conduits, and
study seismic waves from explosive eruptions. Finally, they will calculate far-
field body and surface waves and link the time dependence of equivalent single
force and moment tensor representations to detailed source
processes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is supported by the Geophysics and
Petrology &amp; Geochemistry Programs.