* 1113148
* SBIR Phase I:  Cough Analyzer of Airborne Bacteria for Tuberculosis Diagnosis
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2011,07/31/2012
* Patrick Sislian, Deton Corp.
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 07/31/2012
* USD 149,899.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project develops a device
to diagnose lung infections from cough with a focus on active Tuberculosis (TB).
TB diagnostics inherently have a trade-off between practicality (time,
resources, training, cost) and performance (sensitivity and specificity).
Furthermore, most current TB diagnostics rely on sputum samples, which are
difficult to collect (low practicality) and are usually contaminated by saliva,
lowering their quality (low performance). The proposed device is practical: a
patient wears a disposable mask and coughs naturally into a novel impactor that
breaks up the cough droplets in air and collects their DNA. The impactor avoids
both sputum samples and microfluidics for lysing cells. The proposed device?s
high performance is based on the automation of the collected DNA with a nucleic
acid amplification test (NAAT) specific to TB and multi-drug resistant TB (MDR-
TB). The research objectives of the Phase I feasibility project are (1) to
simulate a patient?s cough using pulsed nebulization of TB simulant suspension
and (2) to determine the limit of detection of the impactor-biosensor system.
Anticipated fluorescence results will determine the number of simulated coughs
needed for detection.

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project is in eliminating TB. TB
is a contagious disease that causes 2 million deaths annually. Approximately 9.3
million people worldwide develop TB every year, of which 4.4 million are
undiagnosed. Improving TB diagnostics results in 625,000 annually adjusted lives
saved worldwide, and elimination of TB from industrialized countries. The served
available market for active TB diagnostics comprises more than 175M tests with a
total value of $700M and a potential to reach a total available market of 280M
tests. The market can be segmented based on three market needs: (1) improving
the active TB diagnostic cycle of care, (2) avoiding sputum collection, and (3)
avoiding sputum induction and bronchoalveolar lavage. The proposed device
provides a cost effective solution to all three needs. The development of this
TB diagnostic device can have wider implications in the cough-sample
preparation/diagnostics of other lung infections such as Pneumonia.