* 1113687
* SBIR Phase I:  Ultra-low Profile Wideband Metamaterial Antennas Based upon Advanced Textured Ferrite Materials
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2011,12/31/2011
* Andrew Daigle, Metamagnetics, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Juan E. Figueroa
* 12/31/2011
* USD 145,881.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project pursues the
development of a novel volumetric efficient metamaterial antenna module for
wireless and satellite communications, as well as radar applications. This Phase
I project incorporates advanced metamaterials and textured ferrite composites to
realize a broadband electronic bandgap (EBG) metamaterial as a means for
achieving a dramatic profile reduction (&lt;&amp;#955;/60 in contrast to
&amp;#955;/4) in planar antennas. Phase I activities focus on development of the
ultra-wideband EBG metamaterial, including the design and refinement of
component materials, such as the specially designed textured ferrite substrates
operating in the UHF to L frequency range with &amp;#949;r&lt;15,
&amp;#956;r&gt;20, and tan&amp;#948; &amp;#8804; 0.05. In order to achieve
operation at L-band, tuning of the cutoff frequency with magnetic fields of the
order of 100-200 Oe will be employed. Further, broadband antenna and EBG
metamaterials will be co-designed as a single component to enhance the antenna
assembly performance, with bandwidths &gt;40%, efficiency &gt;60%, beam width of
100¢ª, and gains close to that of Chu's Limit. The development of advanced
ferrite metamaterials represents a highly innovative and enabling advance in low
profile antenna technologies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact/commercial
potential of this project includes addressing the needs of both commercial and
Department of Defense (DoD) markets. The proposed dual use low profile antenna
technology holds the promise of significant performance improvements in height,
weight, and aerodynamic drag reduction over current state-of-the-art
technologies in wireless, satellite communication, and radar systems. The
success of this Phase I project in improving the bandwidth and increasing
volumetric efficiency of radio frequency front ends has an enormous potential to
impact commercial communications and DoD industries and to stimulate the U.S.
economy by producing advanced technologies and, importantly, high-skilled jobs.
A recent global navigation satellite systems (GNSS) market report found the
global value of GNSS products and services, currently at $3 billion, will grow
at a compound annual growth rate between 19 percent and 23 percent, and reach $6
to $8 billion by 2012. This Phase I effort will be performed by a veteran-owned
small-business. Employees include a woman as minority-owner and Chief Operating
Officer and two students actively pursuing engineering doctorates. As part of
this program, the students will be trained in all aspects of metamaterial and
antenna design.