* 1113648
* Broad Implementation: Creating Communities Of Learners For Informal Cognitive Science Education
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2017
* Rebecca Kipling, Museum of Science
* Continuing Grant
* Alphonse Desena
* 08/31/2017
* USD 2,995,325.00

Boston's Museum of Science (MOS), with Harvard as its university research
partner, is extending, disseminating, and further evaluating their NSF/ISE-
funded (DRL-0714706) Living Laboratory model of informal cognitive science
education. In this model, early-childhood researchers over the past three years
have both conducted research in the MOS Discovery Center for young children and
interacted with visitors during the museum's operating hours about what their
research is finding about child development and cognition. Several methods of
interacting with adult visitors were designed and evaluated, including the use
of "research toys" as exhibits. Summative evaluation of the original work
indicated positive outcomes on all targeted audiences - adults with young
children, museum educators, and researchers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project
is now broadening the implementation of the model by establishing three
additional museum Hub Sites, each with university partners - Maryland Science
Center (with Johns Hopkins), Madison Children's Museum (with University of
Wisconsin, Madison), and Oregon Museum of Science and Industry (with Lewis &amp;
Clark College). The audiences continue to include researchers (along with
graduate and undergraduate students); museum educators; and adults with children
visiting the museums. Deliverables consist of: (1) establishment of and
activities at the Hub sites and continued improvement of the MOS site, (2) a
virtual Hub portal for the four sites and others around the country, (3) tool-
kit resources for both museums and scientists, and (4) professional symposia at
all sites. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intended outcomes are: (1) improve museum
educators' and museum visiting adults' understanding of cognitive/developmental
psychology and research and its application to raising their children, (2)
improve researchers' ability to communicate with the public and to conduct their
research at the museums, and (3) increase interest in, knowledge about, and
application of this model throughout the museum community and grow a network of
such collaborations.