* 1113258
* SBIR Phase I:  Antifouling Composites for Renewable Ocean Energy Applications
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2011,12/31/2011
* James Delattre, NanoHorizons Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 12/31/2011
* USD 117,525.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project aims to develop a
reinforced composite material that combines the antimicrobial effectiveness of
nanoscale silver with the strength and weight of reinforced composites to meet
the antifouling performance specifications of the marine environment. In this
project, Carbon Nanotube (CNT)-infused glass fiber composites will be used. CNT-
infused glass fiber composites not only provide an excellent solution to the
weight and strength requirements, but also provide an ideal support for
nanoscale silver integration due to the strong van der Waals interaction between
the nanosilver particles and CNT systems. Additionally, the conductive nature of
the CNT-infused composites coupled with the readily available source of electric
current offer a perfect opportunity to utilize electrochemical silver ion
release to create a tunable antifouling effect. This project is expected to
verify that effective antifouling capabilities can be inherently integrated into
the composites used in products such as tidal turbines, thereby extending their
life and lowering operating costs.

The broader/commercial impact of this project will be the potential to provide
an anti-fouling reinforced composite material for ocean renewable energy and
marine applications. Ocean renewable energy is emerging as a key element of the
alternative energy solution. One of the general challenges is to produce key
components of the system which are strong, lightweight and durable, but also
antifouling. The availability of cost-effective antifouling solution is
essential for the wide adoption of ocean renewable energy.