* 1113336
* SBIR Phase I:  Efficient Comparative Effective Research Tools In Real Time Environment
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2011,12/31/2011
* Jeremy Miller, Transmed Systems Inc
* Standard Grant
* Juan E. Figueroa
* 12/31/2011
* USD 150,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project will focus on the
enablement of comparative effectiveness research (CER) and evidence based
medicine (EBM) by health care researchers utilizing both clinical and
biomolecular data. The quality of health care can be significantly improved
through the secondary use of health care data from electronic medical records
systems (EMR) and also through the use of genomic biomarkers. Today, the current
process of health care research using retrospective data from EMR requires a
team of IT professionals and is very error prone. Further, these systems do not
readily utilize the information that is available from genomic and genetic
screens. The two goals of this project are: 1) to create a self-service, highly
efficient query tool for health care data that can be utilized by clinical
researchers and 2) to create a data mart that integrates EMR data with molecular
data using a knowledge engine that brings context to biomarker data. The
ultimate deliverable will be a system enables the entire life cycle of
personalized medicine (PM); retrospective analysis, validation and report
generation that directly impacts the care of the individual patient.

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project is significant because
it capitalizes on two trends in health care - digitizing patient clinical data
and the increased use of sequencing and microarray technology - in order to
provide Personalized Medicine. The commercialization of the technical
innovations referenced in this project will enable researchers and clinicians to
generate EBM, CER and PM reports with the ultimate objective of improving
patient outcomes. Leveraging historical patient data in CER to eliminate
ineffective therapies from the health care system in general coupled with
utilizing genetic information to create a more personalized model of health care
will focus precious health care dollars on effective therapies optimized for the
individual. Ultimately, this tool will be appealing to every segment of the
health care industry including clinicians, researchers, pharmaceutical
companies, and insurance companies due to the increases in quality and cost
savings that will be created. True Personalized Medicine will have arrived.