* 1113275
* NEESR-SG:  TIPS - Tools to Facilitate Widespread Use of Isolation and Protective Systems, a NEES/E-Defense Collaboration
* ENG,CMMI
* 01/01/2011,09/30/2013
* Stephen Mahin, Board of Regents, NSHE, obo University of Nevada, Reno
* Standard Grant
* Joy Pauschke
* 09/30/2013
* USD 905,143.00

This award is an outcome of the NSF 07-506 program solicitation George E. Brown,
Jr. Network for Earthquake Engineering Simulation (NEES) Research (NEESR)
competition and includes the University of Nevada, Reno as the lead institution
with subawards to the University of California, Berkeley; University of
Wisconsin, Green Bay; and the University at Buffalo, SUNY. Recent earthquakes
have shown that even moderate ground shaking can produce large economic losses
and major societal disruptions due to the widespread structural, nonstructural,
and contents damage in code compliant buildings. Seismic isolation, in
conjunction with energy dissipation, offers a simple and direct opportunity to
control or even eliminate damage by simultaneously reducing deformations and
accelerations. The United States once led the development and application of
seismic isolation, but now this technology is more widely used in other
countries. This project conducts a strategic assessment of the economic,
technical, and procedural barriers to the widespread adoption of seismic
isolation in the United States. NEES resources will be used for experimental and
numerical simulation, data mining, networking and collaboration to understand
the complex interrelationship among the factors controlling the overall
performance of an isolated structural system. Innovative conceptual solutions
will be developed for reducing construction costs (e.g., more effective
placement of isolators and improved architectural detailing) and improving
performance of isolation systems (e.g., use of new isolation devices).
Coordinated experiments and computations will address behavioral uncertainties
related to isolation devices, such as thermal heating, buckling and tensile
capacity, geometric scaling, and strain rate effects. This project will involve
shaking table and hybrid tests at the NEES experimental facilities at the
University of California, Berkeley, and the University at Buffalo, aimed at
understanding ultimate performance limits to examine the propagation of local
isolation failures (e.g., bumping against stops, bearing failures, uplift) to
the system level response. These tests, including a full-scale, three-
dimensional test of an isolated 5-story steel building on the E-Defense shake
table in Miki, Hyogo, Japan, will help fill critical knowledge gaps, validate
assumptions regarding behavior and modeling, and provide essential proof-of-
concept evidence regarding the importance of isolation technology. This
integrated, holistic approach to cost-effectively and reliably limit the adverse
impacts of earthquakes is also supportive of emerging trends in construction
towards sustainable design. This knowledge will be integrated into a rational
performance-based procedure that allows consistent comparison of the performance
of alternative isolation and conventional systems in terms of safety, loss of
use, and life cycle costs.

The new knowledge, tools, and performance-based design framework will facilitate
the effective application of seismic isolation technology, leading to
substantial reductions in the losses and disruptive societal impacts associated
with future earthquakes. Through a needs assessment survey and workshop series,
decision makers, professional engineers, researchers from throughout the United
States and Japan, and representatives from industry and regulatory bodies will
share strategies, resources and technology, and synergistically foster
application. Existing resources will be leveraged for activities to educate a
national audience, ranging from K-12 to practitioners, about seismic isolation
technology. The project will involve undergraduate students through the NEES REU
and LSAMP programs, on-site experiments, and other research activities.
Following the experiments, all data will be made available through the NEES data
repository (http://www.nees.org).