* 1113525
* SBIR Phase I:  Next Generation Green Cement Technology
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2011,12/31/2011
* Kraig Warnemuende, Neyer, Tiseo & Hindo, Ltd.
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 12/31/2011
* USD 149,779.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project aims to create next
generation green cement, a much more sustainable alternative to Portland cement.
Among several emerging green cements, magnesium cement is the most prominent and
has many superior properties when compared to Portland cement. It does not need
wet curing, has high fire resistance, low thermal conductivity, and good
resistance to abrasion and chemicals. It also has high strength; 7,000-10,000
psi is not uncommon. However, the majority of commercial magnesium cement
products experience strength loss when wet. Such strength reduction is a major
obstacle to their widespread structural use. Furthermore, most magnesium oxides
(the primary ingredient of magnesium cements) are produced from calcined
magnesites. Magnesite deposits are not uncommon worldwide but larger deposits
are all in foreign countries. Domestic magnesite deposits are not adequate for
the economical production of magnesium cement and its products. Therefore, the
intellectual merit proposed herein consists of 1) advancement of green cement
technologies by developing production of a magnesium cement from low-cost
minerals instead of magnesites and 2) optimization of the mineral composition to
enhance strength and ductility, and to eliminate wet strength reduction of this
new green cement.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact/commercial potential
of this project is in its sustainability and superior properties. Because of its
mineral nature, magnesium cement is noncombustible, and has better fire, mold,
and fungus resistance than Portland cement. Magnesium cement is also much
"healthier" than existing competitive products made from wood, plastic, and
gypsum that are susceptible to one or more of these negative effects. Although
extensive durability data have yet to be obtained, preliminary studies have
shown that magnesium cement materials are resistant to freeze/thaw cycles,
dry/wet exposure, and alkali-silicate reaction. From a practical perspective,
these green cements have workability similar to that of regular Portland
concrete. They can be mixed, cast, and cured with common concrete equipment and
practice. Therefore, the effort of switching from Portland cement to this green
cement, either partially or completely, is expected to be minimal with a short
learning curve. Potential applications include all markets currently served by
Portland cement concrete. Immediate product niches served by this material could
include interior wallboard, ceiling board, drop ceiling, tile backer,
underlayment, floor substrate, exterior sheathing, fascia, trim, siding, roof
substrate, exterior insulation and/or structural insulating panel construction,
and pipes for water or sewerage storage and transportation.