* 1113394
* SBIR Phase I:  Novel Urine-excreted Plasmodium Falciparum and P. vivax Poly-asparagine Proteins as Targets for Bi-specific Monoclonal Antibody and Urine Malaria Test Development
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2011,06/30/2012
* Edwin Agbo, Fyodor Biotechnologies, Inc
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 06/30/2012
* USD 180,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project aims to develop a
bivalent monoclonal antibody using novel Plasmodium falciparum (Pf) and P. vivax
(Pv) proteins shed in the urine of febrile malaria patients. Using a
bioinformatics approach, we will create, score, and select in silico-generated
recombinants of natural antigen variants designed to express mosaics that
maximize the inclusion of common potential in one structure and minimize the
inclusion of rare epitopes. Antigenic properties of the recombinant antigens are
validated by indirect ELISA using panels of well-characterized sera from
apparently healthy individuals and clinical Pf and Pv malaria patients. The
utility of the recombinant antibodies are evaluated in a dipstick test using a
range of clinical urine samples from Pf/Pv endemic regions. Our overall
objective is to develop a simple one-step urine-based dipstick test for the
simultaneous but specific diagnosis of clinical Pf and/or Pv malaria.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact/commercial potential of this project
relates to the development of a broad-based one step urine test for home-based
or point-of-care diagnosis of clinical Pf and/or Pv malaria in persons with
fever. The test will potentially provide a reliable tool to differentiate
between symptomatic and asymptomatic disease, and provide better treatment
options to those in need. It will potentially offer wider acceptability of
clinical malaria diagnosis in endemic regions, especially in remote settings and
in places where mixed infections frequently occur by obviating the occupational
hazards involved with phlebotomy, thus helping to reduce the unnecessary use of
antimalarial drugs. Overall, it has the potential to markedly impact the way
over 95% of all clinical malaria is diagnosed and treated in endemic regions,
and drive the current global effort towards home-based or point-of-care testing
for malaria mandated by the World Health Organization prior to treatment in all
cases of fever. Since it is based on the same platform as current RDTs, this
test can be easily integrated into current healthcare structures to provide
significant benefits to public health in most endemic countries. No such test is
currently available.