* 1113493
* SBIR Phase I:  Martha Madison's Marvelous Machines
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2011,12/31/2011
* Victoria VanVoorhis, Second Avenue Software, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Glenn H. Larsen
* 12/31/2011
* USD 149,265.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project proposes to
construct the first in a series of science collaborative multiplatform learning
games called Martha Madison?s Marvelous Machines. This game will be designed to
engage a target audience of middle school girls in virtual collaborative physics
projects to improve understanding of the nature of science, technology,
engineering, and mathematics (STEM) disciplines and careers. The specific
content of this game will enable students to develop understanding of
introductory Physics and Engineering aligned with Common Core standards. There
will be options for single player play and multi-player play, depending on the
platform(s) on which the game is released. In the multi-player option, there
will be puzzles which can only be solved through collaboration with other users
(via network play). Second Avenue Software (SAS) anticipates the release of
Common Core Standards for Science and Martha Madison will be developed according
to the Common Core Standards in order to provide a consistent, clear
understanding of what students are expected to learn. In the event that Common
Core Standards for Science are not in draft form at the time of the award, SAS
will draw on its extensive experience correlating with state standards to make a
physics and engineering game that is engaging, educative and
robust.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact/commercial potential of this
project lies in SAS?s contribution to meeting the need of improving physics and
engineering education by providing a game-based application which as the
potential to increase interest in STEM careers and learning outcomes in STEM
disciplines. Based on a review of the literature regarding womens? participation
in STEM education, STEM careers and learning modalities for women and girls,
this requires development of materials specifically designed to meet their
educational needs and interests. Current practice in commercial games reflects
this need. Games are frequently designed in two versions: one for boys and one
for girls, reflecting each gender?s distinct patterns of play. Martha Madison
will be designed to appeal to all genders without alienating boys or girls,
while paying special attention to engaging girls in STEM learning. Martha
Madison will be created using the Unity 3D platform which allows for publishing
to a diverse array of applications including tablets, computers, consoles (all
of which now include digital delivery), and mobile devices. With so many
possible applications, Martha Madison has tremendous commercial potential.