* 1113709
* SBIR Phase I:  Transparent Conducting Nanofiber Composite Electrodes for High Efficiency Thin Film Tandem Solar Cells
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2011,12/31/2011
* Craig Peters, PLANT PV
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 12/31/2011
* USD 149,950.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project aims to develop
low-cost solution-processed transparent conducting electrodes for tandem solar
cell applications. Tandem solar cells can be comprised of two vertically stacked
thin film solar cells that are each designed to absorb different regions of the
solar spectrum, allowing an efficiency that is higher than a single junction
device. Tandem solar cells are a promising technology that is capable of
achieving more than 25% power conversion efficiency. However, a highly-efficient
top cell that is more than 75% transparent in the near-infrared spectral region
is required. Currently, transparent electrodes are primarily made of metal
oxides, which strongly absorb in the near-infrared portion of the solar
spectrum, significantly reducing the potential tandem power conversion
efficiency. In this project, PLANT PV will develop new materials that are highly
transparent in the near infrared and can withstand high processing temperatures
to lower the cost and improve the overall power conversion efficiency of tandem
solar devices.

The broader/commercial impact of this project will be the potential to provide a
novel transparent conducting electrode that is highly transparent in the near
infrared for tandem solar cell applications. Solar energy market is currently
one of the fastest growing energy sectors in the world. To compete directly with
traditional fossil fuels, the cost per watt of installed solar modules must be
further reduced. Thin-film based tandem solar cells have the potential to
provide high power conversion efficiency and low cost. The transparent
conducting electrodes that is highly transparent in the near infrared combined
with highly efficient wide-band gap solar cells is expected to lead the way to
low-cost, high-efficiency tandem solar cells.