* 1113508
* SBIR Phase I:  Electrically Reconfigurable Antennas for Wireless Local Area Networks
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2011,12/31/2011
* John Kountouriotis, VariWaves
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 12/31/2011
* USD 150,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project aims to develop
commercially viable electrically reconfigurable antennas for wireless Local Area
Networks (LAN). Reconfigurable antennas coupled with cognitive radios and
Multiple Input Multiple Output (MIMO) systems can significantly improve the
performance of next generation wireless communication by adaptively establishing
the strongest possible wireless link for transmission. The intellectual merit of
this research involves using a wide array of preliminary work, prototypes, and
intellectual property to transition reconfigurable antenna technology to
practical wireless LAN products by i) developing compact reconfigurable antennas
to be integrated into wireless LAN access point, ii) demonstrating the
performance improvement achievable with these reconfigurable antennas in legacy
wireless LAN access points, and iii) quantifying the potential performance
increase in future wireless LAN access points, with protocol stacks that are
designed to leverage reconfigurable antenna capabilities.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact/commercial potential of this project is to provide
to the market of wireless devices a novel technology capable of improving the
wireless connectivity while diminishing the overall power consumption. The
reconfigurable antenna technology will enable the development of competitive
consumer products and innovative applications, including products for wireless
personal, local and metro area networks; laptop, cellphone, and smartphone data
communications; gaming and other home networked devices. Performance driven
market like i) home and enterprise networking, ii) wireless high definition
audio/video transmission, and iii) 3G data offloading will strongly benefit from
this technology. Beyond the commercial impact of electrically reconfigurable
antennas, another broader impact component is to foster technical innovation and
design among undergraduate cooperative education students. VariWaves through its
strong cooperation with Drexel University will seek to place students in
stimulating work environments where they will be exposed to real-world
applications of their interdisciplinary education.