* 1113287
* SBIR Phase I:  Deploying AR in K-12 Science Education
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2011,12/31/2011
* Tam O'Shaughnessy, Imaginary Lines Inc. (dba Sally Ride Science)
* Standard Grant
* Glenn H. Larsen
* 12/31/2011
* USD 149,996.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project explores the
technical, instructional and commercial viability of Augmented Reality
applications for K-12 science education. Research indicates that learning
science in context increases student involvement and makes data meaningful. The
opportunity is to further deepen the learning experience using emerging AR
technology. This proposal is led by Imaginary Lines, a small, woman-owned
business. The Phase I research will answer questions regarding technical
implementation, usability, instructional design and commercial potential by
developing and assessing prototypes that display real-time measurements in a
background scene with increasingly sophisticated Augmented Reality. The research
plan includes: Technical Evaluation of implemented features to assess
reliability and robustness; Design Evaluation, to review functionality with
users (students and teachers), gauge expectations, and identify delivery
approaches that resonate; Usability Testing of prototype activities to assess
product use; Instructional Evaluation, to gauge the appeal and instructional
value; and Suitability Testing, to assess reactions to the concept and to
specific implementations.

The broader impacts/commercial potential of this project result because the
proposed product brings a technology to K-12 education that could transform the
way students imagine, learn and interact with science. Augmented Reality appeals
strongly to students, puts science in real-world context and stimulates
independent exploration. The product would deliver standards-based science
content in a richly engaging, personal and contextual way. It promises broad
benefits, including instructional benefits, by teaching science in context; and
societal benefits, by developing 21st century skills in tomorrow?s workforce.
Augmented Reality is projected to reach the education market by 2014. This
product could be first to market with Augmented Reality applications for science
education. Today's students are growing up with Augmented Reality; it will be
how they naturally assimilate information and explore their world. The product's
competitive advantage is that it presents real data as part of the student?s
world in a way that the student will (by then) be accustomed; its transformative
nature charts a path to even further innovation.