* 1113288
* SBIR Phase I:  Nano-Aluminum Forgings for Lightweight Transportation Applications
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2011,12/31/2011
* Sunil Patankar, POWDERMET INC
* Standard Grant
* Grace Jinliu Wang
* 12/31/2011
* USD 149,999.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project will evaluate and
demonstrate the feasibility of using low nano-aluminum forgings in connecting
rod and wheel-based applications. To date, no approaches have proved cost-
effective for significantly reducing the mass of driveline components such as
the crankshaft, connecting rods and valvetrain. Mass reduction of these moving
components would significantly increase fuel economy and engine performance, yet
there has been a resistance to mass-reduction efforts in large volume
applications. This program will prepare ductile phase toughened nano-aluminum
composite billet forgings and characterize mechanical properties before and
after aging at 200Â°C. The program encompasses powder preparation, degassing,
consolidation, forging, and mechanical property characterization of 2218-6061
aluminum alloys. The results of this research is to clearly show that one can
get decent ductility without sacrificing strength in nanocrystalline alloys by
controlling structure at the meso-scale. In fact, the strength can be made
higher due to precipitation (ageing), even though this processing step partly
recovers the grains and improves the ductility. Other dual-phase
microstructures, such as those in steels involving ultrafine martensites, are
also advantageous in offering a good combination of strength and
ductility.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact/commercial potential of this
project will encourage the use of lightweight alloys in the automotive field by
providing a drastic material and manufacturing cost reduction compared to
titanium. Currently, the automotive market of connecting rods is mainly oriented
to components built with ferrous material because manufacturing and design
methodologies are well consolidated and high performances are obtained with
minimum cost. However, the use of lightweight materials, i.e., titanium alloys,
seems a very attracting alternative, but is still restricted to high performance
engine sectors because of the high cost involved. The main advantages are the
mass reduction; that is a crucial topic for components subjected to very high
inertial loads. Furthermore, the very good fatigue behavior of such materials,
meets very well for the requirement to withstand cyclic loads. Other markets
including sporting equipment, including bats, tennis racquets, and golf club
heads and shafts offer significant performance-driven niches that could be
potential commercial beachheads markets. Portable military equipment, such as
human robotic extensions, lightweight pack frames, computer housings, and
similar military niche markets would be among the initial markets targeted for
these materials. Military armored vehicles are also a large potential
application for this high strength, high hardness alloy.