* 1113400
* SBIR Phase I:  Micro-Solar Powered Battery Charger Circuit
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2011,06/30/2012
* Wayne Chen, Triune Systems
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 06/30/2012
* USD 179,507.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project will research and
develop an efficient, integrated single-chip solar powered charge control
circuit charging lithium ion (Li-Ion) and nickel metal hydride (NiMH) batteries
from micro-solar panels for remote sensor and portable electronic applications.
To achieve this goal, our investigation will focus on the following areas: 1)
Research and development of an efficient power control algorithm and boost
circuit optimized for applications using micro-solar cells, 2) Research and
development of programmable embedded control circuits required to automatically
control proper charging of Li-Ion and NiMH batteries. The intellectual merit of
the proposed activity is to provide efficient, low cost solar energy harvesting
solutions for autonomous sensor and mobile consumer electronic products. At the
end of this project, an integrated, single chip maximum power point tracking
(MPPT) circuit with integrated voltage boost and programmable battery charger
circuitry will be demonstrated. The novel automatic MPPT algorithm enables a
single solution for 1 to 8 cell panels without a change in circuit board
parameters and eliminates the need for external microcontrollers. The integrated
boost/MPPT features do not exist on the market today.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
broader impact/commercial potential of this project is very large because of the
scalable nature of this technology. Scalable energy harvesting system blocks
have application to solar charging for portable products, autonomous wireless
sensors for real time system control, and larger rooftop solar harvesting for
residential and industrial applications. This wide application space represents
a significant opportunity to enable harvested renewable energy and reduce
dependency on non-renewable energy sources. From a commercial perspective, all
of these applications are anticipated growth markets over the next decade.
Growth in cell phone use in developing regions like Africa, India, and China
offers a large opportunity for solar charging. In addition, the recent
earthquake in Japan has highlighted the need for solar charging for cell phones
and flashlights when the power grid is vulnerable to natural disasters.
Efficiency improvements in new wireless sensors systems and
residential/industrial solar power systems will drive new demand and provide
reduced costs of adoption for consumers. The results of this research project
will increase solar energy harvesting effectiveness for small and large systems
thereby providing consumers with new choices for energy savings and new freedoms
for grid-independent power.