* 1113240
* SBIR Phase I:  Engineered Solid Electrolyte Interphase Films for Silicon-Based Lithium Insertion Anodes
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2011,06/30/2012
* Wanli Xu, ELECTROCHEMICAL MATERIALS, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Prakash Balan
* 06/30/2012
* USD 174,020.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project proposes to develop and
commercialize new types of silicon nanowire anodes which may be used to safely
store large amounts of lithium for many types of lithium batteries. The key
innovation involves unique functionalization and integration methods that enable
nanowire anodes to be cycled reversibly for thousands of cycles without
mechanical failure, agglomeration, or deleterious side reactions. Silicon
nanowires will be fabricated via electroless etching, and chemically or
electrochemically functionalized to improve their performance and capacity
retention in a lithium-ion battery. The objective of this work is to develop
novel silicon composite anodes that may undergo over 200 deep cycles with
capacities of at least 1000 mA.hg-1.

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project is to develop high
capacity anode rechargeable lithium batteries with capacities of over 1000
mA.hg-1, which represents approximate doubling of cell capacity without a
significant change in manufacturing or cost. There is a critical need for high
energy density rechargeable batteries for next generation hybrid vehicles and
fully electric vehicles. In a recent report, the U.S. Department of Energy
pointed out that the primary obstacles to the widespread introduction of
lithium-based batteries for electric vehicles are the relatively low specific
energy and the relatively high cost per kWh. The proposed integration and
surface engineering methods will address these problems allowing the safe
storage of lithium in silicon anodes for current and future generations of
lithium batteries.