* 1113330
* SBIR Phase I:  Development of Novel Nanofillers for Tire Innerliners Based on an Advanced Manufacturing Process of Organically Functionalized Layered Double Hydroxides (LDHs)
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2011,12/31/2011
* Xiaofan Luo, Flow Polymers, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 12/31/2011
* USD 143,984.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project aims to develop a
cost-effective and environmentally-friendly process to prepare organically
functionalized layered double hydroxides (organoLDHs). Such organoLDHs feature a
two-dimensional nano-platelet like morphology and are tuned to have good
compatibility with organic polymers. In this project, organoLDHs will be studied
as high-performance additives for tire innerliners, the inner-most layer of a
pneumatic tire that holds the internal air pressure. The addition of organoLDHs,
even in small amounts, is expected to significantly enhance the inflation
pressure retention (gas barrier) properties of tire innerliners.

The broader/commercial impact of this project will be the potential to create a
new class of additive products with great market potential in the tire industry.
The values such products provide include (1) better tire performance, including
enhanced inflation pressure retention, better tire durability and reduced
rolling resistance; (2) helping tire and automobile manufacturers meet
challenging regulations on vehicle fuel economy and greenhouse gas emissions;
and (3) potential savings on manufacturing cost. The potential addressable
market size of this technology is about $100 million.