* 1113625
* SBIR Phase I:  Unconventional Low Cost Production of High Performance Electroactive Polymers
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2011,12/31/2011
* Shihai Zhang, Strategic Polymer Sciences, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Prakash Balan
* 12/31/2011
* USD 149,680.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project will develop a novel
low-cost and safe approach to synthesis electroactive polymers (EAPs). Currently
the EAPs are produced with a traditional direct copolymerization process using
an expensive and dangerous monomer. The process has the danger of explosion and
the EAPs are prohibitively expensive. The new process will develop an indirect
approach by using low-cost and commercially available monomers to synthesis a
polymer without electroactive behavior, which will be converted to the desired
EAP in a second step using a special catalyst. This new approach provides an
unconventional process to manufacture the EAP with low cost and high safety.

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project will be to create a
commercially viable process for producing specialty smart EAPs that might not
otherwise be economical for practical applications. The low-cost and safe
process will reduce the price of the high performance EAPs by more than
100-times so they will be cost effective for commercial applications such as
energy storage capacitors with high energy density, electrocaloric effect
cooling devices with high efficiency, energy harvesting modules to convert
mechanical energy to electricity, and advanced actuation devices for minimally
invasive surgery, full-page braille displays, and haptic feedback.