* 1113635
* SBIR Phase I:  Microwave Heating of Reaction-Bonded Silicon Carbide Ceramics
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2011,06/30/2012
* Shawn Allan, Ceralink Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 06/30/2012
* USD 150,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project addresses the need for
lower cost ceramic materials, specifically for reaction-bonded silicon carbide
(RBSC) products. RBSC is used in a multitude of applications ranging from kiln
furniture to body armor inserts to ultra-high purity semiconductor components.
Lowering costs would make ceramic materials available for more wide-spread use.
Currently, these products are limited in applications due to the high costs
associated with expensive raw materials and high-temperature processing
requirements. This project addresses these issues though the use of low cost
preform materials and an innovative thermal processing technique. In prior work,
a new method for producing RBSC was developed, through liquid infiltration of
molten silicon by direct microwave heating. This innovative process allows for
complete infiltration of porous preforms using microwaves, without the need for
a high vacuum environment. However, one of the persistent technical issues is
the formation of undesirable silicon veins in the RBSC. This may be caused by in
part by a significant exothermic reaction during the infiltration. The veins can
detrimentally affect the physical properties of the final RBSC. The anticipated
technical results of this work are to identify the origin of silicon vein
formation, and to develop methods to mitigate this issue.

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project is to lower the cost of
RBSC ceramics, making them more economically viable in current applications, and
increasing their use in previously unfeasible applications where RBSC could
provide superior performance characteristics. The successful development of low-
cost, higher strength, and higher purity RSBC would provide significant benefits
to ceramic component manufacturers and end users. Some of the current
applications for RBSC include kiln furniture and various burner parts for
combustion. Areas targeted for expanded use are: wear resistant components
(e.g., slip ring seals), body armor for soldiers, sand blasting nozzles, and
diffusion components for the semiconductor industry. The semiconductor industry
is of particular interest. As devices continue to get smaller, the purity of
diffusion components is becoming a critical issue. The use of this RBSC for
high-purity wafer carriers would be advantageous, as preforms in the green state
can be heated and purified. Finally, this work will enhance scientific and
technological understanding of high temperature exothermic reactions, explore
methods to control exothermic rates of reaction, and quantify the energy benefit
of microwave processing versus conventional methods.