* 1113641
* SBIR Phase I:  Magneto-electric-MEMs-enabled Wireless Power for Medical Implants
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2011,06/30/2012
* Robert O'Handley, Ferro Solutions, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Juan E. Figueroa
* 06/30/2012
* USD 150,000.00

This Small Business Innovative Research (SBIR) Phase-I project will develop
micro-electro-mechanical-systems (MEMS) comprised of engineered magneto-electric
(ME) materials to enable wireless power transfer systems for medical implants.
Engineered ME materials are composites of magnetostrictive (M) and electro-
active (E) components that convert magnetic fields into voltages much more
efficiently than do natural MEs. Incumbent wireless power technologies rely on
coils to convert time-dependent magnetic fields, generally at radio frequencies,
into useful power. Bulk ME receivers, though not yet optimized, show increasing
sensitivity advantages over comparable-size, high-permeability coil receivers as
frequency and/or device size decreases. A series of several dozen generic MEMS
resonators (cantilevers, bridges, plates in different sizes and aspect ratios)
were designed with high-Q, epitaxial piezoelectric films grown on single-crystal
substrates. Phase I of the new program includes characterizing the mechanical
integrity and resonance characteristics of the piezoelectric MEMS substrates.
Photo-resist masks for selected devices will be designed to allow deposition of
M films on the piezoelectric resonators to create generic ME-MEMS devices. These
devices will be packaged and tested for received power-per-unit-magnetic-field
at different frequencies and field strengths. Data will be analyzed and compared
with that for bulk ME and coil devices. The broader impact/commercial potential
of this project should extend well beyond development of smaller and more
efficient wireless power systems for implanted medical devices. High-performance
ME wireless power receivers have not yet been made at the MEMS scale. This
research program will develop new thin film processing techniques for deposition
of high Q amorphous magnetic films and CMOS-compatible, piezoelectric films on
each other that would impact many technical markets including magnetic and/or
acoustic sensors, communications systems capable of operation in environments
that hinder conventional radio transmission, and possibly new multifunctional
components for intelligent electronic systems. Successful development of ME-MEMS
receivers will enable a variety of engineered ME devices, such as: i)
magnetometers that could rival SQUID magnetometers in sensitivity while
consuming far less power and operating at room temperature rather than L-He
temperatures, ii) systems for low-frequency communications in high-absorption
environments where RF systems fail; iii) advanced processes for co-deposition of
magnetic and electro-active films, enabling new applications of multi-functional
ME-MEMS devices.