* 1113300
* SBIR Phase I:  Resonant Acoustic Cell Enrichment (RACE) Technique for Rare Cell Detection in Blood
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2011,06/30/2012
* Reza Shekarriz, Acoustic Biosystems, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 06/30/2012
* USD 180,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project addresses the
need for rapid, cost effective and efficient sample preparation for isolating
rare cells (e.g., pathogens, circulating tumor cells, etc.) from large blood
volumes. A prototype of an innovative sample preparation technology will be
developed and its performance will be demonstrated during Phase I. Resonant
Acoustic Cell Enrichment (RACE?) technology employs acoustophoresis to provide a
continuous flow, automatable, and rapid alternative to the current methods for
isolation of rare cells. RACE enables processing of large blood volumes at 10s
of ml/min without adversely affecting cell viability. It allows purification of
rare targets out of whole blood based on binding target cells to antibody-coated
beads and concentrating the beads rapidly into a small volume of clean buffer.
Using this approach, cells can be concentrated into small volumes in a preferred
buffer in a fraction of time required by current technology. Thus, target cells
can be isolated in minutes while the user waits. During Phase I, recovery and
enrichment of bacterial markers in spiked animal blood samples will be examined
with qPCR. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader commercial impact of the proposed
technology is the potential for clinical applications. For example, sepsis is a
serious medical condition that is usually treated in intensive care units.
Treatment requires identification of the type of infection afflicting the blood
stream. However, identification of the type of pathogen is confounded by low
number of colony forming units per milliliters of blood (&lt;10 cfu/mL).
Currently, this is remedied by the rapid processing of larger volumes of blood
(3-10 mL) and the use of red blood cell lysis followed by centrifugation to
increase the yield of pathogenic microorganisms. Using the RACE technology, the
pathogens would be isolated in a small volume of clean buffer that can be
readily analyzed using genetic analysis techniques. The immediate market for the
proposed sample preparation system is point-of-care DNA-based genetic testing.
Acoustophoresis devices will be relatively inexpensive; a sample preparation
system could be delivered to the market for $5,000 to $10,000.