* 1113365
* SBIR Phase I:  MatLab Based Toolbox for Promoting Engineering Education of L1 Adaptive Control Theory
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2011,06/30/2012
* David Carroll, CU Aerospace, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Glenn H. Larsen
* 06/30/2012
* USD 179,972.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project will develop a
MATLAB based toolbox that can be used in educational laboratory environments for
the training of the next generation of engineers with modern adaptive control
theory, and will be performed by CU Aerospace (CUA) and team partner the
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign (UIUC). The existing MATLAB toolboxes
for control system design that use the dated theoretical advances from 1980?s
and 90?s are suitable for applications in linear systems. However, the existing
toolboxes cannot effectively serve the purpose of control design for complex
systems in the presence of uncertainties. The key feature of this breakthrough
L1 adaptive control theory is the separation between identification and control.
It leads to decoupling of adaptation from robustness and ensures uniform and
predictable response in the presence of unpredictable failures and disturbances.
The CUA-UIUC team will build a commercial toolbox that captures the recent
advances in control theory having routines for implementation of L1 adaptive
controllers, and apply the new toolbox in laboratory classroom environments to
train our future generation of scientist-engineers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
broader impact/commercial potential of this project is that the development of
the L1 Adaptive Control Toolbox will serve as the ideal tool to transition this
modern control theory to a much wider technical audience both through continuing
education of practicing professionals and engineering students. Within a very
short time span, the architectures of this powerful theory for robust adaptive
control of complex systems has supported a large number of very challenging and
ambitious experiments including: (i) flight tests of a subscale commercial jet
(GTM-AirSTAR) at NASA, including post-stall flight regimes; (ii) control of
nuclear plants; (iii) coordination of multiple unmanned autonomous vehicles in
time-critical missions within given spatial constraints using vision-based
sensors; (iv) pressure control in drilling applications of oil production;
control of fiber optics; (v) networked control systems in the presence of
various failures; (vi) control of anesthesia; (vii) iterative learning control
in the presence of unpredictable disturbances; (viii) aerobiological sampling;
control of smart materials in the presence of hysterisis; (ix) aerial refueling
of multiple UAVs in turbulence; (x) control of flexible aircraft; and (xi)
control of rotorcraft. The development of this toolbox into a commercial product
will serve as a springboard for CUA to develop systematic design methods for
broader applications of this theory to industry and many governmental
departments including DOE, DOD, DOT, and NASA.