* 1113606
* SBIR Phase I:  High-Throughput Agile Robotic Manufacturing System for Tile Mosaics
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2011,06/30/2012
* Edward Acworth, Artaic LLC
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 06/30/2012
* USD 180,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project will demonstrate
a proof-of-concept&lt;br/&gt;prototype of a high-throughput agile tile mosaic
manufacturing system. Mosaics have proven to be a&lt;br/&gt;great source of
visual splendor for thousands of years. Despite its prominence in art and
architecture,&lt;br/&gt;mosaic is arduous to design and assemble by hand. The
goal of this Phase I work is to prove the&lt;br/&gt;feasibility of a
programmable high-throughput multi-head robotic tile assembly system to enhance
the&lt;br/&gt;production agility of mosaic tilings. Research innovation in Phase
I will merge the benefits of parallel&lt;br/&gt;tile placement with robust high-
capacity tile cartridges to radically decrease tile mosaic fabrication
time&lt;br/&gt;and associated tile mosaic assembly costs. The measurable
objective of Phase I is a 5x increase in&lt;br/&gt;production throughput over
current state-of-the-art mosaic manufacturing technology, while
enhancing&lt;br/&gt;tile placement accuracy. The system will be capable of
producing both template and ?mass customized?&lt;br/&gt;mosaics. In Phase II,
the prototype will be refined into a commercial grade system, integrated with
an&lt;br/&gt;Enterprise Resource Planning system, and placed into service in
Artaic?s production environment.&lt;br/&gt;Successful Phase I/II demonstration
will significantly lower the time and cost for manufacturing
mosaics&lt;br/&gt;and potentially revolutionize the $76B global tile
industry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact/commercial potential of this
project goes beyond art, design, and architecture.&lt;br/&gt;Robotic automation
will lower the cost of mosaic and increase its societal impact in adorning
public,&lt;br/&gt;commercial, and residential spaces. The proposed research, if
successful, will have a significant impact&lt;br/&gt;on agile manufacturing. It
will allow penetration into unforeseen markets by reducing the cost of
highthroughput flexible assembly. The solution proposed by the research will be
immediately applicable to&lt;br/&gt;customers and partners, and potentially
useful in parallel industries such as medical, pharmaceutical, food, consumer
products, and others that will benefit from robotic agile manufacturing enabled
mass customization. Agile mosaic manufacturing capability could revitalize the
U.S. tile manufacturing industry and create job opportunities. The investigators
estimate that a 5x production rate increase will enable a breakthrough price of
$19.99, 75% lower than the competition, and for the first time achieve broad
market affordability.