* 1113303
* SBIR Phase I:  Novel Mechanisms for Non-rotational Wind Energy Conversion
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2011,12/31/2011
* Harry Jabs, Chembionics, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 12/31/2011
* USD 149,855.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project brings a
development of a new non-rotational wind energy conversion that will enable
novel wind energy applications in areas where the wind energy currently cannot
be used. The technology utilizes novel electrofluidic approaches to develop the
wind energy system that can be easily transported and assembled and it will have
much lower production and maintenance costs compared to the conventional turbine
technology. Wind energy installations are increasing worldwide at a rate
exceeding 25%; however wind energy faces potential issues with aesthetics,
sound, wildlife issues, shadow flicker and public safety. The current wind
turbines are too large, highly visible, difficult to transport, and do not
satisfy the need for quick installation of a portable wind energy system for
disaster relief, military deployment, or difficult to access wind resources. The
proposed technology does not use movable parts in the utilization of wind energy
and will open up applications of wind energy in setting that are not
conventional used, such as in cities, on bridges, skyscrapers, or large
stadiums. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact/commercial potential of this
project is based on the advantages of the proposed non-rotational technology
that include efficient operation at lower wind speeds, the system does not
require complicated moving parts or its costly maintenance, such as needed in
conventional wind turbines. The developed products will open-up new markets both
for large wind energy installations as well as home applications. Wind energy is
one of the alternative sources that generates electricity without a release of
harmful pollutants or gases and is one of the cheapest forms of energy available
today. The proposed technology will open-up new markets for wind energy in
settings where no electric grid infrastructure exists, such as in some rural
farms, as well as it may provide a backup or supplemental energy source in
disaster situations. It will enable novel uses of wind energy in high-rise
buildings, bridges and/or as portable and transferable energy systems.