* 1113466
* SBIR Phase I:  A Multifunctional Piezoelectric Smart Flooring System for Energy Efficient Control in Commercial Building Systems
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2011,06/30/2012
* Andrew Zimmerman, Civionics, Inc
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 06/30/2012
* USD 167,477.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project will develop a
transformative green building technology that overcomes several limitations
endemic to building automation systems in use today. Mainly, (a) the high cost
of tethered sensor deployment, (b) the dependence on building energy, (c) the
inaccuracy of occupancy sensors, and (d) the inability to adjust to changes in
building usage over time. This project will utilize advanced wireless sensing
technology to create a low-cost sensing platform that can be used to pervasively
monitor building occupancy, environment, and energy consumption. These wireless
sensors will then be embedded within a novel piezoelectric flooring system,
which will provide power to the network using energy harvested from building
foot traffic. By programming each wireless sensor with pattern classification
capabilities, the resulting flooring system will be leveraged as an extremely
accurate occupancy sensor. Lastly, by applying market-based optimization and
reinforcement learning strategies, the resulting wireless smart floor itself
will be designed to make optimal building control decisions in the midst of
changing occupancy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact/commercial potential
of this project centers around the improved and reliable implementation of
wireless sensing and energy harvesting technologies within the built
environment. While these technological benefits can be applied to a wide range
of societal problems, this project is focused on maximizing the environmental
and economic impact of green building automation technology. In the United
States, commercial buildings have been documented to consume upwards of 18% of
the Nation?s total energy and 35% of the Nation?s electricity. This is due in
large part to the inefficient use of energy (e.g., the lighting, heating or air
conditioning of unoccupied spaces). It has been found that green building
technologies like the those being developed in this project have the potential
to reduce annual U.S. commercial building energy consumption by roughly 6%,
mitigating the environmental consequences of wasted energy while creating a
green building market that could grow to nearly $150 billion by 2013. This
project aims to capitalize on the potential economic and environmental impact of
green building technologies by providing a self-powered wireless smart flooring
system that can minimize unnecessary energy expenditure while providing building
occupants with an additional level of comfort and environmental control.