* 1113564
* SBIR Phase I:  High Power and Energy Density VN-based Asymmetric Supercapacitors
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2011,12/31/2011
* Saemin Choi, Inmatech, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Prakash Balan
* 12/31/2011
* USD 149,280.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project will demonstrate the
technical feasibility of using proprietary low-cost, nanostructured vanadium
nitride (VN) based electrodes and an asymmetric cell architecture with aqueous
electrolytes to manufacture high energy density supercapacitors. Currently
available commercial products deliver 3-6 Wh/kg with power densities of 700 W/kg
at a cost of ~$0.10 per Farad. The cost must be decreased by at least a factor
of two for broader market acceptance, and the energy density improved to reduce
the size of the supercapacitor. Successful completion of the proposed SBIR
program will lead to next generation supercapacitors with energy densities that
approach 15 Wh/kg, exceeding the current state of the art by a factor of 3, and
costs that are as much as 10 times lower than those for currently available
commercial devices. The superior performance and cost are derived from the use
of inexpensive, base metal nitrides and oxides tailored to give high specific
capacitance, aqueous electrolytes that enable fast, efficient high power
cycling, and an asymmetric cell design that maximizes the operating potential
window. This combination of performance and cost will enable significant
expansion in the use of supercapacitors for a number of important
applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact/commercial potential of
this project lies the improvements in energy density and reductions in cost.
These advances will enable the use of supercapacitors for power management
solutions for a number of energy storage systems. Commercial applications could
include use in hybrid electric vehicles for load-leveling during start-up,
acceleration and regenerative braking, memory back-up in mobile phones, and
uninterruptible power supplies. Transportation and smart grid applications
represent large markets with &gt;30% annual growth each. The automotive
supercapacitor market totaled $55M in 2009 and could grow to $243M by 2015
fueled by the demand for hybrid electric vehicles. The smart grid market for
supercapacitors is forecasted to $3.6B in 2015 driven by peak-load management
and regenerative braking for light rails. Devices developed during this SBIR
program could support a transition from electricity produced from fossil fuels
to carbon neutral electricity thus reducing our nation's production of
greenhouse gases and dependence on foreign energy sources. Federal agencies
including the Department of Defense will also benefit, in particular, for
applications such as extended range vehicles, exoskeleton systems and
electromagnetic armors. Finally, this project will give students at the
University of Michigan an opportunity to participate in a commercialization
effort.