* 1113135
* SBIR Phase I:  Holographic Laser: High-Brightness, High-Power Laser Diode
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2011,12/31/2011
* Christophe PEROZ, Abeam Technologies
* Standard Grant
* Juan E. Figueroa
* 12/31/2011
* USD 147,538.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project aims to develop a
novel technique for manufacturing digital planar holograms, which will result in
the enhancement of the brightness and power density of high-power laser diodes.
Preliminary results of coupling lasers with holograms demonstrated a suppression
of lateral modes, which enhances brightness and, additionally, narrows and
stabilizes the laser spectrum. The successful introduction of this technology in
the laser marketplace depends on the ability to fabricate planar holograms at a
low cost and a simplification of their integration with laser diodes. The
objective of this project is to develop and launch the commercialization of
holographic lasers with higher a brightness and power. Phase I will consist of
exploring a novel nano-manufacturing technology for low-cost fabrication of
planar holograms by imprinting planar holograms into sol-gel films. The research
will explore the issue of correlating the imprint process parameters with the
sol-gel material properties to replicate computer-generated holograms with high
performance. Phase II will demonstrate the monolithic integration of imprinted
planar holograms into commercial laser diodes.

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project is that the brightness
and power density of current, high-power laser diodes can be increased, while
retaining their compact size and low cost. Semiconductor diode lasers have
achieved high output power, allowing them to transition from special scientific
items into true industrial tools. There is a huge interest worldwide in major
industrial applications of semiconductor lasers such as direct materials
processing and pump sources for industrial solid-state lasers and optical fiber
lasers. Development of laser diodes with higher performance is being pursued by
all major laser manufacturers and will have direct applications in multi-billion
dollar markets, such as material processing and the semiconductor industry. The
proposed nanofabrication process will allow the low-cost fabrication of digital
planar holograms and will simplify their future monolithic integration with
commercial laser diodes. Competing solutions are much more expensive and less
compact.