* 1113593
* Collaborative Research: New Zealand as a Natural Laboratory to Investigate Earthquake Stress Variation
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2015
* Rachel Abercrombie, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* Eva Zanzerkia
* 08/31/2015
* USD 140,364.00

Global studies of earthquake source parameters have suggested that high stress
drop events are more likely to occur in intraplate regions, along strike-slip
faults, and at deeper depths. These studies combine stress drops determined from
a variety of methods whose uncertainties are poorly known. The PIs will
investigate the validity of these general observations by using a single
analysis technique (empirical Green¡¯s function method) on moderate-sized
(4.0&lt;ML&lt;6.0) earthquakes recorded by the modern broadband New Zealand
network that has been operating for over 7 years. The planned research has three
aims: 1) determine factors controlling the earthquake rupture process in four
distinct tectonic regimes of New Zealand, 2) examine uncertainties in estimating
stress drops obtained using the empirical Green¡¯s function (EGF) technique, and
3) a preliminary examination of spatial variations in earthquake parameters
along the Hikurangi Margin, North Island, New Zealand. The initial focus will be
to investigate four distinct tectonic regimes where large earthquakes with
prolific aftershock sequences or swarm sequences provide us with numerous
moderate magnitude (4 ¡Ü ML¡Ü 6) events. These regions include strongly coupled
subduction (Dusky Sound 2009), weakly coupled/aseismic subduction (Gisborne
2007), strike-slip crustal (Darfield 2010 and Christchurch 2011), and back-arc
spreading (Matata 2005-2010). Few studies have focused on the source processes
of moderate magnitude earthquakes, although this knowledge is critical in
developing scaling relationships and examining earthquake self-similarity. By
using a single analysis technique for data recorded by a single network to
determine stress drops for earthquakes in these diverse settings the researchers
maximize their chances of finding significant differences in stress drops and of
reliably determining the uncertainties in the analysis technique. The results
will be useful to scientists who study subduction zone processes or the dynamics
of the earthquake rupture process. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The researchers will
focus on a preliminary study of earthquakes along the margin of the North Island
of New Zealand where the Pacific plate is being subducted (pushed) beneath the
island. This margin has large, along-strike variations in geology and structure
that affect how parts of the Pacific plate stick or creep as the plate descends.
The results will also be relevant to studies of SSE and seismic hazards in other
subduction zones such as Cascadia and Alaska. Since many urban regions of the
world (e.g. Japan, Cascadia, Indonesia, Chile) are located along these types of
plate margins, the results will be useful to scientists who study geologic and
tectonic processes at these margins, as well as to improving earthquake hazards
models and building codes for these highly urbanized areas. The results of the
uncertainty analysis will be useful to researchers studying how similar
earthquakes are to one another or how valid it is to use observations from small
earthquakes to predict what may happen in larger earthquakes.