* 1113285
* SBIR Phase I:  Hybrid Question Answering Combining a Search Index with an RDF Store
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2011,06/30/2012
* Christine Nezda, Lymba Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 06/30/2012
* USD 179,760.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project will address the
issue that enterprises today are faced with the problem of linking their
disparate structured databases with unstructured text documents like articles,
manuals, reports, emails, blogs, folksonomies, and others. There is no easy way
to perform a federated search, let alone enable more intelligent applications
over such diverse data sources without considerable time and effort spent in
system and data model customization by experts. With the recent emergence of
commercial grade Resource Description Framework (RDF) triple stores it becomes
possible to merge massive amounts of structured and unstructured data by
defining a common ontology model for the DBMS schemas and representing the
structured content as semantic triples. Lymba proposes novel methods to
transform unstructured data sources inside corporate firewalls into a
consolidated RDF store, merge it with other ontologies and structured data, and
moreover offer a natural language question answering (QA) interface for easy
use. To make the QA robust, an innovative hybrid approach is proposed that draws
answers from the RDF store as well as directly from indexed text documents.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The potential impact of delivering a question answering
system that operates on a commercial grade RDF store is significant as it fills
a need for users of this store to easily access more information and quickly
implement intelligent applications using natural language questions as the main
vehicle. The proposal also leads to enabling technology software to advance the
semantic web. If successfully deployed, the proposed research has the potential
to translate into a viable commercial product with significant revenues.