* 1113071
* SBIR Phase I:  Environmental Biofilm Decontamination and Enhanced Energy Efficiency with Engineered Phage
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2011,06/30/2012
* Michael Koeris, Novophage Therapeutics, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 06/30/2012
* USD 180,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project will evaluate the
feasibility of using engineered bacteriophages to treat bacterial biofilms in
industrial infrastructure. Bacteria are a major source of contamination,
corrosion, bio-fouling, and energy inefficiency in industrial settings, costing
the American public >$22B annually. They persistently colonize industrial
infrastructure such as heat exchangers, cooling towers and transmission pipes.
When bacteria settle on surfaces, they create a protective slime, called a
biofilm. These biofilms are similar to dental plaque and can cause corrosion and
poor heat transfer. Biofilms provide shelter for bacteria against conventional
biocides, such as bleach and other toxic biocides. Current chemical and
mechanical treatments are inadequate for remediating industrial biofilms due to
a combination of environmental toxicity, corrosiveness and poor anti-biofilm
efficacy. Using synthetic biology, bacteriophages?the natural enemy of
bacteria?have been engineered to target bacteria in biofilms and force them to
express proteins that degrade biofilms in a highly effective, environmentally
friendly manner. This project aims to test the efficacy of these engineered
phages, alone or in combination with biocides, against biofilms grown in model
industrial systems. The broader/commercial impact of this research is to reduce
the use of toxic, corrosive, expensive, and environmentally damaging chemical
biocides, improve energy efficiency, and increase infrastructure lifetimes in
industrial systems. Products resulting from this project will constitute
cutting-edge treatments for biofilm contaminations in industrial settings. This
project also represents a major scientific milestone in the practical
application of synthetic biology to remediate industrial and environmental
problems.