* 1113825
* SBIR Phase I:  Ultra-Low Wear Coatings Based on a Novel Family of Aromatic Thermosetting Copolyesters
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2011,12/31/2011
* James Economy, ATSP Innovations, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 12/31/2011
* USD 147,859.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project aims to develop
an Aromatic Thermosetting Copolyester (ATSP) system and process it into highly-
effective wear resistant coatings. Surface treatments and coatings are key to
improving wear performance and durability in a wide array of applications. In
this project, different ATSP powder blends will be studied. Coatings of
ATSP/PTFE blends on metal substrates (using sintering) will be produced.
Tribological tests of these coatings under industrially-relevant conditions will
be performed. Preliminary spray coatings from the ATSP powder blends will also
be explored. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader/commercial impact of this project
will be the potential to provide ultra-low wear coatings for mechanical devices,
such as air-conditioning and refrigeration compressors, to replace the liquid
lubricants. Recent preliminary research on air-conditioning and refrigeration
compressor surfaces has shown that high-performance and recyclable ATSP system
exhibit low friction coefficient and at least one order of magnitude reduction
in wear rate compared to the state-of-art polymeric coatings. Blends of ATSP
with other polymers and additives have the potential to offer low-cost and
versatile wear resistant coatings for applications in engines, pumps and
compressors.