* 1113469
* SBIR Phase I:  Novel Casting Process for Developing a Carbon Modified Hyper-Eutectic Aluminum-Silicon Alloy for Forging Wear Resistant Parts
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2011,12/31/2011
* Matthew Blankenhorn, Aluminastic Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Grace Jinliu Wang
* 12/31/2011
* USD 149,961.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project proposes to develop a
20-25% Si alloy based on the 4032 aluminum forging alloy composition that has
low density and high wear resistance. The proposed Phase I research builds upon
carbon dispersion in the melt that can increase machinability and fluidity of
cast aluminum alloys. To achieve these advantages in hyper-eutectic alloys, it
is proposed to adjust the carbon and copper contents in the aluminum alloy
during melt processing, and to precipitate during solidification equiaxed
particles of primary silicon, carbides and graphite flakes in the Al-Si
eutectic. These micro- and nano-particles will provide for higher wear
resistance, modulus and toughness. There are significant challenges in this
research including the possibility of precipitation of undesired acicular
silicon, unacceptable shrinkage, hydrogen embrittlement, segregation etc. during
ingot solidification. The high silicon content can significantly reduce
solidification and homogeniezation kinetics during processing making it hard to
achieve uniform properties and microstructure. Since this research aims to
create a new alloy composition using a novel casting process, it will generate
considerable new fundamental knowledge in solidification and deformation
processing.

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project is that a new market
will open up to higher-integrity machinable forged hyper-eutectic parts that are
heat treatable. Currently, most aluminum-silicon alloy components are limited to
cast structures where their strength and wear capabilities override the
additional costs of testing for physical defects, rejections, and high costs of
machining. Applications in automotive engines include pistons, cylinder heads
and connecting rods where wear resistance and light weight is important, and
computer equipment manufacturing where thermal properties, weight and rigidity
are critical.