* 1113495
* SBIR Phase I:  High Efficiency Electrochemical Compressor Cell to Enable Cost Effective Small-Scale Hydrogen Fuel Production and Recycling
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2011,12/31/2011
* Kathy Ayers, Proton Energy Systems, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Prakash Balan
* 12/31/2011
* USD 150,000.00

Review Analysis &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research
Phase I project addresses current limitations in hydrogen compression and
enables reduction in hydrogen requirements for several applications through
recycling of exhaust hydrogen containing water and other benign impurities. This
project will demonstrate the feasibility of operating a proton exchange membrane
(PEM)-based device as a high efficiency electrochemical compressor/purifier.
Advantages over previous research in PEM-based hydrogen pumps include use of a
microporous plate for improved water distribution, which will enable more
uniform fluid distribution and high current densities. The objectives of this
phase include demonstration of a prototype cell, determining the separation
efficiency of a prototype device as a function of output pressure, and
developing design boundaries for optimization in Phase 2 and integration into a
system. Cell stack design experience along with the improved plate technology
will be utilized in order to address current limitations due to local membrane
dryout. The anticipated result will be an improved hydrogen recycler which will
enable substantial reduction in hydrogen production cost and new market
opportunities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact/commercial potential of
this project includes applications ranging from power plants to heat treating to
backup power and fueling. For example, over 16,000 power plants worldwide use
hydrogen as a cooling fluid in the turbine windings. Currently, increases in dew
point cause significant decreases in cooling efficiency and increase windage
losses by several percent, requiring purging of the hydrogen chamber and
increased production to backfill. Thus, significant energy waste is generated.
Current solutions for hydrogen compression are also noisy, bulky, and
inefficient. In applications where hydrogen is being evaluated as an alternative
fuel, high pressure storage is needed. Having a mechanical compressor that
represents half of the size and material cost of a home fueling or backup power
device is not commercially feasible. The device proposed has the opportunity to
decrease the energy required to produce pure hydrogen by 75% over generating
additional hydrogen from water, and to compress the hydrogen with as little as
100 mV of overpotential even at high current density. Advances in these areas
would find immediate commercial interest, and address key strategic areas on the
government agenda related to energy savings and green technology.