* 1113338
* Collaborative Research: Constraining Volcanic Jet Dynamics with Infrasound Using Numerical and Empirical Models
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2011,07/31/2015
* Darcy Ogden, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Standard Grant
* Robin Reichlin
* 07/31/2015
* USD 330,883.00

Explosive volcanic jets produce eruption columns that often form buoyant ash
clouds and may fully or partially collapse to form pyroclastic density currents,
dangerous fast-moving lateral flows of hot ash and gas. These natural hazards
directly threaten surrounding communities and global air traffic. Our ability to
mitigate these risks is restricted by our inability to safely measure volcanic
jets or monitor them co-eruptively. Infrasound (acoustic signals with
frequencies below that of human hearing) provides a means to detect the
atmospheric oscillations from volcanoes at distances of meters to thousands of
kilometers from the source. This project aims to use these signals to constrain
the physics of volcanic jets and measure&lt;br/&gt;them in real-time. These
measurements may be used as input parameters for aviation safety ash-cloud
prediction models and toward assessing the hazard presented to local communities
by a given eruption. Additionally, this work will provide constraints on
eruptive parameters and physics for numerical and experimental
studies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Recent infrasound recordings of volcanic jets have
frequency spectra similar to the acoustic signal produced by man-made jets (jet
noise). For the past 60 years, aeroacoustics has studied the relationship
between the flow properties of man-made jets and the acoustic signal produced.
Our long-term objective is to reverse this concept by determining the flow
properties of volcanic jets based on the infrasound signal produced by the
eruption. This work represents a first step toward this long-term goal. We begin
by building a catalog of infrasonic jet noise observations to determine
characteristic volcanic jet noise features and determine any correlations
between these features and known eruptive parameters. This process includes
searching existing infrasound databases using new signal processing tools and
empirical and theoretical propagation modeling. We will then use analytical and
numerical models of volcanic jets to adapt established empirical models of man-
made jet noise to volcanic systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is
supported by the Geophysics and Petrology &amp; Geochemistry Programs and the
Experimental Program to Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR).