* 1113254
* SBIR Phase I:  3D X-ray Imager
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2011,12/31/2011
* Denis Zelenin, Pacific Microchip Corp.
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 12/31/2011
* USD 150,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project aims to develop a
novel 3-D X-ray imager that will allow potential users to directly obtain 3D
images with a single X-ray exposure. Computer Tomography (CT) permits capturing
a 3D image of an object however, it requires bulky and expensive mechanical
parts to produce a series of 2D X-ray images taken around a single axis of
rotation. The proposed imager will overcome these limitations so that 3D X-ray
imaging can become as portable and widespread as 2D. The expertise in design of
monolithic X-ray imagers that combines high-speed precision electronics for
signal processing will be employed. This design will use bulk silicon as a
direct photon-to-electron X-ray detector to sense backscattered X-rays. The use
of time of flight measurement, 56 ranging bins will ensure high depth
resolution. A novel gating feature will permit further increase in resolution
and detuning the image of the objects that obscure the target areas. During
Phase I a circuit design and in silico validation of the 3D X-ray imager will be
provided. During Phase II a monolithic prototype will be designed, fabricated
using a commercial silicon technology and tested resulting in a full commercial
product. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact/commercial potential of this
project includes the ability to manufacture the 3D X-ray imager on 200mm
standard CMOS wafers as a wafer scale chip including the X-ray detector array
based on direct X-ray photon to electron conversion. The proposed 3D X-ray
imager allows for a revolutionary breakthrough in the construction of CT
scanners for medical applications, improvised explosive devices (IED) detection
for military, luggage and cargo screening equipment. In order to make CT
equipment compact, the proposed 3D X-ray imager eliminates mechanical parts.
According to industry estimates, the global X-ray imaging sensor market is
expected to grow from $700 million or 19,000 units in 2008 to $7.2 billion or
212,000 units in 2012. This new technology will make handheld CT scanning
inexpensive. Medical personnel will be able to quickly assess injuries even when
they are not close to a standard CT machine as may happen in a remote area, on
the battlefield, and at the scene of a natural disaster or terrorist attack. It
is expected to sell this device to CT scanner producers, IED detection device
manufacturers, and airport luggage and cargo screening equipment manufacturers
to replace currently used 2D imagers.