* 1113674
* SBIR Phase I:  Gel-Assisted Casting of a Self-Assembling Biocomposite Material
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2011,12/31/2011
* Emily Carroll, Ecovative Design LLC
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 12/31/2011
* USD 149,900.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project will develop an
innovative, environmentally benign process for forming net shape products of
superior quality and performance from dissimilar biomaterial components.
Plastics and foams are dependent upon inherently unsustainable raw materials,
require a high embodied energy to produce, and do not readily biodegrade at the
end of their useful lives. This project will focus on the further development of
an alternative material system: a self-assembling biocomposite which is
literally grown in the dark using fungal tissue to bind heterogeneous particles
of agricultural waste. The biodegradable material exhibits mechanical properties
that rival synthetic foams and offers the potential to transform the multi-
billion dollar protective packaging and structural cores industries. However,
the thin-walled plastic forms used to shape resulting products during growth
have a limited service life and must be replaced frequently. Removing or
reducing dependence on these forms, through development of a gelatinizing growth
substrate and process, will increase sustainability and yield, and reduce costs
to further incentivize widespread adoption. The proposed research will answer
questions that will determine whether this gel-assisted casting process is
technically and commercially feasible, and therefore laying the groundwork for a
Phase II project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact/commercial potential
of this project is difficult to overstate. Conventional methods of producing
low-cost, high strength-to-weight ratio materials for protective packaging and
building construction use up to 10% of the world's petroleum as feedstock and
consume considerable energy in the production process. Mycological material
technology eliminates the need for fossil fuel feedstock and currently requires
only one-eighth of the energy to produce an equivalent volume as compared to
synthetic foam. In addition, the products are non-toxic, fire-retardant, and
readily biodegradable. The commercial potential is high, as products made of
this material, as currently manufactured, already successfully compete in the
marketplace with products made of expanded polystyrene and expanded
polypropylene. The benefits to society at large include safer materials, the
transition to regional manufacturing which will bolster local economies, the use
of domestic byproducts as the primary raw material, lower energy consumption,
and a production method which creates less waste and pollution. The successful
completion of this project will help United States manufacturers to emerge as
world leaders in the production and supply of sustainable materials, with the
potential to serve numerous global markets.