* 1113110
* SBIR Phase I:  Advancing a Novel Low-voltage Electric Arc Method to Oxidize Organic Material in Contaminated Water
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2011,12/31/2011
* Mandar Sunthankar, Symbios Technologies, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Gregory T. Baxter
* 12/31/2011
* USD 149,988.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project from Symbios
Technologies LLC advances a&lt;br/&gt;novel plasma reactor method to oxidize
organic matter in untreated water. This method has further potential
to&lt;br/&gt;destroy harmful substances such as pesticides, pathogens, and some
inorganics. A provisional patent covering this&lt;br/&gt;technology has been
filed with the U.S. Patent office. In earlier research, a proof-of-concept batch
apparatus&lt;br/&gt;demonstrated that this reactor could destroy selected
organic compounds and pathogens. However, this early&lt;br/&gt;version could not
be economically scaled up nor run in a continuous mode. This Phase I project
will build a new&lt;br/&gt;apparatus design at a laboratory scale, capable of
treating water continuously. Studies will then be conducted to&lt;br/&gt;verify
the effectiveness of the new reactor design, and to investigate the mechanisms
and kinetics of the&lt;br/&gt;degradation of a selected organic
compound.&lt;br/&gt;The broader/commercial impacts of this research are: an
economical and effective method to treat raw&lt;br/&gt;water, input water,
industrial wastewater, and contaminated potable water; and potential portability
to desired&lt;br/&gt;locations. There are several ongoing incidences of
waterborne diseases in many parts of the world and economical&lt;br/&gt;options
for on-site treatment are limited. Our analytical projections indicate that it
would be feasible to treat large&lt;br/&gt;quantities of untreated water
economically on a commercial scale using a portable system. Furthermore,
this&lt;br/&gt;apparatus would be compatible with renewable energy sources and
with extended applications to remote sites, such&lt;br/&gt;as military bases and
disaster relief operations.