* 1113289
* SBIR Phase I:  Towards Precision Ultra-Portable 13C/12C CO2 Atmospheric Isotopic Ratio Monitors Using Quantum Cascade Laser Spectroscopy
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2011,12/31/2011
* Stephen So, The Laser Sensing Company
* Standard Grant
* Gregory T. Baxter
* 12/31/2011
* USD 149,949.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project focuses on the
development of a proof-of-concept ultra-portable CO2 isotope ratio monitor.
Carbon isotope ratio monitoring is essential for discerning natural versus
anthropogenic emissions sources of CO2. Widespread measurement of differentiated
carbon isotopes will provide major steps towards building more accurate models
of climate change. However, isotopic ratio monitoring is notoriously difficult,
even for the gold standard gas sensors based on mass spectroscopy, which can
take up an entire room and require skilled technicians to operate. Phase I will
explore the development of sensor components suitable for battery powered, easy-
to-use, laser spectroscopic CO2 isotope ratio monitors using novel high-
efficiency infrared quantum cascade lasers (QCLs). The broader/commercial impact
of this work targets improved atmospheric monitoring, climate change analysis,
and carbon capture/sequestration/verification. Carbon sequestration sites will
require fine grained leak detection when captured into underground geological
features, and isotopic ratio monitoring will allow such detection to be greatly
improved. Additionally, data generated by such carbon isotope ratio sensors will
answer many critical questions related to the human impact of burning fossil
fuels.