* 1113457
* SBIR Phase I:  Development of a Commercial Culture of Dehalococcoides for Anaerobic Treatment of PCB's
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2011,06/30/2012
* Margaret Findlay, Bioremediation Consulting Inc
* Standard Grant
* Gregory T. Baxter
* 06/30/2012
* USD 150,000.00

This Small BusinessI nnovationR esearch( SBIR) Phase1 project addressesth e
developmento f a bacterial culture to degrade PCBs (polychlorinated biphenyls)
in contaminated soils and sediments. PCBs are persistent, toxic contaminants
which accumulate in the fatty tissues of animals,c ontaminatingf ish and
humans.P CB-degradingb acteriah ave beend ifficult to produce. In2009, a
readily-grownb acterials peciesw as shownb y BioremediationC onsultingI nc (BCI)
to degrade the most harmful and carcinogenic type of PCBs. This finding allows
the development of an anaerobic PCB-degrading culture for cost-etfective
inoculation into PCB-contaminated sediments. The proposed research will document
the ability of BCI's culture to extensively dechlorinate three types of
commercial PCB mixtures, and will develop methods of rapid culturing. The
broader/commerciailm pactso f this researcha ret he developmento f a bacteriai
noculantt hat will degrade PCBs in soil and sediment. PCBs are toxic chemicals
used historically as heatresistant fluids in many industrial applications,
including transformers in the electric utility industry. Several hundred million
pounds were manufactured and disposed, resulting in contamination of soils and
river sediments. The recent finding at BCI, that a strain of dechlorinating
bacteria is capable of dechlorinating PCBs. provides an opportunity for BCI to
develop a commercial culture for inoculating contaminated sites with PCB-
degrading bacteria. The marketing of this product will be complementedb y our
already-successfusl aleso f other dechlorinating cultures used in treatment of
contamination by diverse chlorinated compounds. Major stakeholdersin the utility
industries,a nd remediationc ontractors,h ave expressedin terest in partnering
with BCI and/or obtaining culture.