* 1113370
* SBIR Phase I:  Development of Integrated Oil Debris Sensors for Machinery Fault Detection and Conditioning Monitoring
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2011,06/30/2012
* Dennis Townsend, Akron Air Materials, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 06/30/2012
* USD 164,682.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project aims to develop
an innovative integrated wear debris sensor for condition health monitoring of
rotating and reciprocating machinery via detecting metallic and nonmetallic wear
debris in the machinery?s lubrication oil. Today?s online debris sensors can
provide only limited information on the progression of machine wear or do not
have in-situ online capability. This Phase I project will focus on building a
laboratory prototype to demonstrate the proof-of-concept high-throughput
detection, differentiation, characterization, and counting of nonmetallic, and
metallic (ferrous and non-ferrous) debris ranging from 20ìm to 150ìm (which are
indicative of machines? wear status) in real time. The integrated sensor will
consist of 1) an ultrasonic sensing unit with a unique flow recess design that
accurately detects all metallic and non-metallic debris, and 2) an inductive
Coulter counting sensing unit that detects and differentiates ferrous and non-
ferrous metallic debris. It is anticipated this sensor is able to accurately
measure wear debris size and concentration of each type, and thus provide
information for conditioning based maintenance and life prognosis of a variety
of high speed rotary machinery including rotorcraft transmissions and turboshaft
engines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact/commercial potential of this
project is an innovative high throughput oil debris sensing technology that
provide advance warning of sudden catastrophic failure, facilitate better
maintenance scheduling, and significantly reduce the cost of machine operation.
The high throughput and high sensitivity of the sensor, along with its low cost
and compact size, makes it an ideal instrument for real-time condition
monitoring and life prognosis for a variety of machinery such as bearings,
gearboxes, and turbomachinery, and thereby have broader impacts on and
commercial potentials for the transportation, manufacturing and military
industries. It is a powerful complement to existing offline oil wear debris
analysis. The proposed research will form the scientific foundation for the
development of advanced sensors systems for micro/nanoscale particle sensing. In
particular, studies of particle sensing in a nonconductive, high viscous
environment are poised to have a transformative impact on monitoring new soft
materials processing involving micro/nano particles, and the development of
sensors for detecting metallic and dielectric particle contamination in
nonconductive materials and environments.