* 1114159
* Collaborative Research: Deciphering connections among land management, soil erosion, and sediment yield in large river basins
* GEO,EAR
* 09/15/2011,08/31/2016
* Paul Bierman, University of Vermont & State Agricultural College
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Torgersen
* 08/31/2016
* USD 188,942.00

Amanda Schmidt, Paul Bierman, Dylan Rood&lt;br/&gt;Oberlin College, University
of Vermont, University of California ? Santa Barbara&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project will combine a daily record of sediment yield with isotopic inventories
to decipher the connections among land use, soil erosion, and sediment yield in
4 large rivers draining the Tibetan Plateau. Sediment yield data, measured daily
for 44 stations, each with up to 27 years of daily sediment concentration and
discharge records, suggest that in these basins there is no systematic increase
in sediment yield over time despite significant, and well-documented, land
clearance. The investigators will combine the sediment yield data with analysis
of 3 isotopic systems to understand why 30 years of extensive deforestation did
not change sediment yield. Their isotopic analyses will document sediment
sources, sinks, and rates of movement. They will use one isotopic system, in
situ 10Be, to calculate background erosion rates integrated over millennial
timescales; rates that can be compared to modern sediment yield data. A second
isotopic system, meteoric 10Be, will be a tracer for sediment mixing from
heavily disturbed and less-disturbed regions, and can additionally be combined
with sediment yields to estimate soil loss. The third isotopic system, 137Cs and
210Pb, will allow investigators to determine how much sediment in transport
comes from deep gully/landslide erosion and how much comes from near surface
sediment sources. This project will provide background erosion rates that can be
compared to modern sediment yield data. Furthermore, the work will provide a
robust means of identifying sub-basins that are heavily disturbed and are losing
soil, even if much of that soil is not making it into the river network.
Geomorphic mapping, both in the field and through remote sensing, will determine
where and how much eroded sediment is stored on the landscape as colluvium and
in terraces. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will provide information about
how land-use affects soil erosion and sediment yield at different spatial and
temporal scales, critical data for implementing meaningful land-use policies in
mountainous regions around the world. The Chinese government is building a
series of dams in the study area, the source of fresh water for nearly 2 billion
people. Understanding the time scales over which sediment moves off slopes, into
channels, and downstream is critical for determining the life span of these and
other dams in mountainous areas worldwide. This project will bring together an
early career faculty member at an exceptional undergraduate institution, a
senior researcher who directs a state-of-the-art research facility, and an early
career scientist at a research facility in order to achieve maximum enrichment
of both undergraduate science education and pedagogical training for the
doctoral students.