* 1114205
* PFI:  Partnership for Innovation in Thermally Sprayed Systems - Enabling New Applications Through Collaborative Research
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2011,06/30/2016
* Yacov Shamash, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Alexandra Medina-Borja
* 06/30/2016
* USD 599,933.00

This Partnerships for Innovation (PFI) project from SUNY at Stony Brook a.k.a.
Stony Brook University, brings together a small business-academia innovation
team to capitalize on emergent opportunities in thermal spray (TS) deposition of
functional oxides for applications in high temperature sensing and electrical
energy conversion systems. It has long been appreciated that successful
development of functional oxide deposition via TS (a platform technology) would
provide an enabling new capability for a high rate, economical approach to large
area deposition of components in fuel cells, batteries, and a range of thick
film sensors. Many of these inventions have been contemplated for several
decades but have not been translated into innovative applications, largely due
to the complexity in materials science of TS systems as well as to limitations
in process science and control. Over the last decade, much has changed in both
knowledge and technology which has resulted in a reconsideration of the
capability for functional materials systems. However, in order to push the
capability of TS to play an active role in thick film manufacturing, new process
science ideologies aimed at improving functional properties and enhancing
reliability must be implemented. Furthermore, scientific endeavors in academia
must be leveraged with entrepreneurial pursuits in small businesses to
demonstrate the viability of TS to meet rigorous requirements in sensor and
energy systems. The intellectual merit stems from the ability to introduce
academically derived, sophisticated scientific concepts such as advanced
diagnostics and process maps into industrial manufacturing practice. Successful
development of the proposed technologies through the PFI will not only have
immediate impact among the small business innovation partners, but also will
provide a framework for consideration of TS expansion into the arena of
functional materials. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of this research
are numerous. Successful consideration of TS in sensors and energy systems will
open the door to wide ranging opportunities including thick film devices,
mesoscale electronics, and photocatalytic surfaces. It has the potential to
bring down manufacturing costs and provide scaling for fuel cells and batteries
enabling their wide spread utilization. It will also distill confidence in TS
technology and enhance capabilities of small business service providers for both
traditional and novel applications. Effective interactions among graduate,
undergraduate students, and industrial innovators can influence and inspire a
spirit of innovation in a generation of both engineering and business students.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Partners at the inception of this project includere the
Knowledge-Enhancement Partnership (KEP) unit, consisting of the lead academic
institution, Stony Brook University (Department of Materials Science and
Engineering), and Boston University (Department of Mechanical Engineering); two
small businesses: MesoScribe Technologies (St. James, NY) and Surface
Modification Systems (Santa Fe Springs, CA); and one large business: Applied
Materials (Santa Clara, CA). In addition, there are other partners. The partners
include a private sector organization: Sutzer Metco (Westbury, NY);and three
public sector organizations: Sandia National Laboratories (Albuquerque, NM), VTT
Technical Research Center of Finland (Helsinki, Finland), and the Institute of
Plasma Physics (Prague, Czech Republic).