* 1114898
* CNH: Long-Term Vulnerability and Resilience of Coupled Human-Natural Ecosystems to Fire Regime and Climate Changes at an Ancient Wildland Urban Interface
* GEO,GEO
* 09/01/2011,02/29/2016
* T Ferguson, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Sarah Ruth
* 02/29/2016
* USD 1,498,027.00

As global climates change, large wildfires have become regular features of
national and international news. These fires are newsworthy because they affect
the lives and livelihoods of thousands of people and because the types of fire
are so different than in the recent history of these places. Certain types of
fire are necessary to sustain key structures and functions of many environments
around the world. Both people and climate can alter the types of fire that these
environments experience through their effects on fire ignitions and on
vegetation (fuels). In various circumstances these alterations may either
increase or decrease the risk for types of fires that will not sustain those
environments or the human societies dependent upon them. Although the physical
and ecological responses of fire and vegetation to weather/climate are
relatively well known, the interplay between human activities and fire are
poorly understood, especially over time scales of centuries. Improved
understanding of these interactions is needed for managing these forests today,
and for anticipating future social and environmental vulnerabilities where high-
density human settlements have developed -- also known as the Wildland-Urban
Interface. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In the past half-century many thousands of
homes have been built within North American forests dominated by ponderosa pine
(Pinus ponderosa) trees. These forests and communities are now extremely
vulnerable to large, severe fires during droughts as a consequence of fire
exclusion and other land use practices. Through a historical case study, this
project tests alternative hypotheses of how human activities at the Wildland-
Urban Interface affect the response of fire-adapted pine forests to climate
change and conversely, how humans respond to these changes over multiple
centuries. The study area is an ancient Wildland Urban Interface in northern New
Mexico where large communities of Native American farmers lived within ponderosa
pine forests through varying climate episodes over the last 1,000 years.
Archaeology and paleoecology will be combined to build multi-century fire and
forest histories across gradients of human population sizes, ranging from large
towns to relatively unoccupied areas. Dynamic computer models will be developed,
and using paleoclimatic data as input they will simulate fire and forest
histories across the landscape and through time. Tested against the local fire
histories, these simulations will be varied in the magnitude and location of
human impacts to identify tipping points in the sustainability of these forests
and human communities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The understanding of long-term,
landscape-scale dynamics of human societies, forests, and climate generated by
this project will be necessary for sustainable management of similar forests at
the Wildland Urban Interface across the American West and elsewhere. Information
from the project will be provided directly to manager-partners who are engaged
in landscape-scale fire and forest management initiatives on federal and tribal
lands. Participatory research with American Indian tribes whose ancestors lived
in these ponderosa pine forests will contextualize the fire and forest histories
and human responses to environmental changes. Participation in both research and
education will strengthen the relationships between scientists, managers, and
community members, facilitating the use of scientific information in management
decisions aimed at establishing resilient, sustainable forests. An educational
program will establish a legacy of learning by developing and implementing K-12
lesson plans that integrate fire-society issues in science and history
classrooms in the region. The involvement of undergraduate and graduate
students, participation of American Indian research partners and
underrepresented K-12 students, and the linkages to contemporary managers
provide a broad capacity to disseminate project results in meaningful,
applicable, and lasting ways.