* 1114535
* Collaborative Research; Full-Scale Development; Native Universe - Indigenous Voice in Science Museums
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2016
* Leslie Kimura, University of Hawaii at Hilo
* Standard Grant
* Robert Russell
* 08/31/2016
* USD 274,424.00

Native Universe: Indigenous Voice in Museums, a collaboration between the
Indigenous Education Institute, University of California-Berkeley, and the
University of Hawaii at Hilo, builds on the successful NSF-funded Cosmic Serpent
collaborative (DRL 07-14631/DRL 07-14629). The Cosmic Serpent professional
development project explores commonalities between native and western science,
enabling participants to use STEM as an entry point for museum programs and
exhibits. Native Universe endeavors to move to the next level by creating a
professional development program which fosters systemic institutional change
through the infusion of indigenous voice in programs and exhibits focusing on
environmental change. Topics to be explored include species distribution,
environmental vulnerability, adaptation of human systems, and science and policy
issues on the local, regional, and global levels. This project is designed to
assess how cultural background and exposure to indigenous knowledge systems
integrated with western science influence these perspectives; develop
sustainable institutional competence in presenting multiple perspectives on
environmental change; and create models for inclusion while building an enduring
community of practice. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project design relies upon a
conceptual framework grounded in the literature on indigenous voice and
traditional ecological knowledge, as well as current models for institutional
change. Front-end, summative, and process evaluation will address questions
related to how science museums facilitate engagement and inclusion of indigenous
voice in the presentation of environmental change content, stages of readiness,
and the emergence of models for this process. Methods for data collection
include reflective logs, pre-post questionnaires, and semi-structured interviews
at multiple points to measure the degree and nature of change within museums, as
well as how change was initiated, supported, and sustained by staff.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Project deliverables include three museum case studies
developed during 9-month residencies, public experiences for visitors, a
culminating virtual conference, and a dynamic community of practice among
museums committed to indigenous voice in informal science education. The museum
residencies will take place at the Oregon Museum of Science and Industry, the
Arizona-Sonora Desert Museum, and the Museum of the North in Alaska. Intensive
case studies will be conducted at each site following the Diné Strategic
Planning Process (consisting of initiation, growth, implementation, and renewal)
and featuring the Ìmiloa Astronomy Institute as a model for institutional
change. Exhibits and programs have been identified at each site that will be
developed or expanded to integrate environmental change content and native
perspectives. Dissemination of the project findings will be accomplished through
publications, conference presentations, videos, webinars (four per year), and
the virtual conference. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;It is anticipated that this
project will impact over 1.2 million visitors at the collaborating institutions,
in addition to the professional audience of museum staff. Native Universe may
provide valuable interpretive tools for the field to understand and address the
challenges associated with integrating cultural perspectives and science
content. The museum case studies will contribute knowledge about the cultural
process of science learning, and may transform the way science is presented in
museums by leveraging indigenous voice to enhance public awareness and
understanding of environmental change from a culturally-grounded perspective.
The overall benefit is increased participation of indigenous individuals in STEM
and increased public science literacy in the area of environmental change.