* 1114964
* CNH-Ex: Aligning Marine Management Institutions with Key Ecological and Economic Linkages in the Gulf of California, Mexico
* GEO,GEO
* 09/15/2011,02/28/2014
* Heather Leslie, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* Sarah Ruth
* 02/28/2014
* USD 243,357.00

Many benefits produced by healthy ecosystems are common pool resources, which
create particular challenges for environmental policy and management. Yet local
institutions often enable effective stewardship of these resources, and build
social and ecological resilience to environmental change. The objective of this
project is to explore the interplay between key ecological, economic, and
institutional processes related to small-scale fisheries in Mexico's Gulf of
California, and how interactions among these processes influence both ecological
and economic outcomes. Previous scholarship focused on the gulf and other areas
with low governance, enforcement, and monitoring capacity has often emphasized
either ecological or institutional dynamics, but rarely integrates ecological,
economic, and institutional analyses as proposed here. Through a combination of
conceptual and quantitative modeling and field research, we are developing an
innovative interdisciplinary approach for analyzing coupled natural and human
coastal marine systems. Through these activities and associated interactions
with other scientists and practitioners in the region, we are collecting
substantial primary social, economic and ecological data to inform the
development of quantitative models of human-environment linkages in the gulf,
and contributing to the training of the next generation of sustainability
science scholars.

Well-functioning coastal and marine ecosystems provide a wide array of societal
benefits, including food production, protection from coastal storms, and
opportunities for recreation and tourism. Stewardship to ensure continued
provision of these benefits requires understanding the connections between
ecosystems and the people who live with them. Knowledge of the mechanisms
underlying these interactions is vital for mitigation and adaptation to our
changing world, particularly in the face of climate change. In this project, we
focus on small-scale, or artisanal, fisheries in the Gulf of California, Mexico.
To sustain fisheries in the gulf, a variety of management tools are under
consideration, including marine reserves and other marine protected areas, catch
shares, and territorial use rights. Moreover, the expected decentralization of
fisheries management due to the recently amended Fisheries Law is anticipated to
alter both ecological and socioeconomic dynamics within the region. Through the
development of an interdisciplinary framework for understanding coastal marine
environment-society connections, along with gulf-specific analyses, we will help
inform development of innovative marine management strategies in this region and
other coastal and marine areas worldwide.