* 1114389
* PFI:  Farmer-Academic-Industry Partnership for the Development of Sustainable, Energy Efficient, Multifunctional Bioproducts for the Built Environment
* TIP,TI
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2015
* Vishwanath Prasad, University of North Texas
* Standard Grant
* Sara B. Nerlove
* 08/31/2015
* USD 599,549.00

This Partnerships for Innovation (PFI) project from University of North Texas
will create an innovative partnership among farmers, academic researchers, and
industrial scientists and engineers to develop kenaf (a plant in the hibiscus
family, related to okra and cotton)-based biomaterials for sustainable
structured insulated panels for the built environment, especially in zero (net)
energy applications. Kenaf is selected because of its ability to grow in arid
conditions, where alternative plantings cannot be considered. From an
engineering standpoint, it represents a domestic resource that has the same
strength to weight ratio as glass fiber. Natural fibers in their as-harvested
state have a porous structure that is often destroyed by the industrial
processing through alkali treatment. Approaches based on placing the freshly
harvested crop in river or pond water are not effective on a large scale. An
alternative approach using bacteria based on selectivity for kenaf will be
utilized through an academic-farmer partnership. The goal will be to develop
technologically viable reinforcements that retain their natural features while
reducing the environmental footprint associated with their processing.
&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts from this research arise from the
interdisciplinary partnership at all levels of the PFI. A successful effort
could yield positive economic, environmental, and energy savings for both
residential and commercial buildings, while meeting or exceeding the industrial
standards. The platform of new multifunctional materials also has potential
applications for commercially viable sustainable building products in many
sectors (e.g., aerospace, packaging, and transportation). Efforts to integrate
fiber process modifications will translate to job creation in rural segments
with value-added markets improving the investment returns. The work is
inherently interdisciplinary-- incorporating a variety of areas of engineering
(biochemical, green, mechanical, and structural) and life cycle analysis--and
through small-group interactive processes, promotes the direct involvement of
graduate students early in the innovation value chain. Innovative academic-
industrial research activities will be integrated with socially responsible
entrepreneurship training, where doctoral students in each department will work
together as an interdisciplinary Venture team, merging business and engineering
innovation with sustainability concepts. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Partners at the
inception of the project include the Knowledge-Enhance Partnership (KEP) unit,
consisting of the University of North Texas, two small businesses: InnoVida
Southeast (Miami, FL) and Ladonia Market Center (Ladonia, TX); and a federal
agency: Agricultural Research Service, USDA (Lane, OK). In addition, there is
another academic partner: Florida International University (Miami, FL).