* 1114303
* Core dynamics experiments in the three meter geodynamo device
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2011,06/30/2014
* Daniel Lathrop, University of Maryland, College Park
* Continuing Grant
* Robin Reichlin
* 06/30/2014
* USD 498,204.00

The Earth's magnetic field is dynamic and has been weakening for the last 160
years. The main field is generated in the Earth's core by the interaction of the
rotating, turbulent liquid metal outer core and electrical currents induced by
that motion. This project seeks to resolve how the rotation of the planet and
turbulence affect the generation of magnetic fields in the Earth's core. At the
heart of the project is the University of Maryland's three meter-diameter model
of the Earth's core. That model uses 20 tons of rotating liquid metal and vessel
to mimic the interaction of magnetic fields, turbulence and rotation in a scale
model of the Earth's core. A magnetic sensor array is used to measure the
dynamics of magnetic fields induced by the sodium flow. With this array the
magnetic Gauss coefficients (spherical harmonic amplitudes) can be determined in
order to understand the magnetic and hydrodynamic modes and their dynamics,
study of the role of turbulent fluctuations in momentum transport and magnetic
field generation, and resolve wave motions and their contribution to geophysical
dynamical processes. These magnetic measurements are complimented by diagnostics
rotating with the experiment, including torque sensors, ultrasound velocimetry,
dynamic pressure probes, and dynamic wall velocity probes. This project includes
the initial sodium operations for the three meter system, now that the device
and preliminary water experiments are complete.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project
science, including the initial operation of a world unique device, is undertaken
by a team of young researchers at the University of Maryland. The mentoring and
career development experiences of the young scientists involved are an extremely
important part of the project. Additionally, high-school science class field
trips will be hosted to encourage the next generation of Science, Technology,
Engineering, and Mathematics students from diverse backgrounds, while exposing
them to an international science project. Finally, the measurements from the
magnetic probe array allow the rendering of the magnetic fields into movies in
order to convey our observations to the public.