* 1114645
* Two Eyes, 3D: Studying Stereoscopic Representations in Informal Learning Environments
* EDU,DRL
* 10/01/2011,09/30/2015
* Holly Taylor, American Association of Variable Star Observrs
* Standard Grant
* Ellen McCallie
* 09/30/2015
* USD 660,487.00

Researchers at the American Association of Variable Star Observers, the Living
Laboratory at the Boston Museum of Science, and the Adler Planetarium are
studying stereoscopic (three-dimensional or 3D) visualizations so that this
emerging viewing technology has an empirical basis upon which educators can
build more effective informal learning experiences that promote learning and
interest in science by the public. The project's research questions are: How do
viewers perceive 3D visualizations compared to 2D visualizations? What do
viewers learn about highly spatial scientific concepts embedded in 3D compared
to 2D visualizations? How are viewers' perceptions and learning associated with
individual characteristics such as age, gender, and spatial cognition
ability?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Project personnel are conducting randomized,
experimental mixed-methods research studies on 400 children and 1,000 adults in
museum settings to compare their cognitive processing and learning after viewing
two-dimensional and three-dimensional static and dynamic images of astronomical
objects such as colliding galaxies. An independent evaluator is (1) collecting
data on museum workers' and visitors' perceived value of 3D viewing technology
within museums and planetariums and (2) establishing a preliminary collection of
best practices for using 3D viewing technology based on input from museum staff
and visitors, and technology creators.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Spatial thinking is
important for learning many domains of science. The findings produced by the Two
Eyes, 3D project will researchers' understanding about the advantages and
disadvantages of using stereoscopic technology to promote learning of highly
spatial science concepts. The findings will help educators teach science in
stereoscopic ways that mitigate problems associated with using traditional 2D
materials for teaching spatial concepts and processes in a variety of
educational settings and science content areas, including astronomy.