* 1114849
* Dynamics and Impacts of Mesoscale Gravity Waves in the Moist Baroclinic Jet-Front Systems
* GEO,AGS
* 07/01/2011,06/30/2017
* Fuqing Zhang, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Chungu Lu
* 06/30/2017
* USD 566,219.00

This research explores the fundamental dynamics of gravity waves and their
interaction with moist convection and baroclinic waves. It will characterize the
source, dynamics and impacts of the mesoscale gravity waves generated in the
moist baroclinic jet-front systems through utilizing high-resolution simulations
of idealized moist baroclinic waves along with analyzing real-case modeling and
aircraft observations during past field campaigns. The major objectives of the
research are following. (1) Investigate the characteristics, source, propagation
and dynamics of gravity waves simulated in high-resolution simulations of
idealized moist baroclinic waves, examine the similarities and differences of
wave initiation and propagation between simulations with varying intensity of
moist convection, understand the coupling and interactions of gravity waves with
small-scale moist convection and large-scale background baroclinic waves, and
assess the momentum/energy fluxes from these gravity waves and their impacts on
the large-scale circulation. (2) Explore the role of gravity waves and balance
adjustment in the upscale error energy transfer from small-scale convection to
largescale baroclinic waves and the impacts on mesoscale predictability of moist
baroclinic jet-front systems under both idealized experiments and real-data
events. (3) Characterize the source, propagation, dynamics and impacts of
mesoscale gravity waves in the extratropical uppertropospheric lower-
stratospheric region through analyzing high-resolution aircraft measurements and
numerical simulations during the 2008 Stratosphere-Troposphere Analyses of
Regional Transport Experiment (START08), and quantitatively compare the momentum
and energy fluxes estimated from aircraft and satellite observations with those
calculated from model simulations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit:
&lt;br/&gt;Gravity waves are ubiquitous in the atmosphere and play a fundamental
role in a wide variety of atmospheric processes that have important implications
for tropospheric weather, stratospheric dynamics, ozone chemistry and the
general circulation. They can transfer significant amounts of energy and
momentum, initiate and organize convection, and produce atmospheric turbulence.
The momentum transport and deposition by gravity waves have significant impacts
on the general circulation of the atmosphere. A better knowledge of these
processes demands a complete understanding of the mechanisms by which the
gravity waves are generated, together with their characteristics, distribution
and variability. Building on the progress and success on dry dynamics of gravity
waves achieved under previous NSF supports, the ultimate goal of this project is
to understand the dynamics and impacts of the mesoscale gravity waves generated
by the tropospheric baroclinic jet-front systems and their interactions with
moist convection.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: &lt;br/&gt;Better
understanding of mesoscale gravity waves and their interaction with moist
processes may lead to better understanding of the dynamics and improved
forecasts of convective triggers and modulation as well as the associated severe
weather. Better understanding of flow imbalance and mesoscale gravity waves may
provide guidance on mesoscale data assimilation and mesoscale predictability.
Better understanding of gravity wave processes may also lead to better
parameterization of the energy and momentum transport between the troposphere
and stratosphere by non-topographic and non-convective mesoscale gravity waves.
This project will fund and train two graduate students. It will also foster
research collaborations between the university and several leading research
institutions.