* 1114168
* Constraining Mantle Rheology at Lithospheric Conditions by Modeling Seamount Induced Deformation and Gravity Anomalies
* GEO,EAR
* 10/01/2011,09/30/2015
* Shijie Zhong, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Robin Reichlin
* 09/30/2015
* USD 196,618.00

The surface layer of the solid Earth is called lithosphere that is on average
about 100 km thick and includes the crust and mantle components. The lithosphere
is relatively cold (i.e., temperature less than ~1200 C) and deforms in both
brittle and plastic fashions under stresses. Mantle rheology at lithospheric
conditions (i.e., temperature less than 1200 C) describes quantitatively the
lithospheric deformation under stress, and is important for understanding long-
term tectonic deformation, mountain building, volcanism, lithospheric thinning,
and plate tectonics. Most studies on mantle lithospheric rheology employ a
laboratory approach and investigate the response of rock samples or specimen to
applied stress in laboratory settings. Although laboratory studies have provided
many important insights on lithospheric rheology, it remains challenging to
directly apply them in studies of lithospheric deformation processes.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project seeks to constrain lithospheric rheology by
directly modeling observations of surface and Moho deflections and gravity
anomalies associated with seamount and oceanic island loads at plate interiors
and in subduction zones. Seamounts and oceanic islands are formed on oceanic
lithosphere due to volcanic eruptions on a short time scale (~ 1 million years
or less). They cause significant deformation on oceanic lithosphere that can be
observed in deformation of sedimentary layers and gravity anomalies. The loading
of seamount and oceanic islands (e.g., Hawaii) on lithosphere can therefore be
viewed as a natural laboratory to study the lithospheric response to stress or
loading. This project seeks to address the following questions: 1) What is the
lithospheric strength (stress) and rheology at plate interiors and in subduction
zones? 2) How does lithospheric viscosity vary with temperature (i.e.,
activation energy)? 3) Is the mantle rheology inferred from modeling field-based
observations consistent with that inferred from recent laboratory studies? 4)
What are the rheological effects of subduction processes such as faulting,
bending and hydration, as seen by subduction zone seamounts? The specific tasks
for the proposed two-year project include: 1) to formulate 2- and 3-D finite
element viscoelastic loading models with realistic rheologies including
viscoelastic, nonlinear creep, and frictional (i.e., Byerlee's law) rheology, 2)
to use recent compilations of elastic plate thickness, plate age, load age and
size for ~80 seamounts and oceanic islands to constrain mantle rheology at
lithospheric conditions including the activation energy, 3) to use seismically
imaged deflected crust data, load and lithospheric ages, gravity data for
selected intraplate oceanic islands (Hawaii, La Reunion, Canary, Cape Verde, and
Marquesas) and subduction zone seamounts (the Louisville Ridge seamount near the
Kermadec trench and the Daiichi-Kashima seamount in the Japan Trench) in 3-D
loading models to further constrain the rheology in different tectonic
settings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is supported by the Geophysics and
Marine Geology &amp; Geophysics Programs.