* 1114690
* SPYHOUNDS
* EHR,DRL
* 08/15/2011,07/31/2012
* Kate Taylor, WGBH Educational Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Valentine Kass
* 07/31/2012
* USD 253,963.00

SPYHOUNDS is a new transmedia learning experience for 6- to10-year old children.
SPYHOUNDS represents an effort to extend the value of the successful TV series
FETCH! with Ruff Ruffman by moving to a new media platform and revamping the
storyline. The popular character Ruff Ruffman becomes a super spy through top-
secret missions. Ruff needs help (both on and offline) from kids at home, who
become the spyhounds. Each mission is designed to have kids watch new animation,
complete online activities designed to promote STEM exploration, and participate
in offline activities that require kids to investigate real world phenomena.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Pathways grant provides development support to fund a
pilot phase of the project. The STEM content in the pilot phase will focus on
physical science. Deliverables will include 3 x 60-second mini animated
episodes, 3 interactive games rolling out over a 6-week period, 6 x 60-second
audio updates from Ruff, daily in-character blog updates as Ruff plays out the
mission, offline decoding activities supported by video clips, daily social
media updates through Facebook and Twitter, editorial staff reviewing/posting
user generated content, and Web-based survey data. WGBH and Concord Evaluation
Group will conduct formative and summative evaluation using a wide array of
success metric and analytics. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;While the project design is
rooted in an evidence-based curriculum and lessons learned from prior work, the
Spyhounds concept offers a new educational media model. The pilot phase
supported by this grant will help inform the future development of a year-long
effort. The project's goal is help audience members develop understanding of
science and math concepts, enhance problem-solving skills, and expand their
understanding of how science and math are used in the real world. Spyhounds has
potential to contribute to theory development, especially as it evaluates how
young audiences take information learned online and apply it in the real world.