* 1114831
* US- Casablanca International Workshop in Mathematical Biology: Control and Analysis, Casablanca, Morocco June 20-24, 2011
* O/D,OISE
* 04/01/2011,03/31/2013
* Abdessamad Tridane, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* DeAndra Beck
* 03/31/2013
* USD 49,896.00

1114831 &lt;br/&gt;Tridane, Arizona State University &lt;br/&gt;Summary of
Proposal: This project is for support for US participants, including professors
and students - to a workshop on ?Mathematical Biology: Analysis and Control-
Casablanca, Morocco June 20-24, 2011.? The Moroccan organizer is Dr. Noura
Yousfi of the Hassan II-Mohammedia-Casablanca University. The focus of the
workshop is on disease modeling for endemic and emerging diseases in Africa.
Included in the plan are plenary lectures, poster sessions, lectures as well as
tutorials for African students, and round tables. A major objective is to
facilitate and encourage collaborations between researchers from African
countries, the US and other countries.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit:
Disease modeling is necessary for understanding and developing control
strategies for epidemic diseases. The workshop seeks to create future
international collaborations, data sharing, and possible development of
international models for educational training in the field of disease modeling.
The workshop will expose US researchers to mathematical biology in Africa,
promote interactions and collaborations, and train students and postdocs. There
will be discussion sessions with African researchers on problems specific to
Africa. The workshop's steering committee includes a significant representation
from the host country as well as from Kenya, Botswana, Uganda and Tanzania. The
topic on disease models and control fits well with Africa, where many problems
related to disease emerge. The workshop would facilitate the development of
collaborations between junior researchers in the US, with expertise in the
modeling of disease, and researchers residing in Africa.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts: The workshop will have a good impact on
junior researcher and students in Morocco and nearby countries. It also benefits
the participating US scholars and junior researchers as they will become
familiar with some real disease problems occurring in Africa, which can increase
the interaction of US researchers and North African colleagues, and make
positive impact on promoting scientific research in Africa and also in US (for
Africa related problems.) Three of plenary speakers are female, and three of
them are minority. The organizers plan to post lectures online, and publish
proceedings on a good journal in math biology. Many of the main research
advances in this field have come from US, Canadian, and European universities,
and that new collaborations between African and non-African researchers would
enable data sharing and idea sharing between a broader international community.
Mentoring of junior researchers and students by African and non-African senior
researchers is also expected.