* 1114197
* PFI:  Renewable Resource Materials:  Developing a New Platform with a Purpose
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2011,06/30/2014
* Alexis Abramson, Case Western Reserve University
* Standard Grant
* Sara B. Nerlove
* 06/30/2014
* USD 600,000.00

This Partnerships for Innovation (PFI) project from Case Western Reserve
University (CWRU) focuses on the translation from research to realization in the
field of specialty materials from renewable resources such as those found in
clay, algae, waste plastics, paints and oils, and animal waste. CWRU and four
small businesses in the specialty materials from renewables technology space
will join together to explore a new model of cooperation with potential to
change the way researchers and small businesses work together in this platform.
This will result in more productive innovation capacity building to serve as
preparation for enabling movement into the marketplace. The small business
partners are located in N.E. Ohio and are a part of a synergistic cluster that
will later serve to enhance opportunities for the development and
commercialization of novel applications. Research teams include partner
companies, CWRU faculty, PhD students, and Master of Engineering and Management
students, who will bridge technology and business issues. An additional partner,
SRI International, known internationally for its disciplined innovation process,
will lead the research teams through collaborative activities key to their
innovation training. Through this PFI, the small businesses will have the
opportunity to collaborate on innovative technologies with each other and CWRU;
two out of the four companies have not had significant prior interaction with
universities. Moreover, the identified faculty members who will be working with
them will be actively growing their research activities in this field.
Consequently, this PFI is enabling the emergence of a cluster in specialty
materials from renewable resources that will foster innovative and high impact
research and development in the region. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader
impacts of this research are as follows: (1) to train a new generation of PhD
researchers to deeply consider market and societal needs in the context of their
research and thus contribute more productively in a global innovation economy,
(2) develop and sustain new and productive paths of interaction between a major
research university and small companies, leading to the building of innovation
capacity in the region and a model that can be widely utilized, and (3) enhance
the development and deployment of technologies based on renewable resources
which will contribute positively to both economic growth and national security.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Partners at the inception of the project are all part of
the Knowledge Enhancement Partnership (KEP) unit, consisting of Case Western
Reserve University (Departments of Macromolecular Science and Engineering, Civil
Engineering, Mechanical and Aerospace Engineering, and the Institute for
Management and Engineering); four small businesses: Aeroclay Inc. (Beachwood,
Ohio); Green Wave Innovation LLC (Valley View, Ohio); NuVention Solutions Inc.
(Valley View, Ohio); and Vadxx Energy LLC (Akron, Ohio); and a private sector
organization (not-for-profit): SRI International (Menlo Park, CA).