* 1114623
* Radiolab: What Curiosity Sounds Like Discovering, Challenging, And Sharing Scientific Ideas
* EHR,DRL
* 10/01/2011,09/30/2014
* Jad Abumrad, New York Public Radio - WNYC
* Continuing Grant
* Sandra Welch
* 09/30/2014
* USD 1,498,205.00

This project is designed to bridge the "public understanding of science" radio
model with a "public engagement with science" approach using a new public media
tool - the "Public Insight Network". Radiolab, an innovative hour-long radio
program has developed a highly innovative and successful format over the past 5
years that fosters interest and understanding in STEM based on audiences'
natural curiosity. It has exposed non-science attentive listeners to
transformative STEM concepts such as Stochasticity (physics, statistics,
neuroscience), Musical Language (behavioral science, neurology, acoustics) and
Space (mathematics, astronomy, technology, engineering). This project will
expand the model using innovative online strategies that will connect listeners
with working scientists, with each other and with the Radiolab hosts. This new
model is grounded in the direct interaction of audiences and scientists which
positions listeners as active creators and curators of content rather than
passive recipients. The target audience is young adults 18 years old and above.
Key organizational partners are The Public Insight Network (and their
affiliation with the National Academies of Science), American Public Media, the
Borough of Manhattan Community College and Brooklyn College.

Project deliverables include 30 hour-long Radiolab programs for broadcast on
public radio stations; interactive, user generated articles for the web site;
live online chats, engagement "apps" for mobile smart phones; and live events at
college campuses and science centers. In addition, the project will implement a
mentorship program to train college-aged underrepresented students that have
demonstrated an interest in science and/or science journalism. Formative
evaluation will gather actionable information from audiences and scientists than
can inform the design of the deliverables.The summative evaluation will assess
the success of the strategy for engaging audiences in ongoing science learning.

Audiences are projected to increase from the current base of 1 million radio
listeners per season and 2 million podcast downloads per month. The intended
learning outcomes for the audience include their gaining greater knowledge and
exposure to current scientific research, and increased engagement by becoming
participatory learners through online interactions with science professionals
and other listeners.