* 1114165
* Scientists for Tomorrow
* EHR,DRL
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2015
* Marcelo Caplan, Columbia College
* Standard Grant
* Robert Russell
* 08/31/2015
* USD 249,936.00

Through the Scientists for Tomorrow pathways project, The Science Institute at
Columbia College in Chicago will test a model for preparing non-science major,
pre-service elementary school teachers to deliver three ten-week informal
science education modules to youth in after school programs. The initiative will
bring engineering concepts, environmental science, and technology to
approximately 240 urban Chicago youth (ages 10-14 years old) and their families.
The Science Institute will partner with eight minority serving community based
organizations and the Museum of Science and Industry, the Field Museum, and the
Garfield Park Conservatory Alliance to develop and implement all aspects of the
program. The goals of the program are two-fold. First, the project will develop
and implement a high-quality STEM based afterschool program for under-
represented youth in STEM. Second, the professional development and experience
implementing the curriculum with youth in the local communities and within
informal science education (ISE) institutions will extend and enrich the pre-
service teachers' STEM content and pedagogical knowledge base and better prepare
them to teach science in formal and informal settings.

Thirty teachers will receive specialized professional development through a
seminar, course, and other support mechanisms in order to best support the
implementation of the modules, while building their STEM content expertise,
confidence, and pedagogical knowledge. Each module has a different STEM content
focus: alternative energy (fall), the physics and mathematics of sound and music
(winter), and environmental science (spring). At the end of each module, a
culminating youth-led presentation will be held at one of the partnering Chicago
museums. Youth will be encouraged to participate in all three modules. The
formative evaluation will be conducted by the Co-Principal Investigators. Pre
and post assessments, artifact reviews, and interviews will be used for the
summative evaluation, which will be conducted by an external evaluator at the
Illinois Institute of Technology.

The project deliverables include: (a) a teacher training program, (b) an after
school curriculum, and (c) media tools - DVDs, website. Over the grant period,
the project intends to reach 120 youth each year, over 100 family and community
members, and 30 teachers. The larger impact of this project will be the
development of a scalable model for bringing relevant STEM content and
experiences to youth, their families, and non-science major pre-service
teachers. As a result of this project, a cadre of pre-service teachers will
have: (a) increased their STEM content knowledge, (b) gained experience
presenting STEM content in informal settings, (c) learned effective approaches
to deliver hands-on STEM content, and (d) learned to use museum and other ISE
resources in their teaching. In fact, after the grant period nearly half of the
teachers will continue to work at the centers as part-time instructors, fully
supported by the partnering community centers.