* 1114670
* Full-Scale Development Project:  Marcellus Matters:  Engaging Adults in Science and Energy (EASE)
* EDU,DRL
* 10/01/2011,12/31/2016
* Brian Orland, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Paul Jennings
* 12/31/2016
* USD 2,541,418.00

This Full-Scale Informal Science Education award focuses on the physical and
social science surrounding the extraction of natural gas from the Marcellus
shale formation beneath the surface in north central and western Pennsylvania.
The project targets the adult residents of the impacted or soon-to-be-impacted
areas of Pennsylvania. This is a complex project involving the disciplines of
geology, engineering, chemistry, social science, performance, and land
management. Further, the project team includes a mix of physical scientists,
educators, theater arts faculty, social scientists and engineers from
Pennsylvania State University, the Pennsylvania State Cooperative Extension
Service, and Juniata College.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project addresses several
potential barriers to communication of science to the public. The proposal team
provides four entry points for citizens of rural Pennsylvania to engage in
learning about energy, its needs in the Nation, the economics behind these
needs, the geology of the shale deposit and how to have productive discussions
and make decisions using science-based evidence. The project will engage a
multitude of communication mechanisms such as forums, community meetings,
theater performances, data centers, blogs and workshops. The Pennsylvania State
Extension will play a central role in working at the local
level.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project is a complex effort wherein the
residents of north central and western Pennsylvania will learn about the science
and policies of natural gas extraction and how to derive and use scientific
information for decision making. The proposal team will learn how to work and
communicate with rural citizens. Further, the team will derive a variety of
models from these activities that are likely to be adaptable for use in other
areas of the Nation that have natural gas deposits.