* 1114245
* High-Resolution Structure and Seismicity of  the Central Chile Subduction Zone
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2011,06/30/2014
* Haijiang Zhang, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Eva Zanzerkia
* 06/30/2014
* USD 147,678.00

The Mw 8.8 Maule, Chile earthquake of 27 February 2010 is estimated to be the
sixth largest earthquake globally since 1900. The Maule earthquake is the most
recent in a long history of large and great subduction megathrust earthquakes
along the central and southern Chile convergent plate boundary. It ruptured the
megathrust segment just to the north of the great 1960 Chile earthquake, the
largest earthquake ever instrumentally recorded, filling in and apparently
extending beyond an identified seismic gap. Existing and new local/regional
datasets for Chile provide key data allowing us to constrain marginwide velocity
structure and pre- and post-seismic earthquake locations with a greater accuracy
than has been achieved before for this region and move toward a better
understanding of how this convergent plate boundary fault releases strain and
evolves over the seismic cycle. Among the key issues to be addressed are the
following: (1) What are the updip, downdip, and along-strike limits of
aftershockactivity, and how do aftershocks spatially relate to prior seismicity
and main shock rupture pattern? (2) Do structural variations in the upper and
lower plates affect main shock rupture and aftershock distribution? (3) Are
there identifiable gaps in the background seismicity and/or aftershock
distribution that could be potentially filled by a major earthquake?

The project involves the following steps: First, they will carefully reprocess
the available ISS, ISC, and PDE data for the region encompassing the Chile
subduction zone from about 40° S to 30° S, extending as far back in time as
1918, using stringent event quality criteria to produce significantly improved
single event hypocenters for the global data. Next, they will gather all
available regional arrival time data, including data from new and preexisting
Chilean, U.S. and international deployments, and then combine them with the
groomed global data to produce a comprehensive and internally consistent margin-
wide earthquake catalog. Finally, they will use the complete dataset for (a)
single-iteration nested regional-global tomography, (b) robust multiple-
iteration nested regional-global tomography, and (c) teleseismic double-
difference tomography and relocation.

The goal of this project is to investigate the Mw 8.8 Maule, Chile earthquake of
27 February 2010, its aftershock sequence, and the nature of the plate boundary
fault on which it occurred. The Maule earthquake, estimated to be the sixth
largest earthquake globally since 1900, is the most recent in a long history of
large and great earthquakes along the central and southern Chile convergent
plate boundary. It occurred just to the north of the great 1960 Chile
earthquake, the largest earthquake ever instrumentally recorded. In this
project, researchers will form a comprehensive and internally consistent catalog
of earthquakes for analysis. Using these data, researchers will determine
precise earthquake locations for the 2010 aftershock sequence and prior
earthquakes and image the 3D structure of the plate boundary region and the
fault on which the 2010 great earthquake occurred. These results will allow us
to address significant scientific questions that will help us better understand
why great earthquakes occur where they do, when they do.