* 1114744
* Pathways - Citizen Science In The California Naturalist Program: Building The Nexus Between Learning and Action
* EHR,DRL
* 11/01/2011,10/31/2014
* Adina Merenlender, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* David Haury
* 10/31/2014
* USD 249,972.00

The University of California-Davis and its collaborators are identifying and
testing strategies for implementing a model citizen science program that links
the statewide Master Naturalist program with local citizen science projects that
engage the public in scientific research. The goals of the project are to
develop a mechanism for broadening the reach of master naturalist programs and
measure the impact of participation in scientific research on citizens' science
learning and environmental stewardship behavior. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project is (1) implementing strategies for engaging underserved young people
(ages 18-23) and enhancing learning for seniors in the California Naturalist
program, (2) developing and testing a citizen science training module, (3)
establishing two regional volunteer naturalist networks in Northern California
that have links to local citizen science projects, and (4) developing web tools
for use by naturalists and scientists to promote science learning. Project
deliverables include training sessions, support services, network coordination,
web tools, and participant tracking. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project is
expanding the involvement of at-risk and minority youth in naturalist training
and citizen science activities, and connecting them to senior Master Naturalists
to form inter-generational learning groups. Merging these audiences will result
in the formation of a diverse corps of citizen naturalists who participate in
ecological monitoring of local natural areas and conduct land stewardship
activities. The project's findings will help program administrators scale-up the
approach statewide and across the nation.