* 1114211
* PFI:  Multifunctional Microelectrode Arrays for Neuroscience Research and Technology Development
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2011,06/30/2016
* Robert Rennaker, University of Texas at Dallas
* Standard Grant
* Alexandra Medina-Borja
* 06/30/2016
* USD 599,783.00

This Partnerships for Innovation (PFI) project from the University of Texas-
Dallas seeks to develop a multifunctional microelectrode array platform
technology that has the potential to revolutionize how neuroscience research is
conducted. Microelectrode arrays (MEAs) have provided significant insight into
how the nervous system receives, processes, and transmits information. With the
ability to stimulate and record from cells within the nervous system using MEAs,
neuroscientists have been able to probe neural circuitry and examine the
underlying spatiotemporal dynamics in health and disease. The overall goal of
this partnership is to develop and productize a microelectrode array platform
technology for neuroscience that is in turn capable of successively producing
increasingly complex high performance devices. The vision is a multifunctional
MEA platform technology that incorporates: 1) multichannel optical stimulation,
using embedded organic light emitting diodes for selective neurostimulation; 2)
shape memory polymers to provide a more robust, long-lived interface with the
nervous system; 3) embedded microsystems based on thin-film transistors and
piezoelectric polymers for on-board signal processing and micro-positioning of
electrodes in vivo; and 4) low-cost, disposable fabrication materials and
methods for in vitro neuropharmacological assay use. The project team proposes
to develop this novel multifunctional MEA platform technology by leveraging
advances in flexible display technology and materials science, demonstrating
this technology platform in both in vitro and in vivo neuroscience studies.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of this research will include the
resulting technologies that will be productized in various embodiments for use
in clinical research and treatment. Because the proposed MEA platform is based
on materials and processes that have been developed for the flexible display
industry, a clear path to large volume manufacturing has already been
demonstrated. In addition to the technology to be developed, which will open up
whole new areas of research in neuroscience, the graduate and undergraduate
students involved in this project will be exposed to a wide array of science and
technology, ranging from semiconductor processing to neuroscience. They will
also learn a tremendous amount about systems engineering, because, while the
bulk of the project is about microelectrode array development, the arrays have
to be compatible with the recording and stimulating electronics and software.
Even more important, the students have the opportunity to work with proven
entrepreneurs, such as Harvey Wiggins, the founder of Plexon. Mr. Wiggins has
taken Plexon from a one person operation to the leading manufacturer of
neuroscience recording hardware and software in the world. The students will be
involved in the entire innovation process, including product definition, product
design, process development, product fabrication and testing and finally
marketing. UT Dallas' High School Comets program will also get local high school
students involved in the project. The ultimate goal of the program is to create
a technology platform that will create high paying jobs for students like those
involved in this project, and, at the same time, benefit society by providing a
new set of tools for neuroscientists to solve the most pressing medical
problems. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Partners at the inception of the project are all
part of the Knowledge Enhancement Partnership (KEP) unit, consisting consisting
of the University of Texas-Dallas (Materials Science and Engineering, Mechanical
Engineering, and Neuroscience) and two small businesses: Plexon, Inc. (Dallas,
TX), the leading manufacturer of neural recording equipment and software in the
world, which will provide the team with expertise in electrical engineering and
computer science; and Syzygy Memory Plastics (Atlanta, GA) which will provide
expertise needed to develop the appropriate polymer substrate materials for both
in vivo and in vitro multielectrode arrays.