* 1114901
* Computational Methods for Inverting the Soft X-Ray Transform
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2011,09/30/2014
* Gabor Herman, CUNY Graduate School University Center
* Continuing Grant
* Junping Wang
* 09/30/2014
* USD 239,992.00

The aim of this project is the mathematical development, computational
&lt;br/&gt;implementation, testing and evaluation of procedures for inverting
the soft x-ray &lt;br/&gt;transform, which has arisen recently from experimental
cellular biology, but has &lt;br/&gt;not previously been subjected to a rigorous
treatment from the computational &lt;br/&gt;mathematics point of view. The soft
x-ray transform is the appropriate mathematical &lt;br/&gt;model for the
physical process by which two-dimensional projections are &lt;br/&gt;acquired in
soft x-ray microscopy (SXM), which has the unique capability of
&lt;br/&gt;imaging whole cells in their native environment with high resolution.
The proposed&lt;br/&gt;novel computational methods for inverting this accurate
image formation &lt;br/&gt;model for SXM are designed to improve the resolution
in the reconstructions of the &lt;br/&gt;three-dimensional (3D) structures from
their SXM projections. It is conjectured &lt;br/&gt;that such a treatment will
result in improved accuracy and usefulness as &lt;br/&gt;compared to the
currently used heuristic procedures. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In many areas of
biology, the understanding of a 3D structure provides a way &lt;br/&gt;of
understanding its function. Many structures, such as single molecules,
&lt;br/&gt;viruses, cells, etc., are too small to be viewed with the naked eye.
&lt;br/&gt;Microscopy has been providing images with information
about&lt;br/&gt;details of these structures. However, unprocessed microscopic
images &lt;br/&gt;present structures that are superimposed over each other,
making&lt;br/&gt;them hard to interpret. Combining multiple images from
different directions &lt;br/&gt;of the same structure by techniques of 3D
reconstruction allows accurate &lt;br/&gt;visualization of such structures. The
understanding of 3D shapes of &lt;br/&gt;structures is important in many
biomedical areas, for example, in drug &lt;br/&gt;design. Of the many approaches
to unraveling 3D biological structures, &lt;br/&gt;soft X-ray microscopy (SXM)
has the unique capability of providing &lt;br/&gt;high-resolution details of
subcellular 3D structures in their native environment, &lt;br/&gt;i.e., the
whole cell. Such currently-unavailable structural information will be
&lt;br/&gt;important for understanding many biological processes. An example is
&lt;br/&gt;mitochondrial dysfunction as it occurs in human diseases,
understanding &lt;br/&gt;of which is important for assessing cardiovascular and
nervous &lt;br/&gt;system function in mitochondrial disorders.