* 1114741
* Full Development: Cyberlaboratory -- Exploring Customization and Continuity
* EHR,DRL
* 10/01/2011,09/30/2018
* Shawn Rowe, Oregon State University
* Continuing Grant
* Arlene de Strulle
* 09/30/2018
* USD 2,696,189.00

In this full-scale research and development project, Oregon State University
(OSU), Oregon Sea Grant (OSG) and the Hatfield Marine Science Center Visitors
Center (HMSCVC) is designing, developing, implementing, researching and
evaluating a cyberlaboratory in a museum setting. The cyberlaboratory will
provide three earth and marine science learning experiences with research and
evaluation interwoven with visitor experiences. The research platform will focus
on: 1) a climate change exhibit that will enable research on identity, values
and opinion; 2) a wave tank exhibit that will enable research on group dynamics
and problem solving in interactive engineering challenges; and 3) remote sensing
exhibits that will enable research on visitor interactions through the use of
real data and simulations.

This project will provide the informal science educaton community with a suite
of tools to evaluate learning experiences with emerging technologies using an
iterative process. The team will also make available to the informal science
community their answers to the following research questions: For the climate
change exhibit, "To what extent does customizing content delivery based on real-
time visitor input promote learning?" For the wave tank exhibit, "To what extent
do opportunities to reflect on and share experiences promote STEM reasoning
processes at a build-and-test exhibit?" For the data-sensing exhibit, "Can
visitors' abilities to explain or use visualizations be improved by shaping
their visual searches of images?" Mixed-methods using interviews, surveys,
behavioral instruments, and participant observations will be used to evaluate
the overall program.

Approximately 60-100 informal science education professionals will discuss and
test the viability of the exhibit's evaluation tools. More than 150,000
visitors, along with community members and local middle and high school
students, will have the opportunity to participate in the learning experiences
at the HMSCVC. This work contributes to the fields of cyberlearning and informal
science education. This project provides the informal science education field
with important knowledge about learning, customized content delivery and
evaluation tools that are used in informal science settings.