* 1114189
* TC: Small: Collaborative Research: Exploration and Validation of Hardware Primitives for Security and Trust
* CSE,CNS
* 07/31/2010,07/31/2014
* Reza Mohammadpourrad, University of New Mexico
* Standard Grant
* Nina Amla
* 07/31/2014
* USD 136,611.00

Hardware-level security and trust in many of society's microelectronic-based
infrastructures, e.g., transportation, energy, etc., is inadequate. This project
investigates chip-level hardware primitives that are designed to improve the
security and trust in such systems. In particular, many security mechanisms
depend on a secret, unique identifier that is associated with the chip or board
in the system. An embedded digital signature inserted by the manufacturer is not
secure because it can be extracted by adversaries. A physical unclonable
function (PUF) is a recent approach for providing an entire set of secure,
unique identifiers for each chip. PUFs are chip-level primitives that leverage
the intrinsic and random manufacturing variations of the process technology. A
PUF that measures the resistance variations in the chip's power grid is
investigated as a hardware primitive for providing secure, unique identifiers.
Similarly, integrated circuit trust relates to the degree of confidence one has
that a fabricated instance of a chip implements only those functions described
in the original specification -- nothing more and nothing less. There are
increasing opportunities for adversaries to secretly change a chip's function
given the trend of the industry to disseminate the chip fabrication process over
many organizations. "Trust but verify" is likely the only approach to dealing
with this threat. To support this verification process, a set of hardware
primitives are investigated that are designed to measure the parametric, analog
characteristics of chip as a means of detecting any malicious logic that might
have been inserted by an adversary. A chip built in an advanced technology is
used to experimentally validate the PUF and hardware Trojan detection methods.