* 1114792
* Seventh International Nanotechnology Conference on Communication and Cooperation (INC7). To be Held May 16-19, 2011, in Tsukuba, Japan.
* ENG,ECCS
* 03/15/2011,02/29/2012
* Kang Wang, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Usha Varshney
* 02/29/2012
* USD 30,000.00

Objective: We are requesting $30,000 in travel funds from NSF to enable 12
faculty and students from the US to attend the Seventh International
Nanotechnology Conference on Communications and Cooperation May 16-19, 201 in
Tsukuba, Japan, details of the conference can be found at http://www.inc7.jp.
This conference is being sponsored by SRC-SIA, NSF, IMEC, JEITA-JSI, and several
US, European and Asian companies. It will feature invited speakers and poster
presenters from industry, academia, and government who will describe advances in
beyond-CMOS nanoelectronics, nanoenergy, nanophotonics and issues related to
nanosocietal implications.

Intellectual Merit: The INC7 conference will bring together some of the world?s
most renowned and technologically advanced thinkers to exchange information and
ideas with regards tonanotechnology, nano-optics, nanoelectronics and other
high-tech and current technology areas that are impacting mankind, nature and
development. In addition, this arena provides a unique opportunity where
academics and industry leaders can interact on issues in nanotechnology. Current
issues that will be discussed at INC7 includes energy and environmental
challenges facing mankind in particular targeting to decrease CO2 emissions and
increase the viability of renewable energy solutions - and the associated
societal implication and issues. Also, another major challenge that will be
discussed includes a look at logic switch replacement technologies for CMOS and
what alternate state variables are viable options. Semiconductor industry
related questions and topics that will be discussed include nanoscale
interconnects, thermal management, directed self-assembly, and fault tolerance.
At a high level, the spirits of the meeting will target world regional groups
co-operate to implement strategic and beneficial cooperative programs to
progress mandkinds? development through nanotechnology and its associated
intellectual merits.

Broader Impact: The INC7 conference provides an arena where global senior
researchers, industry leaders and policy makers from North America, Europe and
Asia will hold discussions on a variety of efforts in nanoscience, along with
opportunities for collaboration. Young scientists will also be invited to
present posters highlighting their work and will give them a chance to exchange
information and ideas with these technologists. The broader impact we foresee
coming from the INC7 is the dissemination of relevant and current nanotechnology
issues permeated to the nextgeneration of technology leaders. The event will
provide an opportunity for academic, gov lab and industry to meet in a forum
where the purpose of cooperation and coordination is targeted, leading to
lasting collaborative science and technology relationships and alliances to more
effectively solve and innovate solutions to many grand challenges faced today.