* 1114786
* International Workshop on Structural Health Monitoring 2011; Stanford University, Palo Alto, California; 13-15 September 2011
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2012
* Fu-Kuo Chang, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Kishor Mehta
* 08/31/2012
* USD 18,000.00

This project will support the organization of a three-day international workshop
on structural health monitoring at Stanford University. The workshop activities
will integrate advanced sensing technology with diagnostics, prognostics, and
knowledge of material/structural damage characteristics to assess the health of
structures in service to prevent structural catastrophes, minimize downtime and
sustain performance, and reduce maintenance cost. The workshop will review the
current developments in this area, identify key and emerging research issues,
and promote exchanges and crossfertilization across different disciplines such
as sensors and sensor systems, networking, computing, data mining, integrated
design, diagnostics, prognostics, signal processing, multifunctional materials,
and applications such as civil infrastructures, ground/air/space transportation
vehicles, and marine structures. The workshop will consists of keynote lectures
by distinguished individuals from industry, university, and government,
technical and poster presentations, and meeting of expert panels to discuss key
issues and concerns to the industry and academia. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
workshop will provide a multi-disciplinary forum for exchange of scientific
information between researchers, practitioners and students. A special faculty-
student panel discussion is organized to establish a direct interface between
students and distinguished researchers/academicians around the world. The
workshop will produce proceedings of the technical presentations made by
different researchers and form a scientific committee to develop guidelines and
recommendations for government agencies and industry to promote structural
health monitoring research and its application on buildings and civil
infrastructure.