* 1114305
* PFI: Establishing an Open Forum for Innovation in Advanced Fluorescent Microspectroscopy Technology for Molecular Imaging in Living Cells
* TIP,TI
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2014
* Valerica Raicu, University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee
* Standard Grant
* Sara B. Nerlove
* 08/31/2014
* USD 570,543.00

This Partnerships for Innovation project from the University of Wisconsin-
Milwaukee (UWM) focuses on innovation in the area of fast-acquisition-speed
spectrally resolved two-photon microscopy (SR-TPM) and identification of
biomarkers and labeled antibodies for use in research, diagnostics, and drug
screening applications. As part of the PFI project, an Open Forum for Innovation
(OFI) will be established to develop and guide proof-of-concept experiments in
several areas related to SR-TPM technology development and applications: (1)
high-spectral resolution and high-acquisition speed imaging scanners, (2) fiber
laser alternatives to current solid-state lasers, and (3) novel biomarkers and
labeled antibodies for detecting transient interactions between proteins in
vivo, identifying rare cell types (such as circulating cancer cells) in body
fluids, and developing living cell assays for cell signaling pathways to be used
for drug screening. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of this research
are (1) expansion of the SR-TPM customer base, currently represented by cellular
biologists, to include both biochemists and drug researchers; (2) introduction
of fiber laser products more broadly to the microscopy market; and (3) expansion
of applications of fast-acquisition speed spectrally resolved fluorescence
microscopy to include development of targeted diagnostics and therapeutics. This
team's ability to address such needs would significantly expand the U.S.
presence in the scanning fluorescent microscope market, by providing product
capabilities that exceed those of existing products. Proof-of-concept
experiments to be conducted will directly involve graduate, undergraduate
students, and postdoctoral researchers who will work alongside consultants and
lab scientists from the&lt;br/&gt;knowledge-enhancement partner companies. To
add to the university's innovation capacity and create a cadre of UWM-grown
scientist-entrepreneurs during the performance period of this project, OFI will
evolve into a UWM University-Small Businesses Collaboratory (UWM-USBC), which
will offer resources and networking opportunities to its member investigators,
establish a gateway for businesses to UWM-developed technology, and promote the
PFI project leaders as role models for knowledge transfer within UWM, in the
Southeast Wisconsin area, and in the U.S.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Partners at the
inception of the project include the Knowledge Enhancement Partnership (KEP)
unit, consisting of UWM (College of Letters and Science (through its Department
of Physics) and the Graduate School at the University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee),
and three small businesses: Aurora Spectral Technologies, LLC (Milwaukee, WI),
NeoClone Biotechnology International, LLC (Madison, WI), and PolarOnyx, Inc.
(San Jose, CA). In addition, there are other core partners. These include
private sector organizations: Brandt Innovative Technologies, Inc. (Pewaukee,
WI) and the UWM Research Foundation, Inc. (UWMRF, Milwaukee, WI). In addition,
two industrial collaborators and potential end users: MetriTrack, LLC (Hillside,
IL) and AndroBioSys, Inc. (Buffalo, NY)], as well as academic collaborators and
potential end users from the University of Toronto and University of Wisconsin-
Madison, have already expressed strong interest in participating in the OFI.