* 1114621
* Metaphor-Based Learning of Physics Concepts Through Whole-Body Interaction in a Mixed Reality Science Center Exhibit
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2011,03/31/2014
* Michael Moshell, The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Continuing Grant
* Alphonse Desena
* 03/31/2014
* USD 1,418,085.00

This research project, from The University of Central Florida, and the Museum of
Science and Industry, investigates a three-cycle research and development
process where middle school student learners will be immersed in a mixed reality
environment while interacting with functional metaphors to determine the effects
of conceptual change, motivation and scientific habits of mind while engaged in
learning physics content. The project is guided by the following research
questions: How does the opportunity to embody elements of an immersive
simulation affect a learner's propensity to experience conceptual change and
develop scientific habits of mind? What design features of missed reality
environments best support metaphors? What metrics are most effective for
assessing learning through body-based metaphors? What are the practical
considerations to creating immersive metaphor-based learning experiences in ISE
institutions such as a Science Center?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigators
will use a between subjects mixed method approach with middle school students (N
= 360) involving three research cycles that are performed in controlled
conditions. The multiple iterations will allow modifications to the study's
design to dig deeper into the data and afford more careful analysis, revisions
and modifications to simulation content, protocol and data collection
instruments and the technology installation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Middle school
students will be recruited from local schools and the Museum of Science and
Industry visitors. The evaluation plan includes the assessment of perceived
values of using whole-body metaphors within mixed reality environments to learn
physics. Professional audiences, educators and ISE practitioners will assess the
impact, design and content associated with research on learning, mixed reality
design, science and physics education. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Research on
understanding the process of using whole-body interactions in a mixed reality
environments will help educational researchers and practitioners in the field
understand the effectiveness of metaphor based learning of scientific concepts
with whole body interactions. This project contributes knowledge about how
people learn within informal settings. This theory-driven design approach has
the potential for broad implementation in both formal and informal environments.