* 1114148
* 2011 Soft Condensed Matter Physics Gordon Conference: Soft Matter Far From Equilibrium at Colby Sawyer College, New London, New Hampshire; August 14-19, 2011
* MPS,DMR
* 06/15/2011,05/31/2012
* Cristina Marchetti, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* Daniele Finotello
* 05/31/2012
* USD 12,000.00

The 2011 Gordon Conference on "Soft Condensed Matter Physics: Soft Matter Far
from Equilibrium" will highlight a wide range of phenomena at the forefront of
soft materials research where traditional concepts, based on equilibrium
physics, fail to provide an accurate description. Topics will include fluids and
solids undergoing catastrophic deformations, active and self-propelled systems,
new developments in and applications of turbulence, dynamics and flow in
confined and driven systems, jamming and glassy systems, and the interplay of
geometry and topology in soft materials. Invited speakers will represent a
variety of scientific disciplines, ranging from soft condensed matter physics to
chemical engineering to geophysics. The Conference will bring together
investigators who are at the cutting edge of their field, and it will provide
opportunities for junior scientists and graduate students to present their work
in poster format as well as exchange ideas with leaders in the field. As a means
to stimulate further exchange of ideas we plan to select by jury 3-4 junior
presenters of particularly outstanding posters to give short talks. The
collegial atmosphere of this Conference, with programmed sessions as well as
opportunities for informal gatherings in the afternoons and evenings, provides
an avenue for scientists from different disciplines to brainstorm and promotes
cross-disciplinary collaborations in the various research areas represented. The
conference will be preceded by a two-day Gordon-Kenan Research Seminar that
provides a unique opportunity for young researchers to share in the GRC
experience and build informal networks with their peers.