* 1114500
* RESEARCH: Master Science Hobbyists: Characteristics, Motivations, Experiences, and Career Trajectories
* EHR,DRL
* 01/01/2012,12/31/2015
* Thomas Andre, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Ellen McCallie
* 12/31/2015
* USD 286,912.00

This project will be conducted by a team of investigators from North Carolina
State University. The principal investigator proposes to examine the
characteristics, motivations, in and out-of-school experiences, informal science
activities, and career trajectories of 1000 science hobbyists and "master
hobbyists." Master hobbyists are individuals who have developed science
expertise and spend considerable free time engaging in science as a leisure
activity. Master science hobbyists are found across most areas of science (e.g.
birdwatchers, amateur astronomers). This research will determine who these
individuals are, their career pathways, how they engage in science activities
and what motivates, sustains, and defines their science interests. One of the
particular goals of this research is to develop new understandings of how
science hobby interests develop for women and underserved minorities.

In the proposed research investigators will use the results of interviews and
surveys to identify contextual factors that influence the motivational processes
that, in turn, influenced choices of careers and contribute to ongoing choices
in hobby and citizen science activities. Of interest in this study is how
citizen scientists who are also serious hobbyists differ from master science
hobbyists. Research on citizen scientists has shown that this group is highly
motivated by collective motives (such as a desire to help others and further
science), whereas this may not be the case with the master science hobbyist. Two
groups will be sampled: a) birdwatchers and b) amateur astronomers. This
sampling model will allow investigators to contrast their findings by: 1) those
who have selected a science career versus those that did not select a science
career, 2) those who participate in citizen science activities and those that do
not, and 3) those who are birdwatchers (greater mathematical components) and
those who are amateur astronomers (lesser mathematical components). Additional
coding and analyses will examine any differences in the evolution of bird
watching and astronomy hobbies. The results of this research will be examined in
light of existing motivational and sociocultural models of career selection.

This research will document differences in the perceived motivational elements
that influenced master science hobbyists/citizen scientists to choose a science
career or not. The results can inform federal, state, and local policies for
supporting youth and adults engaged in free choice learning. Results of this
research will inform the design of intervention/recruitment programs and ISE
outreach initiatives. Potential audiences include ISE institutions (e.g. museums
and science centers), organizations with links to STEM (e.g. scouts, boys/girls
clubs) and pre- and college initiatives that seek to influence career choices
and life-long science interests. The proposed cross-disciplinary approach will
promote new understandings of complex issues related to motivation, retention,
career selection, leisure activities, engagement with formal and informal
educational environments, gender and ethnicity, communities of practice and
changes in interests over time. Members of the advisory board have expertise in
assessment and measurement and will work closely with the project team to
conduct a detailed examination of methodologies and analyses at all phases of
the project.