* 1114923
* Probabilistic Methods in Computational Topology
* MPS,DMS
* 10/01/2011,09/30/2015
* Thomas Wanner, George Mason University
* Standard Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 09/30/2015
* USD 180,000.00

Computational topological methods are increasingly and successfully being used
to analyze and understand complex data, provided both from experimental sources
and numerical simulations. Many of these topological methods use homology theory
and the related Betti numbers to concentrate on essential topological
information. Usually the objects of interest are discretized before their
homology can be computed. This process of discretization can introduce artifacts
which cause the resulting topological information to be incorrect. Uncertainty
can also occur in experimental settings due to noise. In this project, the
investigator and his colleagues develop two mechanisms for a quantitative
assessment of the correctness of topological information. The first approach is
based on the realization that most applied problems involve randomness, and it
studies the accuracy of homology computations for random fields by providing
explicit probability estimates which give a-priori information on suitable
problem discretizations. The second mechanism develops a method for rigorous
computational a-posteriori correctness based on randomized subdivisions. In
addition, the investigators address two specific applications which are
interesting in their own right. First, they develop a new method for finding
isolating blocks in dynamical systems, which has a wide range of possible
applications and provides a novel tool for studying dynamical properties of
evolution equations. The second application focuses on pattern classification in
materials science and leads to a classification of possible phase separation
phenomena in multi-component alloys.

Recent advances in computational sciences have led to an immense increase in the
amount of generated data, and the development of novel techniques to quickly and
reliably extract essential information from this data has become a central
issue. The project research develops probabilistic approaches for topological
data analysis, including quantitative reliability assessments. The project has
applications in the field of materials science, such as in the study of the
properties of industrial level metal alloys and the design of new materials.
Topological methods have already been shown to provide important insight into
such materials studies, and the techniques developed in this project are applied
in the context of materials characterization and design. This leads to a
classification of phase separation phenomena in multi-component alloys and has
the potential to lead to system-response-maps, which can then be used in the
design of materials, such as for example the design of controlled drug-release
coatings for arterial stents. The project also leads to a broader study of
random fields using homology theory, which in the long term has applications in
medical imaging. The project involves student research at both the undergraduate
and graduate levels.