* 1114218
* International Doctoral Dissertation Research: Behavioral ecology of complex maternal care in a Neotropical frog
* O/D,OISE
* 08/01/2011,07/31/2012
* Richard Tokarz, University of Miami
* Standard Grant
* Harold Stolberg
* 07/31/2012
* USD 14,316.00

Parental behavior in amphibians is exceptionally diverse, but it is relatively
understudied and poorly understood. Using Oophaga pumilio, a Neotropical
dendrobatid frog that feeds its offspring with unfertilized eggs, this doctoral
dissertation research project will test the following hypotheses about the
mechanisms behind parental behavior in an amphibian: 1. mothers discriminate
between offspring and unrelated young during parental care; 2. the sensory mode
of mother-offspring communication is suited to the habitat of the species; 3.
mothers use honest begging signals from offspring to allocate their provisioning
resources; and 4. mothers provision offspring with an effective defense against
predators. This research is conducted at La Selva Biological Station in Costa
Rica in collaboration with Dr. Ralph Saporito from John Carroll University and
Dr. Mahmood Sasa from the University of Costa Rica. The project has an extensive
field setup of 1000 artificial tadpole-rearing sites, using twelve motion-
activated IR video cameras placed above cups containing tadpoles to provide
unique and efficient observation of mother-offspring interactions in the
field.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study will broaden the comparative
understanding of amphibian parental care by elucidating the behavioral
mechanisms behind a complex amphibian parental care system. Features of this
system allow for fresh ways to explore hypotheses that are of interest to a
wide-ranging audience about offspring discrimination, multi-modal sensory
integration, honest signaling, and chemical antipredator defenses. The
experiments and observations should help answer many important questions
relating to parent-offspring behavior more generally. This project also involves
outreach, mentoring and environmental education activities with U.S. students
participating in undergraduate research programs at La Selva as well as with
Costa Rican students and public visitors. Involving U.S. students in first-rate
research experiences with international collaborators in a foreign setting helps
train a globally engaged work force and is an important goal of NSF's Office of
International Science and Engineering.