* 1114235
* The Role of Fluids in Earthquake Initiation and Suppression: Models of Fluid-Grain Interaction in Fault Zones
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2011,06/30/2015
* David Sparks, Texas A&M Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Robin Reichlin
* 06/30/2015
* USD 215,234.00

Earthquakes represent a significant natural hazard in many inhabited areas of
the world. Yet, despite much study, the conditions that control the stability
and nature of the slip on faults are still poorly understood. An important
control on fault-stability arises from the fact that faults zones are often
filled with granulated rock and the interstices of these grains are filled with
groundwater. Variations in the pressure of this fluid have been observed to
trigger movement on faults. The proposed project will result in a better
understanding of the basic physics behind slip on faults, in particular the
coupling between solid stresses and fluid pressures in the fault zone. The
insight gained from this work will contribute to the efforts to assess the
seismic hazard associated with individual faults, and the risk of triggering
earthquakes by natural or man-made changes in local groundwater levels. This
work should also add to the understanding of saturated granular flows, such as
landslides and offshore turbidity flows (both of which constitute significant
natural hazards to lives and structures).&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The saturated
gouge-fault block system includes several coupled mechanisms that may control
fault stability and determine the conditions under which faults creep, slip
slowly (slow earthquakes), or accelerate into earthquakes. Increases in fluid
pressure reduce the effective stress across a fault, which weakens the fault and
promotes sliding, while the dilation that accompanies the onset of slip will
lead to pressure reductions that can strengthen the fault. Fluid flow into and
out of the fault will mute pressure fluctuations, but is highly dependent on
permeability in both the granular fault gouge and in the confining wall rock,
which in turn can vary greatly with gouge dilation and stress-induced damage. We
will study this system using a grain-scale numerical model. This model couples
together the discrete element method (DEM) for granular dynamics with a
continuum finite-difference solution for fluid flow through permeable media.
This grain-scale approach allows for heterogeneity and localization within the
fault gouge, and accounts for effects of the pressure on the dilation of the
fault. We will simulate sections of a gouge-filled fault zone confined by
breakable wall rock (simulated with bonded cohesive granular material). The
modeled fault will be subjected to various types of loading, including slow
increases in tectonic shear stress and the transient passage of seismic waves
and fluid pressure waves. The goal will be to map out the conditions for fault
stability, and quantify the relationships between fault stresngth and the
evolving permeability and fluid pressure in both the fault gouge and damaged
wall rock.