* 1114839
* Conference: 2011 Laser Diagnostics in Combustion Gordon Research Conference, Waterville Valley, NH, August 14-19, 2011
* ENG,CBET
* 05/15/2011,10/31/2011
* Volker Sick, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* Arvind Atreya
* 10/31/2011
* USD 15,000.00

Proposal Title: 2011 Laser Diagnostics Gordon Research
Conference&lt;br/&gt;Principal Investigator: Sick, Volker
&lt;br/&gt;Institution: Gordon Research Conferences&lt;br/&gt;Proposal No: CBET-
1114839 &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The main objective of this award is to support
U.S. students and researchers to participate in the 16th Gordon Research
Conference on Laser Diagnostics in Combustion to be held on August 14 -19, 2011
at Waterville Valley Resort, Waterville Valley, NH.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit&lt;br/&gt;This biennial conference,
first held in 1981, has served as the off-the-record forum for scientists from
all over the world interested in using laser light to understand combustion
problems. Each meeting has been essentially a workshop, and the
interdisciplinary discussions of major research issues are a highlight of the
meeting. The Gordon Research Conference format brings together approximately 135
scientists for a week of intense interaction and scientific
discussion.&lt;br/&gt;As is tradition, the conference proceedings will not be
published to encourage participants to present unpublished, new data; this is a
major strength of the Gordon conferences. Much emphasis will be placed on the
requirement for speakers and poster presenters to discuss their latest "cutting-
edge" research. This is not a conference for reviewing previous research, but
rather to concentrate on novel, exciting, and often controversial advances of
today and tomorrow. This is encouraged by the "off-the-record" rule of all
Gordon Research Conferences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact&lt;br/&gt;The
2011 Gordon Conference on Laser Diagnostics for Combustion Program features
twenty-one presentations that provide updates on the latest advances in laser-
based diagnostics and sensor activities important in combustion efficiency and
emissions for combustion systems relevant to the NSF mission. Many different
laser-based techniques have been and continue to be at the focus of our
investigations to meet these demands, including Raman and Rayleigh scattering,
non-linear Raman spectroscopy, laser-induced fluorescence, multi-photon and
pump-probe approaches, four-wave mixing and holographic grating techniques, and
advanced laser absorption schemes. New techniques will be discussed such as
high-speed laser imaging, coherent x-rays, surface-enhanced Raman scattering,
and other surface diagnostics such as XPS. The design and application of laser-
based diagnostics and the interpretation of the obtained data requires a
thorough fundamental knowledge of laser physics, of spectroscopy, and of
combustion chemistry. The transfer from a concept, an idea of a laser diagnostic
approach to the application for experiments is often more difficult than
initially envisioned. Concepts of how to develop the best experiment and
examples of how laser diagnostics is used in a wide range of environments will
be shown - from laboratory reactors to aircraft gas turbines. This is the only
scientific forum with an interdisciplinary focus on laser-based diagnostics of
combustion; therefore, it is crucial for us to aim to support as many young and
emerging US scientists and other participants, providing sufficient funds are
received from all sources, to attend this meeting.