* 1114152
* Program on Quantization
* MPS,DMS
* 04/15/2011,03/31/2012
* Brian Hall, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* Tie Luo
* 03/31/2012
* USD 20,000.00

This project is to support graduate students to participate in a summer school
and a conference on quantization, which will be held at the University of Notre
Dame during May and June in 2011. Topics of the summer school and the conference
are centered around quantizations, covering several different fields of
mathematics, including mathematical physics, geometric quantization, deformation
quantization, and quantum analogues of classical objects. These topics are
closely related to recent developments in functional analysis, representation
theory of Lie groups, and spectral geometry. The summer school is geared toward
undergraduate students and graduate students followed by a conference. The
summer school consists of two weeks of program with the first week aimed at
undergraduate students and the second week geared to graduate students. The
summer school and the conference will promote research activities in areas of
mathematics related to quantization. The organizers have selected lecturers with
a broad array of interests and backgrounds, including some physicists. The
summer school and conference will give graduate students access to a wide array
of current research activity in quantization, and give the students an
opportunity to interact with prominent researchers. A public lecture by a
physicist engaged in the Large Hadron Collider project in Europe will help
enhance public awareness of science, and also give mathematicians the
opportunity to interact with an experimental high energy physicist. The
undergraduate summer school will expose top undergraduates to important ideas in
mathematical physics, and encourage them to learn more about physics. The volume
of proceedings of the conference will serve as a resource for students and
researchers interested in learning about quantization.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Quantization is an important topic in mathematics and
physics. From the physics point of view, methods of quantization are procedures
for building models for quantum mechanical systems from analogous and more
intuitive classical mechanical systems, which provide strikingly precise
experimental predictions. Much of the development of theoretical physics in the
20th century may be regarded as the process of refining quantization to give
improved experimental predictions, and the search for a unified field theory is
an attempt to quantize general relativity in a manner compatible with existing
quantum theory. On the mathematics side, problems related to quantization and
quantum mechanics provided a strong motivation for the development of functional
analysis, the representation theory of Lie groups, and spectral geometry. More
recent developments with much current activity include geometric quantization,
deformation quantization, and quantum analogues of various classical objects.
The Program on Quantization will inaugurate a new Center for Mathematics at
Notre Dame. It will combine two week-long summer schools, one aimed at advanced
undergraduates and one aimed at graduate students with a conference devoted to
the most recent advances in the area. The invited speakers at the conference are
among the world's leading experts in the mathematics of quantization.