* 1114457
* Ecohydrology in Permafrost Systems: The Impact of Watershed Heterogeneity on Stream Flow Dynamics and Hydrologic Pathways
* GEO,EAR
* 09/15/2011,08/31/2016
* Larry Hinzman, University of Alaska Fairbanks Campus
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Torgersen
* 08/31/2016
* USD 544,489.00

The overall objective of this study is to quantify the relative roles of
vegetation water use and soil water storage dynamics associated with permafrost
presence/absence in determining the water flow pathways, mechanisms, timing and
magnitudes in the sub-Arctic boreal forest ecosystem. This ecosystem is located
in the zone of discontinuous permafrost and has two primary ecosystem types:
permafrost free, deciduous dominated and permafrost affected, coniferous
dominated. This study will integrate climatic, ecologic, thermal, and hydrologic
processes through an intense field study program using hydrologic modeling. The
field site comprises three catchments that represent a gradient of varying
permafrost extent and ecosystem-type composition at the Caribou Poker Creeks
Research Watershed (CPCRW) Long Term Ecological Research (LTER) site. In
addition to stream flow observations, measurements of plant water use, soil
moisture, seasonal soil thaw, and meteorologic variables will be collected along
a north-facing (permafrost affected) coniferous dominated ecosystem to a south-
facing (permafrost free) deciduous dominated ecosystem. Data from the field
study will be used to develop and parameterize a vegetation water use model,
which in turn will be integrated into a hybrid hydrologic model. Development of
this semi-distributed, process-based hybrid hydrologic model will simulate the
major hydrologic processes of the boreal forest ecosystem, emphasizing the water
storage and release mechanisms. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The boreal forest is a
critical source of Alaska?s freshwater. This study will contribute to improved
understanding and prediction of freshwater availability that will be affected by
changes in permafrost and ecosystem distributions in the boreal forest. This
study will also advance the field of ecohydrology, which is relatively under-
explored in northern systems. The sub-Arctic environment will be the first in
the Arctic to experience most of the current or expected climate-associated
changes. Such changes have the potential to shift the magnitude and timing of
freshwater delivery to the Arctic Ocean which is anticipated to lead to changes
in sea-ice formation, thermohaline circulation, and ultimately the climate
system from local to global scales. Outreach is an important aspect of this
study. Teachers from local K-12 schools will participate in training workshops
focused on the boreal forest ecosystem that will be conducted in conjunction
with the Global Learning and Observations to Benefit the Environment program
(GLOBE) program at the University of Alaska Fairbanks. Prior experience shows
that the approach that will be used in this project is an effective means to
integrate the natural science of the region into local classrooms.