* 1114268
* Collaborative Research: Deformation Processes in the Andaman Islands
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2011,06/30/2015
* Anthony Lowry, Utah State University
* Continuing Grant
* Eva Zanzerkia
* 06/30/2015
* USD 111,271.00

By capturing the postseismic deformation following the 2004 Sumatra-Andaman
great earthquake, this project continues a six-year effort to understand the
evolution of transient strain and stress. Several dozen studies have examined
geodetic measurements of the transient deformation that followed the event, but
the dominant mechanisms and processes involved in near-field deformation remain
murky. Most of these studies conclude that a small amount of accelerated downdip
slip occurred in the first few weeks or months following the earthquake, but
that subsequent postseismic deformation and uplift are dominated by deeper
viscoelastic flow. The most recent two years of near-field data from the Andaman
region however exhibit uplift and right-lateral shear that is not replicated in
existing models of viscoelastic flow. Expansion of the network would optimize
the greater network to isolate nonlinear viscoelastic flow response by (1)
extending the network coverage across the along-strike region of largest
postseismic signal present in the time-variable geoid response, and (2) pairing
up closely-spaced sites, enabling us to fingerprint fault slip signals
superimposed on the desired flow signals.&lt;br/&gt;U Memphis collaborators will
perform the maintenance and measurements at both continuous and campaign sites,
in partnership with Center for Earth Sciences, Indian Institute of Science,
Bangalore. All data will be archived at, and openly available from, the UNAVCO
Facility which is also loaning several receivers for this project.
&lt;br/&gt;Utah State University will combine these measurements with other
local and regional GPS network data, and with GRACE time-variable gravity data,
to model the full evolution of transient stress and strain in the region. We
will refine existing estimates of the coseismic slip and examine (separately and
together) models of fault slip, viscoelastic flow and poroelastic flow to
determine which deformation processes are the most likely mechanisms for
observed transients.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The earthquake cycle is driven by a
slow build-up of shallow stress within the earthquake zone. These shallow stress
changes result from quiet slip on faults and flow of rocks at greater depths
where temperatures are higher. Our understanding of the deeper fault slip and
flow processes is limited by the difficulty of measuring small changes at great
depths, but importantly these processes are briefly accelerated to measurable
rates immediately following large earthquakes. The 2004 Sumatra-Andaman
earthquake was the third-largest ever recorded, and GPS measurements indicate
that it moved the ground surface in the Andaman and Nicobar Islands by up to
sixteen feet toward India, and as much as three feet upward or downward. Since
then, the islands have continued moving rapidly, totaling an additional foot
toward India and a foot upward. Conventional scientific wisdom holds that the
motion may be largely fault-slip driven in the first few weeks to months after
an earthquake, but should be dominated by deeper flow in the years that follow.
However, the most recent two years of measurements show anomalous motion that is
not consistent with existing rock flow models, but would be consistent with
predictions for fault slip. This project will combine GPS and gravity data with
new modeling tools to try to understand this surprising observation, with
special attention to how stress changes resulting from deep fault slip may
influence the stress that drives deep rock flow, and vice-versa. The project?s
scientific objectives have potentially far-reaching implications for our
fundamental understanding of earthquake physics, seismic hazard, and the
evolution of stress throughout the earthquake cycle.