* 1114655
* Investigating An Intelligent Cyberlearning System For Interactive Museum-based Sustainability Modeling
* EDU,DRL
* 09/15/2011,08/31/2013
* Bradford Mott, North Carolina State University
* Continuing Grant
* William Neufeld
* 08/31/2013
* USD 713,386.00

This project will develop a prototype intelligent cyberlearning platform for
middle school audiences at a museum location to test and evaluate the use of
virtual learning technologies. The content for this test is focused on
sustainability issues that enable students to develop an age-appropriate
understanding of the relationships between specific conservation decisions,
energy use, human health, and population growth within Earth's ecosystem. The
prototype cyberlearning system will demonstrate how users can learn about
science topics by interacting with a display of environmental factors that
enable them to explore the impact of social, economic, and technological forces
that may change one existing state and condition to another. The system will
enable users to understand the interrelationships of those elements by enabling
them to change conditions and then observing the effect of the changes they make
on the conditions presented in the initial model.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The prototype intelligent cyberlearning system
will provide a unique integration of a sophisticated agent-based modeling
simulation of environmental, social, and economic phenomena with three advanced
learning technologies: game-based learning systems, intelligent tutoring
systems, and narrative-centered learning systems. The game-based and narrative
aspects of the project are embodied in the interactive time-travel focus of the
3D display on a multi-touch surface computing table in which users will play the
role of environmental scientists who have been charged with helping earth become
a thriving green planet. They will go back in time and be given the opportunity
to make different decisions on any range of options. After they make their
decisions, they will travel forward in time to see the results of their
decisions. All of the interactions will be used to dynamically generate their
time-travel adventures. The intelligent tutoring system will track user's
problem-solving activities in the simulated world. As users make decisions, the
intelligent tutoring system will draw inferences about their level of
understanding of key environmental concepts. Given the current problem-solving
goal (e.g., reduce green house gases) and the current state of the environment
(e.g., climatological state, earth's population, factory emissions), the
intelligent tutoring system will draw on its knowledge of common environmental
misconceptions to assist students as they progress through the sustainability
narratives. The intelligent tutoring system will receive the updated state from
the agent-based simulation, which will then provide explanatory commentary and
advice through the virtual human to the users about the causal connections
underlying the results of the decisions they have made. Similarly, during the
course of decision-making, users will be able to request advice, and the same
computational framework will drive the virtual human's advice generation
functionalities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will design,
development, deploy, and evaluate a prototype intelligent cyberlearning platform
for sustainability that supports independent, but guided, exploration of science
topics. Because all users interactions will be accompanied by a virtual
environmental scientist who will narrate their journeys and offer problem-
solving advice, users will be afforded rich learning opportunities that support
independent inquiry but also provided guided exploration of complex science
topics. With a focus on group learning experiences in the out-of-school setting,
the virtual environmental scientist will answer questions that will engage
groups of users in a collaborative effort to understand the rich
interrelationships of sustainability. The project will demonstrate the
transformative potential of intelligent cyberlearning systems that integrate
agent-based modeling with game-based learning, intelligent tutoring systems, and
narrative-centered learning in an out-of-school setting to enable users to
experience science in fundamentally new ways.