* 1114924
* CNH: Global Sensitivity and Uncertainty Analysis in the Evaluation of Social-Ecological Resilience: Theoretical Debates Over Infrastructure Impacts on Livelihoods and Forest Change
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2016
* Stephen Perz, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Betsy Von Holle
* 08/31/2016
* USD 1,435,000.00

New road infrastructure leads to numerous changes in affected regions, including
economic integration, environmental degradation, and conflicts over natural
resources. This project will apply a systems approach that features resilience
as an integrative concept to bring together economic, ecological and social
science perspectives to better understand infrastructure impacts. To evaluate
system resilience to infrastructure, this project will use global sensitivity
and uncertainty analysis to quantify the probability that a key indicator of
system state will go past a critical threshold, i.e., a tipping point,
indicating loss of resilience via a change in system state. The study system for
this work is the frontier of the southwestern Amazon, a highly biodiverse region
in which highway paving is underway. The project will focus on two key issues
that have been debated by scholars who study infrastructure impacts: changes in
land tenure and livelihoods. The research will draw from different theoretical
perspectives on these issues to model specific changes in land ownership, use,
and livelihoods, which in turn affect two key indicators of system state: forest
cover and forest value. Dynamic simulation models will be developed to compare
model output for forest cover and forest value as they depend on different
assumptions about how highway paving affects tenure and livelihoods. Simulation
models will be integrated with sensitivity analysis to assess model uncertainty
in predicting changes in forest cover and forest value, and to assess system
resilience to highway paving.

This project will strengthen collaborative ties between University of Florida
and partner institutions in Bolivia, Brazil, and Peru, and build tri-national
capacity for social-ecological research in the Amazon. Graduate students and
postdoctoral scholars will be trained and gain experience in collaborative,
interdisciplinary and international team research. The study region has local
governments and other stakeholders with needs for greater access to scientific
findings regarding infrastructure. This project will disseminate research
results using an innovative knowledge exchange model designed to reach hundreds
of stakeholders. Such outreach and dialogue will support broader public
participation in environmental planning by regional governments. The modeling
approach developed in this project will also contribute to understanding for
other problems such as climate change and global market shifts.