* 1114984
* CNH:   The Emergence of Adaptive Governance Arrangements for Tropical Forest Ecosystems
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2016
* Jan Sendzimir, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Betsy Von Holle
* 08/31/2016
* USD 1,500,000.00

This research will generate new knowledge on long-standing questions about the
origins of adaptive forest governance. Previous research has established that
strong institutional arrangements, i.e., the rule systems that structure human
behavior, are needed for effective forest governance outcomes. But the specific
contextual factors that enable strong institutional arrangements to take form
remain a puzzle. This research directly addresses this puzzle by collecting and
analyzing new data on how humans interact with their natural environment. This
project will combine new data collection and advanced analytical methods to
rigorously test the hypothesis that the emergence of adaptive governance is
critically linked to three factors: local ecological knowledge; cultural values
and beliefs, and socioeconomic inequalities. Data will be collected from 56
community-managed tropical forest ecosystems in Bolivia and Uganda and will
focus on the measurement of possible causes and consequences of individual and
community decision making about access to and use of forest resources. These
data will be generated using a variety of data collection methods, including
direct measures of forest composition, satellite imagery, studies of forest user
behaviors, household surveys, focus group discussions, and interviews with key
informants and decision makers. Data will be analyzed using system-dynamics
models, cross-sectional time-series analysis, and qualitative comparative
analysis to determine how the interrelated factors of local ecological
knowledge, cultural values and beliefs, and socio-economic inequality within
resource user groups affect forest conservation outcomes. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;This research challenges the conventional wisdom that extrinsic
incentives, such as direct payments to forest users, will uniformly lead to
increased forest conservation, and will produce information on how forest
conservation efforts affect forest users' decisions and behavior in a variety of
socioeconomic and cultural settings. This new knowledge will build a more
nuanced view of the potential benefits of a global program to Reduce Emissions
from Deforestation and Forest Degradation in Developing Countries. The research
is of immediate practical value as organizations around the world struggle to
create policies that promote effective natural resource governance.