* 1114851
* CNH: Understanding the Consequences of Water-Use Decisions in a Dynamic Environment
* SBE,BCS
* 09/15/2011,02/29/2016
* Lilian Alessa, University of New Hampshire
* Continuing Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 02/29/2016
* USD 1,499,373.00

Little is known about the consequences of water-use decisions in Arctic
communities despite the rapid changes occurring there. This collaborative
research will examine the social and environmental factors that contribute to
the resilience and vulnerability of communities and will aim to forecast
potential water resource consequences within a cultural and biophysical context.
The investigators will test the theory of technology-induced environmental
distancing, which is the loss of awareness of change in natural resources due to
increasing reliance on modern technology. This theory will be used to address
the rates of change and feedbacks between social perceptions and values
affecting water resources and changes in surface hydrology in the Arctic. The
connection between Arctic communities (whether with and without municipal water
systems) and water in their environment is much closer than the connections to
water for most other communities in developed nations because Arctic communities
continue to rely on water for subsistence resources, such as salmon, as well as
for transportation. This project will provide an understanding of how values and
perceptions at local scales are linked to regional hydrological system dynamics
as well as how culturally mediated decisions may result in cumulative effects at
the regional watershed level. The investigators will examine these linkages
through the development of an integrated, systems-level, coupled modeling and
text mining framework. They will focus on Alaskan communities, addressing how
values drive perceptions of water quality and quantity for water users; how
rapidly changing biophysical water systems have to change before water users
attempt to adapt or mitigate hydrologic change; and how changes in water values
and water-use patterns lead to changes in the hydrologic system for current and
future systems. They will employ a combination of qualitative and quantitative
techniques, including survey fieldwork, data mining, and computer modeling to
understand these complex interrelationships and feedbacks between the natural
and human systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will test and advance the
idea of technology-induced environmental distancing and contributing to
socioecological theory. It will directly link and apply qualitative data with
quantitative modeling, closely integrate new information gathering techniques
with complex system modeling, and examine the coupling between social dynamics
and hydrologic systems. The project will identify processes through which social
dynamics translate into physical changes, and it will develop and test the
theory of technology-induced environmental distancing with respect to the human-
hydrological system, thereby facilitating new approaches, including models that
can be developed with minimal programming and that will be applicable in a wide
variety of socioecological contexts. Policy makers and other decision makers
will benefit from a greater understanding of how technology-induced
environmental distancing affects water systems. The software tools to be
developed will provide analytical interfaces that can address socioecological
interactions in the Arctic. The application of text mining approaches for
detecting socioecological changes will be a relatively novel development, with
more direct links made between socioecological modeling and qualitative data
gathering. This project is supported by the NSF Dynamics of Coupled Natural and
Human Systems (CNH) Program.