* 1114674
* Playscapes: Designed Nature Environments To Promote Informal Science Learning
* EHR,DRL
* 10/01/2011,09/30/2014
* Victoria Carr, University of Cincinnati Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Ellen McCallie
* 09/30/2014
* USD 330,124.00

The University of Cincinnati Arlitt Child and Family Research and Education will
conduct a two-year research investigation to document and understand young
children's scientific dialog, interactions, behaviors, and thinking within
expressly designed natural play environments called playscapes. Two existing
environmental science-focused playscapes will serve as the informal context for
the study. Pre-school children and their teachers at early childhood centers,
Head Start programs and informal learning institutions such as zoos, nature
centers, and museums will participate in the study. The Cincinnati Nature Center
and the Cincinnati Playscape Initiative will partner with the University of
Cincinnati for this research endeavor. The results of the study are expected to
not only address a significant gap in the literature base related to self-
directed play and young children's scientific thinking within playscapes
environments, but the study also has the potential to inform the field more
broadly about scientific learning and teaching across informal and formal
contexts at the early childhood levels.

Nine research questions will frame the study and seek to investigate: (a)
children's behaviors in intentionally designed playscapes, (b) children's
scientific thinking in intentionally designed playscapes, and the relationship
between access to the playscape environment and children's attitudes about
science and their own scientist identities. The study sample includes over 200
children (ages 3-5) will be recruited from local university, child care centers
and head start programs. Each child will participate in research activities at
one of two test sites, with sixty children participating in research activities
at both test sites. As part of the study, the children will visit the test sites
at least three different times and will be asked to explore the playscape
environments on their own, with other children, and with their teachers.
Lavalier microphones will capture the students' self-talk and dialogs with
others, as they explore the specially designed playscape environments. Other
data collection methods include: behavior mapping, direct observation, dialog
analysis, surveys, focus groups, and curriculum-based assessments. A team of
researchers, including university faculty and graduate assistants, will employ
inductive, deductive, and abductive analytical methods and reasoning to analyze
and synthesize the data. Concurrently, an external evaluator at the Evaluation
Services Center will employ a mixed-methods approach for the formative,
remedial, and summative project evaluations.

An ultimate goal of the project is to use the research findings to provide a
scientific base for the development of an early childhood approach that promotes
scientific thinking and learning within self-directed, informal contexts.