* 1114155
* Collaborative Research: Water and Carbon Dynamics in Tropical Peat Lands -- Comparison of a Forested Peat Dome with a Deforested Peat Dome in Borneo
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2015
* Lucy Hutyra, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Torgersen
* 08/31/2015
* USD 314,288.00

Tropical peat forests in Southeast Asia contain vast stores of organic carbon
and many of these areas are now rapidly emitting this carbon as they are logged
and converted to agriculture. Peat accumulates where the water table is near the
surface because saturated conditions maintain anoxia, limiting decay of the
peat. Thick peat deposits have likely accumulated over thousands of years
because of a positive feedback -- accumulating peat restricts drainage, lifting
the water table so more peat can accumulate. Beyond this basic understanding,
very little is known about the dynamics of tropical peat forests. What is the
sensitivity of tropical peatland coupled H2O/CO2 dynamics to changes in climate?
How does peat accumulation or loss depend on seasonality of rainfall? How does
peat accumulation depend on nutrient conditions, such as phosphate
concentrations? What role, if any, does methane production and consumption play
in peat formation or loss? How do lags, legacies, and recovery dynamics of past
land use impacts current ecosystem dynamics? What can be done to restore
degraded peat lands? To answer these questions, the project is establishing a
research site that encompasses two adjacent peat domes, a pristine forested dome
and a deforested dome, both on the island of Borneo, in Brunei. All indications
are that, prior to deforestation, the ecology of these neighboring domes was
indistinguishable. At this site, they will bring together accurate measurements
of carbon fluxes over nested time-scales (daily to seasonal to interannual) with
analysis of the biogeochemical mechanisms that control peat oxidation and decay.
It is hypothesized that most of the fluctuation in net carbon flux from these
domes can be predicted from hydrological dynamics, and that the period of
maximum carbon uptake (or minimum carbon loss in the deforested site) occurs in
the first-stage of dry season when primary productivity increases from higher
inputs of photosynthetically active radiation (PAR) and heterotrophic
respiration rates remain low because of high water tables. They will also
combine near-continuous eddy-flux measurements of CH4 with chamber and dissolved
CH4 measurements to create a unique and comprehensive assessment of methane
emissions and dynamics.

Most tropical peat is found in Southeast Asia and land-use changes are altering
hydrologic systems there, breaking the feedback that has caused peat to
accumulate. In recent years, peatland degradation and oxidation has been
estimated to account for emissions of 0.30 Pg C yr-1 (averaged over 1997-2006),
about a quarter of the global CO2 emissions from deforestation and forest
degradation. This research, combining data collection and model development,
will provide the tools necessary for understanding historical shifts in tropical
peat stores, advancing our understanding of the role that tropical peat forests
have played in the carbon cycle over geologic history. These tools will also be
valuable for managing existing tropical peat lands. The comparison between an
undisturbed site and a deforested site will enable us to construct models
appropriate to consider the effects of deforestation and development of tropical
peat lands, as well as restoration of degraded peatlands. Data collection is
enabled in part by on-site support from the Brunei Forestry Department and
environmental sensor development activities at the Center for Environmental
Sensing and Modeling (CENSAM) based in Singapore and funded by the Science
Foundation of Singapore. The project agreement between SMART (an MIT/Singapore
collaboration) and the Brunei Forestry Department includes training workshops
related to carbon flux measurement and carbon inventories so the methods and
knowledge generated through this project can reach local academics, the
government, and the broader Bruneian community. A PhD student is to be supported
through the MIT-SMART program.