* 1114481
* Full-Scale Development: Science STARS-Nurturing Urban Girls' Identities Through  Inquiry-Based Science
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2016
* Angela Calabrese Barton, University of Rochester
* Standard Grant
* Robert Russell
* 08/31/2016
* USD 1,249,984.00

Science STARS (Stars Tackling Authentic &amp; Relevant Science) is an after-
school program that will engage approximately 400 urban middle school girls in
authentic inquiry-based scientific investigations and the creation of a science
documentary that extends their research and situates their findings. The project
has been piloted in Rochester, NY and will be expanded to sites in Lansing, MI
and Seattle, WA. New elements have been added to enhance the project experience
including the documentary video component, partnerships with local community
outreach organizations, mentoring by local female scientists, leveraging
embedded assessments to enhance the measurement of learning, and a conference
and presentations to local stakeholders to showcase the work of the
participants. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Participants will meet during the school
year plus three intensive weeks during the summer for a total of about 65 hours
per year. A unique feature of this project is the use of pre-service teachers
from local teacher preparation programs to facilitate the investigations. This
in turn develops the capacity of pre-service teachers to implement and leverage
inquiry-based learning in their practice. Project-level research will address
questions of how models such as this encourage the development of positive
science identities in girls and how situating science investigations in their
community affects their understanding of science and local issues. The project
evaluation will be conducted by Horizon Research and will focus on the quality
of project activities, the quality of the project's research plan, and the
impact on participants and pre-service teachers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Science
STARS thoughtfully bridges formal and informal learning environments. While
Science STARS largely situates its home base in schools in order to increase
access to those who may not self-identify with science, the program is designed
to capitalize on the unique affordances of informal settings and contribute to
understanding how informal science education can be used to nurture positive
science identities for urban middle school girls.