* 1114811
* Frontier and Empire on the Central Anatolian Plateau: Transitions at Cadir Hoyuk
* SBE,BCS
* 06/15/2011,05/31/2015
* Sharon Steadman, SUNY College at Cortland
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 05/31/2015
* USD 294,260.00

A National Science Foundation grant will support archaeological work at the site
of Çadýr Höyük in central Turkey (Anatolia). Dr. Sharon Steadman and an
international team will conduct three years of fieldwork including excavation
and the conservation of both artifacts and architecture. The international team,
consisting of scholars from the U.S., Mexico, Canada, Europe, and Turkey, will
investigate three important periods during the 6,000 years of nearly unbroken
occupation at the Çadýr Höyük site (ca. 5200 B.C.E. - 1170 C.E.). Previous
research has demonstrated that the settlements at Çadýr Höyük experienced three
significant transitional periods in which comfortable, stable, and well-stocked
communities located either at the heart or the frontier of contemporary empires
became far more unstable and residents coped with considerably more meager
circumstances. The first transition occurred in the later prehistory in the Late
Chalcolithic/Early Bronze I (ca. 3300-2800 BCE), the second when the Hittite
Empire collapsed around 1200 BCE, and the last during the Byzantine empire's
fading control of central Anatolia (ca. 600-1100 CE). The Çadýr team will
examine the experiences of these settlements' residents as their surrounding
worlds collapsed. Particular areas of focus include subsistence practices, craft
production, trade relations, and domestic and public buildings and spaces;
results will reveal how residents experienced and reacted to changes and
challenges in their day-to-day living circumstances. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
research at Çadýr will yield data on two major research areas of interest to
scholars beyond Anatolia, namely those interested in frontier studies, and those
investigating imperial collapse. Additionally work will contribute to
anthropological and archaeological literature on subsistence strategies in
stable or stressful circumstances; craft production management in crisis
periods; and sociopolitical reorganization in the context of collapsing external
imperial/centralized systems. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;An additional element to the
research is Çadýr's geographical position within each of these empires; as
noted, in each of the three transitional cases, Çadýr was situated either at the
heart of an empire, or in the frontier of one. The Late Chalcolithic Çadýr
settlement rested in, or just beyond, Uruk's churning system at the turn of the
4th-to-3rd millennia; Çadýr was near the nerve center of the Hittite heartland
in the second millennium; and it was a rural frontier settlement within the
Byzantine Empire two thousand years later. Micro-level investigations at the
village level will be a lens through which both the impact a collapsing empire
had on local populations, and the role that changes in these local/rural
settlements played in the dissolution of these powerful imperial systems can be
viewed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts include the elucidation of multiple
periods in a little known region of Anatolia (particularly the Chalcolithic and
Byzantine periods). The team will continue to provide original material and data
to students for B.A. and Master's theses and Ph.D. dissertations; the project
will also continue to serve as a training excavation for U.S., European, and
Turkish students who wish to gain expertise in excavation and laboratory
techniques while learning, first hand, about the livelihoods of 6000 years of
northern Anatolian residents.