* 1114081
* SBIR Phase I:  Novel Peritoneal Dialysis Catheter to Reduce Infections
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2011,06/30/2012
* Julia Rasooly, Puracath Medical Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 06/30/2012
* USD 165,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project is focused on
developing an innovative catheter design for peritoneal dialysis patients that
is not reliant on patient compliance. Currently, 50% of PD patients (on average)
experience peritonitis within the first 18 months. The risk of infection rapidly
multiplies in subsequent months. Treatment for peritonitis includes long-term
antibiotic treatment that causes multiple side effects and does not always
eradicate the infection. Every year, roughly 25-50% of PD patients are forced to
switch to HD as a result of complications from infections. Such complications
can involve catheter removal, which costs at an average of $20,000 per infection
episode, and ~$200Million annual cost to the healthcare system. Many more
patients are never administered PD in the first instance because of risk from
infection and the complexity involved with current sterilization protocol.
Anticipated results with this innovative catheter are around 50% decrease in
infection risk.

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project addresses the challenge
of infection related to dialysis. Chronic Kidney Disease incidence is growing at
over 7% for these age groups. In the US, nearly 400,000 patients receive
dialysis treatment every year. The global market for peritoneal dialysis exceeds
$2Billion. Moreover, PD has proven to show up to 27% lower mortality risk and
enhanced quality of life, at ~25% lower cost. By reducing the incidence of
peritonitis and by decreasing the time, complexity, and training involved in the
current sterilization protocol, our solution will transform the dialysis
paradigm, enabling a much broader group of patients to enjoy the substantially
improved quality of life that PD can provide. Moreover, a more clear
understanding of infections related to catheter-related bacteremia will help
find solutions to lessen hospitalizations resulted from infection in other
catheter-related cases as well (including urinary, IV catheters, and PICC
lines). Infections related to catheters are still a major global problem and
this solution can save more than $35 Billion in catheter-related bacteremia
costs.