* 1114275
* PFI:  Development of Lubricants and Battery Electrolytes From Nanoparticle Ionic Materials
* TIP,TI
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2015
* Emmanuel Giannelis, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Sara B. Nerlove
* 08/31/2015
* USD 600,000.00

This Partnerships for Innovation (PFI) project from Cornell University will
develop applications for high performance lubricants and non-flammable
electrolytes for lithium ion and other advanced batteries. These applications
will be generated utilizing a new platform technology of nanoparticle ionic
materials (NIMs) discovered at Cornell. NIMs consist of inorganic core particles
wrapped within a dense layer of organic molecules. Tethering mobile molecules to
the tiny particle cores yields a family of nanoscale materials whose properties
can be tuned to conduct electrical charge or serve as a lubricant, while not
releasing volatile organic compounds (VOCs) because NIMs are solvent-free. Thus,
used as lithium battery electrolytes, NIMs can be designed to provide
competitive electrical conductivity and electrochemical stability for high
performance, while eliminating the risks of conventional battery electrolytes
employing flammable solvents. Likewise, in applications as lubricants, ultra-
slippery gel-like NIMs greases and oils can be designed to enhance energy
efficiency and longevity of high-performance machine components that present
small tolerances and commensurate high contact pressures, yet demand stable
lubricant mechanical properties over extended periods of
time.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of this project are enhancement
of education and entrepreneurship, and an improvement in U.S. economic
competitiveness. Since this project will facilitate commercial deployment of new
hybrid materials in two high-growth technology sectors: electrical energy
storage and high performance machinery (e.g. wind-turbines, heavy-duty trucks,
and high-speed rail), significant economic multiplication of the initial funding
investment is expected. For education and entrepreneurship, the project will
educate engineering researchers in the structure-property-performance
relationships of NIMs in partnership with both industrial partners interested in
the scaling up of NIMs production and performance and with Johnson School of
Business graduate students, who will assist project participants in adapting
NIMs for these new applications and in transitioning these technologies to the
marketplace. More broadly, interactions of the project participants with K-12,
Research Experience for Undergraduates, Research Experience for Teachers, and
Women in Engineering programs organized by the Cornell Center for Materials
Research and the College of Engineering will significantly expand the
educational experiences provided by the project. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Partners
at the inception of this project are all part of the Knowledge-Enhancement
Partnership (KEP) unit, consisting of Cornell University (Department of
Materials Science and Engineering, the KAUST-Cornell Center for Energy and
Sustainability, Cornell Center for Materials Research, and the Entrepreneurship
and Innovation Institute at the Samuel Curtis Johnson Graduate School of
Management); two small businesses: NOHMS Technologies, Inc. and Primet Precision
Materials, Inc. (both of Ithaca, NY); and a standalone small business subsidiary
of Quaker Chemical: Summit Lubricants, Inc. (Batavia, NY).