* 1114953
* CNH-Ex:   Water Quality and Environmental Health in Botswana: Coupled Dynamics in a Water-Scarce Environment
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2013
* John Bock, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Alan Tessier
* 08/31/2013
* USD 249,983.00

Water-restricted environments that experience strong seasonal variation are
extremely vulnerable to landscape alteration and pollution from human
activities. Increasingly, degradation of limited water resources is identified
as an important and urgent problem facing much of the world, in particular
Africa. This research project will evaluate coupled human and ecological drivers
influencing water quality, and the health of human and animal populations in the
Chobe River Region of Botswana. The investigators will use Escherichia coli as a
model microorganism to track transmission linkages between the Chobe River and
different trophic guilds of wildlife, domestic animals, and humans in the
system. Using predictive models calibrated with field samples the researchers
will investigate long-term effects of climatic changes; seasonal variation in
hydrology; increases in human population; and landscape modification impacts on
water quality and human and animal health. This project will identify markers of
high-risk environments where coupled human-natural systems influence water
quality, forming the foundation of an early-warning system that can be used by
communities and governments to improve preparedness and interventions. This
project integrates educational and government outreach into a research approach,
which aims to develop a more predictive and fundamental understanding of the
present and future impact of coupled dynamics of societal change and development
on water quality and health and the potential long-term influence of climate
change on these interactions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research project
establishes multidisciplinary scientific networks and international
partnerships. The project will support a graduate student-training program
between the USA and Botswana, which is integrated with a multifaceted outreach
program directed at Botswana youth living in the study area. This approach will
strengthen cross-cultural understanding and minority-leadership capacity in
scientific discovery. This study promises direct benefits to society through the
translation of research findings into developmental policy that will promote the
sustainability ecosystems on which human populations depend. Results from this
project will advance our understanding of coupled human-natural systems and the
influence this has on water quality and health for humans, livestock, and
wildlife.