* 1114663
* 3D Visualization Tools For Enhancing Awareness, Understanding, And Stewardship Of Freshwater Ecosystems
* EDU,DRL
* 08/15/2011,07/31/2016
* Louise Kellogg, University of California-Davis
* Continuing Grant
* Chia Shen
* 07/31/2016
* USD 2,403,503.00

The University of California, Davis Tahoe Environmental Research Center (TERC),
UC Davis W.M. Keck Center for Active Visualization in the Earth Sciences
(KeckCAVES), ECHO Lake Aquarium and Science Center (ECHO), UC Berkeley Lawrence
Hall of Science (LHS), and the Institute for Learning Innovation (ILI) will
study how 3-D visualizations can most effectively be used to improve general
public understanding of freshwater lake ecosystems and Earth science processes
through the use of immersive three-dimensional (3-D) visualizations of lake and
watershed processes, supplemented by tabletop science activity stations. Two
iconic lakes will be the focus of this study: Lake Tahoe in California and
Nevada, and Lake Champlain in Vermont and New York, with products readily
transferable to other freshwater systems and education venues.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI will aggregate and share knowledge about how to
effectively utilize 3-D technologies and scientific data to support learning
from immersive 3-D visualizations, and how other hands-on materials can be
combined to most effectively support visitor learning about physical, biological
and geochemical processes and systems. The project will be structured to
iteratively test, design, and implement 3-D visualizations in both concurrent
and staggered development. The public will be engaged in the science behind
water quality and ecosystem health; lake formation; lake foodwebs; weather and
climate; and the role and impact of people on the ecosystem. A suite of publicly
available learning resources will be designed and developed on freshwater
ecosystems, including immersive 3-D visualizations; portable science stations
with multimedia; a facilitator's guide for docent training; and a Developer's
Manual to allow future informal science education venues.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Project partners are organized into five teams: 1) Content
Preparation and Review: prepare and author content including writing of
storyboards, narratives, and activities; 2) 3-D Scientific Visualizations:
create visualization products using spatial data; 3) Science Station: plan,
design, and produce hands-on materials; 4) Website and Multimedia: produce a
dissemination strategy for professional and public audiences; 4) Evaluation:
conduct front-end, formative, and summative evaluation of both the 3-D
visualizations and science activity stations. The summative evaluation will
utilize a mixed methods approach, using both qualitative and quantitative
methods, and will include focus groups, semi-structured interviews, web surveys,
and in-depth interviews. Leveraging 3-D tools, high-quality visual displays,
hands-on activities, and multimedia resources, university-based scientists will
work collaboratively with informal science education professionals to extend the
project's reach and impact to an audience of 400,000 visitors, including
families, youth, school field trip groups, and tourists.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will implement, evaluate, and disseminate
knowledge of how 3-D visualizations and technologies can be designed and
configured to effectively support visitor engagement and learning about
physical, biological and geochemical processes and systems, and will evaluate
how these technologies can be transferred more broadly to other informal science
venues and schools for future career and workforce development in these critical
STEM areas.