* 1114837
* TC: Small: Location-Privacy Protection for Mobile Handset Users
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2016
* Kang Shin, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* nan zhang
* 08/31/2016
* USD 499,800.00

Increasing use of smartphones and location-based services (LBSs) for their on-
and off-job functions will likely entice users to reveal their location and
movement information, which may be exploited by adversaries to infer the Points
of Interest (POIs) they visit, and hence their privacy information. To protect
mobile users' location privacy, this project will first improve the
understanding of emerging threats and attacks against their location privacy.
With this understanding, it will then develop, implement, and evaluate an
efficient and effective framework, called the Location Information ScrAmbler
(LISA), that adjusts uncertainty in a user's location, thereby removing -- or
significantly weakening -- the distinguishability of the POIs s/he may visit.
This project has intellectual merit as follows. By protecting location privacy
locally on each mobile user's device, LISA will not rely on trusted third-party
servers commonly required by existing approaches; this removes single-point-of-
failure vulnerabilities and facilitates its implementation and deployment.
Moreover, since energy-efficiency is the most critical requirement for energy-
deficient mobile devices, this project will develop ways of making a trade-off
between location privacy and energy consumption to adaptively achieve a balance
between privacy protection and energy consumption. At present, location privacy
is a very subjective concept with widely-varying definitions. To advance the
understanding of, and develop effective measures for location privacy and
protection, this project consists of (1) formal definition of location privacy
based on the notion of m-unobservability; (2) collection of real-world traces of
human and vehicle mobility pattern, and development of different mobility and
tracking models by analyzing the traces; (3) optimization of the trade-off
between the level of a mobile user's location privacy and energy consumption by
the mobile user's device; (4) adaptive configuration of the location-privacy
requirements according to the user's preference and situation so as to optimize
energy consumption; (5) augmentation of users' mobile devices with LISA to
protect their location privacy without requiring any trusted third-party server
that most existing approaches rely on; (6) comprehensive field experiments to
evaluate the efficacy and efficiency of LISA by implementing and deploying it to
20 some volunteers' smartphones. This research will also make broader impacts by
improving both the security and productivity of a rapidly-growing number of
people who use smartphones and LBSs for their daily functions. The proposed
integration of research, outreach, and education activities will have social and
educational impacts on the security research and industry communities,
protecting mobile users' privacy, increasing the awareness of mobile service and
network security, and developing skilled human resources.