* 1114739
* SciGirls TV Series, Website and Outreach - Season Two
* EHR,DRL
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2014
* Richard Hudson, Twin Cities Public Television
* Standard Grant
* Valentine Kass
* 08/31/2014
* USD 2,780,888.00

SciGirls TV Series, Website and Outreach is a transmedia project to encourage
and empower girls to pursue careers in STEM. It is the first television series
on PBS designed specifically for middle school girls, ages 8 - 12. The approach
is based on gender research and best practices for STEM education for girls.
Each episode features different real girls in active science investigations and
engineering projects, while the series is unified by two appealing animated
characters. The innovative format of the show forges a unique link to the
Website, which is an integral part of the TV show itself. This request will
support: * The production of ten new television episodes; * Enhancement of the
SciGirls website on pbs.org; * Use of new technologies to create a SciGirls
Smartphone app and interactive games; * Expansion of the SciGirls Museum
Affiliates collaborative; a new SciGirls Mentorship Program with the AAUW and
other professional organizations of scientists and engineers; and development of
a new partnership with the Girl Scouts of the USA.

The project's strategic partners are the National Girls Collaborative Project
(NGCP) in Seattle and The Franklin Institute in Philadelphia. The NGCP links
SciGirls with its network of 500 community-based science programs for girls, and
The Franklin Institute helps coordinate the Museum Affiliates, a network of
science museums that implements SciGirls outreach activities. The project will
also work with the Girl Scouts of America's new "Girl Scout Leadership
Experience" program which emphasizes STEM learning. The most significant web
component is a social networking feature that allows girls who are interested in
science to connect with peers across the nation. To date, there have been over
800,000 unique visitors and 50,000 registered "SciGirls."

SciGirls TV is produced by Twin Cities Public Television and distributed by PBS
Plus. Launched in February 2010, SciGirls Season One broadcasts reached over 86%
of U.S. households. In addition, all programs are streamed on pbskids.org and
available on iTunes free of charge. The Spanish version will be distributed on
V-me. Two separate project evaluations will be conducted. Dr. Barbara Flagg will
evaluate how SciGirls improves girls' knowledge and understanding of science and
engineering and gives them greater confidence in their abilities in STEM.
Valerie Knight-Williams will investigate the use of SciGirls outreach materials
with a national network of after-school educators.