* 1114138
* Improving the Measurement of Innovation: Supporting  International Comparisons
* SBE,NCSE
* 04/15/2011,01/31/2014
* Susan Peric, Organization For Economic Cooperation & Development
* Standard Grant
* Mark Boroush
* 01/31/2014
* USD 260,000.00

Business leaders and public policymakers worldwide continue to have high
interest in identifying the conditions, investments, infrastructure, and
policies likely to promote and hasten the pace of innovation by businesses and
other economic actors. Increasingly, surveys of innovation are being developed
and used to gauge the incidence of innovation across national economies and to
identify the driving variables and relationships. The European Union has run its
Community Innovation Survey (CIS) among member countries regularly since 1992.
CIS-based surveys have also been implemented in many of the member countries of
the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) and, more
recently, in China and some African countries. In the United States, the
National Science Foundation?s new Business R&D and Innovation Survey (BRDIS),
first fielded in 2009, includes questions on business innovation drawn from the
CIS approach.

This is an opportune time to review the CIS approach from several perspectives:
what are the CIS questions actually measuring; how well can these measures,
transferred to the U.S and other national economies, yield robust statistical
results and produce indicators that can be compared over time and with those of
other countries using the CIS model; and what might also usefully be measured
were new questions to be added.

Project Description

The proposal outlines a project to conduct an in-depth review of the questions
in the CIS and other existing innovation surveys and to develop new and improved
questions. The project would be conducted over two years, as part of an ongoing
OECD taskforce on business R&D and innovation survey re-design.

The work program would include cognitive testing of existing questions in
English and selected languages, as well as the development and testing of new
questions in areas of growing interest in the study of innovation, such as the
measurement of intangible assets for innovation. The result would be a set of
carefully tested questions and guidelines for their use. These results could be
used to extend the coverage of existing surveys, or for new surveys, to produce
internationally and inter-temporally comparable indicators of innovation.

The project would be managed by the Secretariat of the OECD Working Party of
National Experts on Science and Technology Indicators (NESTI) -- which includes
the European Union and the United States and has observers from the African
Union, Brazil, China, and the Russian Federation, the Ibero-American Network on
Science and Technology Indicators (RICYT) and the UNESCO Institute of Statistics
(UIS). Participants in this proposed activity would be invited to bring together
present work on question testing and methodology, as applied to questions in
innovation surveys, and to contribute to an agenda for new work.

Importance and Broader Significance

The intellectual merit of this work arises from the use of leading edge
cognitive testing and questionnaire development methods and the application of
such methods in the domain of innovation survey questions. Survey design
techniques will also benefit from work on a survey instrument that is used in a
wide variety of economies and cultures.

The work will give rise to a community of practice that will continue well
beyond the end of the project -- as part of the NESTI membership, supported by
the OECD. The impact of the project would be considerable. A better
understanding of innovation and its impacts will provide input to policy
development directed at fostering business innovation and entrepreneurship. The
project?s final report will include detailed assessments of existing questions
and will offer new or improved questions to advance the capture of information
on innovation.

For NSF?s BRDIS, adding rigorously tested questions and implementing a reviewed
structure will contribute a better understanding of business survey methods. And
with wide dissemination, survey results will support public debate of the role
of innovation in the U.S. economy and inform the development of better designed
policies. The report will be also available for use internationally, including
for survey programs in developing countries.