* 1114008
* SBIR Phase I:  Enhanced Reflectivity GEMM Materials for High-Efficiency and Low-Cost III-Nitride LED Technology
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2011,06/30/2012
* Robert Jorgenson, Lightwave Photonics, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 06/30/2012
* USD 179,974.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project will investigate the
feasibility of using dopants to significantly improve the reflectivity of a
novel grown epitaxial-metal-mirror (GEMM) technology to increase light-emitting
diode (LED) device performance and substantially reduce the cost of
manufacturing high-brightness III-nitride LEDs. The GEMM technology provides an
integrated mirror directly into the epitaxial layers of the LED device, which
simplifies manufacturing, reduces cost, and improves yield. Furthermore, the
GEMM allows for very precise control over the placement of the mirror in order
to take advantage of micro-half-cavity effects. The reflectivity of the first-
generation GEMM materials for blue wavelengths is approximately 70%-75% and
therefore to further improve the performance and efficiency of the GEMM for blue
LEDs and drive market adoption of GEMM-LEDs, we will investigate doping of the
GEMM materials to shift the reflectivity spectrum to shorter wavelengths. It is
anticipated that these doped-GEMM materials will exhibit reflectivities of 90%
or greater in the range of 450 to 460 nm, leading to significantly improved LED
performance, while simultaneously reducing manufacturing costs, and will
ultimately drive solid-state lighting to become truly commercially
competitive.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact/commercial potential of
this project will be the availability of highly energy-efficient solid-state
lighting for general consumer use at a cost that is competitive with compact-
fluorescent lamps. Currently, LED-based lamps are 5 to 10 times the cost of
comparable compact-fluorescent lamps. The market pull for the GEMM technology
relies on a projected 35% to 68% lower production cost per lumen for LED chips,
which will motivate LED chip manufacturers to purchase GEMM substrates for
device growth. Downstream manufactures of LED-based fixtures and manufacturers
that integrate light emitters into their products would also greatly benefit
from the lower cost and higher performance of GEMM-LEDs. The successful
demonstration of enhanced GEMM materials for LEDs during this project has the
potential to accelerate the availability of cost-competitive solid-state
lighting and drive consumers to embrace LED-based general lighting. In turn, the
acceleration of widespread adoption of solid-state LED-based lighting has the
potential to reduce the nation's dependence on foreign energy, reduce domestic
greenhouse gas emissions, and revitalize the economy of the United States
through the creation of "green" jobs and continued technological leadership.