* 1114558
* ISE Full-Scale Development: Herpetology Education in Rural Places and Spaces (HERPS)
* EHR,DRL
* 08/15/2011,01/31/2018
* Andy Ash, University of North Carolina Greensboro
* Continuing Grant
* Ellen McCallie
* 01/31/2018
* USD 2,771,232.00

The Herpetology Education in Rural Places &amp; Spaces (HERPS) project is a
four-year full-scale development project designed to engage diverse North
Carolina residents from the Central Piedmont, Eastern Piedmont, and Inner
Coastal Plain regions of the state in conservation and field experiences focused
on herpetology, the study of reptiles and amphibians. The project targets rural
underrepresented groups in STEM; predominately African-Americans, Hispanics, and
Lumbee Native Americans. The University of North Carolina-Greensboro and its
partner organizations, Elon University and University of North Carolina-
Pembroke, will partner to develop and implement all phases of the project.
Ultimately, the project aims to increase knowledge of and interest in
herpetology and related conservation issues, provide authentic research
experiences, and better understand identity-related motivations and affordances
of the casual, regular, and enthusiastic participant across project strands.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;HERPS builds on four pilot studies and will engage people
of all ages in a broad range of herpetological activities including: (a) an
annual herpetology-focused community event (HERPS Celebrations), (b) technology
resources such as a project website and customized mobile applications (HERPS
Cyberhub), (c) summer and year-long herpetological research experiences (HREs)
for high school students and teachers, and (d) in-depth longitudinal
herpetological study opportunities (e.g., box turtle study). In addition, there
is separate but integrated research stand that will focus on identity and HERPS
experiences, as settings for informal science learning. The identity research
will study: (a) identity-related motivations and (b) identity-related
affordances of casual, regular and enthusiastic participants across threads. In
addition, an extensive formative and summative evaluation will be conducted
using a mixed methods approach by an external evaluator.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Using a multiple-entry-points approach for learning and
engagement, this project could serve as a replicable model for similar efforts
in other settings. In addition, the results of the identity reseach strand could
fill a critical gap in the identity and informal science education research
bases. With an average estimated reach of nearly 15,000 people of all ages and
diverse backgrounds, the potential broader impacts of this project could be
extensive.