* 1114077
* SBIR Phase I:  In-situ Transmission Electron Microscope Microfluidic Specimen Holder with High Accuracy Environmental Monitoring and Control
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2011,06/30/2012
* Daan Hein Alsem, Hummingbird Scientific LLC
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 06/30/2012
* USD 150,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project will develop a
microfluidic in-situ Transmission Electron Microscope (TEM) specimen holder with
accurate temperature and pressure measurement and control abilities. The
inability to dynamically image materials at atomic resolutions in changing
liquid and gas environments is a significant impediment to the advance of
physical, chemical, materials, biological and medical sciences. We have recently
developed commercially viable continuous flow fluid sample holders for
observations of interactions of materials in both liquid and gas environments at
ambient pressures. These holders have already opened up new avenues of research
in material reactions through real time observation and imaging of nanoscale
material interactions. However, currently none of the results acquired with
these systems can be quantified or verified because it is not possible in the
current system to directly locally measure temperature and pressure in the
microfluidic cell at the sample. This project will solve this problem by
developing a new in-situ TEM microfluidic holder that contains microfabricated
local temperature and pressure sensors inside the fluid cell. This will be a
crucial enabling technique in opening up the possibilities of in-situ
experiments while imaging at high resolution in fluids inside the TEM.

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project is the availability of a
characterization technique that can image solid/liquid and solid/gas interfaces
with atomic resolution under quantifiable and accurately controllable
environmental conditions. This product has the potential to becoming a high-
impact in-situ TEM holder product, because it has a broad range of important
applications over several scientific and engineering fields. It will allow
biological structures to be imaged at nanometer resolution in their controlled
native environment and provide new insight on structure-function relationships
in biological systems. In materials science and chemistry it will provide new
insight into the growth and synthesis of nanostructures under controlled
atmospheric conditions, which is important for future generations of electronic
devices. Finally, it will create insights for researchers studying catalysis
under relevant and controlled environmental conditions, as well as new
understanding of the fundamental processes in corrosion.