* 1114931
* CNH-Ex: Political Fragmentation in Local Governance and Water Resource Management
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2011,02/28/2015
* Jae Hong Kim, Kansas State University
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 02/28/2015
* USD 249,019.00

Although many researchers have observed that institutional setting is critical
in resource management, little is known about how the structure of local
governance facilitates or inhibits land and water resource management and
thereby affects ecological systems. Does disaggregated local governance that
enhances local autonomy have a positive effect on resource management and
planning? Or does political fragmentation tend to induce destructive
interjurisdictional competition over resources? Under what institutional
circumstances can favorable management outcomes be achieved? This exploratory
research project will analyze land-use changes and shifts in water quantity and
quality in the Interior Plains, the largest physiographic division in the U.S.,
where a large degree of heterogeneity in political fragmentation exists.
Focusing on the Interior Plains of the United States, the investigators will
empirically examine the influence of institutional settings on the effectiveness
of water resource management, with special attention given to political
fragmentation in local governance. The project will be conducted in three
phases. In the first phase, the investigators will measure political
fragmentation in local governance at both regional and 12-digit watershed scale
levels using a variety of metrics. In the second phase, they will analyze land-
use changes using an econometric approach, with explicit consideration given to
political fragmentation. In the third phase, they will investigate how the
relationship between land use and water quality and quantity varies with the
degree of political fragmentation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is expected
to shed light on the critical connections between institutional arrangements and
natural resource systems. A better understanding of these connections will
facilitate more meaningful and constructive dialogue about the structure and
nature of communities and their collective actions. The project will produce
tangible outcomes, such as an integrated georeferenced database designed to
enable empirical analysis of the institutional structure, land use, water
resources, and their linkages. This database will be a useful resource for a
wide range of future relevant studies across scales of decision making.
Furthermore, the research findings will contribute to development of more
effective and complete planning and resource management practices in the large
study area and neighboring regions. This project is supported by the NSF
Dynamics of Coupled Natural and Human Systems (CNH) Program.