* 1114795
* Conference Grant: Direct Cellulose Conversion to Chemicals and Fuels, March 27-31, 2011, Anaheim, CA
* ENG,CBET
* 03/01/2011,08/31/2011
* Mark Mascal, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Ram Gupta
* 08/31/2011
* USD 6,000.00

Principal Investigator: Mark Mascal&lt;br/&gt;Institution: University of
California-Davis&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number: 1114795&lt;br/&gt;Title: Conference
Grant: Direct Cellulose Conversion to Chemicals and
Fuels&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Biomass
conversion research has been traditionally dominated by bioprocessing
approaches, but these often involve the use of expensive enzymes, engineered
microorganisms, and capital intensive processes. However, chemical approaches do
not rely on biotechnology and offer considerable versatility. Specifically,
thermochemical and catalytic processes can convert biomass-derived carbohydrates
to a wide variety of derivatives across a number of markets, including fuels,
polymers, pharmaceuticals, and agrochemicals. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
proposal seeks funding for the support of a symposium to be held at the 241st
American Chemical Society (ACS) National Meeting on March 27-31, 2011 in
Anaheim, California. The title of the symposium is "Direct Cellulose Conversion
to Chemicals and Fuels," and the PI is the symposium organizer. The editor of an
established sustainable chemistry journal (Dr. Guido Kemeling from the journal
ChemSusChem) has agreed to serve as the Session Chair. The assembling together
of experts in the area of chemical biomass conversion for a special symposium at
the ACS meeting will enable cross-fertilization of ideas and technologies,
foster collaboration, and generally raise awareness of this approach to bio-
energy production, potentially leading to partnerships with
industry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The symposium
will include presentations by young researchers (students and postdocs,
including representation from under-represented groups), and also reaches out
internationally, with invitations extended to speakers in China, England,
Finland, Germany, Hong Kong, and the Netherlands. Representatives from academe,
industry, and the national labs will participate. Finally, in terms of
curricular development, the PI?s own participation in the symposium will be of
assistance in assembling new course materials for an Industrial Chemistry
course, which includes a section on alternative energy.