* 1114314
* PFI:  Role of the Smart Grid in Alleviating Electrical Power System Stress Conditions Through Demand Response
* TIP,TI
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2014
* Saifur Rahman, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Sara B. Nerlove
* 08/31/2014
* USD 699,969.00

This Partnership for Innovation project is based on collaboration among Virginia
Polytechnic Institute and State University a.k.a Virginia Tech, three small
businesses, and a utility partner. The proposed partnership focuses on the
design and evaluation of smart grid sensing and control hardware and software
that enable demand response programs to offer customer choices for efficient use
of electricity at all levels. This capability is to be built through the
development of a platform consisting of optimization- control algorithms and
product conceptual designs based on electric utility requirements and customer
preferences. The hardware designs include a smart power management system and
wireless sensor-control devices for 240-Volt end-use appliances, which are
necessary to implement efficient and flexible electricity demand control
programs. The intellectual merit of this research is the design of advanced
control and sensing technologies and algorithms that can serve as the interface
between a utility and its customers to enable the implementation of cost-
effective demand response programs while providing customer
choice.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of this research are (1) a
potentially stronger local economy as a result of the innovative design of new
alpha-prototype products that could lead to electric energy saving products in
the future; (2) a local job creation opportunity through the development of a
new line of business for the partner companies and others; and, most important,
(3) a viable improvement in the economy at a national level as a result of more
efficient operation of the power grid by coordinating supply and demand in an
optimal manner. The proposed platform will allow the electric utility to operate
its assets more efficiently, and, at the same time, will allow its customers to
manage their power consumption without compromising their lifestyle or way of
life. In addition, this project has received strong support from two public
sector organizations in Virginia: the Arlington County government and the Center
for Advanced Research and Engineering (CAER). The County of Arlington is in the
process of developing a Community Energy Plan, which is expected to recommend
extensive use of energy efficient devices and smart grid technologies to
optimize the use of electricity in homes and businesses, thus reducing the
county's carbon footprint. The outcome of this research complements this local
need.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Partners at the inception of the project are all part
of the Knowledge Enhancement Partnership (KEP) unit, consisting of Virginia Tech
(Virginia Tech Advanced Research Institute (VT-ARI)); three small businesses:
Advanced Manufacturing Technology, Inc. (AMTI) (Lynchburg, VA); EIT, LLC
(Sterling, VA); and Innovative Wireless Technologies (IWT) (Forest, VA); and a
private sector organization: Dominion Virginia Power (Richmond, VA).