* 1114556
* Collaborative Research: Research Culturally Based Citizen Science: Rebuilding Relationships to Place
* EDU,DRL
* 09/15/2011,08/31/2015
* Menominee Administration, Menominee Indian Tribe of Wisconsin
* Continuing Grant
* Catherine L. Eberbach
* 08/31/2015
* USD 216,544.00

The purpose of this three-year collaborative design research project is to
examine the role of culture in the development of knowledge and reasoning about
the natural world and the subsequent sense-making of and participation in
natural resource management. The PIs propose to examine the ways in which
culture impacts observational habits, explanation constructing, uses and forms
of evidence, and orientations towards socio-scientific challenges such as
natural resource management. Collaborating on this project are researchers from
the American Indian Center of Chicago, Northwestern University, and the
Menominee Indian Tribe of Wisconsin. The audience for this study includes the
academic informal science education community and indigenous science educators.
This project also offers extensive cross-cultural, cross-disciplinary research
opportunities for pre- and post-doctoral research trainees.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will employ a mixed methods approach and
proposes evaluation through an advisory board and community input. A community
assessment team is proposed to review activities, obtain feedback from the
larger community, and identify challenges to the effective implementation of the
program. The project is comprised of two main panels of studies: the first
consisting of a series of investigations of learning in everyday activities and
the second consisting of two community design experiments that engage two Native
American communities and two non-Native communities, one rural and one urban for
both communities, in a culturally based citizen science (CBCS) project focused
on ecosystem disruption (e.g. invasive species; climate change) and natural
resource management. The CBCS project will engage participants in question
formation, data collection, data analysis, forming policy recommendations, and
citizen action around the findings. This project will develop a citizen science
model that effectively engages diverse communities towards productive science
learning, helpful scientific data collection, and citizen engagement in
community planning and local policy decisions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
researchers believe that fundamental advances in STEM teaching and learning are
needed across the broad landscape of learning environments and that the success
of such advances may pivot on innovations and discoveries made in informal
environments. Insights obtained from prior research on learning in indigenous
cultures, especially in biological and environmental sciences, combined with the
anticipated results from this study could lead to a deeper understanding of
cross-cultural similarities and differences in science learning.