* 1114947
* CNH-Ex: The Collapse of the Ancient Maya: Interdisciplinary Research on Society and the Environment
* GEO,GEO
* 09/15/2011,09/30/2016
* Nicholas Brokaw, University of Puerto Rico-Rio Piedras
* Standard Grant
* Sarah Ruth
* 09/30/2016
* USD 249,768.00

Our research addresses the collapse of a civilization and the consequences of
deforestation in the tropics. The ancient Maya reached a high population
density, deforested much of their environment, and caused significant soil
erosion in southern Mexico and northern Central America by about 800 AD. In the
next century their civilization declined over large areas, with populations
reduced by 90% in some regions. Our goals are to: 1) understand the interactions
between the ancient Maya and their environment that contributed to the collapse
of their civilization in northwest Belize, Central America, and 2) to assess the
impact of ancient Maya land use, ending 1200 years ago, on the present
environment. To do this we will study archaeology, geology, and ecology at the
same research sites and overlay the results to reveal connections among ancient
land use, ancient impacts on soil and topography, and the present soil
characteristics and tree species composition of a tropical forest. We will work
in an area where there was a variety of intensive ancient Maya land uses, but
where there has been little disturbance since the collapse of the Maya and the
re-growth of the forest beginning c. 1200 years ago, which means that the
footprint of the ancient Maya in our study area should be more evident than in
other places. The study will be carried out in the 250,000-acre Rio Bravo
Conservation and Management Area, administered by the Programme for Belize
(PfB), a Belizean conservation organization, and be conducted under the auspices
of the PfB Archaeology Project, operated by the University of Texas at Austin.
Humans increasingly affect the planet, for example, by deforesting the landscape
and accelerating soil erosion. These changes could lead to "tipping points",
when ecosystems suddenly change radically and no longer support agriculture,
provide adequate water, or otherwise supply human needs. Scientists need to
study these impacts and suggest how to mitigate the present changes and prevent
future tipping points. But we can also learn by studying tipping points reached
in the past, such as the collapse of the ancient Maya described above. To
understand that collapse we are combining social science (archaeology), geo-
science, and ecological science to study past events at sites of ancient Maya
civilization in present-day Belize. Archaeologists in our team will study past
land use. Geo-archaeologists will study past topography and soils. Ecologists
will study past and present forest environments. Our work is guided by a model
connecting ancient land use, deforestation and soil erosion, consequences for
the environment, and responses by the ancient Maya to these landscape changes.
In addition to understanding past events we are interested in the long-term
consequences of ancient deforestation for the present-day forests. The
similarities and differences between ancient deforestation (after which the
modern, fairly diverse forest re-grew in Belize) and modern deforestation could
provide clues to the consequences of modern land use and provide recommendations
for improved use. Another goal for us is to create a model collaboration between
social, geological, and biological scientists for the study of the ancient Maya
and the modern forest, and that can be a general model for studying and managing
environmental problems.