* 1114446
* Integrating geodesy, seismology and dynamic rupture modeling: the 2010 Sierra El Mayor-Cucapah earthquake
* GEO,EAR
* 08/15/2011,07/31/2015
* David Oglesby, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Eva Zanzerkia
* 07/31/2015
* USD 170,287.00

The researchers propose to generate comprehensive models of the unusual April
4th, 2010 Mw 7.2 Sierra El Mayor-­&amp;#8208;&amp;#8209;Cucapah earthquake in
northern Baja California. A number of&lt;br/&gt;novel observations were made of
this earthquake?s behavior, including multiple&lt;br/&gt;mapped stepovers
between ruptured fault segments, eyewitness reports of
locally&lt;br/&gt;reversed rupture direction, plus the earthquake had a greater
rupture length (~100 km) than is typically seen for an event of its size. We
will model the event in two ways: first, with a kinematic inverse model that
incorporates all available observational data (e.g. InSAR, GPS, teleseismic
waveforms, strong motion waveforms, geologic rupture data) in order to generate
both realistic subsurface geometries of the fault segments involved, and a
picture of how the slip evolved on those faults during the earthquake rupture.
This will be achieved using a Bayesian maximum
likelihood-­&amp;#8208;&amp;#8209;based method developed by the PI. Second, they
will produce forward dynamic earthquake rupture models using a 3D finite element
code that seek to reproduce the features seen in the kinematic model and by
eyewitnesses, by varying the initial physical conditions (e.g.
pre-­&amp;#8208;&amp;#8209;earthquake&lt;br/&gt;stresses and frictional
conditions.) The end result will be a full description of both how and why the
earthquake ruptured.&lt;br/&gt;The incorporation of such a diverse range of
expertise into a&lt;br/&gt;single earthquake study has not been attempted
before. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;We stand to gain more insights into the earthquake
process than would be possible from applying any of the individual techniques in
isolation. In addition, a detailed description of the faulting involved in the
earthquake will help us to evaluate its potential effects on the nearby active
faults in southern California ? the Elsinore and San Jacinto faults, and thus
aid seismic hazard assessments in the region.&lt;br/&gt;In addition to
disseminating findings through conferences and publications,&lt;br/&gt;the
researchers aim to communicate our findings to the public by developing museum
exhibits in both English and Spanish for display at UC Riverside and elsewhere.