* 1114945
* CNH-RCN: A Global Sustainable Soundscape Network
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2017
* Catherine Guastavino, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 08/31/2017
* USD 499,556.00

Sounds are a perpetual and dynamic property of all landscapes. The sounds of
vocalizing and stridulating animals and the non-biological sounds of running
water and rustling wind emanate from natural landscapes. In contrast, urban
landscapes are dominated by human-produced sounds radiating from a variety of
sources, such as machines, sirens, and friction generated by tires rotating over
pavement. Since Rachel Carson's seminal book, Silent Spring, nature's sounds
have been inextricably linked to environmental quality. Because sound is a
fundamental property of nature and can be drastically affected by a variety of
human activities, sound provides a valuable perspective for examining the
dynamics of coupled natural and human systems. In recent years, ecologists,
cognitive psychologists, and scholars in the humanities have begun to study
soundscapes from their own natural, social, and creative disciplinary
perspective. Work in the U.S., Canada, and Europe is moving forward in these
three camps with little to no coordination. Even within the ecological
community, no formal group has been formed that allows research to be integrated
and compared. To facilitate interaction among these communities of scholars and
to invite scholars from other fields to examine sounds as measures of and
perspectives into human and natural system interactions, this award will
establish a research coordination network (RCN), the Global Sustainable
Soundscape Network. This RCN will bring together ecologists (landscape
ecologists and conservation biologists), acoustic ecologists (from the creative
arts) and acousticians and psychoacousticians (scientists that study sound and
how people perceive sound) to coordinate studies of diverse soundscapes around
the world. The network will help to foster open communication among different
disciplines about the composition of soundscapes and the underlying mechanisms
that control dynamics and the ways that humans experience sounds in the
environment through the support of workshops, sharing of tools, social
networking, and activities of coordinated "theme teams" that will address
standards, interdisciplinary capacity building, sustainability, and conservation
and engagement among other issues. The RCN will coordinate activities across
four or five soundscape monitoring sites where long-term acoustic data have been
and will be collected. The RCN will look to develop a common vocabulary, long-
term monitoring standards, and metadata standards for acoustic data for use by
researchers. It will increase awareness of this new field among ecologists and
social scientists through a variety of activities, and it will increase public
awareness of the importance of people's acoustic connection to nature. This RCN
project also will impact education. Four doctoral students will be supported as
fellows to participate in workshops, and two workshops will conducted in
coordination with conservation groups and natural resource management agencies.
Four undergraduate students will conduct soundscape research at host
universities.

This research coordination network will stimulate new research on the role of
sound as a measure of and perspective on the dynamic interactions among natural
and human systems. It will facilitate greater contact among scholars in
different disciplines who are examining soundscapes, and it will encourage other
researchers to become involved. The RCN also will seek to broaden public
awareness of soundscapes, and it will facilitate the involvement of researchers
who are members of underrepresented minority groups by involving in leadership
roles scholars from Tuskegee University and Alabama A&M University. This project
is supported by the NSF Dynamics of Coupled Natural and Human Systems (CNH)
Program.