* 1114332
* PFI:  Partnership for Innovation on Liquid-Crystal Polymer Interfaces
* TIP,TI
* 09/15/2011,08/31/2015
* Todd Diacon, Kent State University
* Standard Grant
* Sara B. Nerlove
* 08/31/2015
* USD 600,000.00

This Partnerships for Innovation project from Kent State University, which is
partnering with two knowledge-enhancement partner companies and five other
academic, industrial and non-profit partners, will establish a broad platform on
liquid crystal (LC) - polymer interfaces. LC - polymer interfaces have been of
vital importance in the liquid crystal display (LCD) industry since its
inception. The recent advent of flexible LCDs using plastic substrates is
generating renewed and urgent interest in interface design and associated
behavior. The move from glass to soft flexible substrates not only raises new
technical problems, but also illuminates old ones. These problems and questions
of basic science are exceptionally close and are inextricably linked; the goal
of the project is to connect device and manufacturing issues in industry to the
frontiers of academic research. The project aims to identify the technical
issues in real products of the partner companies and to offer solutions based on
the state-of-the-art characterization, computational materials science, and
novel materials development. The proposed platform will not only solve key
problems in currently emerging technologies, but it will also enable new LC-on-
plastic (LCOP) technologies and thereby provide to U.S. industry new
opportunities with the potential for strong economic development based on LCOP
products.

The broader impacts of this research are potentially large-scale economic
opportunities for U.S. display and related industries. A dramatic technological
change today is the move of LCDs from glass to plastic substrates. This change
represents a tremendous opportunity for U.S. industry to again establish a
leadership position and develop and benefit from the emerging LCOP technology.
The partnership will disseminate project results through networks in the LC-
polymer community and provide a model for future industry-university
collaboration in practical problem solving. If the current challenges are
overcome, the U.S. will have the opportunity to harness, develop, and cultivate
this emerging new technology, with vast technological and economic promise.

Partners at the inception of the project include the Knowledge-Enhancement
Partnership (KEP) unit, consisting of Kent State University (Liquid Crystal
Institute) and two small businesses: AlphaMicron (AMI) (Kent, OH), and Kent
Displays (KDI) (Kent, OH), both of which are the pioneers responsible for the
breakthrough demonstrations that LCOP technology is possible. In addition, there
are other partners. These partners include other academic institutions:
University of Akron and University of Oklahoma; a private sector organization
(non-profit): Bridgestone Americas Center for Research Technology; and public
sector organizations: Nortech/FlexMatters and Polymer Ohio Inc.