* 1114977
* CNH-Ex: Land-Use Intensification and Protected-Area Vulnerability in Africa's Albertine Rift
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2011,02/28/2014
* Colin Chapman, University of New Hampshire
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 02/28/2014
* USD 249,995.00

Tropical deforestation and degradation are major causes of global environmental
change, with substantial projected impacts on biodiversity and world climate.
Expanding agriculture and more extensive forms of land use lead to degradation
and fragmentation of natural forest habitats, impacting flora and fauna and
altering ecological processes. A changing climate may lead to additional impacts
on forests and agricultural land, thereby inducing people to alter practices and
engage is even more extensive land-use practices. The establishment of parks has
been a major mechanism used to protect remaining tropical forest biodiversity,
particularly in regions with high human densities. This juxtaposition of
biodiversity preservation and land-use extensification in hotspots greatly
challenges both the intentions of conservation infrastructure and efforts to
alleviate poverty. Quantifying where these areas (hotter hotspots) occur on the
landscape, and analyzing how local people perceive and respond to impacts is
fundamental to understanding and facing this dual challenge. The exploratory
research project will be framed around a single question: How and where has land
use intensified around parks in the Albertine Rift of eastern Africa over time?
To help answer this question, a multidisciplinary team of investigators will
quantify the rate and extent of forest conversion surrounding seven Ugandan
parks to identify patterns of land-use change and extensification as a function
of climate, land use, and population change over the last decade. They will
conduct their investigation at both a regional and local scale, incorporating
household-level survey data to explore impacts of and responses to land-use
change and extensification. Major project objectives are to quantify the extent
and pattern of land-cover change; to quantify climate trajectory and
variability; to identify risks and land-use strategies of local people; and to
integrate and analyze the complex relationships among demographic changes on the
landscape, household perceptions of forest use (including risks), objective
measurements of those characteristics, and patterns of
change.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will provide a quantitative assessment
of extent and rate of Albertine Rift forest conversion and agricultural
extensification as related to climate and population change. While conservation
hotspots have been pinpointed at large scales, this project will improve their
resolution and offer individual assessments of parks within a hotspot region.
The project also will provide new insights regarding how dynamic landscape
respond to human-related activities as local scales as well as how those changes
relate to climate change and perceptions of risk, all of which are essential for
developing frameworks of complex interactions for park-edge interfaces. The
project will provide a strong foundation for interdisciplinary education and
training for North American and Ugandan students, collaborators, and non-
governmental organizations. Data will be made available to residents and
stakeholders in the study region, and project results will assist conservation
efforts. The collaborative ties and education promoted by this research will
enhance the capacity of local governments, Makerere University, and the Uganda
Wildlife Authority. This project is supported by the NSF Dynamics of Coupled
Natural and Human Systems (CNH) Program.