* 1114706
* Thermodynamics of Denatured State Polyproline II Conformational Bias
* BIO,MCB
* 04/01/2010,03/31/2011
* Vincent Hilser, Johns Hopkins University
* Continuing Grant
* Kamal Shukla
* 03/31/2011
* USD 55,639.00

Disordered peptides and proteins are known to occupy the left-handed polyproline
II (PII) conformation a significant fraction of the time. In spite of these
insights, neither the residue-specific bias for PII, nor the role of PII in
determining the stability of the native state is understood. The current project
uses isothermal titration calorimetry (ITC) and NMR chemical shift perturbation
to study a series of substituted peptides, which have been selected to provide
access to the amino acid specific propensities to adopt the PII conformation.
Specifically, the project takes advantage of the ability of SH3 domains to
recognize and bind peptides in the PII conformation. As the PII conformation is
helical, with three residues per turn, two of every three residues on the
peptide are involved in binding to the SH3 domain, and the third residue is on
the backside of the helix pointing into solution and making no contact with the
SH3 domain. By studying substitutions at these non-interacting sites, the
intrinsic bias of each amino acid can be illuminated. The studies conducted in
this project will provide; 1) a calorimetrically based PII propensity scale, 2)
a thermodynamic dissection of the component enthalpy and entropy contributions
to the bias for each amino acid, and 3) the effects of common perturbants on the
propensity. As such, this project provides a comprehensive thermodynamic
description of the denatured states of proteins and peptides. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;A quantitative characterization of the structure and energy of the
denatured states of proteins represents the cornerstone to a molecular-level
understanding of both protein stability and fold-specificity. Recent studies
have revealed a significant bias in unstructured peptides towards the
polyproline II (PII) conformation, even at non-proline residues. This indicates
that the PII conformation is a dominant component of the denatured states of
proteins. This project provides a comprehensive thermodynamic description of the
denatured state, which represents a new potential source of data and information
that will be especially useful in understanding the mechanism of protein
folding. This project will provide training to students in thermodynamics,
protein structure and folding, and a variety of biophysical techniques.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;