* 1114978
* CNH: People, Water, and Climate: Adaptation and Resilience in Agricultural Watersheds
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2011,02/28/2019
* Nandita Basu, University of Iowa
* Standard Grant
* Jacqueline Vadjunec
* 02/28/2019
* USD 1,211,485.00

Resilience in natural and human systems is defined as the capacity to cope with
disturbance. Adaptive capacity refers to a system's ability to change in basic
structure or function when it is perturbed beyond its capacity for resilience.
The concepts of sustainability, resilience, and adaptability are clearly related
but few studies have systematically analyzed how interactions among them affect
system-level dynamics, fragility, uncertainty, or risk. This interdisciplinary
research project will investigate how regional coupled natural and human systems
respond to changes in climate, economic, and policy conditions that operate over
larger geographic and temporal scales. The investigators will explore these
concepts in an agriculturally based Midwestern watershed (the Iowa/Cedar River
Watershed in Iowa) within the context of sustainability, resilience, and
adaptability. They will define sustainability using Elkington's Triple Bottom
Line concept (people, planet, profit) in which social and environmental values
are added to the traditional economic measures of success. In the context this
particular study, they will consider surface and groundwater resources that will
not be polluted or withdrawn so that intended agricultural uses can no longer be
supported and agriculture practices that do not deplete the soil or groundwater,
and, at a minimum, supports existing levels of economic activity. The
investigators will evaluate the multidimensional tradeoffs that exist among
traditional measures of optimality, such as maximization of environmental
quality and economic return, and measures of resilience, adaptability, and
sustainability. To conduct this analysis, they will develop models that simulate
how landscapes change in response to changes in natural and socioeconomic
factors. Land-use decision making will be modeled to simulate how humans respond
to changing conditions, and these models will be linked to models of surface and
ground water quality to quantify environmental impact. Evolutionary computation
techniques will be developed to produce production possibility frontiers that
quantify tradeoffs among competing objectives. Stakeholder preferences for
various objectives will be solicited through focus groups, and surveys and
cyberinfrastructure will be developed to support the significant computational
needs of this study.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;While landscapes are in a continual
state of change, the national and global-scale factors that currently affect
landscapes in the Midwest are without precedent. The generation of precise
predictions regarding future conditions is an unrealistic goal under such
conditions. This project therefore will evaluate a suite of plausible scenarios
to identify those strategies that are most likely to result in sustainable
agricultural landscapes. The investigators hypothesize that sustainable outcomes
are produced by systems that have an ability to adapt to changing and uncertain
conditions and that possess the resiliency needed to respond to unexpected and
significant perturbations. Natural (e.g., climate) and human (e.g., policy and
economic) processes can constrain or enhance the ability of systems to adapt and
respond to change and uncertainty. It is important to promote processes that
enhance sustainability, and avoid those that produce constraints. This project
will advance the theory and practice of sustainability science by constructing
models that link adaptability, resilience, and sustainability to more
traditional measures of economic and environmental optimality. From a more
practical perspective, the project will have an impact on policy and land
management in the Midwest by providing better data and analytical tools to
decision makers as they address complex problems and refine policy. The project
also will provide information and examples that help the general public
understand the imperative of sustainability in the context of changing climatic
and economic conditions. Because of the uncertainty associated with the
magnitude and spatiotemporal pattern of regional, national, and international
changes, research designed to bound uncertainty, to document plausible natural
and socioeconomic outcomes, and to analyze the impact of alternative adaptation
strategies can be especially timely and important. This project is supported by
the NSF Dynamics of Coupled Natural and Human Systems (CNH) Program.