* 1114686
* The Change
* EDU,DRL
* 08/15/2011,12/31/2016
* Seth Kramer, Ironbound Films, Inc.
* Continuing Grant
* Valentine Kass
* 12/31/2016
* USD 818,760.00

The Change (working title) is a film project with supporting website and
resource materials to document how climate change is impacting indigenous
peoples in the most climate sensitive regions, and how anthropologists,
environmental scientists, engineers, and others are working with these
communities to help mitigate the effects. The documentary features Dr. Susie
Crate, an NSF-funded anthropologist, and her bi-national teenage daughter Katie,
whose father is from Siberia. The Viliui Sahka in Siberia, Alaska Natives in
Nome, and South Pacific Islanders on Tuvalu are the communities portrayed in the
film. The Change is a Full-Scale Development project produced by Ironbound
Films. Outreach partners include the Center for Climate Change Communication
(4C) at George Mason University, the Global Climate Adaptation Partnership
(GCAP), the Society for Applied Anthropology (SfAA), the International Indian
Treaty Council (IITC), and the Institute for Tribal Environmental Professionals
(ITEP).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Ironbound Films has designed this project to build
upon its successful prior documentary work, The Linguists. Deliverables include
a documentary for limited theatrical release and television and Internet
broadcast along with an interactive website, curriculum guide, a shorter
classroom version of the film, and a robust outreach strategy in collaboration
with project partners. One of the components of the outreach in conjunction with
SfAA will be to create the first social networking site around climate change
adaptation. Another in conjunction with GCAP is to create a series of four
virtual climate change tours for Google Maps and Earth applications. SmartStart
Educational Consulting Services will conduct front-end, formative, and summative
evaluations. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The real-life characters and communities
featured in the film will illustrate how climate change is affecting people
today in various parts of the world. The project gives voice to anthropologists
who have been working to understand climate change as a cultural phenomenon, a
perspective rarely showcased in the media. Anthropologists have expressed the
need for an effective means to share this work and its results with the public.
The story is based on contemporary climate science and anthropology, but
features the personal perspective of the bi-national teenage daughter, and is
intended to appeal to an audience not typically drawn to a climate change
documentary, especially the young or underserved. An aggressive, targeted
marketing and outreach campaign reflects the film's innovative approach.