* 1114781
* Full-Scale Development Project: The Science Of Sharing: Exhibits And Activities Fostering Investigation Of Cooperation, Competition, And Social Interdependence
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2015
* Hugh McDonald, Exploratorium
* Continuing Grant
* Alphonse Desena
* 08/31/2015
* USD 2,344,457.00

The Exploratorium and the Museum of Life and Science will develop, evaluate and
implement Science of Sharing, a three-year full-scale development project
designed to bring the scientific study of human social behavior to a broad
public audience. Science of Sharing will create new ways for visitors to
experiment with social psychology and will generate important information for
informal science institutions committed to involving visitors in discussions of
personal, societal, and scientific responses to real-world
challenges.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Science of Sharing addresses a critical ISE
issue: creating ways for visitors to experiment with inquiry based exhibits and
activities that heighten public knowledge of the study of human social behavior.
Based on research in social psychology and game theory, the project (a) fosters
public engagement in activities exploring collaborative behavior and resource
sharing; (b) promotes awareness of connections between these experiences and
STEM-related research in psychology and economics; and (c) links individual
behaviors to real-world issues of resource depletion and group conflict.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary audience is youth and youth-adult museum
visitors, with particular focus on underrepresented communities with limited
access to communication technologies. The secondary audience is ISE
professionals with interest in new kinds of interactive experience and
visualization tools focusing on social behavior and techniques for fostering
social interaction and public discussion of science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project will (1) conduct front end evaluation to assess visitor attitudes and
knowledge about issues of cooperation and resource use; (2) design, prototype,
and evaluate 15 inquiry-based exhibits and 4 Experimonths (public events with
web, museum, and community-based components on social-psychological topics); (3)
conduct design-based research to investigate aspects of these exhibits and
activities that prompt self-reflection and build metacognitive skills; and (4)
work with local school districts to adapt exhibits for classroom use.