* 1114828
* HCC: Small: Motivations, Expectations and Goal Pursuit in Social Media
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2011,11/30/2013
* Donna Hoffman, University of California-Riverside
* Continuing Grant
* William Bainbridge
* 11/30/2013
* USD 413,756.00

This research will test a conceptual model of the relationship between social
media goal pursuit and well-being that is grounded in motivational theory and
results from two pilot studies. In the theoretical framework, the broad range of
goals people have for using social media is uniquely determined by two broad
dimensions that specify the primary focus of the 1) content interaction and the
2) person interaction. The social media goals corresponding to these dimensions
are hypothesized to be pursued according to the basic needs that social media
satisfy for its users and the motivational orientations supported by those
needs. The model states how goals lead to different well-being outcomes with the
relationship between social media goal pursuit and well-being moderated by
perceptions of overall well-being in specific life domains, along with
constructs related to social identity. Three studies will test and validate the
conceptual model: validation of the dimensions underlying social media goal
pursuit (Study 1), development of new scales to measure the social media goals
(Study 2), and testing and refinement of the model in a structural equation
modeling framework (Study 3). The model will permit examination of a host of
research questions including whether certain social media goals render
individuals more vulnerable to negative well-being outcomes. For example, do
individuals low in well-being pursue particular social media goals in the hope
of improving their lives? Are these goals different from those that individuals
more satisfied with their lives pursue? The model will allow researchers to
build upon a common set of constructs and can increase understanding of why
people use social media, along with its benefits and consequences.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A validated theoretical framework relating higher-order
social media goals to subjective well-being in the context of basic needs and
motivations has the potential to advance foundational research in multiple
domains of inquiry. Consumer psychologists and marketing academics can use the
framework to examine the relationship between social media goals and consumer
response to marketing efforts in interactive media environments. Social
psychologists and personality researchers can further refine and extend the
framework to include other important constructs likely to impact social media
goal pursuit and well-being. Computer information systems researchers can use
the model to further understand how social media systems are impacted by
individual differences. Although there has been a great deal of descriptive
research examining the different usage behaviors people engage in when they use
social media, most studies tend to focus narrowly on reasons or motivations for
using a particular type of social media, rather than on organizing the results
in the context of a broader conceptual framework that can explain what drives
use and how usage goals are related to key well-being outcomes. Understanding
the drivers of social media use and its consequences for well-being will have
important national policy and consumer welfare implications.