* 1114313
* Prediction and characterization of novel Earth-forming minerals using advanced ab initio simulations
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2015
* Artem Oganov, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Robin Reichlin
* 08/31/2015
* USD 360,000.00

The study of the Earth's deep interior is one of the most fascinating fields of
modern research. It expands our knowledge about the world in which we live and
provides clues for understanding processes that have shaped our planet and
determine phenomena that we observe on the surface of the Earth such as the
magnetic field of the Earth, volcanism, earthquakes, etc. Our understanding of
the deep Earth comes from a number of different sources, including:
&lt;br/&gt;1) geophysical observations, mainly seismology and geomagnetic
observations ,&lt;br/&gt;2) mineral physics, &lt;br/&gt;3) numerical modeling of
the Earth?s dynamics and energetics,&lt;br/&gt;4) geochemistry and
cosmochemistry, and &lt;br/&gt;5) direct (but, unfortunately, limited) evidence
from the deep mantle from inclusions in diamonds. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Mineral
physics provides information about the physical properties of Earth forming
minerals, their dependence on temperature and composition, and phase diagrams of
mineral systems. Mineral physics information is used to explain seismic
discontinuities, deduce the composition and temperature inside the Earth,
interpret the origins of seismic anisotropy. While experimentally it is possible
to reach conditions of the Earth's innermost core, such studies are extremely
complicated and have significant uncertainties in the measurements of pressure,
temperature, and physical properties, many of which can not yet even be measured
at all. In this situation, theoretical simulations based on quantum mechanics
and making no assumptions about the nature of the material, have already proven
their utility in Earth sciences, in particular, in combination with experiment.
Among many important advances made using quantum-mechanical calculations are the
establishment of the crystal structure of MgSiO3 perovskite, discovery and
characterization of MgSiO3 post-perovskite, and the determination of the melting
curve of iron. The discovery of post-perovskite has provided, for the first
time, a simple convincing explanation for seismic anomalies found in the D"
layer of the Earth mantle and uncovered fascinating insights into the structure,
dynamics, and evolution of our planet. For instance, it explained the unusually
large topography of the D" discontinuity and showed that the D" layer is growing
with time as the Earth cools down. The existence of the post-perovskite phase
transition in the deep mantle has been shown to lead to important geodynamical
consequences. The large contrast of rheological properties between perovskite
and post-perovskite may also have important geodynamical implications. The post-
perovskite phase transition provided tighter constraints on the temperature
profile in the mantle, the heat flow from the core into the mantle, and
explained the double discontinuity found near the boundary with the core. The
melting curve of iron, on the other hand, helped researchers to constrain the
temperature profile in the Earth's core. Despite these breakthroughs, Earth's
inner core and core-mantle boundary remain mysterious regions with major
unsolved questions. The present project aims at clarifying these questions. Ths
investigators will apply the most advanced and recently developed tools in
computational physics - in particular, evolutionary crystal structure prediction
(Oganov, Glass, 2006) to address outstanding problems related to the inner core
and core-mantle boundary region.&lt;br/&gt;(i) From crystal chemistry of alloys
to the chemistry of the inner core. Usually, compositional models of the inner
core start from equations of state of FeSi, FeS or Fe3S, Fe1-xO, Fe3C or Fe7C3,
and FeH - which are assumed to be the stable compounds in the corresponding
binary systems. Except FeSi, none of these compounds were proved (either
experimentally or theoretically) to be stable at the actual conditions of the
inner core. The actually stable compounds may have different chemistry,
coordination numbers, density and elasticity, and this may lead to serious
changes in compositional models of the inner core. &lt;br/&gt;(ii) Properties of
alloys in the inner core. Once we predict the stable compositions and
structures, equations of state and elastic constants will be computed taking
into account the effects of pressure and temperature. Anomalous anisotropy and
high Poisson ratio may then be perhaps explained by the properties of iron
alloys. &lt;br/&gt;(iii) Reaction at the core-mantle boundary: what could be its
products? There are proposals of various chemical reactions occurring at the
core-mantle boundary. Such a reaction could have important geophysical
implications, and the PI would like to approach this possibility
theoretically/computationally by exploring chemical equilibria in the relevant
multicomponent system(s). While direct exploration of all possible reactions in
this system is overwhelmingly difficult, new computational tools may enable
rapid exploration.