* 1114877
* Support for the 11th International Estuarine Biogeochemistry Symposium
* GEO,OCE
* 03/15/2011,02/29/2012
* Brent McKee, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Donald L. Rice
* 02/29/2012
* USD 24,814.00

This award will provide funding to the University of North Carolina at Chapel
Hill to organize the 11th International Estuarine Biogeochemistry Symposium,
which will take place in Atlantic Beach, North Carolina in May, 2011. This
meeting, entitled "Crossing Boundaries", is part of an on-going series
(originally entitled the International Model Estuaries Symposium) that has
occurred semi-annually over the past three decades, and participation in the
symposium by US scientists has always been significant. The last two symposia
have been in Germany and China, and the series now returns to North America. The
Symposium has traditionally been organized in a plenary fashion with keynote
talks on pre-selected topics of interest, followed by a series of related talks.
As the meeting lasts 4 days, the number of talks (20 minutes each) will be
restricted to 20-30. Each session begins with an invited keynote speaker and a
general discussion after each session is proposed. However, in addition to
talks, there will be provision for large interactive poster sessions so that a
larger number of presentations can be made.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This year?s
Symposium will provide an exciting major interdisciplinary forum for marine,
earth, and atmospheric scientists by focusing on the dynamics of estuaries in
modulating the transport and transformation of materials from land to the ocean.
In addition to examining the processes that occur within the central estuary,
this symposium will explore transport and transformations at estuarine
boundaries and within adjacent environments that exchange with estuarine waters
(floodplains, ground waters, bed sediments, the atmosphere, tidal river, and
inner shelf). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: For US estuarine chemists,
this meeting has been the primary forum for the presentation of their results to
an international community and the structure and nature of the Symposium allows
for substantial interaction with foreign colleagues with similar interests. As
in the past, the meeting will be designed to attract estuarine chemists from the
US with particular expertise in the topic areas, many of who will be keynote
speakers, as well as a diverse international contingent. The first announcement,
which was sent out in November, was circulated to all US scientists in
attendance at the two previous symposia, plus a broader list of US scientist
with interests in the biogeochemistry of estuaries. Other notices will be posted
on related websites and e-mailed using US listings of oceanographic departments
and institutions across the country. Contact for emerging graduate students will
be made through the most recent DISCO and DIALOG lists, particularly those with
thesis topics in estuarine chemistry. After application and approval of this
international travel grant, all US scientists making application to the meeting
will be notified of the opportunity to obtain travel, registration and
residential support. Costs for attending the meeting will be economical given
that no foreign travel is required for US scientists.