* 1114363
* PFI:  Data-driven Support for the Smart Farm
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2011,06/30/2016
* Philip Boudjouk, North Dakota State University Fargo
* Standard Grant
* Alexandra Medina-Borja
* 06/30/2016
* USD 599,722.00

This Partnership for Innovation project from North Dakota State University Fargo
is driven by the need for sustainable agriculture and the recognition that the
infrastructure associated with precision agriculture enables a quantitative,
data-driven approach to sustainability. The "Smart Farm" includes a data-driven
decision support system incorporating sensor data, satellite images, and weather
information to allow farmers to respond flexibly to production and environmental
needs. The platform is versatile and can be applied to any crop. In the initial
phase, sugarbeets will serve as a prototype application. The research has the
following four objectives: 1) Examine the current production system for making
recommendations regarding fertilizer and pesticide use based on satellite
imagery and improve efficiency and scope; 2) Implement prediction of yield based
on remote sensing data; 3) Integrate additional sensor and meteorological data;
4) Evaluate the environmental and economic impact of farming choices such as
cover crop usage, crop-rotation, and no-till systems as measured within the
"Smart Farm".&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of this research include
a high potential for increasing U.S. competitiveness, considering that it is
based on affordable technology that stands to strengthen exports of farm
equipment. The businesses involved in the partnership will benefit from the
opportunity of exploring new technological developments freely without the
constraints of purchase negotiations. The student work will allow the students
to make important progress in a direction that has the potential for strong
long-term profitability. The project also proffers excellent opportunities for
introducing students to research, innovation, and entrepreneurship. Considering
the importance of agriculture to North Dakota, the subject matter of the
proposed work is exceptionally comprehensible to potential young innovators,
including students from tribal colleges in North Dakota. Overall, it is the goal
of the partnership to establish a self-sustaining basis for innovation, centered
on sustainability and data-driven evaluation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Partners at
the inception of the project include the Knowledge-Enhancement Partnership (KEP)
unit, consisting of North Dakota State University (Department of Computer
Science and Operations Research; Office of the Vice President for Research
Creative Activities and Technology Transfer; Extension School of Natural
Resource Sciences; Industrial and Manufacturing Engineering); three small
businesses: AgriImaGIS,(Fargo, ND); Holland Scientific, Inc.(Lincoln, NE); and
Meridian Environmental Technologies, Inc.(Grand Forks, ND); and two large
businesses: Crystal Sugar Company (Moorhead, MN) and RDO Equipment Co.
(Moorhead, MN). In addition, there is another private sector partner, a large
business: Phoenix International (Fargo, ND).