* 1114432
* Collaborative Research: Testing the Hypothesis of Late Cretaceous True Polar Wobble (TPw)
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2015
* Joseph Kirschvink, California Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Robin Reichlin
* 08/31/2015
* USD 257,364.00

Like a Frisbee, all planets moving freely in space want to spin around an axis
called their 'principal moment of inertia'. Any large 'wart' on the planet, or
inside it, that is not balanced gravitationally will migrate towards the
Equator, forcing the spin axis (the 'poles' of the planet) to 'wander?' relative
to its solid mass. This is called 'True Polar Wander' (TPW), and is part of the
well-understood physics of many planetary bodies. The entire solid part of the
planet wanders at the same time relative to the spin axis, and as such is quite
different from the normal motion of tectonic plates here on Earth.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; A vigorous debate has been raging within the geophysical
community for the past decade about the possible existence of a short burst of
TPW associated with the end of a long period of geomagnetic Normal polarity,
called the Cretaceous Long Nomal Chron, around 84 million years ago. Similarly,
small wiggles in the pattern of sea-floor magnetic anomalies at about the same
time have been interpreted as a result of an anomalously weak, fluctuating
geomagnetic field. Recently, the investigators have obtained higher-resolution
fossil magnetic (paleomagnetic) data from the classic Scaglia Rossa lime-stones
in Italy which confirm the presence of a major (~20 degree) shallowing of
inclination in Chron 33R, whereas coeval data from South Dakota display both
persistent declination and inclination anomalies as predicted by the TPW
hypothesis. The Italian data also provide provocative hints that there might be
a series of short, ~million-year scale oscillations superimposed on this long-
term trend. The PIs call these 'True Polar wobbles' (TPw) to distinguish them
from longer time-scale TPW motions which have been the focus of most previous
geophysical investigations. The entire solid Earth may have been doing something
akin to a geological 'Hula dance', according to the PIs. However, distinguishing
these hypotheses requires a globally distributed set of high-quality, high-
resolution magnetic data that can be compared accurately from area to area. This
project will support field and laboratory work aimed at increasing the density
of such observations in this focused interval by expanding the geographic extent
of the sampling sites, and to refine the stratigraphic correlation using
biostratigraphy and high-resolution Sr isotope variations. Ths plan is to launch
a shallow scientific drilling program with portable (Winkie(TM)) diamond-bit
coring systems to collect continuous oriented core from critical sections for
these studies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit. If either form of these
TPW motions exist, they would be fundamentally important for at least two
important reasons: First, they would represent a previously-unrecognized class
of TPW, with an as-yet unknown driving mechanism. Second, they seem to be
associated with the end of one of the few time intervals in which the frequency
of geomagnetic reversals drops essentially to zero. These anomalous directions
have longer durations than can be explained plausibly by the normal dynamo
processes thought to operate in Earth's outer core. On the other hand, the
motions and changes implied by the data seem too rapid to be explained by mantle
dynamics if some form of TPW is responsible. For the counter-hypothesis, there
are similar problems in understanding how an anomalous state of the geodynamo
would have a memory persisting for the ~5 Myr span of the Italian data set. In
either case the new results should increase our understanding of terrestrial
geophysics, and could possibly yield clues to the underlying cause of the end of
the Cretaceous Long Normal Chron. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; Broader Impacts. Either
anomalous field configurations or TPW could help sub-divide geological time in
and around the Cretaceous Long Normal Chron, providing a basis for higher-
resolution magnetostratigraphy at a time of major global hydrocarbon
sequestration. If TPW is the cause, it has the additional implication that the
3rd order sea-level variations would be globally asynchronous, contradicting a
fundamental assumption in the field of sequence stratigraphy. TPW predicts a
quadrature pattern of sea-level variation, with geographic areas moving towards
the Equator experiencing relative transgressions, and those moving away,
regressions. In turn, this implies that the global sequence stratigraphic
framework that petroleum geologists have devised over the past 30 years would be
180 degrees out of phase over half of the planet. Results of this work could
also have bearing on the great 'Baja-BC' debate, as comparisons with displaced
terranes would need to be made between units closely matched in age. This
research will involve the training of under graduate and graduate students and
an early career PI.