* 1114065
* Magnetostratigraphy and Polarity transitions studies of lavas of  the island of Lanai, Hawaii
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2011,06/30/2014
* Emilio Herrero-Bervera, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* Robin Reichlin
* 06/30/2014
* USD 165,000.00

Paleomagnetic data are the unique source of observations to understand the
geomagnetic transitions and hence the geodynamo processes involved in field
generation. However, because reversals and excursions occur over a few thousands
years at most, it is a real challenge to acquire detailed paleomagnetic
information about the reversing and the transitional field. In addition, due to
the fact that there is a real need to obtain reversal records from long volcanic
sequences in order to have a better understanding of the generation of the
field, we propose to study in detail, a long volcanic sequence (about 320
meters) of lavas from the island of Lanai with the main objective of
investigating the directional behavior (i.e. Declination and Inclination) as
well as the geomagnetic field strength recorded before during and after several
successive polarity transitions registered by the Lanai section. We have already
identified a volcanic section on the island of Lanai (Hawaii) covering about
400,000 years of geomagnetic field changes that includes the possibility of
studying the detailed records of the successive Gilsa, Gardar, Bjorn and Cobb
Mountain Subchron and excursions, since the base of the section is 1.6 +/-0.08
Ma old according to Ar/Ar radiometric age determinations. We also propose to do
additional high precision Ar/Ar radiometric dating of the reversal boundaries
and the expected excursions of the Lanai lava sequences.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;It is clear that proper analysis of these observations
requires documenting the total field vector and therefore conducting an
exhaustive study of the directional changes and absolute paleointensity of the
paleo-field recorded by the sequence of lava flows of the Lanai Volcano is
proposed here. The objectives of this two year proposed study are primarily
related to the knowledge of the field variations during periods like reversals
and excursions but also related to the critical time intervals that precede and
follow reversals that so far have only been documented from a few sedimentary
sequences with conflicting observations, particularly for the interval between
1.6 to ~1.2 Million years that is still not very well defined in terms of the
above mentioned reversals and excursions of the geomagnetic field. Reversal
studies cannot be separated from the surrounding polarity intervals and most
records published so far were not long enough to provide complete information.
The Lanai sequence offers the first exceptional opportunity to study field
changes over a time period that includes several polarity intervals and thus
documents the paleofield behavior over various time constants. This is a basic
condition to extract and bring up significant constraints for the theoretical
and numerical modeling of the geodynamo. The principal investigator and three
undergraduate student(s) will carry out the entire scientific research project
proposed here. The involvement of undergraduate students will be a priority in
this project, from fieldwork through lab work, analysis and publication. The
project will help support a US scientist of an underrepresented ethnic group
(the PI). Data will be disseminated through publication the web and community
maintained paleomagnetic databases. This project will also provide the stimulus
to maintain the paleomagnetics and petrofabrics operation at UH which is used by
a diverse group of students and researchers from all over the world.