* 1114734
* Broad Implementation - COASSTNET: Scaling Up COASSTal Citizen Science
* EDU,DRL
* 11/01/2011,10/31/2013
* Julia Parrish, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Ellen McCallie
* 10/31/2013
* USD 313,695.00

University of Washington researchers and their collaborators are evaluating the
impacts and effectiveness of a citizen science program called COASST (Coastal
Observation and Seabird Survey Team) that engages 600 trained non-scientists in
collecting data on beached birds found on more than 300 beaches from the north
coast of California to Alaska. The goals of the COASST program are to expand
coastal citizen involvement in scientifically meaningfully science and improve
the use of citizen science as a tool for scientific inquiry and resource
management. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Project personnel are analyzing current COASST
materials and activities to determine (1) the best uses of COASST bird data, (2)
how to maximize engagement of coastal citizens in COASST's scientific
activities, (3) how to increase COASST participant learning, skills development,
awareness and action, and (4) how to scale up the project by developing
additional materials and facilitating adoption of the COASST model by other
organizations around the country. The analysis includes an evaluation study of
the existing beached bird instructional module to identify successful components
for future use and determine whether the balance between automation and
individualization of components, such as the materials, website, and training,
optimizes participant experience. The project team is also working with current
participants, marine scientists, and marine natural resource managers via
surveys, focus groups and design and testing groups, to determine what other
types of data are important for citizen scientists to collect.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project's findings will help researchers understand
how citizens, scientists, and resource managers can partner to engage the public
in rigorous citizen science activities, create a flexible citizen science
program that can be scaled-up demographically and geographically, and work with
new and existing COASST participants, COASST data end-users, and potential
COASST model adopters to meet new scientific, educational, and resource
management needs.