* 1114392
* Hydrologic influences on soil trace gas fluxes across complex terrain
* GEO,EAR
* 09/15/2011,08/31/2015
* John Dore, Montana State University
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Torgersen
* 08/31/2015
* USD 323,907.00

The physical and microbiological processes governing nitrous oxide and methane
fluxes to and from soil are highly variable in space and time and are
controlled, directly and indirectly, by soil moisture content, which is largely
governed by hydrologic processes. The goal of this project is to evaluate the
impact of hydrological dynamics, in other words catchment scale water
redistribution, on soil-atmosphere trace gas fluxes across a mountain landscape.
A combination of nitrous oxide, methane and carbon dioxide flux determinations,
soil water content and redistribution measurements, chemical assays of potential
reactants, digital terrain analyses and hydrological monitoring will be used to
assess the environmental controls on trace gas flux spatial and temporal
dynamics in a forested Montana watershed. Relationships between trace gas
sources and sinks and hydrologic properties in montane ecosystems will be
uncovered. This project will test an existing topography analysis framework that
uses hydrologic property based landscape units (slope position in relation to
streams, aspect, drainage area, and so on) to translate point-scale trace gas
measurements to the landscape scale. The project builds upon prior and ongoing
NSF-funded research on hydrologic controls on carbon dioxide flux in montane
ecosystems and uses existing field infrastructure and technical resources to
advantage.&lt;br/&gt;Nitrous oxide and methane are, like carbon dioxide,
radiatively active trace gases that contribute significantly to global warming.
It is known that the montane forested ecosystems of North America are a
significant carbon sink. However, the net impact of montane forested ecosystems
on atmospheric warming potential is unclear because the net fluxes of other
trace gases are not known. This is, in part, because effective approaches to
translate point trace gas flux measurements to whole landscapes have yet to be
developed for such systems. The approach that will be developed and tested in
this project has the potential to improve net greenhouse gas emission estimates
for montane forested ecosystems at the landscape scale ? the spatial scale
considered in policymaking regarding greenhouse gas emissions. In addition, this
research project will provide land-air carbon dioxide, nitrous oxide and methane
flux data at multiple space and time scales that will be useful to scientists
interested in benchmarking models. Hands-on field training opportunities in
hydrology and biogeochemistry will be provided for graduate and undergraduate
students from Montana State University.