* 1114918
* CNH: Diversification, Portfolio Effects, and the Sustainability of Fishing Communities
* GEO,GEO
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2016
* Gunnar Knapp, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Sarah Ruth
* 08/31/2016
* USD 1,499,997.00

It has become increasingly apparent that biological complexity stabilizes many
key ecosystem processes and increases the reliability of resource flows to
humans. While discussed extensively in the ecological literature, the extent to
which biocomplexity translates into tangible social and economic benefits to
communities and their economies remains essentially unexplored. Our research
will investigate how the biocomplexity of fisheries ecosystems translates into
social and economic attributes of the human communities that exploit these
ecosystems. Because human activities often feed back to affect the biocomplexity
of ecosystems, we will further explore how human effects on the inherent
variability of ecosystems affect the socio-economics of human communities. By
coupling our understanding of how biocomplexity affects humans, and how human
actions affect natural system biocomplexity, we will be in a position to inform
efficient biocomplexity policy. While the methods, design, and results of this
research program will be genera1izable across a range of coupled human and
natural systems, we focus on the salmon-producing ecosystems of Western Alaska
where we have extensive knowledge of the natural biocomplexity of the
ecosystems, where the regional socio economic activities are supported almost
exclusively by fisheries, and where tight feedbacks exist between natural and
human components of the ecosystems. These features make these particular systems
highly tractable to integrated bioeconomic assessment and
modeling.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;We seek to understand the interactions between
the ecological dynamics of salmon ecosystems and the social and economic
benefits to people who rely on salmon for their livelihoods in Western Alaska.
In particular we are interested in understanding how the reliability of annual
salmon returns, as determined by the biocomplexity of salmon stocks and their
watersheds, affects the long-term economic performance of fisheries and the
ability of local residents to participate salmon fisheries. We will also explore
how management strategies should change as multiple ecosystem objectives are
included into policy. In particular, current management objectives are focused
narrowly on maximizing biological yield to commercial fisheries without
consideration for the ecological and associated economic benefits of salmon in
freshwater ecosystems (e.g., via sport fishing). Further, we will assess the
degree to which fishermen and their communities benefit from the opportunity to
generalize their efforts to exploit multiple species and multiple ecosystems as
an alternative to the specialization that current management systems tend to
encourage. This work will provide key insights into the complex interactions
between social-economic dynamics and the ecological dynamics of fisheries and
other coupled natural-human ecosystems.