* 1114388
* Math on a Sphere: An Interactive Exploration of 3D Surfaces for Public Audiences
* EDU,DRL
* 11/01/2011,10/31/2014
* Sherry Hsi, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* William Neufeld
* 10/31/2014
* USD 243,981.00

This project will develop an interactive application for spherical displays
developed by NOAA called Science on a Sphere. The spheres are animated globes
that can show dynamic, animated images of the atmosphere, oceans, and land of a
planet. NOAA primarily uses SOS as an education and outreach tool to describe
the environmental processes of Earth. Science On a Sphere was initially
developed as a way to explore environmental data using new visualization
techniques. There are about 70 installations of the sphere in science centers,
planetariums and museums world-wide with 40 in the US. Currently the spheres
only display static content. This project will extend the amount of content
available and provide interactivity. The resulting application will be available
to both installed spheres and those institutions thinking about purchasing and
installing the sphere display.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Math on a Sphere will enable
users to create 3-D interactive graphic content for spheres. The project will
enable users to interact with the displays they develop for the spheres either
on-site or remotely. Through the use of a computer-based toolkit, users can
create their own programs, build geometric patterns, and send a variety of
graphical content to the spherical display. The project hypothesizes that user-
directed development combined with a visually compelling spherical display will
spark interest in STEM topics and specifically, in the test version,
mathematical content. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will prototype, design,
implement, test, and evaluate software that allows users to display their
computational work on an installed sphere as well as work remotely on the
project and to test their mathematical computations by viewing the spherical
display remotely either through a computer monitor or a camera view of the
sphere itself. While the prototype will be developed focusing on mathematical
concepts, there are clear links between the toolkit being developed to physics,
meteorology, oceanography and astronomy. The project will increase the
computational and spatial reasoning and thinking of the target audience of
middle school and high school students. The application will be available
remotely for individual users but could easily be used in classroom settings.
The application can be used by teachers and museum and science center staff as
well to encourage its use among users both on site and remotely. The successful
demonstration of interactive 3-D display of science concepts using the Science
on a Sphere installations can lead to interactive use of other large public
display installations such as walls or large screen projection. This capability
would extend the ability of users to derive greater use of these visually driven
devices for learning STEM concepts and content.