* 1114525
* Broad Implementation Of The Lost Ladybug Project: Integrating New Places And New Faces Into A National Lifelong Learning Opportunity
* EHR,DRL
* 10/01/2011,09/30/2017
* John Losey, Cornell University
* Continuing Grant
* Ellen McCallie
* 09/30/2017
* USD 2,491,912.00

The Lost Ladybug Project (LLP) is a Cornell University citizen science project
that connects science to education by using ladybugs to teach non-scientists
concepts of biodiversity, invasive species, and conservation. The project has
successfully engaged thousands of children (ages 5-11) in collecting field data
on ladybugs and building a ladybug biology database that is useful to
scientists. It has also reached 80,000 people over the Internet. The goal of the
project is to promote lifelong appreciation of biodiversity and science, and
provide scientists with data on the changing distribution and abundance of
ladybug species across the country.

The current project is broadening the Lost Ladybug Project's reach
geographically, culturally, demographically, and contextually by creating new
tools and materials for the website, and forging new connections with (1) youth
groups, (2) science centers, community centers, botanical gardens, nature
centers, and organic farms, (3) adults, (4) Native Americans, and (5) Spanish-
speakers. The expanded project could potentially involve tens of thousands of
new individuals in ladybug monitoring research. An evaluation study is measuring
the impacts of the expansion on new participants' knowledge, skills, attitudes,
interests, and behavior.

The Lost Ladybug Project has been important in advancing scientific discovery
and building scientific knowledge. Data collected by the project's volunteers
have improved scientists' understanding of (1) ladybug species presence/absence,
(2) shifts in ladybug species composition, (3) shifts in ladybug species ranges,
and (4) change in ladybug body size and spot number. Evaluation data show that
the project has a broad audience reach and is achieving its learning goals for
adults and children. Broadening the project's reach will further increase the
project's importance to ecology, conservation biology and biodiversity research,
as well as education research.