* 1114829
* Toward Integrated STEM Education: Developing a Research Agenda
* EDU,DRL
* 06/01/2011,05/31/2015
* Greg Pearson, National Academy of Sciences
* Standard Grant
* Julia Clark
* 05/31/2015
* USD 358,733.00

The National Academy of Engineering is conducting a comprehensive examination of
the current state of integrated Science, Technology, Engineering and Mathematics
(STEM) education in K-12 schools. STEM education is a recognized priority for
K-12 education but to date most of the attention and funding has been focused on
improving the single-letter components of STEM and mainly only science and
mathematics. This study focuses attention on the potential benefits of teaching
and learning that combine or integrate essential content and processes of two or
more of the four STEM disciplines with particular emphasis on technology and
engineering. Preliminary evidence suggests that integrated STEM may produce
gains in students' academic interest and achievement as well as influence career
aspirations. The goal of the study is to craft a research agenda that will
examine the value of an integrated STEM education to students (K-12) in terms of
learning achievement, motivation, and career aspirations. The final report
summarizes the findings from the data gathering and analysis and the committee's
conclusions and recommendations for a research agenda. This report is
disseminated through presentations to relevant groups, publication of print and
online articles and editorials and briefings to relevant stakeholders. About 75%
of the funding for this study is provided through private foundations
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The study is done by a carefully selected project
committee of 12-14 experts in diverse fields relevant to the focus of the effort
appointed by the president of the National Academy of Engineering. They are
supported by knowledgeable Academy staff. The Committee meets six times over 30
months. The first workshop is to devise a conceptual framework or taxonomy of
the multiple ways integration can occur. Other workshops inform the Committee
about specific issues relevant to integrated STEM education. The project
includes a review of the literature on integrated teaching and learning, primary
qualitative research on the current practices in integrated teaching (surveys,
curriculum analyses, interviews and site visits), and review of policy at the
district, state, and national levels. The goal of the study is to develop a
research agenda that will examine the value of an integrated STEM education to
students (K-12) in terms of learning achievement, motivation, and career
aspirations. An external evaluator assesses the data gathering effort, the
project's communication and outreach efforts and the impact of the final report.
Surveys and/or interviews with workshop participants and others determine how
the report influences the national discussion STEM education. The final
evaluation report distills the lessons learned and the implications for next
steps in studying the integrated STEM concept.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project
and the final consensus report are designed to inform stakeholder groups that
have an interest in understanding the limits and potential of integrated STEM.
The stakeholders include federal and state agencies with a role in education,
foundations, STEM teacher organizations and STEM professional societies as well
as practitioners and the general public.