* 1114485
* EAGER - Subterranean Ground Water Discharge (SGD) in the Arctic as a Source of Atmospheric Methane ? A Proof of Concept Study
* GEO,OPP
* 03/15/2011,02/29/2016
* Slawek Tulaczyk, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Standard Grant
* Marc Stieglitz
* 02/29/2016
* USD 267,228.00

The major objective of this proof of concept study is to evaluate the
contribution of Subterranean Groundwater Discharge (SGD) in the Arctic to the
global methane budget. Methane is a potent greenhouse gas and large natural
reservoirs exist in Arctic soils and permafrost. The working hypothesis is that
methane released from thawing permafrost in the Arctic is transported via
groundwater flow (above and below the permafrost layer) and enters the
atmosphere via coastal waters and lakes. This source of methane may be realized
as an important source of natural methane to the atmosphere and may provide a
positive feedback to global warming.&lt;br/&gt;The objectives of the study are:
&lt;br/&gt;1) To estimate the magnitude of subterranean groundwater discharge
and associated methane flux into lakes and coastal waters in Alaska at three
representative sites. &lt;br/&gt;2) To evaluate methane evasion rates from the
water column to the atmosphere. &lt;br/&gt;3) To determine if the contribution
of methane input from subterranean groundwater discharge to the global methane
budget is significant, and if so &lt;br/&gt;4) To use the preliminary data to
design a more through research plan that will enable precise estimates of fluxes
and provide a basis for global extrapolation of results such that the
contribution of this source to current and future climate changes and the global
methane budget will be possible.&lt;br/&gt;The project will support a graduate
student full time for two years. Undergraduate students in the ACCESS program
and the California Alliance for Minority Participation in Science, Engineering
and Mathematics program at UCSC will also participate in the proposed work. The
PIs will work with COSEE Alaska to ntegrate this work in their outreach and
education activities including teacher workshops, symposia, and work with local
communities in Alaska.