* 1114385
* Collaborative Research: Horizontal Gene Transfer in Porous Media: Experiments and Modeling
* GEO,EAR
* 09/15/2011,08/31/2015
* Julie Zilles, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Thomas Torgersen
* 08/31/2015
* USD 238,375.00

Bacteria can transfer DNA from one cell to another, even if they are distantly
related. This is called horizontal gene transfer, and it helps bacteria adapt to
new contaminants and environmental conditions. It also facilitates the spread of
traits such as antibiotic resistance. In the soil, one mechanism of horizontal
gene transfer can occur when bacteria contact DNA adsorbed to soil surfaces.
Soil surfaces provide places for the DNA to sorb so that they can
interact/"infect" with groundwater transported microbial cells. It is important
to understand this process because it contributes to the development and spread
of both positive (degrading contaminants) and negative (antibiotic resistance)
bacterial traits. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Cell movement, or motility, affects how
often cells associate with surfaces, and therefore is likely to affect the
frequency of interaction between the cells and adsorbed DNA. This project
investigates the relationships among cell motility, cell attachment and
transport, and gene transfer by DNA adsorbed to soil. The research goal is to
identify what controls how fast bacteria are transformed; this is expected to
depend on how long they reside on the surface. Cells are expected to transform
only when they are actually stuck on the soil surface, not when they are trapped
near, but not on, soil surfaces. Thus transformation rates of both motile and
non-motile cells will depend on their residence-time on surfaces coated with
DNA. The ability of motile cells to swim allows them to approach surfaces
independent of the chemistry of surface interactions. Consequently motile cells
should exhibit greater frequency of transformation than non-motile cells. These
hypotheses will be tested through specific experimental and modeling objectives
involving determination of attachment mechanisms in a radial stagnation point
flow (RSPF) system, of residence time distributions and spatial distribution in
a micromodel system, and of attachment-detachment and gene transfer kinetics in
batch and column systems. The experiments will involve both motile and non-
motile bacterial strains and will use surfaces coated with DNA. Results will be
used in the development and testing of models of bacterial transport and
horizontal gene transfer in the soil environment.&lt;br/&gt;As groundwater is a
major source of drinking water and irrigation water, its vulnerability to
biological and chemical contaminants is a major public health concern. The
research results will help risk assessment of groundwater contamination, as
related processes of microbial transport and microbial evolution are studied
together. Graduate and undergraduate students participating in this proposed
project will receive an interdisciplinary education, including experience in
outreach. The investigators will continue their commitment to recruit women and
minorities and to train undergraduate students through Engineers without Borders
(EWB) at U of I and at UC Davis and Women Engineering Link at UC Davis.