* 1114445
* Analyzing the Frequency Dependence of SS Precursors to Understand the Nature of Transition Zone Discontinuities
* GEO,EAR
* 10/01/2011,09/30/2013
* Christine Houser, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Standard Grant
* Robin Reichlin
* 09/30/2013
* USD 74,600.00

The Earth's mantle consists of the rock layer lying between the crust (7-70 km
deep) and the core (2886 km deep) that makes up over 80% of the Earth's volume.
The "transition zone" is one of the least understood regions of the mantle even
though it is one of the most important in terms of understanding how plate
tectonics operates in the deep Earth. The transition zone is defined by two
abrupt jumps in seismic velocity (i.e. discontinuities) at approximately 410 and
660 km depth that are referred to as the 410 and 660 km discontinuities.
Earthquakes produce shear waves that reflect off of these seismic jumps, and
these SS phases provide global discontinuity depth maps. These seismic jumps
result from an abrupt change in atomic structure due to high pressures at depth,
i.e. a phase transition. Variations in the depth of these discontinuities
indicate regional changes in temperature and/or composition, which provide a
means of locating the source of warm volcanic regions and the accumulation of
oceanic crust in the mantle due to plate tectonics.

A perplexing observation from global mapping of these seismic jumps is that the
410 km discontinuity is correlated with the 660 km discontinuity at very long
wavelengths. This observation defies expectations since the phase changes
responsible for these discontinuities have opposite responses to changes in
temperature. It is well known that higher temperatures will move the 410 km
seismic discontinuity to higher pressures (i.e. greater depth). Likewise, colder
temperatures will move this phase change to lower pressures (i.e. shallower
depths). This relationship is reversed for the 660 km discontinuity. Therefore,
a simple thermal anomaly is expected to produce opposite topography of the 410
and 660 km discontinuities, not the observed positive correlation. The
correlated topography could be due to a shift in dominance from olivine to the
garnet system at high temperature. This study tests this hypothesis by examining
whether the reflections change character at different frequencies. The current
catalog of clean long-period SS arrivals will be used to establish a database of
higher frequency arrivals and to compare the PI's recently expanded long-period
stacks to their short-period equivalents. These observed long and short-period
reflections will be compared to predictions for different 1D transition zone
velocity models. The increased seismic activity in the Sumatran region along
with the progress of the USArray TA network have resulted in a staggering
increase in the number of SS traces available for analysis. These highest-
quality stacks occur under the NW Pacific where slow shear wave velocities and
depressed 410 km discontinuity topography indicate regions that are likely
warmer than the average mantle. Thus, the highest quality data is co-located
with the regions where it may be hot enough to change the dominant phase from
the olivine system to garnet system.

This work will provide the greater solid Earth community with the specific
seismic characteristics needed to distinguish between the competing effects of
temperature, composition, and mineralogy on the transition zone discontinuities.
If the character of the reflections indicates that there are two phase changes
occurring around 660 km depth, this would favor the explanation that there is a
change in mineralogy due to high temperatures. Likewise, if there is no
indication of a second phase transition, then chemical heterogeneity may better
explain the observations, and this information is critical to arguments
regarding the spatial distribution of chemical heterogeneities in Earth's
mantle. The results of this work are important to mantle convection calculations
and should drive further mineral physics experimentation at these depths and
temperatures.