* 1114930
* AF: Small: Collaborative Research: Algorithms for Reallocation Problems
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2011,06/30/2014
* Martin Farach-Colton, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Balasubramanian Kalyanasundaram
* 06/30/2014
* USD 249,990.00

Virtualization typically involves remapping physical resources (e.g., storage,
memory, processors) into logical resources so that these computational resources
can be shared in dynamic environments. The remapping process has an online
component, in that requests arrive and the system responds. In traditional
online problems, resources are thought of as irrevocably assigned. However, in
virtualized environments, previously allocated resources can be reassigned or
reallocated. This project formalizes how computational resources can be
reallocated efficiently when there is some cost for the
reallocation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project investigates the algorithmic
complexity of reallocation problems arising from large-scale systems design, and
especially reallocation algorithms that are universal with respect to
reallocation-cost functions. The research plan addresses problems in memory and
storage reallocation, scaleout and sharding in storage systems, reallocation for
dynamic combinatorial and geometric structures (finite-element meshes, metric
spaces), and classical online allocation problems (scheduling and bin packing).
The aim of the project is three-fold: (1) to study the asymptotic performance of
reallocation, (2) to obtain results that are universal with respect to a wide
class of reallocation cost functions, and (3) to quantify the performance of
known heuristics in widespread use.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The way computation
works today, on laptops and desktops, in supercomputers and data centers, and in
cloud computing, critically depends upon virtualization. Hardware trends (e.g.,
multicore, solid state disks) and software trends (e.g., data-centric computing)
mean that virtualization is becoming even more prevalent. Reallocation
algorithms have a large impact on the performance of virtualized systems. The
algorithmic approach outlined in this project promises to improve the
performance, scalability, and predictably of large systems. As such, this
research show great promise for improving the general infrastructure of
computing in the next decade.