* 1114568
* Fusion Science Theater National Training and Dissemination Program
* EHR,DRL
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2015
* Holly Kerby, Madison Area Technical College
* Standard Grant
* Alphonse Desena
* 08/31/2015
* USD 499,993.00

The Fusion Science Theater National Training and Dissemination Program builds on
the success of the Fusion Science Theater (FST) planning grant (DRL 07-32142).
Madison Area Technical College, in collaboration with the Institute for Chemical
Education at the University of Wisconsin-Madison, the American Chemical Society
(ACS) and area science centers and museums will create a national program to
disseminate the FST model which directly engages children in playful,
participatory, and inquiry-based science learning of chemistry and physics
topics. The primary target audience is children aged 4-11, while undergraduate
chemistry students, faculty, and formal and informal educators comprise the
secondary professional audience. The project will result in the development of a
robust, creative, and highly visible national dissemination program.

The National Training and Dissemination Program includes three deliverables.
First, a Distance Performance Training Program will be developed to teach groups
of undergraduate students, faculty, and educators how to perform FST Science
Investigation (SI) Shows. The Training Program includes a Performance Training
Package and a 3-day Performance Training Workshop. The Performance Training
Package will be comprised of training videos, performances videos, scripts,
rehearsal schedules, and training exercises. These materials will be pilot
tested while training representatives of five groups from around the country to
perform SI Shows during the Performance Training Workshop at Madison Area
Technical College in summer 2012. Participants will be selected from ACS
undergraduate groups, outreach specialists, and museum professionals. Workshop
participants then return to their home institutions and lead their groups
through the improved Performance Training Package delivered via Moodle, with
support from FST team members and social networking tools. The second
deliverable is the FST Methods Workshop. The Methods Workshop is designed to
teach formal and informal educators to use selected methods (Investigation
Question, Embedded Assessment, and Act-It-Out) in their outreach efforts and
classroom teaching. Four workshops will be presented at national meetings and at
the invitation of colleges, universities, and science centers. Follow-up with
workshop participants will be mediated through an online forum to encourage
experimentation, modification, and dissemination of a second generation of FST
activities. The final project deliverable is the development and implementation
of a Promotion and Recruitment Plan to connect professional audiences with FST.
The Distance Performance Training Program and workshops will be evaluated using
mixed methods, while embedded assessment will be utilized to measure the impact
on youth participants attending SI shows to determine the overall effectiveness
the Distance Performance Training.

This project is designed to have important impacts on STEM education and
society. The proposed dissemination program brings innovative models and methods
into the hands of informal science education practitioners who can use them to
engage local audiences and enhance their own teaching and communication
practices. Finally the project offers likely benefits for society through the
creation and dissemination of innovative practices to combat science illiteracy,
diminishing pools of scientists and engineers, lack of understanding about the
nature of science, and the achievement gap that exacerbates these problems. This
project could be transformative in informal science education as SI Shows use
theater to engage audiences in multiple aspects of science learning. It is
anticipated that this project will reach up to 2,500 individuals in public and
professional audiences.