* 1114335
* Collaborative Research: Research:  Zoo And Aquarium Action Research Collaborative (ZAARC)
* EHR,DRL
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2015
* Andee Rubin, TERC Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Arlene de Strulle
* 08/31/2015
* USD 634,698.00

The Zoo and Aquarium Action Research Collaborative research project targets zoo
and aquarium staff with a cascading action research model meant to build the
capacity of the informal science education field to conduct action research on
visitor learning. Research questions focus on the experiences of participating
zoo and aquarium staff in conducting action research on visitor experiences and
how they use the information from that research to improve and develop
educational programs. In the first year of the project, zoo and aquarium staff
will implement a well validated educational activity with visitors to their
institutions and learn how to develop and implement action research in their
context. In the second year of the project, zoo and aquarium staff will take
their new skills in action research and develop their own questions to
investigate visitor learning in their own organizational settings.

Project staff will train zoo and aquarium staff in action research, provide
technical assistance and facilitate collaboration among the sites and staff.
This project will contribute to learning in the field about how action research
can be used to develop ISE staffs' skills in data collection, data analysis and
data-driven decision making. Partners in this project include TERC and Oregon
State University, and sites are situated in zoos and aquariums in six states:
CA, MO, MA, AZ, MD and WA. At each of these institutions approximately 15 senior
staff will participate in the professional development.

Evaluation of the project will focus on the learning that is generated about
collaborative models for action research and the impact on ISE staff of
participating in action research as professional development. Methods for the
evaluation will include surveys and interviews with participants, observations,
document review and site visits. Outcomes of the project include increased
capacity for zoo and aquarium staff to conduct action research on visitor
learning, case studies of collaborative action research projects that will be
disseminated widely through workshops and conferences, and research papers
presented at conferences and published.