* 1114406
* PFI:  Sustainable Highway Bridges with Novel Materials and Deconstructible Components
* TIP,TI
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2017
* Marsha Read, Board of Regents, NSHE, obo University of Nevada, Reno
* Standard Grant
* Prakash Balan
* 08/31/2017
* USD 619,121.00

This Partnerships for Innovation (PFI) project from the University of Nevada
Reno (UNR) has two primary objectives: to develop novel precast concrete bridge
elements to resist loads such as earthquakes, hurricanes, etc., without being
damaged and to develop connection and column products that can be disassembled
and recycled. Meeting these objectives will provide essential elements for a new
paradigm, "Highway for Life (HFL)," an expression created by the Federal Highway
Administration for the U.S. highway industry to capture the idea of advancing
long lasting highways through innovation. In this study, novel materials with
demonstrated potential through past studies by the PI and four knowledge-
enhancement partner (KEP) small businesses will be adopted. Several modular
elements will be developed consisting of Nickel-Titanium shape memory alloys,
built-in elastomeric pads, engineered cementitious composites, and fiber-
reinforced polymer structural members. Large-scale structural models will be
built and tested to evaluate performance under large deformations and to
identify measures to improve and refine the connections. The proposed research
will be collaborative; involving an extensive exchange of ideas, information,
and knowledge enabled by using regularly scheduled face-to-face or cyber-
assisted meetings among the principal investigator and KEP business members. The
existing mechanisms at UNR Technology Transfer Office to protect intellectual
property of the PIs and of the small business partners will be used to
facilitate the project. A project advisory board consisting of representatives
from state and federal highway agencies will review the proposed designs and
provide feedback to maximize the probability of acceptance of the connections in
bridge construction.

The broader impacts of this research are new connection and column products with
potential new markets in the U.S. and other countries, especially for the
knowledge enhancement partner small businesses involved in this project. The
potential benefits to the travelling public are damage-free bridges that could
remain functional even after disastrous events such as hurricanes and
earthquakes. Emergency response vehicles such as ambulances and fire trucks will
be able to continue to use the highway system and provide the much needed
service without delays. The impact on the general public is a more efficient use
of materials and energy and less pollution because sustainable and recyclable
bridges save tremendous amounts of energy. The direct educational impact of the
project is the knowledge that the UNR team, including graduate and undergraduate
students, and the small business partners will gain by closely working with each
other. It is the intent of the project to engage undergraduate students in a
research context which is both challenging and purposeful, so as to motivate
them to pursue graduate education. The tests of the novel materials will be
webcast with the testing schedule widely announced to maximize the number of
online visitors. The findings from this study will be posted on the project
website. Furthermore, presentations to various technical groups will be made and
the highlights of the project will be incorporated in two advanced structural
engineering courses. To maximize the probability of involvement of
underrepresented groups, the PI will work with the UNR McNair program (a program
aimed at increasing the number of doctoral students from underrepresented
groups) and seek assistance in identifying potential talented students at the
undergraduate and PhD level who could work on the project.

Partners at the inception of the project are the Knowledge-Enhancement
Partnership (KEP) unit, consisting of the University of Nevada Reno (the
structural engineering program of the Civil and Environmental Engineering
Department and the Technology Transfer Office) and four small businesses:
Dynamic Isolation Systems (DIS), Inc. (McCarran, NV), FiberMatrix, Inc. (Sparks,
NV), Hexel Fyfe Co. LLC (San Diego, CA) and Nitinol Technology, Inc. (Palo Alto,
CA). Other partners are public sector organizations: Federal Highway
Administration, California Department of Transportation, South Carolina
Department of Transportation, and State of Washington Department of
Transportation.