* 1114380
* Slow slip at elevated pore pressures on brittle faults in a compliant subduction channel
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2015
* David Schmidt, University of Oregon Eugene
* Standard Grant
* Robin Reichlin
* 08/31/2015
* USD 257,468.00

About a decade ago, observations using the global-positioning satellite (GPS)
system led to the discovery of "slow-slip" behavior along the deepest extent of
faults. These transient events have now been documented along most of the
Earth's subduction zones, including the Cascadia margin of the Pacific
Northwest, where the University of Oregon has been cataloging their behavior,
and in other geologic settings such as the San Andreas and Hawaii. As their name
suggests, slow-slip events occur at sliding rates that are much slower than
those during earthquakes. They nevertheless are capable of releasing large
amounts of the strain energy that accumulates during the time intervals
(typically months to years) that separate them and they play an important role
in determining the conditions along faults just prior to the infrequent, large
earthquakes that pose some of the greatest risks to populations and
infrastructure in these settings. Our efforts focus on unraveling the geological
conditions that enable slow-slip to occur. We are developing a predictive
understanding for how the pressure of pore fluids (i.e. water) along the
subduction interface is controlled by the compaction of sediments and
dehydration reactions that release water from mineral particles. We are also
developing mathematical models to determine whether sliding on brittle faults
embedded in a more compliant matrix in a "subduction channel" can cause slip
behavior that is consistent with observations. This research effort is part of
the training for a promising new graduate student, it will involve an
undergraduate in our broader research effort, and it will enable us to more
effectively disseminate the University of Oregon catalogue of slow-slip source
parameters to the broader scientific community.

Further progress in understanding slow slip requires that improved geologic
constraints be included in the design and implementation of predictive slow-slip
models. Of particular note are the high pore pressures that seem to be required
for slow-slip to occur and the structural features in exhumed subduction zone
rocks that suggest coexistence of brittle and ductile deformation mechanisms. To
explore how high pore pressures develop, we consider consolidation and fluid
flow in porous underthrust sediments and incorporate the effects of chemical
dehydration reactions to develop a synoptic quantification of pore pressure
evolution that follows a subducted volume from the trench to the region of slow
slip. Constitutive behavior will be constrained using measured changes in
sediment permeability and void ratio during uniaxial deformation experiments on
hemipelagic mudstones under elevated pressure and temperature conditions,
potentially including the influence of the smectite-illite transition. A
complementary modeling effort examines the deformation produced by frictional
sliding on faults embedded within a ductile shear zone. Preliminary efforts
focus on a two-dimensional treatment of a subduction channel of fixed width that
contains a single fault in a compliant matrix; subsequent modeling phases will
be geared towards more realistic descriptions that incorporate variations in the
fraction of rigid, competent material within the compliant matrix and include
the effects of roughness along the direction of fault slip, consistent with
observations of exhumed m elange structures. Our new modeling framework is
constrained by an expanding catalog of slow-slip events and scaling
relationships that have been inferred from geodetic observations along the
Cascadia margin. With a combined theoretical, observational, and experimental
approach, this targeted research effort will improve our understanding of the
dynamics of slow slip and the tectonic behavior and hazards along subduction
margins.