* 1114370
* PFI:  A platform-based approach to developing and delivering nanoparticle antivirals for disease control in farmed shrimp
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2011,06/30/2014
* Sharron Quisenberry, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Sara B. Nerlove
* 06/30/2014
* USD 599,907.00

This Partnerships for Innovation (PFI) project from Iowa State University (ISU)
is based on the overarching goal of developing an effective and adaptable system
for disease control in farmed shrimp. The project emphasizes two emerging
technologies RNA interference--(RNAi) and nano-structured materials--to function
in concert as an antiviral effector molecule and delivery system, respectively.
Infectious diseases caused by viral pathogens account for substantial mortality
in farmed Pacific white shrimp (Litopenaeus vannamei) and result in devastating
financial losses. The aim of this project is to rapidly develop highly specific
RNAi-based antiviral molecules to protect individual shrimp from emerging viral
infections. These antiviral molecules will be combined with a nanoparticle
substrate so that the antiviral can be delivered orally to individual shrimp
during the rearing process. The goals and predicted outcomes of this project
will result in a platform system that can be rapidly adapted to respond to ever-
evolving and emerging infectious disease issues in shrimp farming. Therefore,
the project has strong potential for sustained innovation and to transform
disease control for this industry. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of
this project, beyond those for the partners, are economic benefits to the U.S.,
including the following: 1) Stable or even lower consumer prices for a high
protein seafood product supplied from an industry that would dramatically
increase its supply, if vaccines were available; 2) benefit to U.S. companies
that export wheat and soybeans-- the two main ingredients in shrimp feeds--along
with U.S. feed companies that export high tech microencapsultated larval feeds
to shrimp hatcheries worldwide; 2) producers of breeding stocks of shrimp, 3)
sustainable and predictable harvests for domestic shrimp producers, and 4)
positioning the U.S. as the leader in the aquaculture biotechnologies needed for
shrimp/fish farmers to supply future increases in demand for seafood that the
capture fisheries cannot meet. Broader impacts will also be witnessed through
training junior scientists at the undergraduate, graduate, and postdoctoral
levels in a manner that will advance their capacity to practice science in an
environment of entrepreneurialism--balancing bench work and scientific
advancement with the demands and timelines of business. Trainees will benefit
from academics and professional development mentoring at the lead institution
and from regular interactions and time with the employees and leadership at the
associated knowledge-enhancement partner companies.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Partners at the inception of the project are all part of
the Knowledge Enhancement Partnership (KEP) unit, consisting of Iowa State
University (Department of Entomology) and two small businesses: Harrisvaccines
(HV) (Ames, IA) and Liquidia Technologies (LT) (Research Triangle Park, NC).