* 1114019
* Theoretical Investigation of the Origin of Shallow Slip Deficit in Large Strike-Slip Earthquakes
* GEO,EAR
* 06/01/2011,05/31/2012
* Yuri Fialko, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Standard Grant
* Eva Zanzerkia
* 05/31/2012
* USD 93,062.00

Slip inversions of geodetic data from several large (magnitude~7) strike-slip
earthquakes point to coseismic slip deficit at shallow depths (&lt;3-4 km),
i.e., coseismic slip appears to decrease towards the Earth's surface. While the
inferred slip distribution may be consistent with laboratory-derived rate-and-
state friction laws suggesting that the uppermost brittle crust may be velocity
strengthening, there remains a question of how the coseismic slip deficit is
accommodated throughout the earthquake cycle. The consequence of velocity-
strengthening fault friction at shallow depths is that the deficit of coseismic
slip is relieved by postseismic afterslip and interseismic creep. However, many
seismic events with inferred shallow slip deficit were not associated with
either shallow interseismic creep or robust shallow afterslip. Hence the origin
of shallow "slip deficit" remains uncertain. The goal of this project is to
investigate whether inelastic failure in the shallow crust over an earthquake
cycle can explain the inferred deficit of shallow slip. Evidence for such
failure is emerging from geologic, seismic, and geodetic observations. The
project will address this problem using numerical models of spontaneous dynamic
rupture, including effects of both individual ruptures as well as earthquake
sequences. One important question is to what extent assumptions in the kinematic
inversions may bias the inferred slip distributions. In particular, inelastic
deformation in the shallow crust is expected to temper coseismic strain near the
fault, which may introduce an artificial deficit in inversions of geodetic data
that are based on purely elastic models. This project will also evaluate how
inelastic deformation during an interseismic period may affect the coseismic
slip distribution. This will be accomplished by developing earthquake-cycle
models that will self-consistently incorporate full rate-and-state rheology on
the slip interface, elastic deformation, as well as yielding in the host rocks.
Zones of inelastic deformation evolving over multiple earthquake cycles are
expected to affect the prestress on a fault and, consequently, the coseismic
slip distribution. The project will further explore how the time-dependent
evolution of the effective elastic moduli due to damage and healing may affect
the shallow slip deficit.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will result in an
improved understanding of how inelastic deformation in the vicinity of active
faults over hundreds of years influences the slip distribution of large
earthquakes. The anticipated results will impact interpretations of fault slip
based on geologic, seismic, and geodetic data. Results of this work will be also
relevant to the current debate about the size and depth extent of fault-zone
damage associated with major crustal faults. Furthermore, determining the origin
of the shallow slip deficit is important for estimating seismic hazard, as
suppression of shallow rupture could greatly influence strong ground motion in
the vicinity of active faults.