* 1114147
* Collaborative Research: Seismic characterization of microearthquakes and crustal velocity structure around the Whataroa fault zone drilling site, Alpine Fault, New Zealand
* GEO,EAR
* 10/01/2011,09/30/2017
* Steven Roecker, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Eva Zanzerkia
* 09/30/2017
* USD 237,782.00

The mechanical behavior of large faults is controlled by thermal, chemical, and
hydraulic factors, as well as each fault's intrinsic structure and the ambient
stresses. Understanding what conditions prevail within the interiors of active
faults is crucial for elucidating the mechanisms governing long-term fault
evolution and, in particular, the earthquake rupture process. This project
involves a detailed study of microearthquakes and crustal structure within and
surrounding the Alpine Fault, South Island, New Zealand, around the Whataroa
fault zone drilling site. It will be carried out close collaboration with a team
of New Zealand scientists. The key scientific issues to be addressed by this
research project include: (1) determining the geometry of the AF to mid-crustal
depths and the depth to the base of the seismogenic zone, (2) determining focal
mechanisms and estimating principal stress orientations, (3) seismic imaging of
crustal structure using multiple methods, and (4) searching for possible
nonvolcanic tremor (NVT). Our project is designed to test a number of
hypotheses, including: (1) that the complexity of the surface fault trace does
not reflect the fault trace at depth, rather the partitioning seen at the
surface merges into a throughgoing fault with oblique slip in the upper crust;
(2) that the depth to the base of the seismogenic zone is elevated to 15 km, or
perhaps shallower, on the AF beneath the Whataroa area; (3) that the AF dip
remains close to 50Â° to the base of the seismogenic zone; (4) that principal
stress orientations do not vary with distance from the AF; (5) that the
relatively low velocity zone imaged at large scale through much of the crust
along the SIGHT transects is actually a narrower zone closer to the AF, similar
to the resistivity model; (6) that NVT is not present beneath the AF.

The goal of this project is to examine the structure and microearthquake
characteristics of a major active continental fault, the Alpine Fault, South
Island, New Zealand. The Alpine Fault is late in its earthquake cycle and is the
focus of a long-term, multidisciplinary scientific investigation. In this
project, we will carry out seismic field work and subsequent analyses of
microearthquakes associated with the Alpine Fault. The research will be
conducted in conjunction with an ambitious fault zone drilling project focused
on the mechanical properties of the Alpine Fault and the adjacent crust. Their
work will help (1) define the geometry of the fault at depth, (2) determine the
depth range of seismic activity (the "seismogenic zone"), (3) establish a three-
dimensional structural context for interpreting borehole observations and core,
and (4) potentially help to define rupture zones of shallow earthquakes as
future drilling targets.