* 1114141
* Dissertation Research: Pattern and Process in Plant Physical Defenses Across a Latitudinal Gradient
* BIO,IOS
* 05/15/2011,04/30/2013
* Douglas Levey, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Michael Mishkind
* 04/30/2013
* USD 14,907.00

Many plants are eaten by a wide variety of insects, and herbivorous, or plant-
eating, insects sometimes consume almost half of the leaves that a plant grows
each year. Plants in tropical forests tend to be better defended against being
eaten by insects than plants in temperate forests, and the tropical plants are
also more diverse. One explanation for both higher diversity and better defense
may be that insects eat more leaves in tropical forests than in temperate
forests, selecting for plants with more defense and preventing dominance by just
a few plant species. However, it is not really known whether herbivory is higher
in tropical forests, because no previous studies have measured herbivory in a
consistent way across a wide range of latitudes. The goal of this study is to
compare the consumption of leaves of plants in the cucumber family by insects in
three locations, one tropical (Panama), one subtropical (Florida), and one
temperate (Wisconsin). To keep factors such as nutrient content of leaves and
local environmental conditions constant, the investigators will grow plants in
greenhouses and then transplant them into natural environments at each of the
sites. They will then record the number and type of insects visiting the plants,
and how much those insects consume of each plant. This will occur over the main
growing season of the plants at each site. The study will end when fruits and
seeds have been produced, which will reveal how herbivore damage to leaves can
influence plant fertility.

Understanding how herbivory changes from tropical to temperate climates will
help predict how change in climate might change amounts of herbivory in the
future. For example, rise in temperature might cause tropical insects to expand
into higher latitudes and increase the amount of plants that are eaten in the
temperate zone. In the case of insects that eat crops, this could impact
agriculture. Knowing more about current patterns of herbivory may help people
adapt to future change through measures such as changes in pest control
management. This project will also provide research training for undergraduates
and conduct outreach to public schools.