* 1114263
* GOALI: Quality Analysis in Flexible Manufacturing Systems: A Systems Approach
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/30/2011,09/30/2011
* Jingshan Li, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Russell Barton
* 09/30/2011
* USD 124,831.00

This Grant Opportunity for Academic Liaison with Industry (GOALI) award provides
funding for the establishment of an analytical framework to investigate the
impact of flexibility on product quality in flexible manufacturing systems and
application of the results to production systems at General Motors.
Specifically, the work includes deriving a method to address the analytical
modeling for quality performance in flexible manufacturing systems, developing
an approach to Identify the machine and the product type that impede the quality
performance in the strongest manner, i.e., bottleneck machine and product,
investigating the appropriate batch size or production sequence so that both the
quality requirements and customer orders are satisfied, and finally,
implementing the techniques to the painting and machining operations at General
Motors manufacturing plants. The approach of the research would be based on
analytical investigation of Markov processes that describe the flexible systems
at hand. Quality performance will be modeled as a function of transitions among
multiple states characterized by product types and sequences, and propagation of
quality variations among the machines. The challenge of this research lies in
discovering an appropriate mathematical description of such function and its
arguments.

If successful, the results of this research will establish a novel analytical
method to study the interaction between flexibility and quality, and to provide
insights for production system design from the point of view of quality. Such a
method will enable us to evaluate quality performance, identify bottlenecks, and
design scheduling policies (sequencing and batching) to achieve the best quality
and reliable demand satisfaction. The successful completion of this research
will open up a new direction in manufacturing systems research and build a solid
foundation for integrated study of cost, productivity, quality and flexibility.
Furthermore, it will provide production engineers with quantitative tools for
analysis, improvement, and design of flexible manufacturing systems with respect
to quality. Finally, the results obtained will be applicable not only to
automotive but also to other manufacturing industries (e.g., semiconductor,
appliance, etc.) as well.