* 1114597
* ISE Pathways: Audemes, Metaphors and Aural Games: A Pathways Project to Make STEM Engaging for the Blind and Visually Impaired
* EDU,DRL
* 08/15/2011,07/31/2015
* Steven Mannheimer, Indiana University
* Continuing Grant
* Alphonse Desena
* 07/31/2015
* USD 267,249.00

The project, from Indiana University Purdue University Indianapolis (IUPUI),
investigates the design, development and dissemination of metaphoric aural sound
symbols (audemes), audeme dictionary and riddle audeme games to teach scientific
concepts to 75-100 students who are blind and visually impaired (BVI). A number
of research questions are included. How do audemes and sequences function as
metaphors of STEM concepts? Which audeme game structures and strategies work
best to engage BVI students? How do audemes and audeme games impact STEM
education? &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The audeme-to-concept-to-audeme dictionary will
build scientific concepts using standards, state-approved science textbooks,
teachers and students. They will also examine secondary words that are
associated with the science concepts by mining textbooks, identifying tertiary
concepts, and establishing a preliminary dictionary of audemes. A team of
education, students and professionals who are experts will design the audemes
after multiple iterations. A control and experimental group of students will
test the audemes through traditional methods and audeme games. Students will
complete a pre and post test of scientific concepts with repeated measures ANOVA
to examine changes on student scores from the control and experimental groups.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This work using audemes to teach scientific concepts will
make contributions to BVI, learning disabilities, and general population
students. Audemes and audeme games have the potential for broad implementation
in both formal and informal settings for computers, mobile, and other networked
platforms.