* 1114255
* Collaborative Research: Research: Zoo And Aquarium Action Research Collaborative  (ZAARC)
* EHR,DRL
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2014
* John Falk, Oregon State University
* Continuing Grant
* Arlene de Strulle
* 08/31/2014
* USD 166,568.00

The Zoo and Aquarium Action Research Collaborative research project targets zoo
and aquarium staff with a cascading action research model meant to build the
capacity of the informal science education field to conduct research on visitor
learning. Research questions focus around the experiences of participating zoo
and aquarium staff in conducting action research on visitor experiences and how
they use the information from that research to improve and develop educational
programs.

In the first year of the project, zoo and aquarium staff will implement a well
validated educational activity with visitors to their institutions and learn how
to develop and implement action research in their context. In the second year of
the project, zoo and aquarium staff will take their new skills in action
research and develop their own questions to investigate visitor learning in
their own organizational settings. Project staff will train zoo and aquarium
staff in action research, provide technical assistance and facilitate
collaboration among the sites and staff. This project will contribute to
learning in the field about models for professional development and how to
develop the research capacity of ISE staff. Partners in this project include
TERC and Oregon State University and sites are situated in zoos and aquariums in
six states including CA, MO, MA, AZ, MD and WA. At each of these institutions
approximately 15 senior staff will participate in the professional development.
Evalaution of the project will focus on the learning that is generated about
collaborative models for action research and the impact on ISE staff of
participating in action research as professional development. Methods for the
evaluation will include surveys and interviews with participants, observations,
document review and site visits.

Outcomes of the project include increased capacity for zoo and aquarium staff to
conduct research on visitor learning, case studies of collaborative action
research projects that will be disseminated widely through workshops and
conferences, and research papers presented at conferences and published.