* 1114059
* SBIR Phase I:  Data Integration and Analysis for the Pharmaceutical Industry
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2011,06/30/2012
* Robert Meadows, BioHeatMap Inc
* Standard Grant
* Juan E. Figueroa
* 06/30/2012
* USD 165,498.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project aims to provide
novel web-based mechanisms to biomedical researchers for the integration and
efficient analysis of the vast amount of biomedical literature. The analysis
will include the detection of important connections between candidate active
substances (drugs), clinical indications (diseases), and even connections to
academic experts/specialists on such drugs and diseases. Delivering such novel
web-based mechanisms requires research on entity resolution, flexible on-line
analytical processing and controlled crowdsourcing. Entity resolution is needed
because the pharmaceutical researcher draws his information from multiple
sources, which often use different terminologies and identification schemes for
the same entity (e.g., the same substance). Controlled crowdsourcing is needed
because humans and automatic agents will cooperate in creating a quality
information asset, where it is important that there is clear trace to who
provided each piece of information and how credible it is. Finally, on-line
analytical processing technologies, which have been very successful in corporate
business intelligence (e.g., sales analysis) will need to be extended for the
purpose of analyzing the biomedical literature.

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project is reduced costs in the
drug discovery process and enablement of promising new drug discoveries. The
project can impact the effectiveness of researchers and decision making
executives working on drug discovery either in pharmaceutical companies or in
academic organizations. Impact will come in the following ways: 1) Reduction of
costs in the research department by reducing the time that the researchers spend
in searching and browsing the vast amount of biomedical literature for
interesting emerging ideas. The proposed novel ways of biomedical literature
analysis will allow the researcher to obtain, summarize and observe trends in
the latest scientific facts, without copiously browsing thousands of citations
at a time. 2) Enabling of new drug discovery by revealing drug/disease/molecular
target connections that can feed the drug discovery pipeline and would otherwise
be overlooked. The impact of discovering novel drugs can be huge given the
rising medical costs that the country faces.