* 1114934
* CNH: Co-Evolution of Upstream Human Behavior and Downstream Ecosystem Services in a Changing Climate
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/2011,01/31/2017
* Elena Irwin, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 01/31/2017
* USD 1,499,997.00

Non-point source nutrient and sediment runoff from upstream agricultural
production is impairing coastal ecosystem services across the globe, including
the Great Lakes, Chesapeake Bay, the northern Gulf of Mexico, and other regions
of economic, recreational, and cultural importance. This degradation is
projected to worsen with continued climate change, as more intense rains
transport more nutrients and sediments downstream with impacts that include
reduced water clarity, increases in harmful algal blooms, and a loss of high-
valued fish stocks. To address these problems, many agricultural management
practices have been identified that can reduce sediment and nutrient runoff.
Effective design of policies to encourage adoption of effective agricultural
management practices is limited by an important knowledge gap concerning human
behavioral responses to ecosystem conditions, however. This interdisciplinary
research project will use the Maumee River watershed and western Lake Erie as a
model ecosystem to quantify the co-evolution between upstream human behavior and
downstream ecosystem services. The investigators will model how public attitudes
co-evolve with downstream ecosystem conditions and shape support for policies
that impact agricultural management practices, and in turn, how farmers respond
to these policies and public attitudes. They also will integrate biophysical
models of the study region with behavioral models of public policy and farmer
decision making to predict the co-evolution among public policies, farmer
behavior, and downstream ecosystems under possible future scenarios. This
modeling of the two-way coupling between upstream human behavior and downstream
ecosystem services will address the question of whether changes in upstream
public attitudes, policies, and farmer behavior will offset anticipated negative
impacts of climate change on downstream ecosystem
services.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will develop a coupled human-natural
system model that focuses on the dynamic feedback between upstream human
behavioral responses and downstream ecosystem change. It will provide an
assessment of how farmer behavioral responses mediate the interactions between
specific policies and changing ecological conditions, and it will enhance
understanding regarding the capacity of state and local policy makers to
influence farmer behavior and downstream ecosystem conditions in ways that may
counteract the expected negative impacts of climate change. While substantial
research has focused on the one-way impacts of upstream nutrient inputs and
fluxes on watershed functioning and downstream ecosystem services, key reverse
linkages that shape public, policy, and farmer responses to ecological changes
have received much less attention. The integrated model will provide the
theoretical foundation for assessing the dynamic linkages between human
attitudes and behaviors and downstream ecological conditions and will improve
predictions of the dynamic effect of changing behavioral activities and climate
on the availability and quality of downstream ecosystem services. This
predictive knowledge is relevant to societal concerns because it will improve
the ability of decision makers in coastal watersheds to manage adaptively to
address negative impacts of climate change. The project also will provide
education, training, and mentoring for undergraduate and graduate students and
post-doctoral researchers. The investigators will work directly with Grade 6-12
teachers within rural school districts in the Maumee watershed to develop
watershed science curriculum, and they will disseminate results more broadly by
working with the Ohio Sea Grant College Program to develop and distribute
materials targeted at decision makers and the general public. This project is
supported by the NSF Dynamics of Coupled Natural and Human Systems (CNH)
Program.