* 1115362
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant: A Multi-Factor Analysis of the Emergence of a Specialist-Based Economy Among the Phoenix Basin Hohokam
* SBE,BCS
* 06/01/2011,05/31/2013
* David Abbott, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 05/31/2013
* USD 11,743.00

Under the supervision of Dr. David R. Abbott, Sophia Kelly will analyze pottery
provenance data gathered in her study of Hohokam ceramics in the Phoenix Basin,
Arizona. The data will be used to examine the social and economic factors that
contributed to widespread demand for specialized pottery production in this
region during prehistory. The research has significance for several reasons. It
provides insight into the mechanisms which facilitate effective societal
functioning at a traditional level of development. It also provides insight into
an important achievement in prehistoric America.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
prehistoric Hohokam economy provides an ideal case to evaluate the conditions
associated with intensive pottery manufacture, because it was characterized by
the widespread distribution of ceramic vessels fashioned by a relatively small
number of people. For over 600 years, Hohokam households relied almost entirely
on specialists to supply them with the pottery that they used to cook, serve,
and store food. By the mid eleventh century AD, pottery producers in one
geographic area manufactured almost all of the decorated containers used by more
than 20,000 people across this vast region. This type of large and complex
economy, which is typically associated with state-level societies, developed in
the absence of clear political hierarchies. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Ms. Kelly's
study builds a model that evaluates the role of four factors in the development
of demand for specialist produced red-on-buff pottery in Hohokam settlements.
The factors include 1) agricultural intensification in the form of irrigation
agriculture, 2) increases in population density, 3) ritual or social obligations
that require the production of particular craft items, and 4) improved
efficiency of regional distribution systems. Demand for pottery produced by
specialists is estimated through a ceramic sourcing analysis that determines the
volume and concentration of non-local pottery at 14 Phoenix Basin settlements.
The data generated from this project allow for a detailed reconstruction of the
conditions that affect the organization of craft production over time and
provide the basis to model these changes with unprecedented precision.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This dissertation project is of value to researchers
studying ancient economies, as well as to the contemporary ancestors of the
Hohokam, the Akimel and Tohono O'odham. In order to extend the broader impact of
her study, Kelly collaborated with the Gila River Indian Community (GRIC) to
incorporate the tribes research interests in her project design. Mounting
archaeological evidence that prehistoric Hohokam ceramic production and exchange
were part of a complex, specialist economy is a source of interest and pride for
present-day O'odham communities. This study is a timely complement to recent
investment in tribal museums, educational programs on cultural resources on the
reservation, and the establishment of a local Tribal Historic Preservation
Office. In addition, the project involves the training of several GRIC staff
members during the data collection process and a portion of the results will be
co-authored with GRIC archaeologists. The data collected in this study will be
made available through GRIC research databases, and interpretation of the
results will be disseminated to the community through reports, presentations,
and contributions to the local tribal museum (Huhugam Heritage Center). The
databases from this project will be filed with the Digital Archaeological Record
(tDAR). The research results will also be disseminated through presentations at
national meetings and through publication in peer-reviewed journals.