* 1115774
* Towards Evidence-Based Discovery
* CSE,IIS
* 08/31/2009,08/31/2012
* Catherine Blake, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 08/31/2012
* USD 391,759.00

Vast quantities of electronic information provide a unique opportunity for
scientists identify candidate solutions for grand challenges as scientists,
policy makers, and students have never had access to more electronic information
than they do today. The goal in this research is to develop new text mining
methods that are consistent with the manual processes that experts currently
used to resolve contradictory and redundant evidence. Both discovery and
synthesis are difficult activities even for people, so the team plans a socio-
technical strategy to achieve this goal. This study includes a longitudinal
study of manual discovery and synthesis behaviors of a diverse network of
faculty, policy makers, and students from UNC and the Research Triangle Park.
The majority of effort will be to advance natural language processing methods
that automatically identify concepts and relationships, detect entailment and
paraphrasing, and generate multi-document summaries. Lastly, a series of
qualitative and quantitative studies that accurately reflect the degree to which
text mining methods assist in discovery and synthesis activities will be
conducted. This project will advance language processing methods that detect
concepts and relationships, recognize paraphrases and entailment, and generate
multiple documents summaries; provide the natural language community with a
collection of gold standards that reflect diverse and realistic information
needs; train the next generation of scientists to explore complex research that
span disciplines; promote the ?human side of discovery? via a sponsored
workshop. The socio-technical solution to text mining proposed in this project
will ensure broad impact of the subsequent text mining theory and tools. This
project will accelerate scientific discovery by enabling experts to follow
connections between disciplines; and accelerate policy development by reducing
the time required to resolve seemingly redundant and contradictory evidence
within a discipline. Involving policy champions from the Environmental
Protection Agency and the Cecil G. Sheps Center for Health Services will ensure
that the theory and technology produced from this research are consistent with
the complex environment in which discovery and synthesis takes place. Claim
Jumper will accelerate their existing policy efforts, but more importantly,
tools from this project will enable studies that are not feasible with manual
methods.

