* 1115130
* NeTS: Small: Collaborative Research:Cross Layer Survivability to Cascading Failures in Layered Networks
* CSE,CNS
* 08/01/2011,07/31/2015
* Krishnaiyan Thulasiraman, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Standard Grant
* John Brassil
* 07/31/2015
* USD 200,000.00

The objective of this research is to carry out a novel study of network
survivability across layers to deal with cascading failures in layered networks.
This research will be in the context of IP-over-WDM (wavelength division
multiplexing) optical networks, with a focus on multiple failures in the
physical (optical) layer and their consequences at the higher layer, namely the
IP layer. Specifically, the broad scope of the project covers i) Survivable
logical topology mapping under multiple failures, ii) Logical topology mapping
for guaranteed survivability, iii) Logical topology mapping under multiple
constraints, and iv) A generalized theory of flows across layers, capacity of
survivable logical topologies and related algorithmic
challenges.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merits of the proposed
research lie in developing unifying theories and methodologies that will make
significant advances to the understanding of cross-layer survivability issues,
and providing the theoretical foundation for future advances in the general area
of cross-layer design and optimization. The research team will build these
theories on modern advances in graph theory, mathematical programming and
algorithm design. Innovative algorithmic techniques based on advanced data
structures and computer algorithms such as approximation techniques will be
developed. A generalized theory of cross layer flows that will go well beyond
the widely used classical theory of single layer flows will be
developed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: WDM Optical networks form the
critical backbone of all modern communication networks and systems. Modern
communication systems consist of multiple physical implementations communicating
via layered protocols. As such, a single failure at one layer may lead to
cascading failures, i.e., failures at the physical layer lead to failures at the
logical layer. Research in this area of cross-layer survivability is still in
its infancy. Though IP-Over-WDM networks will provide the context for this
research, the theory of cross layer flows and the algorithmic (in particular
approximation) techniques that will be developed will have multidisciplinary
value spanning several STEM related areas: computer science, electrical
engineering, graph theory, mathematical programming, and the emerging area of
network science. Besides extending the frontiers of knowledge in cross layer
theory, the research will have significant educational value in training highly
skilled researchers for research and development in cutting edge technologies in
different areas of information technology. The training program will have a
specific focus on training undergraduate students for future leadership in STEM
areas.