* 1115681
* Role of Ess1 in control of RNA polymerase II
* BIO,MCB
* 01/03/2011,08/31/2012
* Steven Hanes, SUNY, Upstate Medical University
* Continuing Grant
* Karen Cone
* 08/31/2012
* USD 19,401.00

All of the information required to generate a complete organism is stored in
the DNA in discrete units called genes. To decode this information, a large
enzyme complex known as RNA polymerase II is required. RNA polymerase II
transcribes individual genes into mRNA molecules, which encode proteins
(enzymes) that carry out chemical reactions in the cell or serve as structural
frameworks to give cells and tissues their architecture. Not all genes in a
given cell are transcribed at once, and determining how and when RNA polymerase
II transcribes a given gene (there are ~30,000 in humans and 6,000 in yeast) is
an area of intense study. Understanding this process, known as gene regulation,
is the key to understanding how cells become different from one another during
embryonic development, how cells respond to their environment, and how organisms
evolve. Errors in gene regulation by RNA polymerase II contribute to disease and
changes in fitness (survival) of an organism. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
is aimed at understanding one level of control of the RNA polymerase II complex.
RNA polymerase is composed of many protein subunits, the largest of which is
called Rpb1. Rpb1 carries out the enzymatic action in which RNA is synthesized
during transcription of a gene. Many smaller subunits interact with Rpb1 at
different stages of transcription to help direct Rpb1 to the correct DNA site at
the start of the gene (initiation), to help Rpb1 travel along the length of the
gene (elongation), and to signal Rpb1 to stop transcription at the end of the
gene (termination). Determining when these subunits bind to Rpb1 is an important
process that appears to be aided by an enzyme called Ess1. Ess1 is known as a
peptidyl-prolyl cis/trans isomerase. Ess1 binds to Rpb1 and is hypothesized to
induce conformational changes (called cis/trans isomerizations) in Rpb1. In this
way, Ess1 might control subunit binding to Rpb1, and thus help coordinate the
multiple steps of transcription (initiation, elongation, termination) needed to
generate mRNA and small RNAs. This research project is designed to determine
exactly how Ess1 affects Rpb1, and thus how it may play a key role in gene
regulation by the RNA polymerase II complex.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impact
of project: The research project will provide an opportunity for fulltime,
intensive scientific training for a postdoctoral fellow and a Ph.D. student.
Training will be in the various disciplines of genetics, biochemistry, and
molecular biology. The project will also engage college undergraduate students
during the summer months as part of the Department's Research Experience for
Undergraduates Program (also sponsored by the National Science Foundation).
Summer students will participate in ongoing experimental research during which
time they will learn the scientific method, including the making of hypotheses,
designing experiments to test them, carrying out the appropriate control
experiments, as well as thoughtful analysis and interpretation of data. As such,
the project should help inspire as well as train the next generation of
biological researchers. In addition, the results of the project will be
disseminated to the public in the form of research publications, presentations
at national meetings, and free distribution of valuable reagents and scientific
resources (data, strains, antibodies, etc.) to other qualified
investigators.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;