* 1115899
* Collaborative Research:  Disease at the margins of species ranges: anther-smut on alpine species
* BIO,DEB
* 06/15/2011,05/31/2016
* Martin Wu, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 05/31/2016
* USD 989,521.00

Infectious diseases can be devastating to humans and agriculture, but much less
is known about how disease affects natural populations. This study will
investigate the impact of a fungal disease, anther-smut, on the distribution of
alpine plants, and will serve as a model for assessing how sterilizing diseases
affect natural populations. The study will be carried out in an area where there
is heavy disease infestation on many species, and steep environmental gradients
in multiple valleys, enabling systematic studies of the factors that influence
disease processes at the margins of species distributions. Genetic and
ecological experiments, theoretical models, and long-term monitoring will
investigate how disease affects the limits of species' ranges and how marginal
populations may be foci for disease emergence through transmission of infections
between host species. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will enhance
international collaborations, support local conservation efforts, and provide a
field course, training and hands-on research experience in infectious disease
biology for researchers and undergraduate students. Alpine regions are
themselves fragile environments severely threatened by climate change and this
study will establish baseline information essential for managing these plant
communities in relation to disease and the rapid environmental changes that are
occurring in this area.