* 1115167
* Meeting: Student Support for US National Combustion Meeting: March 20-23, 2011 in Atlanta, GA
* ENG,CBET
* 03/01/2011,02/29/2012
* Tim Lieuwen, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Arvind Atreya
* 02/29/2012
* USD 10,000.00

1115167&lt;br/&gt;Lieuwen&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award provides support for
graduate-student travel to the 7th US National Combustion Meeting, organized by
the Central States Section of the Combustion Institute. The meeting will be
hosted by the Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta, GA from March 20-23,
2011. NSF funds are targeted to increase the participation of graduate students
at the meeting.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In 1999, the three United States sections
of the international Combustion Institute - Eastern States, Central States, and
Western States - initiated a biennial series of national meetings on combustion.
These meetings have been highly successful, based on the attendance and the
number of presentations. Consequently, this biennial event has gained a
prominent stature and become the premier national conference in fundamental and
applied combustion. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit:&lt;br/&gt;The
conference will consist of three days of primarily contributed presentations
organized in multiple parallel sessions each day. (Typically, there are six or
more parallel sessions.) The contributed presentations will include both podium
and poster presentations. A few invited speakers will also present each day.
Information about the availability of travel support to graduate students will
be provided in all the meeting announcements and on appropriate websites. In
addition, an announcement about the availability of travel support will be
mailed to members of the Combustion Institute.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts:&lt;br/&gt;Combustion research is a multi-disciplinary field
encompassing diverse disciplines in engineering and science. Society relies on
combustion for power generation, transportation, and manufacturing. This
conference allows combustion-focused researchers to exchange ideas in a
stimulating technical forum. Policymakers will also be in attendance to
participate in the exchange of information. The intellectual merit and broader
Impacts of this activity arise from the participation of combustion experts from
across the United States and from various countries, dissemination of their
technical findings, their communications with students, and their visions of
future research directions.