* 1115256
* AF: Small: The Traveling Salesman Problem and Lightweight Approximation Algorithms
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2011,12/31/2016
* David Williamson, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Rahul Shah
* 12/31/2016
* USD 349,999.00

The traveling salesman problem (TSP) is easily the most famous problem in
discrete optimization. Given a set of n cities and the costs c(i,j) of traveling
from city i to city j for all i and j, the goal of the problem is to find the
least expensive tour that visits each city exactly once and returns to its
starting point. A linear programming relaxation of the problem called the
subtour LP is known to give extremely good lower bounds on the length of an
optimal tour in practice. Nevertheless, the subtour LP bound is poorly
understood from a theoretical point of view. For 30 years it has been known that
it is always at least 2/3 times the length of an optimal tour, and it is known
that there are instances such that it is at most 3/4 times the length of an
optimal tour, but no progress has been made in tightening these bounds. It has
been conjectured that the subtour LP is always at least 3/4 times the length of
the optimal tour. The goal of this research is to resolve this conjecture.
Because this goal is very ambitious, a number of intermediate goals have been
proposed.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Theoretical computer scientists have intensively
studied approximation algorithms for NP-hard problems; these are polynomial-time
algorithms that always provide solutions that are provably close to optimal (in
terms of some performance guarantee). The main issue driving theoretical work
has been improvements in performance guarantee rather than whether the
algorithms are implementable or practical. While understanding the limits of
approximability is and should be one of the issues that theoretical work
advances, one can also explore whether those limits can be reached with
algorithms that are less computationally intensive than the ones currently in
the literature. We call this the creation of lightweight versions of
approximation algorithms. This exploration advances the potential impact of
approximation algorithm on practice without losing the &lt;br/&gt;theoretical
rigor of the field.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of the proposal
lies in the possibility of making substantial progress in resolving outstanding
problems related to the subtour LP for the traveling salesman problem, and also
in making practical some of the outstanding theoretical work in approximation
algorithms. The goal of this research lies in moving theoretical and practical
studies of optimization problems closer to each other. In the case of the
traveling salesman problem, we have a bound that is very good in practice, but
we do not understand its theoretical properties. In the case of approximation
algorithms, we have some very good theoretical algorithms, but they are often
not practical. We would like to understand the theoretical properties of the
subtour LP bound for the traveling salesman problem, and to make practical some
of the good theoretical work in approximation algorithms.