* 1115692
* Numerical Linear Algebra Tools for the Analysis of Complex Networks
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2011,05/31/2015
* Michele Benzi, Emory University
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 05/31/2015
* USD 303,046.00

This project concerns the development, analysis and application&lt;br/&gt;of
numerical linear algebra tools for the quantitative study of&lt;br/&gt;important
properties of large-scale complex networks, such as&lt;br/&gt;centrality,
betweenness and communicability measures. Specifically,&lt;br/&gt;the
investigator and his collaborators study efficient algorithms&lt;br/&gt;for the
fast approximation of the entries of matrix functions&lt;br/&gt;such as the
exponential and the resolvent of adjacency matrices&lt;br/&gt;and graph
Laplacians, as well as their traces. While these&lt;br/&gt;matrices are quite
sparse, in the case of complex networks&lt;br/&gt;they behave very differently
from the matrices associated with&lt;br/&gt;regular lattices (grids), such as
those arising from discretizations&lt;br/&gt;of partial differential equations.
Hence, there is a need to&lt;br/&gt;develop new methods, both computational and
analytical, to deal&lt;br/&gt;with these very large-scale problems. The
investigator brings&lt;br/&gt;together expertise in classical numerical analysis
and approximation&lt;br/&gt;theory, as well as methods from spectral graph
theory and modern&lt;br/&gt;network analysis, to enable efficient computations
involving large&lt;br/&gt;graphs. Potential applications include the analysis of
social networks,&lt;br/&gt;the study of biological and neurological networks,
applications in physics&lt;br/&gt;and operations research, and so
forth.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Over the last decade or so, the emerging
field of network science&lt;br/&gt;has had a profound influence on such
different domains as physics,&lt;br/&gt;chemistry, biology, operations research,
engineering and the social&lt;br/&gt;sciences. A deep understanding of network
structure and dynamics is&lt;br/&gt;of great importance also for Homeland
Security and for many businesses,&lt;br/&gt;including financial institutions and
e-commerce. Detailed, quantitative&lt;br/&gt;models of massive and complex
networks are now pervasive owing to the unprecedented availability of data on
just about any conceivable topic. Extracting useful information from these
massive data sets and networks requires fast and accurate algorithms. Such
algorithms can be used, for instance, to rank the `importance' of elements of a
network, i.e., to determine which nodes are essential for the proper functioning
of a network. They are also used to determine bottlenecks in a network, and
critical connections in a graph. The importance of these notions for crucial
parts of the infrastructure of a country, such as power or transportation
grids,&lt;br/&gt;cannot be overstated. The investigator and his collaborators
develop fast computer techniques to solve these and related problems.