* 1115341
* Computer simulations of giant fluctuations in mixing fluids
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2011,06/30/2014
* Aleksandar Donev, New York University
* Continuing Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 06/30/2014
* USD 323,235.00

Thermal fluctuations in non-equilibrium systems exhibit
remarkable&lt;br/&gt;behavior compared to equilibrium systems. Giant
fluctuations in&lt;br/&gt;binary mixtures of miscible fluids have been observed,
including&lt;br/&gt;in recent experiments in microgravity. Novel mathematical
and&lt;br/&gt;computational challenges need to be addressed in order to
include&lt;br/&gt;thermal fluctuations in traditional computational fluid
dynamics in&lt;br/&gt;a way that is consistent with statistical mechanics. This
proposal&lt;br/&gt;is concerned with the design, mathematical analysis, and
computer&lt;br/&gt;implementation of finite-volume methods for fluctuating
hydrodynamics&lt;br/&gt;of fluid mixtures, as well as applications to
diffusively mixing&lt;br/&gt;fluids in gravity. The following research
directions are proposed:&lt;br/&gt;(1) Multi-resolution numerical schemes for
solving the compressible&lt;br/&gt;stochastic continuum equations; (2)
Algorithms for incompressible,&lt;br/&gt;and (3) low Mach fluctuating
hydrodynamics of miscible mixtures on&lt;br/&gt;staggered and collocated grids;
(4) Simulations of giant fluctuations&lt;br/&gt;and comparisons to experiments;
(5) Study of the contribution&lt;br/&gt;of advection by velocity fluctuations to
transport in finite&lt;br/&gt;non-equilibrium
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Flows at micro and nano scales typical of new
devices and biological&lt;br/&gt;systems are affected by thermal fluctuations.
These effects are often&lt;br/&gt;assumed small and are not included in
traditional computational&lt;br/&gt;fluid dynamics. However, giant fluctuations
in the concentration&lt;br/&gt;of a polymer solution have been observed in
recent experiments&lt;br/&gt;conducted in microgravity on a research space
shuttle. Computer&lt;br/&gt;simulations are ideally suited for studying the
details of this&lt;br/&gt;phenomenon and comparing the predictions of existing
theory to&lt;br/&gt;the experimental findings. However, our community still
lacks&lt;br/&gt;the appropriate computational tools, including both algorithms
and&lt;br/&gt;large-scale parallel codes, to attack this problem. The
investigator&lt;br/&gt;and his colleagues will develop such tools and use them
to answer&lt;br/&gt;important scientific questions concerning fluctuations in
fluids, in&lt;br/&gt;close collaboration with experimentalists. The developed
algorithms&lt;br/&gt;will be implemented in a public domain code whose
development is funded&lt;br/&gt;through a Software Infrastructure for Sustained
Innovation NSF grant.