* 1115680
* CGV: Small: Inverse Light Transport Under Femto-Photography and Transient Imaging
* CSE,IIS
* 08/01/2011,07/31/2014
* Ramesh Raskar, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 07/31/2014
* USD 499,999.00

CGV: Small: Inverse Light Transport under Femto-Photography and Transient
Imaging&lt;br/&gt;Raskar, Ramesh, Massachusetts Institute of
Technology&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;How can you photograph objects beyond the line
of sight? How can you recover bidirectional reflectance of materials from a
single viewpoint? These seemingly impossible tasks are possible by considering
the finite speed of light and using a new type of computational photography
called, Femto-Photography. New advances in ultra-fast imaging provide tremendous
new opportunities in modeling, representing and synthesizing light transport in
computer graphics and computer vision. Research in computational photography and
scene understanding will benefit by analyzing the transient response of the
scene to extremely short duration active illumination. Traditional imaging uses
steady-state response where the global illumination has reached an equilibrium
state. The investigators are developing a new theoretical framework for
transient light transport and are addressing inverse problems using time-
resolved imaging. The investigators have recently developed the first physical
demonstration of hidden geometry recovery.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research
aims to develop a new branch of computational imaging by developing a
mathematical framework for studying higher dimensional light transport that
exploits time-resolved imaging. This research brings ultra-fast imaging in the
realm of computer graphics/vision and computational photography. The finely
sampled time-dimension provides a range of research directions for modeling and
measuring geometry and photometry of scenes that were previously considered
beyond the reach of traditional machine vision. The techniques for time-resolved
imaging exploit multiplexing, sparsity-exploiting reconstructions, state-space
formulation, system identification methods and parameterized reflectance models
in novel ways. Overall, the research pushes the boundaries of light transport
based methods by an extra (time) dimension and hopes to show that forward and
inverse problems in 5D light transport can inspire the next generation of
imaging hardware and algorithms.