* 1115333
* Collaborative Research: AFfield Expansion Method for Acoustic Scattering from Topography: Extensions to Elasticity and the Inverse Problem
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2015
* David Nicholls, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Junping Wang
* 08/31/2015
* USD 129,999.00

This proposal initiates a new collaboration aimed at improving methods of
waveform inversion by including topography in seismic wave modeling and reducing
the reliance of these methods on data at extremely low-frequency. The Principal
Investigators propose to adapt and improve methods developed for simulating
scattering from a diffraction grating. Their approach has extensions to linear
elasticity and provides general improvements for solving the inverse problem.
Significant mathematical advances are required to develop robust and efficient
techniques for this application. The Boundary Perturbation Method extends the
Field Expansion approach to an arbitrary number of layers with independent
topographies and allows for rapid and accurate simulation of acoustic wave
propagation in two dimensions. Extensions to three dimensions and to the general
equations of elasticity are required. Moreover, the extension of frequency-
independent discretizations based on Geometric Acoustics to multilayered elastic
models is a significant and necessary mathematical advance. Additionally,
advances in the inverse problem are also necessary to make the technique truly
applicable to the seismic imaging problem. The standard method of "full-waveform
inversion" requires data at frequencies which are too low to record in practice.
The PIs' approach casts the forward problem as the application of a sequence of
topography-dependent operators where the interface shapes appear rather
explicitly. A number of iteration schemes are proposed for the recovery of these
shapes, using re-arrangements of the compositions coupled to standard
regularizing techniques from the theory of ill-posed problems.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The propagation properties of seismic waves in layers of
sediment are crucial in many technologies including the determination of inner
earth properties and structure, earthquake detection and prediction, and
hydrocarbon (oil and gas) exploration. In light of its many important
applications, it is not surprising that a vast array of numerical and
experimental techniques have been brought to bear upon this problem. However,
several gaps in understanding and capability still exist. The PIs' address some
of these questions through sophisticated numerical simulations which will be
validated against both laboratory experiments and field measurements from the
Tibetan plateau.