* 1115025
* CNH: Impacts of Global Change Scenarios on Ecosystem Services from the World's Rivers
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2016
* Faye Duchin, CUNY City College
* Standard Grant
* Alan Tessier
* 08/31/2016
* USD 1,350,000.00

Water is an essential building block of the Earth system and critical to human
prosperity. At the same time, humans are rapidly embedding themselves into the
basic character of the water cycle without full knowledge of the consequences.
Major sources of water system change include mismanagement and overuse, river
flow distortion, pollution, watershed disturbance, invasive species, and
greenhouse warming. Defining the collective significance of such change
constitutes a major challenge for the Earth and social sciences alike. This
project will advance current understanding of the ways in which humans control,
degrade or enhance water-related ecosystem services, and in turn impact the
global economic system and aquatic biodiversity. These goals will be addressed
through an integrated, interdisciplinary study of human-water interactions that
includes modeling, data integration, and assessment tools as well as synthesis
across water resource management, biology, and environmental economics
perspectives. Model projections will be used to extend recent trends into the
future, and assess the degree to which alternative management strategies can
lead to more sustainable futures over a 100-year time horizon. The
interdisciplinary aspects of the many forces shaping modern river systems
provide a rich intellectual environment for collaboration, and lessons learned
through this project's cross-disciplinary approaches constitute an important
byproduct of the work.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Given the central role of water in
our environment and human well-being, results from this project will have
immediate value to efforts to manage freshwater resources. Beyond its scientific
value, a synthetic understanding of the state of the rivers systems--the single
largest renewable water supply serving humankind--is of strategic importance to
the public policy sector, given a growing sense of urgency regarding water as an
international security issue. The benefits of such synthesis will inform global
social and environmental management challenges: coping with climate extremes;
preserving ecosystem services and biodiversity; food and energy security;
economic competitiveness; and, protecting human health. This project will have
lasting benefits by targeting policy-relevant science, educating the next
generation of students in strategic resource assessment, and informing the
citizenry about major environmental challenges and solutions for the future.