* 1115548
* NeTS:Small: Making Online Network Functions Fast and Compact
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2015
* Jih-Kwon Peir, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Darleen Fisher
* 08/31/2015
* USD 400,000.00

The line speed of modern routers is reaching beyond OC-768 (40Gb/s) to 100Gb/s
or even terabits per second. In order to keep up with such high throughput,
online network functions for traffic measurement, packet scheduling, access
control, and quality of service will have to be implemented using on-chip SRAM.
However, fitting these network functions in fast but small on-chip memory
represents a major technical challenge today. Many online functions rely heavily
on several fundamental building blocks called online primitives for data
processing and storage. Three fundamental online primitives are of particular
importance: (1) spread estimators for measuring the number of distinct elements
in each flow, (2) size estimators for measuring the size of each flow, and (3)
high-performance Bloom filters for membership check against large data sets.
They have numerous applications in service provision, capacity planning,
billing, routing-table lookup, traffic measurement, firewall design, and
intrusion detection. A key technical challenge is how to make online primitives
both fast and compact. Being fast, the requirement is that they should make only
one memory access or update one counter in the worst case when processing each
packet. Being compact, the requirement is that they should use a minimum amount
of SRAM memory and be able to handle a large, unpredictable number of flows.
This project strives to fulfill the above requirements with new methodologies,
called virtual bit vectors and virtual counting vectors, for online data storage
and retrieval. The project consists of four research components: (1) one-memory-
access compact spread estimators, (2) one-counter-update compact size
estimators, (3) one-memory-access fast Bloom filters, and (4) architecture-aware
online primitive designs.

Broader Impact: The proposed research will advance our knowledge for designing
large-scale online operations in a very tight on-chip memory space. New design
approaches developed by this project are expected to improve the performance of
modern routers and firewalls. In addition, because the basic data structures
embodied in these fundamental online primitives are widely applicable in
Computer Science, improvement in their performance can potentially have broad
impact in other research areas. Research outcome will be disseminated through
conference and journal publications. New educational materials will be developed
to incorporate online network functions and research results from this project
into graduate courses.