* 1115881
* Modeling the Effects of Heterogeneity in Water Quality on Cholera Disease Dynamics
* GEO,OCE
* 08/01/2011,07/31/2017
* Joseph Tien, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Michael Sieracki
* 07/31/2017
* USD 973,128.00

Funding was requested to analyze and model cholera epidemics. In order to
accomplish this task, the team will analyze spatio-temporal data from cholera
outbreaks in Haiti (2010), Angola (2006) and London (1832); develop mathematical
theory for coupled patch models of waterborne disease; and develop models to
predict disease spread under different scenarios. The study will explore the
contribution of humans (direct) and of environmental (delayed) pathways to
disease transmission and investigate how heterogeneity in water quality, which
is ubiquitous in developing countries, affects cholera disease dynamics. This
project will advance understanding of the factors governing the spatial spread
of cholera, examine how the arrangement and connectivity between cholera risk
hot spots influence disease spread and develop a modeling framework for rapid
response to a cholera crisis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed study has clear
practical and theoretical significance for understanding and predicting not only
cholera transmission, but other waterborne diseases as well, reaching beyond the
specific study system. The team will develop mathematical theory for coupled
patch models of waterborne diseases and advance understanding of the effects of
movement of individuals and of water to cholera transmission. The team will also
explore inclusion of data from early stages of an outbreak on parameter
estimates and whether information on water quality and availability and on types
of sanitation facilities available can be used to improve knowledge of model
parameters before the disease has reached a given
area.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study will result in the training of
undergraduates and graduate students, and include outreach to the Columbus
Science Pub (public), Cornell's Summer Math Institute (undergraduates) and the
UCLA Math Circle (grades K-12). This project will strengthen international
scientific collaboration through interaction with scientists and students from
the University of Toronto.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research from this study
will provide society benefits through improved understanding of the factors
influencing the ability of cholera to invade, spread and persist in a region.
The proposed study will provide a tool to predict disease spread under different
scenarios for rapid response to a cholera crisis and evaluate the efficacy of
different intervention strategies on containing cholera spatial spread. The team
will interact and communicate their research findings to the Centers for Disease
Control and the National Biosurveillance Integration Center within the
Department of Homeland Security. They will collaborate with the United Nations
University Institute for Water, Environment and Health to compile a database of
time series data from cholera outbreaks worldwide, in association with data on
water quality, water availability, and sanitation facilities from several
outbreak locales.