* 1115547
* NeTS: Small: Collaborative Research:  Inter-provider Dynamics in Neutral and Non-neutral Networks
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2015
* Saswati Sarkar, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* John Brassil
* 08/31/2015
* USD 150,000.00

Over the past five years, the network neutrality debate involving for-profit
ISPs and "content" providers, together with security-related issues, has figured
most prominently in the Western media's coverage of the Internet and in
government regulatory hearings in both North America and Europe. The two
principal issues have to do with equitable treatment of applications
(application neutrality) and side payments between independent content and
service providers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The four research thrusts of this grant
are: the development of unbiased, parsimonious models of macro-economic and
networking dynamics of all parties involved; analyzing these models with an aim
to assess the relative benefit of different pricing regimes, provider alliances,
and service-differentiation strategies; acquiring current, real-world data and
practical lessons-learned to inform these models; and focusing in particular on
comparing neutral to non-neutral frameworks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In a
preliminary example study, a passive model of end-user demand was used to define
a game between multiple ISPs and multiple content providers. The users could
engage in two types of applications: one delay sensitive, the other throughput
sensitive. The fraction of users engaged with a particular provider depended on
the provider?s current prices, subject to a customer inertia model when
competitors? prices were close. A regulated side-payment between providers of
different types was considered. A surprising finding at stable Nash equilibrium
was that monopolistic providers (say a single ISP) receiving side payments
actually had less income than the ?neutral? scenario without side-payments (side
payments result in increased end-user prices by the payee which lowers end-user
demand). Revenues from the application types which consumed the most bandwidth
were naturally affected the most.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary intellectual
merit of this research has to do with the challenge of formulating tractable
though realistic mathematical models of the cross-disciplinary elements of the
macroscopic interactions among different entities participating in the Internet
economy. Identified near-optimal strategies are tracked in the presence of
naturally time-varying system parameters. Though a model may be simple, it often
yields unexpectedly complex behavior (e.g., multiple Nash equilibria with
differing stability qualities). Important real-world data and practical lessons
will be identified in this research through the study of sensitivity of derived
results to the different model parameters in play.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;One
aspect of the broader impact of this research pertains to the enormous financial
stakes involved in the network neutrality debate, and therefore the potential of
this research to influence significantly Internet operations and architectural
development even in the near term. Industry outreach is a significant part of
this research, not only to keep abreast of current developments, but also to
obtain first-hand relevant data that hopefully can be disseminated to the
broader research community. Another aspect of the broader impact of this
research is the development and dissemination of related "economics" teaching
modules suitable for networking graduate courses, and the recruitment and
training of students from under-represented minority groups in Computer Science
and Electrical and Computer Engineering.