* 1115118
* Topics in anisotropic mesh adaptation and application to anisotropic diffusion problems
* MPS,DMS
* 09/15/2011,08/31/2015
* Weizhang Huang, University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 08/31/2015
* USD 180,000.00

The investigator will study anisotropic mesh adaptation for use in the numerical
solution of partialdifferential equations. The studies will be based on a so-
called M-uniform mesh approach of anisotropic mesh adaptation where any
nonuniform mesh is generated as a uniform one in the metric specified by a
tensor. Success has been made with the approach in facilitating a better
understanding of existing algorithms and in developing new methods. A specific
application area is the numerical solution of anisotropic diffusion problems.
New mesh conditions and metric tensors for use in mesh generation have been
developed with the approach so that finite element approximations to a class of
anisotropic diffusion problems satisfy a discrete maximum principle and exhibit
no spurious oscillations and artifacts. The research topics will include the
extension of the existing theory to three dimensional problems and time
dependent problems and the development of a posteriori anisotropic error
estimates and metric tensors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project is concerned with
the development of efficient and reliable methods for the numerical solution of
anisotropic diffusion problems and other problems exhibiting anisotropic
features. Those problems arise from several application areas including plasma
physics (fusion experiments and astrophysics), groundwater contamination
modeling, petroleum reservoir simulation, image processing, and global climate
simulation that are crucial to our national's economy, environment, and
security. Unfortunately, standard numerical methods often produce spurious
oscillations and artifacts and introduce excessive numerical dissipation in the
numerical solution due to the highly anisotropy and heterogeneous nature of
diffusion in those problems. In this project, anisotropic mesh adaptation will
be employed to overcome these difficulties. It is a type of mesh adaptation that
allows the size, shape, and orientation of mesh elements to change throughout
the physical domain. The investigator has demonstrated in his work that a linear
finite element solution can be made to satisfy the maximum principle and thus
contains no spurious oscillations when a properly chosen anisotropic mesh is
used. In-depth studies of anisotropic mesh adaptation will be carried out along
this line in the project. Maximum-principle preserving schemes will be developed
for time dependent problems and three dimensional problems and their application
to anisotropic diffusion problems will be investigated. The studies will lead to
a better understanding of anisotropic mesh adaptation and provide a useful tool
for the numerical simulation of application problems, including anisotropic
diffusion problems which have many important applications.