* 1115657
* NSF Support for the 2011 USENIX Security Symposium, Financial Aid; August 2011; San Francisco CA
* CSE,CNS
* 07/01/2011,06/30/2012
* Fabian Monrose, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Samuel M. Weber
* 06/30/2012
* USD 20,000.00

This award supports approximately 20 US-based students to attend the 2011 USENIX
Security Symposium, the premier forum for advanced professionals from academic
and industrial backgrounds to meet and discuss the newest advances in the
security of computer systems and networks. Participation in Security '11 and
similar conferences is a valuable and important part of the graduate school
experience. It provides students with the opportunity to interact with more
senior researchers in the field and exposes students to leading work in the
field. This award will enable students to participate who would otherwise be
unable to attend the conference. Security '11 will be held August 10-12, 2011,
in San Francisco, CA. The conference will consist of a three-day technical
program, with numerous workshops co-located. The goal of the conference is to
bring together researchers, practitioners, system administrators, system
programmers, and others interested in the latest advances in the security of
computer systems and networks. This cross-disciplinary emphasis makes it well
suited as a target for student participation, and this event has always drawn a
large number of student attendees. Students receiving assistance will be
strongly encouraged to present posters and works in progress as part of the
selection process.