* 1115115
* Digitization TCN: Collaborative Research: Plants, Herbivores, and Parasitoids:  A Model System for the Study of Tri-Trophic Associations
* BIO,DBI
* 07/01/2011,01/31/2016
* Robert Magill, Missouri Botanical Garden
* Standard Grant
* Reed Beaman
* 01/31/2016
* USD 274,783.00

Specimen data in the nation's natural history museums are essential resources
for understanding biological diversity, including many species of strategic
importance to agriculture and national security. Unfortunately this information
is generally available by taxon type rather than integrated across kinds of
organisms. This Thematic Collections Network (TCN) project addresses that
problem by integrating specimen information and photographs from 14 botanical
and 18 entomological collections across the United States. The data captured
will dramatically improve our understanding of the relationships among the more
than 11,000 species of North American Hemiptera (scale insects, aphids,
leafhoppers, true bugs, and relatives), their food plants, and the wasps that
parasitize the hemipterans. This TCN will utilize innovative technologies,
including Web-accessible databases and high-resolution digital imaging, in order
to capture and broadly disseminate via the Internet data for more than 1.6
million hemipteran, 200,000 parasitoid, and 6 million plant
specimens.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Hemiptera is a group of insects containing
many species of great economic importance in the United States. The specimen
information captured by this TCN project for this group and the groups of plants
affected by these insects will be relevant for studies in agricultural sciences,
climate change, invasive species, biological classification, conservation, and
ecosystems. It will represent a truly large-scale integration of data from the
broadest range of non-federal collection resources in U.S. museums and
universities, thereby making a significant contribution to the solution of
national priorities by scientists, policy makers, and the general public.
Student participation and training in modern technologies are integral aspects
of the project. This award is made as part of the National Resource for
Digitization of Biological Collections through the Advancing Digitization of
Biological Collections program and all data resulting from this award will be
available through the national resource.