* 1115978
* New Exponential Integrators and Applications
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/2011,07/31/2015
* Mayya Tokman, University of California - Merced
* Continuing Grant
* Junping Wang
* 07/31/2015
* USD 300,001.00

The need to numerically solve initial value problems for large stiff systems of
ordinary differential equations (ODEs) arises in an overwhelming majority of
scientific and engineering fields. Traditionally implicit solvers have been used
to overcome the stability restrictions on the time step and improve
computational efficiency compared to explicit schemes. Recently, however,
exponential integrators emerged as an efficient alternative to commonly used
techniques. While several of such integrators have been proposed, significant
research efforts are needed to construct, analyze and optimize these
integrators. The PI proposed a class of new exponential propagation iterative
schemes of Runge-Kutta type (EPIRK) which are designed to maximize computational
efficiency for solving very large stiff systems. The research sponsored by this
grant will produce new EPIRK methods designed to have good scalability on
parallel high-performance computing platforms. The study of the new integrators
will produce methodologies for construction of efficient exponential schemes and
explore properties of these methods. An important part of the project is the
development of adaptive versions of the algorithms and implementation of new
integrators as a general-use software package for both serial and parallel
platforms. The software will be used to study several application problems in
plasma physics and biomodeling and will be made widely
available.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In a variety of scientific and engineering
applications researchers want to predict behavior of complex systems which
evolve on a wide range of temporal and spatial scales. Such systems, for
instance, arise in many geo-engineering applications such as storing greenhouse
gases, extraction of oil and gas from highly porous and fractured media or
managing groundwater resources. Another example of a multiscale problem is
modeling magnetic reconnection, one of the most fundamental processes in
astrophysical and laboratory plasmas that governs such important phenomena as
solar flares, magnetic substorms in the Earth?s magnetosphere and dynamics of
magnetic fusion experiments. Computer modeling has become an essential tool in
studying such systems. However, in order to be able to simulate the behavior of
these systems on a computer advanced mathematical tools that offer exceptional
efficiency on high-performance computing platforms have to be developed. The
numerical techniques that will result from this project will allow prediction of
the behavior of a wide range of complex systems of scientific and engineering
interest over the parameter regimes inaccessible to standard methods.