* 1115279
* Fluctuations and Response in Active Materials: From Driven Granular Systems to Swarming Bacteria
* ENG,CBET
* 07/15/2011,06/30/2012
* Corey O'Hern, Yale University
* Standard Grant
*  Ashok S. Sangani
* 06/30/2012
* USD 17,450.00

1115279 &lt;br/&gt;PI: O'Hern, Corey S.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
Merit:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;We seek support of international travel costs for 29
participants from the US, Europe, and India to attend the Workshop "Fluctuations
and Response in Active Materials: From Driven Granular Systems to Swarming
Bacteria" at the Lorentz Center, Leiden University June 20-24, 2011. The
workshop brings together theoretical, computational, and experimental scientists
studying granular and active biological systems. The research field of active
matter was motivated by organized, collective dynamics flocking, schooling, and
swarming exhibited by living matter. Active systems abound in biology and
include bacterial suspensions, cell cytoskeleton, and living tissues. A basic
feature of these systems is the important role of active or selfpropelled
particles. It has been recognized recently that nonliving systems, such as
sheared and vibrated granular materials, display similar dynamical behaviors to
those of active systems, but do not possess an on-board energy source. Instead,
driven granular materials gain and dissipate energy from collisions with the
boundaries of the container and other particles.The rich collective behaviors of
anisotropic `activated nonliving granular systems show striking similarities to
the spatio-temporal behavior of active matter. Understanding the important
similarities and differences between granular and active living matter and
identifying the physical principles that give rise to collective and emergent
behavior in both types of systems can potentially lead to either enhancing or
inhibiting these behaviors in natural and artificial
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Workshop
has two primary objectives. First, we seek to identify promising fruitful
research directions that will address the fundamental open questions that are
common to both nonliving, physical systems such as granular media and active,
living systems. Some of the important questions that have emerged include: 1)
what are the "universal" properties of active matter that determine large-scale
behavior, 2) can an improved understanding of active living matter lead to
design strategies to prevent unwanted jamming and glassy behavior in granular,
colloidal, and other physics systems, and 3) to what extent can bio-activity,
collective behavior, and pattern formation in biological systems be explained by
physical forces, response, and fluctuations. Second, we seek to encourage
international collaborations among scientists in granular and active matter to
develop interdisciplinary research programs to tackle these open questions. At
present, the two research communities are disjointed with minimal discussion and
cross-fertilization of ideas. The workshop will be considered a success if we
establish strong international and interdisciplinary collaborations and linkages
among research groups working in granular and active, living matter. As a result
of this workshop, we envision developing an international collaboration among
scientists in the US, Europe, and India on granular and active media. We have
confirmed the participation of 29 invited speakers (16 from the US and 13 from
Europe) and 7 members of the organizing committee. Five female invited
participants, 1 speaker of African descent, and 7 junior faculty participants
comprise nearly half of the invited speakers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In addition
to the invited speakers and organizers, we expect at least 30 additional
participants. For example, we will encourage the invited speakers to bring
graduate students or postdocs from their groups with them to the workshop to
present a poster or short talk on their work. In addition, we will post an
announcement on the Lorentz Center website that we will offer travel support to
registered participants from underrepresented groups in science and engineering.
These participants will be supported by travel grants from the American Physical
Society.