* 1115224
* Collaborative Research: Observations and Analysis of Wave-Induced Constituent Transport in the Mesopause Region above Cerro Pachon, Chile and Table Mountain, Colorado
* GEO,AGS
* 09/15/2011,08/31/2016
* Xinzhao Chu, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* Therese Moretto Jorgensen
* 08/31/2016
* USD 343,575.00

This is a 5-year scientific collaboration to investigate vertical transport
mechanisms in the upper mesosphere and lower thermosphere (MLT) using a
combination of theory, observations, and atmospheric chemical models. The study
focuses on the mesopause region, 80-105 km altitude, and employs Na and Fe
wind/temperature lidar, meteor radar, and airglow data from two observation
sites at Cerro Pachon, Chile, and Table Mountain, CO. The objectives are to
quantify wave-induced vertical transport in the mesopause region above these
sites, to characterize its effects on the fluxes and vertical distribution of
heat, Na, Fe, O, and other key constituents, and to compare the measurements to
the eddy diffusion parameterization schemes that are traditionally used to
account for vertical transport in atmospheric chemistry models. Specific
scientific goals include: &lt;br/&gt;1) To characterize the vertical fluxes of
heat, Na (at Cerro Pachon) and Fe (at Table Mountain) throughout the mesopause
region and throughout the year, &lt;br/&gt;2) To determine the effective
vertical constituent transport velocities associated with advection, turbulent
mixing, dynamical transport and Na/Fe chemistry and to characterize their
seasonal variations, &lt;br/&gt;3) To quantify the influence of wave-induced
transport on the structure and seasonal variations of the mesospheric Na and Fe
layers by comparing model predictions with observations, &lt;br/&gt;4) To
characterize the effective vertical transport associated with OH Meinel Band,
O(1S) green line and O2 Atmospheric Band airglow emissions throughout the year
at Cerro Pachon, and &lt;br/&gt;5) Through model calculations to assess the
influence of wave-induced transport on the structure and variations of other
important mesospheric constituents such as atomic O.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: Knowledge of the magnitude and
variability of wave-induced vertical transport is important to a wide range of
research problems, including general circulation modeling, atmospheric chemistry
modeling, thermal balance calculations, and the study of the mesospheric airglow
and metal layers. This work will contribute to a much deeper understanding of
the key gravity wave transport processes and their relationships to atmospheric
chemistry. In addition, this work will significantly enhance our ability to
model the constituent structure of the MLT, particularly the meteoric metal and
airglow layers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The research has broader
implications for atmospheric science because the results can be used to
characterize the impact of wave-induced transport on other important
constituents in other atmospheric regions, such as stratospheric ozone, which in
turn affects the thermal balance of the Earth's atmosphere. Hence, the results
of this project may have important applications in global climate modeling.
Furthermore, the direct measurements of the vertical fluxes of mesospheric Fe
and Na, in combination with modeling, will substantially improve current
estimates of the absolute value of the global meteoric input flux, which are
highly uncertain. This is important because the meteoric debris that enters the
MLT is eventually transported into the lower atmosphere, where it affects the
formation of stratospheric aerosols and is ultimately deposited in the oceans,
where it contributes to the concentration of key chemical species, such as Fe.
Both stratospheric aerosols and oceanic Fe play important roles in Earth's
climate. Stratospheric aerosols reflect sunlight, which alters the Earth's
radiation budget, while oceanic Fe promotes the growth of phytoplankton, which
affects the global carbon cycles, in particular atmospheric CO2.