* 1115184
* NeTS: Small: Collaborative Research: Cross Layer Survivability to Cascading Failures in Layered Networks
* CSE,CNS
* 08/01/2011,07/31/2015
* Sartaj Sahni, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* John Brassil
* 07/31/2015
* USD 150,000.00

WDM (wave-length multiplexing) Optical networks form the critical backbone of
all modern communication networks and systems. Therefore, there has been a great
deal of interest in the fault tolerant design and operation of these networks.
In the past decade or so several fundamental advances relating to the fault
tolerance, protection and restoration issues have appeared in the literature.
Most of these advances have been in the context of failures in one layer. But,
modern communication systems consist of multiple physical implementations
communicating via layered protocols. As such, a single failure at one layer may
lead to cascading failures, i.e., failures at the physical layer lead to
failures at the logical layer. Research in this area of cross-layer
survivability is still in its infancy. In this basic research project the
principal investigators will carry out a study of network survivability across
layers to deal with cascading failures in layered networks. The research will be
in the context of IP-over-WDM Optical networks. The focus will be on multiple
failures in the physical (optical) layer and their consequences at the higher
layer, namely the IP layer. Specifically, the broad scope of the project will
cover i) survivable logical topology mapping under multiple failures, ii)
Logical topology mapping for guaranteed survivability, iii) Logical topology
mapping under multiple constraints, and iv) A generalized theory of flows across
layers, capacity of survivable logical topologies and related algorithmic
challenges.

The project seeks to develop unifying theories and methodologies that will make
significant advances to our understanding of cross-layer survivability issues,
and providing the theoretical foundation for future advances in the general area
of cross-layer design and optimization. These theories will be based on modern
advances in graph theory, mathematical programming (e.g., network interdiction)
and algorithm design. The principal investigators will develop innovative
algorithmic techniques based on advanced data structures and computer algorithms
such as approximation techniques as well as a generalized theory of cross layer
flows that will go well beyond the widely used classical theory of single layer
flows.

Broader Impact: Although IP-Over-WDM networks will provide the context for the
research, the theory of cross-layer flows and the algorithmic (in particular
approximation) techniques that will be developed will have multidisciplinary
value spanning computer science, electrical engineering, graph theory and
mathematical programming. The research will also have significant educational
value in training highly skilled researchers for research and development in
cutting edge technologies in different areas of information technology.