* 1115026
* Digitization TCN Collaborative Research: North American Lichens and Bryophytes: Sensitive Indicators of Environmental Quality and Change
* BIO,DBI
* 07/01/2011,06/30/2016
* Bruce Allen, Missouri Botanical Garden
* Standard Grant
* Reed Beaman
* 06/30/2016
* USD 423,584.00

Lichens and bryophytes share biological traits that make them some of the most
sensitive indicators of environmental change. The goal of this project is to
provide high quality data to address how species distributions change as a
result of major environmental events across time and space. Specifically, this
project will digitize the label information (the what, when, where and by whom
collected) and images for approximately 2.3 million biological specimens curated
in North American lichen and bryophyte herbaria. These collections represent
well over 90% of all specimens collected in Canada, the United States and Mexico
and held by over 60 US non-governmental institutions. New, on-line digitization
techniques will be made publically available at at
http://symbiota.org/nalichens/ and http://symbiota.org/bryophytes/, and will
allow interested members of the public to be involved and learn about
biodiversity alongside the professionals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Availability of
nearly the entire North American bryophyte and lichen collections on-line will
greatly accelerate knowledge and evaluation of the biodiversity of these
organisms by fostering collaborations between professionals and the general
public. Additionally, models developed from these digitized data will aid future
mapping projections of large scale species distributions and identification of
biodiversity hotspots as prime candidates for protection. These endeavors will
help to elucidate regions where changes are imminent and likely to have
substantial impact, as well as to facilitate proactive initiatives to alleviate
such changes. This award is made as part of the National Resource for
Digitization of Biological Collections through the Advancing Digitization of
Biological Collections program and all data resulting from this award will be
available through the national resource.