* 1115564
* SHF: Small: Collaborative Research:  A Novel Method for the Performance Analysis of VLSI Circuits with Severe Parameter Value Variations due to Nano-scale Process
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2011,06/30/2015
* Sheng-Guo Wang, University of North Carolina at Charlotte
* Standard Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 06/30/2015
* USD 225,000.00

The advance of VLSI technology has reached to 32nm feature size and below. For
such a nano-scale process, lithography no longer produces the ideal
shape/dimension of circuit components in a silicon wafer, and the corresponding
electrical parameters may vary as large as 1/3 or more. A major concern in VLSI
design is how to evaluate the circuits/systems performance made in such nano-
scale process. In the other words, we want to know how much the performance
specs will change due to variation in circuit parameters from their nominal
values caused by the process uncertainties. The current research on performance
robustness analysis is developed mainly along the line of the Monte-Carlo
sampling method, or stochastic and statistical analysis methods. They all
require a high level of computation complexity to achieve the required accuracy
and one would like to avoid the evaluation of large number of samples to
validate the performance range of a VLSI circuit/system?
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this research the PIs propose a novel method for VLSI
circuit performance robustness analysis which does not require evaluation of
large numbers of samples. Instead, it computes only a few critical polynomials
in frequency domain, or critical systems in time domain. It is a fundamentally
new way to analyze VLSI circuit performance robustness. The consequent leap of
computation efficiency would make nano-scale VLSI circuit design and its
performance robustness analysis practically possible. The objectives of this
project are: (i) to develop a solid theoretical basis for the performance
robustness analysis of VLSI circuits in both frequency and time domains; (ii) to
develop an efficient, novel method for computing VLSI circuit performance
variation bounds and distribution (due to the process variation) without using
the Monte-Carlo method.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broad impact of this project
will be its potentially transformative effect on the robust analysis methods for
VLSI circuits. This research will be integrated into the graduate education of
the Ph.D. students at the two universities involved, and disseminated by
publications in journals and presentations at conferences, a workshop and
collaboration with industry, and will hopefully contribute to broad thinking
across multiple disciplines.