* 1115523
* Collaborative Research: Proximity Algorithms for Optimization Problems Arising from Image Processing
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/2011,07/31/2014
* Yuesheng Xu, Syracuse University
* Continuing Grant
* Junping Wang
* 07/31/2014
* USD 200,000.00

The restoration of degraded images is a fundamental and challenging problem in
image processing. This problem is ill-posed. The total-variation regularization
and its variants are commonly used to convert to a well-posed problem. The
resulting regularized model usually has a non-differentiable objective
functional, which together with the large dimension of the underlying image
makes the minimization theoretically and numerically difficult. Typical
numerical treatments for this minimization are indirect in the sense that the
methods are developed for a smoothed or dual model of the original model. With
this project, the principal investigators use tools from convex analysis to find
the solution of the image restoration models directly under a unified framework.
The PIs address more general mathematical challenges and computational
difficulties associated with the obtained fixed-point formulation. This project
provides a fixed-point characterization for the solutions of models with least
squares and max norm fidelity terms combined with the total variation
regularization term. The study considers images corrupted by Gaussian noise,
impulsive Gaussian noise and Poisson noise, which are all of relevance for
different applications. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Restoring images from available
data is required in a variety of applications including computer tomography;
natural resources and pollution control via satellite imaging in environmental
sciences; and fingerprint and face recognition in security identification.
Advanced mathematical models and efficient computational algorithms for solving
this problem are essential. The developed numerical schemes support improved
automatic image restoration for these applications. Furthermore,
interdisciplinary approaches resulting from the projects enrich upper level
undergraduate and graduate curriculum development and teaching activities.