* 1115206
* AF: Small: Algorithms for Genetics: Epistatic Interactions, Haplotype Assembly, and Selection Signatures
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2011,09/30/2015
* Vineet Bafna, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Mitra Basu
* 09/30/2015
* USD 445,000.00

Algorithms for genetics: epistatic interactions, haplotype assembly, and
selection signatures&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Variation in our DNA (often inherited)
can have important functional consequences, including susceptibility to
diseases. However, much of variation is due to random drift and may have no
functional consequence. Identifying the small subset of variations that are
functionally important is key to a deeper understanding of the genetic basis of
diseases and other phenotypes, and is the mainstay of statistical genetics and
other fields. However, rapidly falling costs of genome sequencing implies that
genomes of entire populations will be completely sequenced. The availability of
tremendous amounts of genetic data, and the complexity of relations between
genotypes and phenotypes changes the nature of inference problems from
statistical to computational, and demands the use of algorithmic (combinatorial
and machine learning) techniques. In this proposal, the PIs propose specific
goals in three broad areas, which involve the use of algorithmic techniques in
solving problems in genetics. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1. Epistatic interactions
and geometric embedding: Epistatic interactions where two distant loci interact
to jointly mediate the phenotype often confound analyses. However, with millions
of loci, testing all pairs for interactions is computationally intractable. The
PIs propose to develop fast algorithms for this problem. The approach depends
upon the development of a metric embedding that maps the genotypes at a locus to
a point in a high dimensional Euclidean metric, such that interacting pairs have
small Euclidean distances. This metric embedding is novel, and allows the use of
geometric algorithms for fast detection of epistasis.&lt;br/&gt;2. Haplotype
assembly: Haplotyping refers to the separation of the maternal and paternal
chromosomes. Successful resolution has great impact in improving the efficacy of
genetic association, and in understanding the genetic history of the population.
The PIs propose the use of modern strobe-sequencing technologies and single
genome amplification to dramatically expand the length of achievable haplotypes.
One of the formulated problems maps naturally to connectivity in a new class of
random graphs.&lt;br/&gt;3. Pooled selection: The PIs propose the identification
of regions under genetic selection, using next generation sequencing data.
Specifically, the proposed tests work on pooled DNA, and partially sampled DNA,
and employ a combination of techniques from population genetics and
combinatorial optimization.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact and Intellectual
Merit&lt;br/&gt;The great promise of genomics is that our complete sequence will
be an integral part of our medical record, and the major health prognostics will
be informed by variation. However, the early research in correlating genotypes
and phenotypes is stymied by lack of analysis tools. The problems addressed here
are central to the domain and will clearly add to the toolkit of geneticists and
biologists. The research also contributes directly to the CISE-CCF mission of
developing novel algorithms for Computational Biology, as the proposed problems
are uniquely at the intersection of algorithmic and genetics, and open new
avenues of research in Computer Science. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dissemination and
outreach will continue through the length of the project contributing to the
broader impact of this research. It will include invited and contributed
presentations, publications, classroom projects, and collaborations. Software
will be freely available as source-code, or web-tools, for academic, research
and non-commercial purposes adding to the infrastructure of genetic analyses
tools.