* 1115575
* AF: Small: Green Computing Algorithmics
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2015
* Kirk Pruhs, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Rahul Shah
* 08/31/2015
* USD 349,892.00

The ascension of power, to join time and space, in the top ranks of scarce
computational resources is relatively recent. Over the last several decades,
when time and space were the key computational resources, computer science
researchers developed many algorithmic techniques for designing time and space
efficient algorithms, and for analyzing the time and space required by
particular algorithms on simple models. The immediate goal of this research is
to build a toolkit of widely applicable algorithmic design and analysis
techniques for algorithmic problems where energy, power and temperature are the
key resources. This will require the discovery of new algorithmic techniques, as
these energy related resources have different physical characteristics than the
resources of time and space.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Energy-efficient computing and
power management are two important focus areas within green computing, which is
the study and practice of designing, manufacturing, using, and disposing of
computers, servers, and associated subsystems, efficiently and effectively with
minimal impact on the environment. Currently the energy usage of information
technology is roughly comparable to that used by the airline industry. On one
hand, given that the growth of information technology is still exponential, this
fraction could grow significantly if there are no changes in information
technology. On the other hand, given that until recently energy efficiency
wasn't a first order design constraint, an order of magnitude improvements in
the energy efficiency of information technology is
possible.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A long term goal of this research is to build a
science of algorithmic power management to support the computing community's
ability to abstractly reason about power, energy and temperature. This science
will serve these software engineers, when faced with information technology
design problems in which power/energy/temperature is the key scarce resource,
just as the science of algorithms serves them when they are concerned with the
resources of time and space.