* 1115068
* CNH:   Dynamics of Coupled Natural and Human Systems in the Colorado Front Range Wildland/Urban Interface:  Causes and Consequences
* BIO,DEB
* 09/15/2011,02/28/2017
* Hope Humphries, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Betsy Von Holle
* 02/28/2017
* USD 1,430,000.00

The wildland-urban interface in the United States occupies only 9% of the
conterminous surface area but contains nearly 39% of all housing units. In the
Colorado Front Range, increasing residential development in these locations has
been accompanied by sharp increases in the likelihood of severe disturbances
such as wildfires and mountain pine beetle outbreaks. The central goal of this
project is to analyze the interactions among environmental, social, and economic
factors in the Colorado Front Range wildland-urban interface, and to forecast
the effects of these interactions on future states of the landscape. The general
objectives are to identify the mechanisms by which such interactions occur,
identify whether or not the landscape can experience disturbances while
maintaining its functions and controls (i.e., landscape resilience), and
evaluate the implications of different environmental and growth policies on
landscape and human responses. Narratives will be developed to define key
components and boundaries, identify drivers of ecosystem change, and
characterize social and economic conditions. Linked computer models will be
developed to examine landscape response over time to changes in land cover,
fire, insect outbreaks, housing density, and building/landscaping
characteristics. Decision making by households and developers under different
policy and economic conditions will be included in the models. This project will
contribute to the development of general theories about environmental, social,
and economic relationships in the context of landscape resilience. Of particular
interest are circumstances under which managing for resilience is difficult to
achieve because of intractable environmental, social, or economic
issues.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Project results will be incorporated into scenarios
that explore future landscape resilience in the Colorado Front Range, under
different climate and forest management conditions. This research provides the
first test of the components of an integrated modeling framework for
understanding wildland-urban interface responses to changes in environmental,
social, and economic factors. Forums and public reviews will be organized to
both educate and receive input from stakeholders about resilience of the
wildland-urban interface. The goals are to sensitize stakeholders to potential
abrupt and unexpected shifts in ecosystem dynamics, achieve shared understanding
of actions that can enhance or reduce resilience, and assess the social
acceptability of different scenarios.