* 1115627
* Multispectral Tomosynthesis Imaging: Mathematical Models, Algorithms and Software
* MPS,DMS
* 09/15/2011,08/31/2014
* Ioannis Sechopoulos, Emory University
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 08/31/2014
* USD 270,000.00

This project focuses on the development of computational methods
for&lt;br/&gt;tomosynthesis breast image reconstruction, a technique used
to&lt;br/&gt;reconstruct 3-dimensional images using slightly modified versions
of&lt;br/&gt;conventional x-ray systems. The mathematical models addressed in
this&lt;br/&gt;project are difficult ill-posed inverse problems; computed
solutions&lt;br/&gt;are very sensitive to errors in the data, and implementation
for large&lt;br/&gt;scale 3-dimensional images is nontrivial. All previous
breast&lt;br/&gt;tomosynthesis image reconstruction algorithms use a simplified,
but&lt;br/&gt;incorrect assumption that the source x-ray beam is comprised
of&lt;br/&gt;photons with a constant energy; that is, the x-ray beam is assumed
to&lt;br/&gt;be monoenergetic. The simplified monoenergetic assumption results
in&lt;br/&gt;a linear mathematical model. This project uses the
physically&lt;br/&gt;correct, and hence more accurate, assumption that the x-ray
beam is&lt;br/&gt;polyenergetic. The resulting mathematical model is
nonlinear,&lt;br/&gt;providing great challenges to the development and analysis
of&lt;br/&gt;mathematical models, as well as for the development of
computational&lt;br/&gt;methods. However, as this project reveals, the nonlinear
model allows&lt;br/&gt;for reconstructing images with substantially fewer
artifacts than the&lt;br/&gt;linear model. Moreover, the nonlinear model can
incorporate&lt;br/&gt;parameterizations to allow for explicit decomposition of
the breast&lt;br/&gt;into distinct materials, such as, glandular tissue, adipose
tissue,&lt;br/&gt;calcifications, and iodinated contrast agents, thereby
providing&lt;br/&gt;improved diagnostic information.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In the
US, over 200,000 women are diagnosed with breast cancer every&lt;br/&gt;year,
but there is a 97% five-year survival rate if the cancer is&lt;br/&gt;localized,
and if it is discovered before it spreads to other parts of&lt;br/&gt;the body.
Therefore, improved imaging techniques that help to detect&lt;br/&gt;and
diagnose breast cancer early can have a profound impact on
the&lt;br/&gt;healthcare of women. The research in this project focuses
on&lt;br/&gt;tomosynthesis imaging, which just received FDA approval for
clinical&lt;br/&gt;use in 2011, because it has the potential to provide
substantially&lt;br/&gt;better screening capabilities than mammography. The new
mathematical&lt;br/&gt;and computational approaches developed in this work are
designed to&lt;br/&gt;unlock the potentially transformative benefits of
tomosynthesis for&lt;br/&gt;breast cancer screening, providing significantly
better diagnostic&lt;br/&gt;information to physicians. In addition to its
application to breast&lt;br/&gt;cancer screening, tomosynthesis, in its whole-
body implementation can&lt;br/&gt;be used for many other applications where
standard x-ray and CT are&lt;br/&gt;used, such as chest imaging for detection of
lung nodules, as well as&lt;br/&gt;non-medical imaging applications such as
nuclear waste inspections and&lt;br/&gt;explosive detection. Thus, advances in
computational methods for this&lt;br/&gt;application can have a very broad
impact in the imaging field.&lt;br/&gt;Collaborations between researchers in
Mathematics and Computer Science&lt;br/&gt;and researchers in the Department of
Radiology and Imaging Sciences&lt;br/&gt;and Winship Cancer Institute at Emory
University facilitates&lt;br/&gt;transitioning new software to clinical use.