* 1115229
* EAGER: Biocatalyst Orientation Control During Immobilization
* ENG,CBET
* 06/01/2011,05/31/2012
* Bradley Bundy, Brigham Young University
* Standard Grant
* George J. Antos
* 05/31/2012
* USD 70,571.00

Enzymatic biocatalysis is a particularly attractive technology in the effort to
develop renewable, sustainable, and highly specific catalytic processes. The
immobilization of enzymes on surfaces frequently leads to increased enzyme
stability, decreased cost, and ease of enzyme separation and reuse. However, the
available immobilization technologies result in random orientations of the
immobilized enzyme which inhibits enzyme function. For optimal biocatalytic
activity, the ability to control the enzyme attachment orientation is necessary
to maximize the enzyme?s active site accessibility and minimize destabilizing
enzyme-surface interactions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI, Bradley Bundy of
Brigham Young University, Provo, UT has previously demonstrated the
incorporation of certain unique unnatural amino acids into proteins at
controlled locations anywhere in the protein with economically realistic high
yields. This unique amino acid is used to covalently link proteins to each other
using biocompatible click chemistry. The working hypothesis is that these same
unique chemical moieties can be used with click chemistry to control the
orientation of the immobilized enzyme on the surface to yield optimal
orientation for activity and stability. Lipase B will be attached using this
click chemistry to a magnetic substrate and tested for specific activity. This
test will be performed for multiple attachment locations which by structure
appear to make the active site accessible or
inaccessible.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed work has the potential to
scientifically impact a significant portion of the multibillion dollar catalytic
enzyme industry. With its successful development this technology would lead to
the transformation of the biocatalysis industry by providing a rapid, reliable,
and covalent optimization method for immobilization. This work would also impact
the protein-surface interaction field, providing researchers with immobilized
enzymes that are all covalently attached in the same orientation. Properties
tested from the bulk could then be reliably extrapolated to the atomic level.
Sustainability would also be impacted as this work leads to cheaper, more
efficient green biocatalysis to economically replace existing unsustainable and
energy and waste intensive chemical synthesis methods.