* 1115607
* Collaborative Research: Interacting disturbances: leaf to landscape dynamics of emerging disease, fire, and drought in California coastal forests
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2016
* Matteo Garbelotto, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 08/31/2016
* USD 844,482.00

Over the past decade, millions of trees in California and Oregon forests have
been attacked by an exotic pathogen, Phytophthora ramorum, causal agent of the
infectious forest disease known as sudden oak death. This destructive outbreak
is occurring in redwood and oak woodland communities in the same places that
have also recently experienced devastating wildfires and extreme droughts. This
research will use a novel combination of molecular, greenhouse, field, and
computational modeling techniques to understand how disturbances created by
wildfire, drought, and infectious disease interact and impact forest ecosystems.
Results are expected to illuminate how wildfire affects the persistence and
spread of an invasive pathogen, how biodiversity impacts emergence of disease in
disturbed vs. undisturbed plant communities, and how these interacting
disturbances alter nutrient cycling in forest ecosystems.

The combined research on the ecology of infectious disease, wildfire and drought
will help develop best management practices for the growing number of forested
landscapes around the world that are being impacted by complex, interacting
disturbances. Outreach to stakeholders will be implemented through two highly
effective organizations - University of California Cooperative Extension and the
California Oak Mortality Task Force. The investigators will also be actively
involved with advising state, federal and International regulatory committees
put in place to create policy for managing sudden oak death and other forest
diseases.