* 1115102
* EAGER:  COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH: A New Integrated Quantitative Metrics Approach for Identifying Coordinated Gaits in Swimming Animals
* BIO,IOS
* 05/01/2011,08/31/2014
* Joseph Thompson, Franklin and Marshall College
* Standard Grant
* Emily Carrington
* 08/31/2014
* USD 10,107.00

Quantitative assessment of animal swimming performance is essential to gaining
an understanding the ability of aquatic species to compete in and withstand
changes in their environment. A thorough understanding of swimming performance
requires quantifying both the motion of the propulsors and the resulting fluid
flow. For the myriad aquatic animals that use them, the ability to quantify
simultaneously fluid flows produced by their various propulsors is constrained
by the current methodological approaches that measure flow in only two
dimensions. In this project, the investigators propose a novel 3D approach for
studying swimming animals. They will focus on the two separate, but coordinated,
propulsive systems of squid (jets and fins) as follows: (1) collect 3D data of
the complete fluid flow (wake) generated by swimming squid (both fin and jet
wakes simultaneously) and 3D kinematic data of the swimming motion; (2) apply
new mathematical tools to quantitatively distinguish between hydrodynamic and
kinematic patterns (i.e., gaits) based on their physical features; and (3)
evaluate the propulsive performance (i.e., thrust and efficiency) associated
with gaits identified in step 2. This quantitative approach will illuminate the
selective pressures driving the structure, mechanics, and dynamics of the
musculoskeletal system that powers and supports the propulsors. This research
holds great promise for developing a universal framework for gait identification
in any swimmer or flyer, especially those employing multiple propulsors, and
thus may potentially transform current methods for studying locomotion. Beyond
the field of biology, this quantitative, 3D approach could provide a valuable
framework for engineers of bioinspired propulsion systems, who may be seeking
improved propulsive performance in compact designs similar to what nature
offers. Finally, the collaborative interdisciplinary nature of this project will
allow undergraduate and graduate students with diverse backgrounds in
physiology, biomechanics, and engineering to interact and acquire training in
cutting edge technologies.