* 1115009
* CNH: Institutional Dynamics of Adaptation to Climate Change: Longitudinal Analysis of Snowmelt-Dependent Agricultural Systems
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2011,02/29/2016
* Tom Evans, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 02/29/2016
* USD 1,200,000.00

Global withdrawals of water have doubled over the past 40 years as irrigated
agricultural land expanded from 138 million ha to 277 million hectares during
the period from 1961 to 2003. Irrigated land is responsible for more than 85
percent of global consumptive water use, producing approximately 45 percent of
the global food supply on only 20 percent of global cropland. The combination of
the increasing use of irrigation in agricultural production and the importance
of snowmelt in many agricultural areas has led to a situation where more than
one-sixth of the world's population relies on glaciers and seasonal snow packs
as their primary source of streamflow. Climate change processes are projected to
impact the amount of snowfall and the seasonality of discharge around the globe.
Temperature effects of climate change alone will be sufficient to alter both
snowpack accumulation and snowmelt dynamics of many agricultural systems. While
additional climate change impacts on growing season rainfall, streamflow, and
drought could serve to either exacerbate or mitigate shifts in snowmelt
climatology on water available for crops, the dependence on snowmelt and
irrigation in many agricultural systems may reduce their ability to respond to
future changes. Of additional concern is the fact that many temperate and
tropical agricultural areas dependent on glacial meltwater are now facing the
threat of complete glacier loss, making climate changes in these regions
potentially more disruptive than in areas where only seasonal snowmelt is used
as a water resource. In the face of water shortages, governance institutions
established to allocate water may be disrupted and forced to change. Critical
tensions exist between the potential impacts of climate change and existing and
future patterns of water use in regions highly dependent on glacier-fed
streamflow for agricultural irrigation. This interdisciplinary research project
will examine how human populations will be impacted by these changes and the
capacity of users in glacier-irrigated agricultural systems to adapt. The
investigators will examine semi-arid agricultural systems that are dependent on
snowmelt located across strongly contrasting institutional and hydrological
settings in eastern Kenya and the western United States. They will integrate
information gathered from focus groups, water-user interviews, field
hydrological measurements, role-playing games, and scenario-based models of
potential climate change impacts to assess community vulnerability to climate
variability and understand how communities might respond to changes in water
availability in the future. They will address interactions among human actors,
the physical and social capital they construct and maintain, and the dynamics of
water availability and allocation across spatial
scales.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will have significant implications for
the governance of water resources and how communities and households cope with
water scarcity. The empirical analysis of past and present water governance will
support the development of scenario-based models of potential climate change
impacts to assess community vulnerability to climate variability and to
understand how communities might respond to changes in water availability in the
future. Findings from this project will be of value to policy makers who are
seeking more nuanced policy responses than simple "one size fits all" solutions.
Many policy analysts recommend one-type of governance, such as government or
private ownership, as being "ideal" to cope with threats to ecological systems.
This research will develop new knowledge about the ways in which institutional
diversity can contribute to the effective management of water resources. This
project is supported by the NSF Dynamics of Coupled Natural and Human Systems
(CNH) Program.