* 1115665
* CSR: Small: DSA-Cloud: Data Semantics Aware Clouds for High Performance Analytics
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2015
* Jun Wang, The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Standard Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 08/31/2015
* USD 390,973.00

This project is motivated by successful deployment of eScience
applications&lt;br/&gt;on clouds: how to deploy HPC analytics applications on
the cloud? Both eScience applications&lt;br/&gt;and HPC analytics applications
manipulate with tera-scale or peta-scale data and require &lt;br/&gt;access to
expensive computing resources. However, HPC analytics applications bear several
&lt;br/&gt;distinct characteristics such as complex data access patterns and
interest locality, which &lt;br/&gt;pose new challenges to its adoption in
clouds. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to develop a data
semantics &lt;br/&gt;aware framework to enable HPC analytics at clouds. Such a
framework is composed of three components; &lt;br/&gt;1) a MapReduce API with
data semantics awareness used to develop high-performance&lt;br/&gt;analysis
applications, 2) a translation layer equipped with data-semantics aware HPC
interfaces, &lt;br/&gt;and 3) a data-affinity-aware data placement scheme. It is
anticipated that high productivity on the&lt;br/&gt;economic impact is
significantly improved through the cost-effective scientific data
processing.&lt;br/&gt;Delivering an open source software to the community speeds
up the 21st century scientific &lt;br/&gt;discovery process in any HPC analytics
areas such as cosmology, astrophysics, chromodynamics,
&lt;br/&gt;bioinformatics, etc. Numerous educational benefits are expected to be
generated from collaborative &lt;br/&gt;effort with several UCF educational
projects and external collaboration and community ties &lt;br/&gt;through the
integration into the FutureGrid, and scientific computing cloud at Department of
Energy.