* 1115818
* Warfare and Polity in the Region of La Mar, Chiapas, Mexico
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2011,05/31/2015
* Andrew Scherer, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 05/31/2015
* USD 42,721.00

With National Science Foundation support, Dr. Andrew Scherer and Dr. Charles
Golden will lead a bi-national team of scholars in the archaeological
investigation of Precolumbian warfare in Chiapas, Mexico. During the Classic
period (AD 250 to 900), the Maya kingdoms of Piedras Negras and Yaxchilan
struggled to control this area, contending with intrusions by other dynasties as
well. Based on the results of Scherer and Golden's prior NSF-supported research,
the Late Classic period (AD 600 - 900) lords of the Yaxchilan kingdom
constructed an extensive landscape-oriented defensive system that consisted of a
fortified border system of masonry walls, hilltop redoubts, and noble palace
centers strategically situated among a series of settlements positioned to
defend the greater polity against attack from neighboring polities. In contrast,
Late Preclassic period (400 BC to AD 250) defensive features from the region are
site-oriented, meant to protect only a single community, and hint at the
fractured geo-political landscape of that earlier time. What is unclear,
however, is whether Yaxchilan's Late Classic period landscape-oriented border
fortification system is unique to that kingdom, thus representing a distinctive
political and military situation, or if other kingdoms in the western lowlands
pursued similar geo-political strategy. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project seeks
to test the diversity of Classic period Maya warfare strategies through the
investigation of the spatial distribution of defensive features, settlement, and
material culture associated with a 360 km2 area around the Classic period site
of La Mar. Data from hieroglyphic texts and iconography establish that La Mar
was a secondary center at the limits of the Piedras Negras polity and that La
Mar's governors were among the Piedras Negras kings' most important military
allies. Lacking, however, is archaeological data to correlate with the
historical evidence for warfare by the Piedras Negras
kingdom.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will enhance understandings of
ancient Maya defensive features and warfare and addresses the role of warfare as
both a cause and effect of political formation and collapse in the Maya region.
The results of this research will contribute to our understanding of
Precolumbian political processes, particularly in regards to Mesoamerican
boundary formation processes. More significantly, this archaeological research
will provide a long-term diachronic perspective that can contribute to the
cross-cultural and interdisciplinary study of warfare at the margins of the
state. Landscape approaches to ancient warfare are of increasing importance in
the study of violent conflict. However comparative data are lacking from complex
societies in the tropical Americas to compare and contrast with not only other
parts of the New World, but also with Old World complex societies where much of
our cross-cultural understanding of fortifications, landscape, and the conduct
of war are rooted.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project will provide field
and laboratory experiences for doctoral, masters, and undergraduate students
from both Mexico and the United States. More broadly, the project will advance
international collaborative research in an area of Chiapas that has received
little archaeological attention. This research will provide government
authorities, land-use managers, and local communities with data regarding the
location and extent of archaeological sites in an understudied region of
Mesoamerica.