* 1115769
* CIF:  Collaborative Research:Small: Distributed Detection Algorithms and Stochastic Modeling for Large Monitoring Sensor Networks
* CSE,CCF
* 08/01/2011,07/31/2014
* Xuanlong Nguyen, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* John Cozzens
* 07/31/2014
* USD 263,483.00

Operational and safety goals for the built environment demand robust, scalable
and reliable large&lt;br/&gt;scale monitoring for infrastructure systems. High
performance real-time event detection and decision making&lt;br/&gt;requires
models and algorithms to process large amounts of data from dense sensor
networks deployed&lt;br/&gt;in these systems. Despite advances in the
development of detection algorithms for such networks, there are&lt;br/&gt;two
widely recognized and conflicting obstacles: detection rules need to be
sufficiently complex to adapt to&lt;br/&gt;the spatiotemporal changes in the
environment, requiring the sharing of data; but rules are constrained
by&lt;br/&gt;statistical performance guarantees and computation and
communications budgets imposed by the network.&lt;br/&gt;This project addresses
these challenges by developing a fundamentally new approach that jointly
accounts&lt;br/&gt;for statistical detection, communication constraints and
distributed computation.&lt;br/&gt;This research develops a framework that
integrates the distributed computation and communication
constraints&lt;br/&gt;of the underlying network infrastructure with flexible
stochastic modeling and learning algorithms&lt;br/&gt;with spatiotemporal data.
The modeling and algorithms enable simultaneous and sequential decision
making&lt;br/&gt;at many local sites, by borrowing information across the
network in a statistically coherent and computationally&lt;br/&gt;efficient
manner. Combining the formalism of sequential change point detection,
nonparametric and&lt;br/&gt;probabilistic graphical models and spatiotemporal
statistics, the project develops distributed and sequential&lt;br/&gt;message-
passing algorithms for detecting changes in the underlying distributions
generating network data.&lt;br/&gt;The models developed also offer new
theoretical understanding of the trade-offs between statistical
model&lt;br/&gt;complexity, distributed computation efficiency, and structure of
communication constraints within the network.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
interdisciplinary research brings together students and researchers from
different areas, utilizing&lt;br/&gt;and developing knowledge and cross-
disciplinary skills in the fields of computer science, statistics,
signal&lt;br/&gt;processing and civil engineering.