* 1115931
* Fast Integral Equation Methods for High-Dimensional Diffusion Problems
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2015
* Johannes Tausch, Southern Methodist University
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 08/31/2015
* USD 129,990.00

The unifying theme of this project is the development and analysis
of&lt;br/&gt;numerical methods for high-dimensional diffusion problems.
In&lt;br/&gt;particular, the research will be focused in two areas, namely
solving&lt;br/&gt;boundary value problems to the heat equation in three
dimensions using&lt;br/&gt;thermal layer potentials. The second issue is the
computation of the&lt;br/&gt;discrete Gauss transform for data sets in many
dimensions. Both&lt;br/&gt;topics involve computations with integral operators
that have a Gauss&lt;br/&gt;kernel. Since these operators are non-local, naive
algorithms scale&lt;br/&gt;quadratically in the number of data points. Realistic
problems can&lt;br/&gt;involve enormous data sets and are therefore tractable
only if fast&lt;br/&gt;methods, that exploit certain analytic properties of the
kernel, are&lt;br/&gt;applied. This project will employ high-order Nystrom
techniques that&lt;br/&gt;are combined with Chebyshev and exponential expansions
for the rapid&lt;br/&gt;evaluation of integral
operators.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The ability to solve the heat equation
efficiently is fundamental in&lt;br/&gt;many applications of science, technology
and medicine. For instance,&lt;br/&gt;heat conduction plays an important role in
the modeling of geothermal&lt;br/&gt;systems, melting, welding, and in
thermography as a means to detect&lt;br/&gt;breast cancer. Often, the task is to
identify an unknown heat source&lt;br/&gt;from known surface temperatures and
fluxes. The solution of such&lt;br/&gt;inverse problems involves solving the
forward problem many times,&lt;br/&gt;therefore speed is essential for numerical
methods. The discrete&lt;br/&gt;Gauss transform is used to find relations in
large data sets. This can&lt;br/&gt;be patterns, correlations, or accumulations
in images, texts, or&lt;br/&gt;internet traffic. Concrete applications are, for
instance, machine&lt;br/&gt;recognition of faces, voices and handwriting. By
engaging a graduate&lt;br/&gt;as well as undergraduate students in research, the
proposed activities&lt;br/&gt;will also contribute to excellence and growth in
the education of the&lt;br/&gt;future workforce.