* 1115178
* Conference: 2011 AEESP Conference and CAREER Workshop: Global Sustainability, Tampa, Florida, July 10-12, 2011
* ENG,CBET
* 03/01/2011,02/29/2012
* Maya Trotz, University of South Florida
* Standard Grant
* Debra Reinhart
* 02/29/2012
* USD 44,350.00

Proposal Title: 2011 AEESP Conference and CAREER Workshop: Global
Sustainability&lt;br/&gt;Principal Investigator: Jeffrey
Cunningham&lt;br/&gt;Institution: University of South Florida
&lt;br/&gt;Proposal No: CBET-1115178&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The purpose of this
proposal is to partially support the 2011 AEESP Research and Education
Conference, including a workshop to assist junior faculty members with career
planning and with the preparation of NSF CAREER proposals. The 2011 AEESP
Research and Education Conference (hereafter referred to as the Conference) will
be hosted by the University of South Florida (USF) in Tampa, Florida, July 1012,
2011. USF was selected to host the 2011 Conference through a competitive
proposal process.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of this proposal
resides in the fact that the Conference is the flagship event of the Association
of Environmental Engineering and Science Professors (AEESP). This conference
serves as a venue for the exchange of information between the academic and
practitioner communities, particularly relating to the advancement of innovative
research and the preparation of students for professional practice in
environmental engineering. In this regard, the Conference benefits the practice
of environmental engineering and science, improves our collective ability to
educate the next generation of environmental engineers and scientists, and
facilitates discovery and advancement of knowledge in our field. The Conference
is typically well attended by Environmental Engineering/Science professors from
throughout the United States. Anticipated attendance at the 2011 Conference is
approximately 300400 attendees, including graduate students and early-career
faculty.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This conference is expected to result in several
broader impacts, including the following. (1) The theme of the Conference is
global sustainability, which will help to prepare faculty and students to be
globally competitive by promoting dialog and increasing awareness of different
global perspectives. (2) Incorporation of professional practitioners at this
years Conference aims to attract, train, and retain a more diverse, globally
integrated, and competitive science and engineering workforce. (3) The
integration of research and education within the six Conference tracks, coupled
with the workshops held in conjunction with the Conference, will lead to
innovation in course and curriculum development. (4) AEESP will recruit members
of groups underrepresented in environmental engineering to participate in the
workshops, particularly the CAREER workshop. This will include graduate
students, post-doctoral researchers, and early-career faculty members. (5) Four
nationally-prominent individuals have been invited to deliver keynote speeches
at the Conference. The participation of these nationally prominent individuals
at the Conference will provide Conference attendees with perspectives and
opportunities not typically available to educators and practitioners in the
field of Environmental Science and Engineering. (6) A post-conference report of
highlights and findings from the Conference will be published in the quarterly
AEESP newsletter and will be disseminated through other appropriate channels
(web site, email distribution list, etc.).