* 1115956
* SHB: Small: Computational Algorithms for Predictive Health Assessment
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2011,12/31/2014
* Mihail Popescu, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 12/31/2014
* USD 150,000.00

Abstract: SHB: Small: Computational Algorithms for Predictive Health
Assessment&lt;br/&gt;This project leverages ongoing work at Tiger Place (TP),
University of Missouri (MU) in the use of sensor technology for in-home health
assessment. The TP team has deployed sensor networks in the homes of seniors,
with a wide range of sensor types and analysis approaches. They are integrating
their sensor networks with an in-house nursing electronic health record (EHR)
and investigating health context-aware computational algorithms for health and
wellbeing assessments. The proposed project has the following objectives: (1)
Integrate the sensor network with an EHR developed in-house to provide automatic
health context for comprehensive algorithm development; (2) Investigate
algorithms for identifying health patterns based on sensor data and contextual
health information such as chronic conditions and medication changes that are
provided by the EHR data; and (3) Investigate the possibility of predicting
physiological changes such as blood pressure based on sensor data. A variety of
machine learning methods are investigated for predictive health assessment.
There are two potential difficulties that this research tackles: ground truth
uncertainty and data unbalance. To address these problems the project is
developing two new machine learning methods: a fuzzy extension of multiple
instance learning and a sensor firing sequence similarity based method for
recognizing pattern changes. Existing sensor data is used as a starting point to
develop the proposed methods, along with simulated data for more diverse testing
scenarios. The integrated combination of the sensor network and EHR is expected
provide a unique, rich dataset in which to investigate health context-aware
algorithms.