* 1115506
* Sahel Seasonal to Decadal Climate Variability and Atmosphere/Surface Two-Way Interactions
* GEO,AGS
* 09/15/2011,08/31/2014
* Yongkang Xue, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Anjuli Bamzai
* 08/31/2014
* USD 496,742.00

Dramatic change over the Sahel from wet conditions in the 1950s to much drier
conditions in the 1970s and the 1980s and then to partial recovery since the
1990s, represents one of the strongest interdecadal signals on Earth in the
twentieth century. Studies suggest that Sahel climate variability is strongly
influenced by external forcings: sea surface temperature (SST), land surface
processes, and aerosols. However, general circulation model (GCM) studies with a
single external forcing (for example, SST) have not been able to reproduce full
seasonal, interannual, and decadal variability and anomalies (SIDVA) of Sahel
climate. In most of these studies, SST, land, and aerosol conditions were
specified, i.e., there was only one way interaction. The relative roles of the
external forcings and their two-way interactions in the Sahel climate SIDVA have
never been quantitatively and comprehensively examined.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will conduct a set of 60-year simulations
with a coupled Atmospheric GCM/biophysical model/dynamic vegetation model as
well as preliminary tests with Atmospheric-Ocean GCM/ biophysical model/dynamic
vegetation model, incorporating two way feedback processes, to explore the
causes of Sahel climate SIDVA and to assess the relative contribution of ocean
and land, including human-induced land use and land cover (LULC) change.
Recently available data will be used to specify LULC change. In addition, a
regional climate model (RCM) using Atmospheric GCM simulations from selected
years as lateral boundary conditions will be applied to assess the regional
details of surface-atmosphere interactions in the Sahel climate SIDVA. This work
will test whether the RCMs will provide additional subseasonal to decadal
prediction skill and if they are able to provide supplementary skillful regional
information not available in coarse scale GCM predictions.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This interdisciplinary research will test the hypothesis
that a comprehensive understanding of West African Monsoon (WAM) SIDVA and its
mechanisms requires synthesized investigation, including multi-major external
forcings and their full feedbacks in the climate model. Data from satellite and
field measurements, especially from African Monsoon Multidisciplinary Analyses
(AMMA) project, and other sources will be applied for evaluation and
specification of model simulations/predictions. Model-simulated major features
and components relevant to the Sahel climate SIDVA, such as precipitation, soil
moisture, vegetation condition, SST, as well as their relationship to each other
will be comprehensively analyzed and compared with data from different sources.
This project intends to provide a comprehensive understanding of how different
earth processes and human activities have contributed to the Sahel climate
variability and anomalies over much of the last century through the
representation of key non-linear feedback processes in WAM climate
simulations.&lt;br/&gt;This project has broader impacts. Understanding Sahelian
climate seasonal, interannual, and decadal variability and anomaly has been
recognized as a critical component in global climate studies by international
programs. The distinct climate features, the strong coupling between Sahel
climate and external forcings, the controversy on the causes of the Sahel
climate anomalies, especially the drought, and significant social and economic
implications of Sahel climate SIDVA make this region extremely important for the
scientific community. This project will address some of the key scientific
issues in the study of Sahelian climate and will contribute to identification of
the attribution of Sahel rainfall changes to anthropogenic and natural drivers
and the effect of climate variability on ecosystems and water resources. The
results from this study will not only further our understanding of the Sahelian
climate, but also provide useful information through regional downscaling for
social planning, which is crucial for the fragile Sahelian economy. They will be
distributed through the Global Energy and Water Cycle Experiment
Hydroclimatology Panel (GEWEX GHP) database and the African Centre of
Meteorological Application for Development (ACMAD).