* 1115153
* III: Small: Real-World Traffic Data Management for Time-Dependent Spatial Queries
* CSE,IIS
* 08/01/2011,07/31/2015
* Cyrus Shahabi, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* nan zhang
* 07/31/2015
* USD 515,612.00

The two most important commodities of the 21st century are time and energy;
traffic congestion wastes both. Several disciplines have studied the traffic
congestion problem using mathematical models, simulation studies and field
surveys. Recently, due to the sensor instrumentation of road networks and the
availability of commodity sensors from which traffic information can be derived
(e.g., CCTV cameras, GPS devices), a large volume of real-time traffic data at
high spatiotemporal resolutions has become available. These data lay the ground
for better understanding of the transportation network and for new
applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The first objective of this project is to
study the efficient acquisition and storage of traffic data. In particular, at
the acquisition time, compact traffic patterns and outliers are constructed from
raw data in real-time, supporting fast queries with approximate results and
error bounds. The second objective is to utilize the traffic patterns to enable
two critical query types that are building blocks of several important
applications in time-dependent road networks: 1) shortest travel-time
computation, and 2) k-nearest-neighbor search.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader
impact of this project is to bring large amount of historical and real-time
traffic data at the fidelities unseen before to the fingertip of transportation
engineers, policy makers and end-users. This in turn enables them to alleviate
one of the major problems of megacities, the main societal fabrics of the 21st
century. Research results are incoporated into courses on Database Systems and
Geospatial Information Management taught at University of Southern California
and are also disseminated through papers published in conferences and journals.
Details about the project including publications and open-source code are
available at the project website: http://infolab.usc.edu/projects/TransDec/.