* 1115489
* HCC: Small: Development of an Eyeglass-Style Compact Eye-Tracked Near-Eye Display Using Freeform Optical Technology
* CSE,IIS
* 08/15/2011,07/31/2015
* Hong Hua, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 07/31/2015
* USD 499,954.00

An integrated eye-tracking head-mounted display (ET-HMD) able to display
stereoscopic virtual images while also tracking the direction of the user's gaze
would benefit both fundamental scientific research and a host of emerging
applications. Yet despite significant advances in and commercial availability of
stand-alone HMD and eye-tracking technologies, a portable, lightweight, accurate
and robust system that conforms to the form factor of a pair of sunglasses
remains elusive. The PI's goal in this project is to develop a fundamentally new
optical technology that will make it possible to realize this dream by
overcoming the limitations of the conventional methods that have been applied to
ET-HMD designs to date. In most previous work on designing ET-HMD systems, the
optical systems for the HMD and eye-tracking paths were treated separately, and
rotationally symmetric optical surfaces were used. In contrast, the PI's
approach is to utilize freeform optical technology in combination with an
innovative optical scheme that uniquely combines the display optics with the eye
imaging optics. To these ends, she will investigate the challenges of designing
the freeform ET-HMD system and develop appropriate design methods along with an
optimization strategy for the required high performance optical system. She will
implement a fully integrated, portable prototype system, and develop calibration
and assessment methods for evaluating both the display and eye-tracking
performance. As a testbed application for the new technology, the PI will
evaluate the feasibility of adopting ET-HMD displays to augment communication by
patients suffering from ALS (amyotrophic lateral sclerosis) or similar
neurological disease that causes loss of speech. Project outcomes will include
the first lightweight and portable ET-HMD display prototype that has a form
factor close to that of sunglasses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The
new technology resulting from this project will have critical impacts in many
fields. It will create a revolutionary and intriguing platform for mobile
communication, wearable computing, and portable entertainment. It will provide a
new tool for research related to vision and human factors, where eye movements
provide a sensible metric for understanding human perception in 3D space and
effectiveness at specific tasks. It will afford augmentative and alternative
human-computer interfaces for people with proprioceptive disabilities or with
situational impairments due to having their hands and feet occupied. And it will
undoubtedly spur development of a host of new and thrilling applications. The
research will also provide a vehicle for training the next generation of
interdisciplinary scientists and engineers, at both the undergraduate and
graduate levels.