* 1115284
* CSR: Small: A Comprehensive Framework for Real-Time Multiprocessor Synchronization
* CSE,CNS
* 08/15/2011,07/31/2015
* James Anderson, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Continuing Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 07/31/2015
* USD 450,000.00

The advent of multicore technologies has fueled much recent work on methods for
designing, deploying, and verifying multiprocessor implementations of real-time
applications. Such methods must necessarily be rooted in resource allocation
techniques that facilitate predictable system designs. In work on such
techniques, scheduling algorithms, which allocate processor time, have received
the greatest attention. Synchronization algorithms, which coordinate access to
other resources, have received much less attention.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
current state-of-the-art regarding real-time multiprocessor synchronization is
that simple locking protocols can be supported, but not much else. This is a
serious impediment that is limiting the evolution of real-time applications to
"multicore-ready" versions. Driven by this, a rich set of multiprocessor real-
time synchronization mechanisms is being developed in this project. These
mechanisms are motivated by real application needs, as have arisen in joint work
involving the investigators and industry colleagues at AT&amp;T and Northrop
Grumman. Such mechanisms are being designed for use within several system
models, also motivated by real needs. These include models wherein various
complexities exist, such as having tasks of differing criticalities, multiple
subsystems that must be "isolated" from one another, heterogeneous hardware
components, dynamic task behaviors, etc. In all of this work, the design of
optimal synchronization protocols is being emphasized. These protocols are being
prototyped and evaluated within a open-source UNC-produced real-time Linux
extension called LITMUS^RT. Broader impacts will include continued joint
research with industry colleagues, and the development of publicly-available
open-source software that can be used by other institutions for research and
teaching purposes.