* 1115839
* TC: Small: New Directions in Side Channel Attacks and Countermeasures
* CSE,CNS
* 08/01/2011,07/31/2015
* Patrick Schaumont, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Shands
* 07/31/2015
* USD 437,558.00

This project develops new and promising techniques in the area of side-channel
attacks and their corresponding countermeasures. In a side-channel attack, an
attacker captures the implementation effects of cryptography, such as power
consumption and execution time. A distinctive feature of a side-channel analysis
(SCA) attack is that it can reveal a small part of the secret-key. Hence, side-
channel attacks avoid the brute-force complexity of cryptanalysis. Using novel
side-channel estimation techniques based on Bayesian statistics, the project
develops more powerful side-channel attacks. The development of novel side-
channel analysis techniques is crucial in order to obtain the best possible
countermeasures. The project also develops novel software-oriented
countermeasures that more flexible and general than traditional hardware-
oriented side-channel countermeasures. The efficiency of side-channel attacks
and side-channel countermeasures are evaluated using hardware and software
prototyping. The project combines advanced statistical techniques with advanced
computer engineering, building synergy between Statistics and Computer
Engineering. In the field of Statistics, the Bayesian matching technique can be
used for variable selection, a technique that is applicable to related problems
in biostatistics, machine learning, data mining, genomics, and other areas with
high dimensional data. Project results will be disseminated by distributing
open-source prototype implementations, measurement data, and in open
publications. A formal training program within the Laboratory for
Interdisciplinary Statistical Analysis (LISA) at Virginia Tech is developed to
distribute the results of this project to students.