* 1115775
* Root Crop Agriculture, Land Use, and Authority Outside of the Ceren Village, El Salvador
* SBE,BCS
* 06/01/2011,05/31/2013
* Payson Sheets, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 05/31/2013
* USD 75,200.00

Supported by the National Science Foundation, Dr. Payson Sheets (Anthropology,
University of Colorado) and an international team of researchers will conduct
archaeological investigations in El Salvador. The team consists of specialists
in ancient botany and graduate students from the U.S., and agricultural
engineers and archaeology students from El Salvador. The team will follow up on
the recent discovery of an agricultural system of the ancient Maya that hitherto
was unknown. About 200 meters south of the ancient Maya village of Ceren, very
large sloping planting beds were discovered, preserved to an extraordinary
degree by the eruption of the Loma Caldera volcanic vent in about AD 600. Test
excavations done in 2009, also supported by NSF, encountered many planting beds
that had been harvested of the manioc, a root crop, that had been growing there
for at least a year. Most of the roots had been removed during harvesting, but
some remained and were encountered as hollow spaces, which the researchers cast
with dental plaster to preserve them in perpetuity. Some of the beds had been
replanted with stem cuttings for the next cycle of growth. Both the stems and
the tubers of the ancient Maya were more robust than those grown by peasant
farmers in El Salvador today.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;One goal of the research is
to understand the means by which ancient farmers were more successful than
present-day farmers in growing manioc. Salvadoran agricultural engineers are
essential in helping to explore the possibilities, and three have been proposed
so far. (1) Manioc tubers grow best in loose soils, and the ancient planting
beds are superior to the present practice of planting in flat fields. (2) Wild
and domesticated manioc grows best in semi-arid areas, as too much moisture
inhibits growth, so the sloping of the ancient beds facilitates drainage. That
is not done by contemporary farmers. (3) The ancient fields were carefully
weeded, also a procedure that is not followed today. Because El Salvador is the
most crowded Central American country, that passed food self-sufficiency some
five decades ago, and is beset by unemployment, it is an ideal location to use
ancient successes to improve present-day agricultural practices. Test plots will
be initiated by three farmers to compare ancient and traditional contemporary
manioc cultivation, to demonstrate and quantify the
differences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research focuses on issues of ancient Maya
agriculture. Scholars have long debated whether agriculture was under elite
control or influence, or whether it was essentially independent from higher
authority. Land-use lines were discovered in 2009 that strictly separated
different farmer's plots. Excavations will focus on whether those boundaries
were locally established, or emanated from the Ceren village, or possibly from
San Andres which is the city under elite control to the south of the fields. And
because Ceren receives abundant rainfall, at the moist end of the continuum that
manioc can stand, it appears that manioc would have been more suitable for
cultivation in dryer areas of the Maya lowlands than at Ceren. Therefore project
members are developing multiple durable indicators of manioc cultivation and
processing that can be found in archaeological sites that lack the unusual
preservation of Ceren.