* 1115618
* Adjusting for Unmeasured Confounding Due to Cluster with Complex Sampling Designs
* SBE,SES
* 09/15/2011,08/31/2015
* Babette Brumback, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Cheryl Eavey
* 08/31/2015
* USD 310,000.00

In social epidemiology, a geographic neighborhood or cluster is viewed as an
important determinant of health behaviors, mediators, and outcomes. One may be
interested in the effects of measured or unmeasured neighborhood characteristics
or in turn on individual effects that have been disentangled from neighborhood
effects. Analyses of nationally representative surveys, such as the National
Health Interview Survey, provide a means of estimating these effects. This
project will develop statistical methods that can account for the complex
sampling design of such surveys at the same time as disentangling individual
effects from neighborhood effects. These methods will be applied to analyze data
from the National Health Interview Survey. Furthermore, in global health and
several other fields, community randomized trials with complex sampling designs
are used to estimate the effect of one or more interventions versus a standard
or control condition. Scientific interest often focuses on the relative effects
of community-level adherence to the intervention on individual-level outcomes.
The project also will develop statistical methods that can account for the
complex sampling design of such trials while simultaneously extracting the
effect of intervention adherence, as opposed to that of intervention intention
on individual-level outcomes. These methods will be applied to analyze data from
randomized trials designed to study effects of school-level sanitation, water
safety, and hygiene on individual education outcomes.

This project involves collaborative research across the fields of biostatistics,
social epidemiology, and global health. The research will advance statistical
methodology as well as improve the capability of researchers in social
epidemiology, global health, and other fields to address important scientific
questions. Disentangling individual-level effects from neighborhood-level
effects will be useful in understanding the relative roles of the individual
versus society and environment in health behaviors and outcomes, which will be
useful in designing interventions. Going beyond simple comparisons of treated
and untreated individuals in randomized clinical trials and estimating the
effects of community-level intervention adherence on individual-level outcomes
will further understanding of the effects of interventions in global health and
other fields. Illustrating and communicating the new statistical methods for
joint estimation of individual-level and neighborhood-level effects on outcomes
using nationally representative surveys will provide the federal agencies that
sponsor these surveys with enhanced options for creating public-use datasets to
facilitate these analyses. The project is supported by the Methodology,
Measurement, and Statistics Program and a consortium of federal statistical
agencies as part of a joint activity to support research on survey and
statistical methodology.