* 1115525
* AF: Small: Some Frontiers in the Approximability of Constraint Satisfaction and Related Problems
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2016
* Venkatesan Guruswami, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Jack S. Snoeyink
* 08/31/2016
* USD 379,998.00

Many important computational tasks can be cast as optimization problems, where
the goal is to find a solution obeying stipulated constraints that maximizes or
minimizes a certain objective value. Unfortunately, most of these problems are
NP-hard to solve optimally. One of the most extensively studied and successful
approaches to cope with this intractability is to settle for approximation
algorithms, which are efficient heuristics that find solutions with provable
guarantees on quality. This approach is appealing as it does not make any
assumptions about the problem instance. Further, on typical instances the
algorithm could perform much better than the proven bound. Research in this
subject has made huge strides, and for many problems we now have good
approximation algorithms as well as strong complementary hardness results. In
fact, for large classes of problems, a common frontier called ``Unique-Games
hardness'' has been identified as the best approximation achievable with known
techniques.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Despite all this progress, certain classes of
optimization problems have eluded existing techniques and their status remains
wide open. Also, the recent breakthroughs open up exciting research topics that
could not be imagined before. The proposed research will identify and
investigate several such frontiers where progress has been lacking, both in
terms of the underlying techniques as well as the end result statements. The
topics studied will include the algorithmic power of strong semidefinite
programming relaxations to tackle some difficult optimization problems,
constraint satisfaction style problems where a solution obeying a global
property is sought, and the approximability of (near)-satisfiable instances of
constraint satisfaction problems. Initial investigations into exploratory topics
such as connections with parameterized complexity and the possibility of
bypassing the Unique Games conjecture in some of its known consequences will
also be pursued.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research will shed light on
the approximability of basic optimization problems that abstract some of the
core computational tasks arising in practice. The research and outreach
activities will aim to foster a cross-fertilization of ideas between the
approximation and constraint satisfaction communities, which have largely
progressed via disparate methods with little interaction. On the education
front, the project will train and mentor graduate students and provide a
stimulating research environment for them. The research findings, as
appropriate, will be integrated into a unified course highlighting the emerging
confluence of approximation algorithms and inapproximability results.