* 1115631
* Collaborative Research: Higher-Order Two-Fluid Methods for Simulations of Particle-Laden Flow
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2014
* Babak Shotorban, University of Alabama in Huntsville
* Standard Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 08/31/2014
* USD 30,103.00

In this effort the PIs and their student develop a high-order two-fluid method
based on a new set of coupled two-fluid hyperbolic conservation PDEs and a
Hybrid WENO-spectral method. The two-fluid model is unprecedented, obtained from
first principles utilizing an Eulerian approach for the description of
particles, which have been predominantly modeled through lower-order methods in
the Lagrangian frame of the particle. In the Eulerian frame, the particle phase
is modeled through a set of hyperbolic Eulerian transport equations governing
the behavior of the Probability Density Function of particle properties. The
equations are derived by a novel statistical method based on a method of moments
via an averaged Liouville equation. The PIs propose to develop a method based on
a high-order resolution, hybrid multidomain WENO-spectral method for the two-
fluid model. The high- resolution method is projected to improve over existing
lower- order method by capturing discontinuous interfaces and shocks sharply,
while accurately resolving small scale, unsteady particle-laden flow features.
The focus of this proposal is on the development of a stable and consistent
capturing of discontinuous particle-gas interfaces as well as a stable and
consistent source coupling between the particle and gas phases. Another focus
will be on the regularization of non- linear, singular and stiff source terms
that couple the gas and particle PDEs. The two-fluid method will be assessed
against published benchmarks, including a one-way coupled isotropic turbulence
and two-way coupled shock particle interaction, computed with a more established
Eulerian- Lagrangian method.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Explosions and combustion
processes generate environments where fluid turbulence and shocks have an
intimate and mutual interaction with particles. Various engineered systems and
natural processes involve high speed particle dynamics, shock- turbulence
interaction, and particle flow interactions; such phenomena play key roles in
debris flow and contaminant spread due to explosions, controlling supersonic
combustion, high- speed coating processes for high-performance aerospace and
electronic components. The volcanic explosions in Iceland, for example,
generated shocks, accelerated turbulent gas flows and micro-scale dust particles
that were carried for hundreds of miles over several days not only polluting the
environment but affecting air traffic for an extended period of time. The
proposed research develops an advanced numerical tool that enables (improved)
computation of these flows which will ultimately enhance understanding of a
large class of engineering and environmental problems. This knowledge can be
used directly in design improvements, control of pollution and the effects of
explosion processes on society. This proposal, moreover, increases the number of
students from underrepresented groups in STEM education by involving students in
the Mathematics, Engineering, Science Achievement (MESA) program at SDSU.