* 1115408
* Approximation of Infinite Dimensional Dynamics
* MPS,DMS
* 10/01/2011,09/30/2015
* Erik Van Vleck, University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 09/30/2015
* USD 226,332.00

In many areas of science and engineering differential equations are employed
as&lt;br/&gt;models of complex phenomena. The focus in this proposal is on the
approximation&lt;br/&gt;of solutions of infinite dimensional dynamical systems.
In particular, the investigator&lt;br/&gt;and his colleagues are interested in
understanding the dynamics of the finite dimensional &lt;br/&gt;approximations
and how they relate to the dynamics of the original dynamical system.
&lt;br/&gt;The specific issues to be investigated are related to stability of
solutions of spatially &lt;br/&gt;discrete reaction-diffusion equations, the
dynamics of so-called anti-diffusion lattice &lt;br/&gt;differential equations,
dynamics and computation of traveling waves for neutral mixed &lt;br/&gt;type
functional differential equations and rigorous computation of periodic orbits
&lt;br/&gt;for retarded delay equations, robust stability for time dependent
linear Hamiltonian systems, &lt;br/&gt;numerical techniques for efficient
computation of Lyapunov exponent like quantities based &lt;br/&gt;upon nonlinear
flows, and approximation techniques for stability spectra of delay equations
&lt;br/&gt;and partial differential equations. Techniques to investigate these
systems combine &lt;br/&gt;numerical analysis and dynamical systems ideas to
gain a better understanding of &lt;br/&gt;approximation dynamics.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Often in complex systems the differential equations used
in modeling are infinite &lt;br/&gt;dimensional, but necessarily these models
are approximated by finite dimensional &lt;br/&gt;systems in order to perform
numerical simulations. In order to understand the behavior of &lt;br/&gt;these
models, the investigator and his colleagues are interested in similarities
&lt;br/&gt;and differences in the behavior of the original infinite dimensional
system and &lt;br/&gt;finite dimensional approximations, for example those
obtained through discretization. &lt;br/&gt;Understanding the impact of
discretization leads to greater confidence when &lt;br/&gt;making inferences
from simulation results. In addition, stability analysis is useful &lt;br/&gt;in
understanding the robustness of complex biological phenomena that occur in the
&lt;br/&gt;environment and in identifying instabilities, for example, in models
of weather prediction. &lt;br/&gt;Discrete models of both biological and
physical processes are becoming more important as &lt;br/&gt;the need for
detailed, microscopic models increases and should benefit from improved
&lt;br/&gt;analysis and computational capabilities.