* 1115199
* III: Small: Robust and Scalable Reputation Management and Recommender Systems Using Belief Propagation
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2016
* Faramarz Fekri, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Maria Zemankova
* 08/31/2016
* USD 398,388.00

Reputation and recommender systems have widespread use in online marketing, web
services, P2P computing, e-commerce, social settings, and education. The
objective of this research is to develop reliable, scalable and dependable
schemes that are also resilient to malicious behaviors.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The approach is based on viewing both reputation and
recommender systems as solving for marginal probability distribution functions
from complicated global (joint-distribution) functions of many variables (users,
items or service providers, and ratings). These marginal probability
distributions are functions of the variables representing the reputation values
(in reputation systems) and the ratings to be predicted to the users (in
recommender systems). However, computing these marginal distributions are
computationally prohibitive (i.e., exponential with the number of variables) for
large scale reputation and recommender systems. Therefore, this research
represents the reputation and recommender systems using factor graphs or
Pairwise Markov Random Fields, and utilizes the Belief Propagation (BP)
algorithm to efficiently (in linear complexity) solve for these marginal
distributions. In particular, the project includes research to: (1) study the
general theories of BP-based reputation management and recommender systems on
various graphical models and develop novel algorithms; (2) study the
convergence, scalability, and robustness of the developed algorithms via
mathematical analysis and intensive simulations; (3) develop a Belief
Propagation based Iterative Trust and Reputation Management (BP-ITRM) system and
compare it with the current state of the art using real-life datasets and
conducting user studies; and (4) adaptively learn various attack strategies
against the reputation and recommender systems, determine the impacts of such
attacks, and decrease their impact. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project is
expected to make contributions to both theory and practice by developing a new
reputation management framework for recommender systems, and algorithms that
provide effective ways to deal with information overload and access to relevant
information. It is anticipated that the work will drive the technology for
effective online products and information services. Technologies resulting from
this research will bring a broad range of benefits in many areas including
online services, P2P and distributed computing systems, e-commerce, business,
social settings, education, national security and the economy. The research
results are expected to make theoretical contributions relevant to computer
science, information theory and statistical inference. This project offers a
unique opportunity to train graduate students and expose undergraduate students
to cross-cutting research in different fields (computer science, information
theory, statistical inference). The project website
(http://www.ece.gatech.edu/research/labs/WCCL/Security6.html) is used to
disseminate resulting publications, datasets (obtained from user studies and
mathematical models), and course materials to broad communities of researchers,
students and industry practitioners.