* 1115390
* Collaborative Research: Stable and Efficient Convexity-Splitting Schemes for Bistable Gradient PDEs
* MPS,DMS
* 07/15/2011,09/30/2014
* Steven Wise, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 09/30/2014
* USD 160,000.00

The goal of this research is to design robust, efficient, and practical
numerical methods for bistable gradient equations (BGEs). These form a a special
class of partial differential equations (PDEs) that describe important phenomena
in materials, fluids, and biology research. For this work the PIs plan detailed
investigations of the slope selection (SS), no slope selection (NSS), phase
field crystal (PFC) and Cahn-Hilliard (CH) equations, which are important 4th or
6th-order BGEs that must typically be solved over large space and time scales.
Numerical solution of these equations (and BGEs in general) can pose enormous
challenges. In this work the PIs will develop convex splitting (CS) schemes for
BGEs. CS schemes are 1st or 2nd-order accurate in time and at least 2nd-order
accurate in space. They are simple, powerful, and particularly well-suited to
studying large spatiotemporal morphological evolution accurately and
efficiently. 1st-order (in time) CS schemes have been known for about ten years;
but, up to now, the underlying theory has been incomplete and their application,
somewhat limited. The proposed high-order CS schemes (2nd-order in time, 2nd-
order and higher in space) are novel features of the PIs work. All CS schemes
have two important properties: they are unconditionally energy stable and
unconditionally uniquely solvable. The energy stability can often be exploited
to prove various norm stabilities, as well as convergence. The unique
solvability follows from the fact that the schemes are derived as the gradients
of strictly convex functionals. As a result, practical solvers can always be
crafted, since gradient descent methods will converge unconditionally. A big
challenge of this work is in designing truly efficient solvers for the
potentially highly nonlinear CS schemes. The PIs have had some early, important
successes in this direction, having crafted nearly optimally efficient nonlinear
multigrid solvers for the PFC and Cahn-Hilliard-Hele-Shaw (CHHS) equations. In
this work they will extend these achievements by deriving sophisticated,
efficient, and time and space adaptive solvers for a variety of BGEs. The PIs
will apply their CS schemes and efficient solvers to study the complicated long-
time dynamics of models for thin film coarsening, tumor growth and treatment,
two-phase fluid flow, and crystal growth.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;BGEs allow
researchers to create models of a great number of physical and biological
phenomena, and hence this work will have a direct impact on many scientific
disciplines. The specific equations that the PIs will focus on (SS, NSS, PFC,
and CH equations) are vital for understanding phase transformations of materials
at the atomic and nanometer scales, the complex processes in biological growth
and development, and the complicated topological change involved in two-phase
flows. For a specific example, the SS equation can be used model the formation
of nano-scopic hills and valleys on the surfaces of certain materials, such as
those used in semiconductor devices. Knowing how these nano-structures form and
move during device processing is critical for precise manufacture. Mathematical
modeling (using BGEs, for example) is often a more practical alternative to
doing laboratory experiments to find ``optimal" processing procedures. However,
in most practical situations, solutions to BGEs can only be approximated using
computerized algorithms. The primary goal of this research is to develop 2D and
3D algorithms that approximate the solutions as accurately, efficiently, and
robustly as possible. The computer algorithms and source codes created from this
work will apply to even more general models than will be explored in this
research and will therefore advance the field of computational science as a
whole. The PIs will make their software packages available in the public domain
so that researchers will have direct access to their algorithms. In addition to
working toward their research goals, the PIs will help to build and reinforce
the human resources pipeline in the field of computational sciences, which is
one of the broader goals in STEM education in the US. Both graduate and
undergraduate students will receive training in high-performance scientific
computing, numerical mathematics, and modeling; and their work is expected to
form the bases of peer-reviewed publications, conference talks, technical
reports, and theses. As a major component of this effort, the PIs will
continuously support and mentor two UMass, Dartmouth undergrads through the
CSUMS program. These students will get hands-on training in algorithm and
software development. This type of training is rare in the typical undergraduate
curriculum. Using this research as a venue, the PIs will work to inspire
students, especially undergraduates and those from traditionally
underrepresented groups, to pursue careers in science and engineering.