* 1115385
* Matrix Functions, Rational Approximation, and Quadrature with Applications
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2015
* Lothar Reichel, Kent State University
* Continuing Grant
* Junping Wang
* 08/31/2015
* USD 180,000.00

This research project is concerned with the development and analysis of novel
methods for the approximation of matrix functions and integrals defined by
matrix functions. The research blends linear algebra and approximation theory.
New rational Lanczos methods for Hermitian matrices with short recursion
formulas are being developed. The existence of short recursion relations is of
significant theoretical and practical interest. It speeds up the computations
because each new rational Lanczos vector only has to be orthogonalized against a
few of the most recently computed Lanczos vectors. The number of required
explicit orthogonalizations is bounded independently of the number of rational
Lanczos steps. The recursion relations define the orthogonal projection of a
given matrix onto a rational Krylov subspace. The projection is represented by a
pentadiagonal matrix, which also has a block structure. This matrix is analogous
to the symmetric tridiagonal matrix associated with a (standard) Gauss
quadrature rule, and is the basis for new algorithms for the evaluation of
rational Gauss, Gauss-Radau rules, and Gauss-Lobatto quadrature rules. The
research is an extension of the very important work by Gene Golub, and his
collaborators, on matrices, moments, orthogonal polynomials, and quadrature.
There may be connections to the structured matrices, such as the CMV-matrices,
which arise in the context of orthogonal polynomials and orthogonal rational
functions on the unit circle, as well as to to semi- and quasi-separable
matrices. When the given matrix is non-Hermitian, rational Arnoldi and rational
non-Hermitian Lanczos processes can be applied. The projections onto the
rational Krylov subspace again have a structure, the exploitation of which is an
important topic in linear algebra. The need to estimate matrix functionals
arises in many applications, including the investigation of social networks and
in Tikhonov regularization of ill-posed inverse problems.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The principal investigator is studying developments of
faster numerical methods for the evaluation, bounding or estimation of
complicated nonlinear expressions that involve large symmetric or nonsymmetric
matrices. The gain in speed is achieved by exploiting structure that until now
has been ignored. The development of fast methods is important when solving
large-scale problems of interest to scientists and engineers. These methods are
applicable in the investigation of social networks, whose properties recently
have received considerable attention, not only by scientists, but also by the
New York Times. A major hurdle in the investigation of social networks is their
large size. The research provides improved tools for investigating these kinds
of networks. The methods can also be applied in solution methods for Maxwell's
equation in three space-dimensions. Essentially, one has to compute the
exponential of very large matrices. These matrices are much too large to allow
the use of standard software. The methods to be developed within the framework
of this proposal speed up the computations by exploiting inherent structure of
these problems. Work on the problems of this proposal requires background in
linear algebra, orthogonal polynomials and rational functions, approximation
theory, and Gauss-type quadrature. Hence the research is well suited for
doctoral students working on this project.