* 1115217
* City as Living Laboratory for Sustainability in Urban Design
* EHR,DRL
* 07/15/2011,05/31/2012
* Jessica Luke, Institute for Learning Innovation Incorporated
* Standard Grant
* Alphonse Desena
* 05/31/2012
* USD 290,557.00

The Institute for Learning Innovation, in collaboration with Mary Miss Studio
and the Institute for Urban Design, is conducting an exploratory research and
development project on sustainable practices related to the built infrastructure
of New York City. The work will (1) pilot test and study new interpretive
strategies for urban "place-based" public learning experiences that focus
pedestrians' attention on a city's ecology and existing built sustainability
infrastructure; (2) engage urban design professionals and STEM researchers to
explore how these new strategies have the potential to transform how urban
design fields inform, dialog and interact with the public about sustainable
urban design and planning; and (3) assess the effectiveness of these public
interpretation programs on STEM learning beyond traditional Informal Science
Learning Environments (ISEs) such as science museums. Project participants also
include faculty from the City College of NY Graduate Program in Urban Design,
STEM faculty from Columbia University, and staff of the Provisions Library in
Washington, D.C.

The project is an early phase of the "City as Living Laboratory" initiative that
can leverage the Rockefeller Foundation-funded Urban Design Week program in New
York City scheduled to occur September 15 - 20, 2011. This request to NSF adds
an additional track to the process to specifically focus on STEM learning and
urban sustainability. From the promotional materials: "The Institute for Urban
Design is currently preparing for the first annual Urban Design Week, a public
festival created to engage New Yorkers in the fascinating and complex issues of
the public realm and celebrate the city's exceptional urbanity. Through a rich
roster of charettes, summits, installations, film screenings, exhibitions, and
tours, Urban Design Week will draw in citizens from every borough and walk of
life and highlight the idea that cities are made by collective effort, and that
each of us can be a part of that great endeavor."

The project goal is to generate new models for public engagement with science in
the city environment and to explore how urban designers and planners, as they
design for sustainability, can more effectively collaborate with STEM
researchers and with the public.

The project has both research and programmatic deliverables. Research activities
include: Public Audiences: observational study of pedestrians in the
installation environment; intercept surveys of the public about their
experiences with the streetscape installations. Professional Audiences: pre-
installation surveys on the role of public space science interpretation for
altering public discourse about urban planning and sustainable cities; focus
group assessment of professionals' experiences with observing public
interactions with the installations; online delayed- post experience survey on
learning outcomes in terms of knowledge, attitude, motivation and anticipated
impacts on professional practices; analysis of blog postings and public media
surrounding the installation; survey of attendees at an ISE forum on the
project, its goals, outcomes and potential for future developments.

Programmatic deliverables include: a workshop that engages urban design students
in the development of experimental streetscape installations; a pilot
installation on streets in the City College of NY (consistent with approvals
already received by NYC Dept. of Transportation); a City as Living Laboratory
art-science workshop for Urban Design Week professionals to highlight possible
benefits of inter-disciplinary collaboration; a panel discussion around new
forms of citizen engagement through a "city as a science learning environment";
a forum specifically for ISE professionals to explore the research findings and
potential for use as a strategy to increase science learning in city places.