* 1115069
* CNH: Wetlands in a Working Landscape: Links Among Landowner Decisions, Climate, Disease Ecology, and Metapopulation Dynamics
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2017
* Steven Beissinger, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Betsy Von Holle
* 08/31/2017
* USD 1,250,000.00

This project will study ecological and social processes governing the structure
and function of wetland ecosystems found in agricultural and rangelands in the
Sierra Foothills of California where they have often been accidentally or
purposefully created. These wetlands are important habitat for a threatened bird
species, Black Rail, and can be a source of mosquitoes that carry the recently-
arrived West Nile Virus, which affects both humans and wildlife. The goal of
this research is to address the question of how landowner practices, attitudes,
and perceptions of the costs, risks and benefits of maintaining wetlands have
affected their number, size, and distribution, and in turn influenced mosquito
populations, West Nile Virus prevalence, and the population dynamics of the
Black Rail. The project will trace the appearance and disappearance of wetlands
over the last 50 years from aerial photographs to develop measures of wetland
change; survey wetland landowners to determine how they assess the costs and
benefits of their wetlands; develop regional climate models that project the
change in wetland size over the next 40 years with changing climate and
irrigation practices; develop population models for rails that incorporate
changes in wetland characteristics; quantify the relationships between the risk
of being exposed to West Nile Virus and climate, land use, and wetland
characteristics; and develop models that integrate these factors to forecast
future changes in wetlands.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Over 90% of California's
wetlands have been converted to other land uses. This project will quantify the
processes that sustain the remaining inland wetlands on agricultural landscapes
by uncovering interactions between wetlands, landowner decisions, and climate
variation. Educational benefits include training of postdoctoral researchers,
and graduate and undergraduate students in research methods including
opportunities for minority student participation, and developing course material
for undergraduate and graduate students. Results from this research will be
disseminated to a broader community through outreach to landowners, agencies,
and stakeholders that manage wetlands in working landscapes. This work will also
inform conservation efforts for a threatened species, the Black Rail, by
determining impacts of disease and by providing models to evaluate regional
development and landscape planning in a rapidly growing region of California.