* 1115658
* Collaborative Research: Reduced Order Model Approaches for Time Dependent Nonlinear PDE Constrained Optimization
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/2011,12/31/2015
* Ronald Hoppe, University of Houston
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 12/31/2015
* USD 149,925.00

This project develops, analyses and implements projection based reduced order
models (ROMs) for optimization problems associated with nonlinear evolution
partial differential equations (PDEs). These ROMs determine a subspace that
contains the essential (for the optimization) dynamics of the nonlinear
evolution PDEs and project these PDEs onto the subspace. If the subspace is
small, the original nonlinear PDEs in the optimization problem can be replaced
by a small system of ordinary differential equations and the resulting
approximate optimization problem can be solved efficiently. The efficient
generation of ROMs together with error estimates that can monitor the quality of
the ROMs is challenging. This project expands and integrates ideas from goal
oriented adaptive mesh refinement, proper orthogonal decomposition (POD), and
model management approaches in optimization to overcome these challenges.
Specifically, model management ideas from optimization are used determine at
which optimization parameters the nonlinear evolution PDE needs to be solved to
generate snapshots for the ROM. Furthermore, for the numerical solution of the
PDE and generation of snapshots a combination of goal-oriented dual weighted
based adaptive space-time finite element approximations of the PDE and discrete
Galerkin-POD will be used. In particular, local-in-time and local-in-space dual
weighted residuals for the control of the error in time and the error in space
will be obtained that also provide a prediction of appropriate time steps at
which snapshots are taken. The goal is the derivation of an a posteriori error
estimator for the ROM error that gives us information about the number of
reduced basis functions that need to be included. This novel approach will
result in an Adaptive Discrete Galerkin-POD (ADGPOD) algorithm for an efficient
and reliable ROM-based numerical solution of PDE constrained optimization. In
addition the resulting ROMs will be demonstrated on several applications,
including flow control/design problems and the optimal control of Asymmetrical-
Flow Field-Flow-Fractionation processes for the fast separation of
nanoparticles, proteins, and other
macromolecules.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The optimal design of processes
and systems in engineering and life science applications often requires the
optimal control/optimization of systems of nonlinear partial differential
equations (PDE). The numerical solution of such problems typically amounts to
the solution of large nonlinear algebraic systems requiring extensive storage
and computational time. On the other hand, the design engineers are interested
to run optimal designs on their PCs within a couple of minutes. This can be
achieved only by a dramatic reduction of the dimension of the problem, i.e., by
developing a reduced model for the underlying PDE system that captures the
essential dynamics of the expensive high fidelity simulation. Although reduced
order models have been shown to work well for a wide spectrum of applications,
they not yet well understood from a theoretical point of view, especially for
nonlinear problems. This project will provide a better theoretical foundation of
reduced order models for nonlinear problems, it will develop novel algorithmic
tools for the efficient generation of reliable reduced order models, and it will
demonstrate the algorithms on important science and engineering applications.