* 1115404
* 2011 Atomic Physics Gordon Research Conference, June 26-July 1, 2011 at West Dover, VT
* MPS,PHY
* 06/15/2011,05/31/2012
* John Doyle, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* Siu Au Lee
* 05/31/2012
* USD 6,000.00

The funding from this grant will be used to support students and postdocs so
they can attend the twentieth in a series of Atomic Physics Gordon Research
Conferences to be held at the Mount Snow Resort in West Dover, VT from June
26-July 1, 2011. This meeting will continue the tradition of focusing on
emerging areas of research within the discipline and major advances in existing
areas of atomic physics and related fields. The program and speakers are to be
chosen based on input from a wide range of practicing atomic physicists. The
areas to be addressed at this conference include both theoretical and
experimental developments, with emphasis on areas that offer significant
challenges and opportunities as we look to the future of the field. In 2011, we
include sessions on Precision Measurements, Alkali Earth Atoms, Quantum
Simulation and Condensed Matter connections, Quantum Information, Fast
Spectroscopy, Mesoscopic Physics, Quantum Optics, Dipolar Gases, and Bose/Fermi
Gases. The informal nature of the conference, in which no proceedings or
publications result, allows for the kind of free exchange of information and
open discussion not always possible in other venues. The Atomic Physics Gordon
Conference provides a unique opportunity to assemble a critical number of
leading researchers in related but differing specializations, along with
significant numbers of students and young researchers, who bring new points of
view to the most exciting and demanding problems at the forefront of physics
research. Effort will be made to welcome a diverse pool of registrants to the
conference.