* 1115838
* Collaborative Research:  Modeling Infectious Diseases:  How Much Ecological Complexity Must We Address?
* GEO,OCE
* 08/01/2011,07/31/2017
* Andrew Dobson, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Michael Sieracki
* 07/31/2017
* USD 350,469.00

Ecology of Infectious Disease Special Competition - Spring
2011&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Ecological systems are undeniably complex. Evaluating
the appropriate level of complexity needed to fully understand their dynamics is
essential to more efficiently increase the predictive accuracy of models. With
funding through this Grant, this theoretical and empirical research will analyze
the benefits of added complexity in host-parasite models and the extent to which
including complexity increases the predictive accuracy of dynamical models. The
team from the University of California-Santa Barbara and Princeton University
will examine the role played by parasites in food webs for 16 estuarine systems
along a latitudinal gradient of the Pacific coast of North America. They will
model four focal parasites found in these webs and perform laboratory and field
studies to parameterize the model. Versions of these models will vary in aspects
of ecological complexity, including alternative hosts, other parasites, varying
detail about life stages, direct and indirect effects of non-hosts and
temperature.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The study is innovative and certainly worth of
funding. The research will advance understanding of how model performance
changes with added complexity and investigate the level of detail needed to
address life-stage complexity, alternative host diversity and food web
complexity. Examining how model performance improves with complexity and the
cost of including that complexity will provide insight on the most appropriate
level of complexity needed for infectious disease models to be most suitably
predictive. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of this project are very
strong. The research from this study will provide a framework for how to most
effectively model infectious diseases in complex systems and will address how
parasites impact ecological networks and surrounding biodiversity. This project
will make excellent provision for the training and support of a post-doctoral
researcher, graduate students and undergraduates, including individuals from
under-represented groups. This study will also feature excellent and very
appropriate outreach to K-12 teachers and students and will enhance
international scientific collaboration through interaction with scientists and
students from Mexico, Czech Republic, Argentina and Australia.