* 1115636
* Numerical Methods for Free Boundary Problems: Two-Phase Flows and Contact Line Dynamics
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2011,07/31/2014
* Shawn Walker, Louisiana State University
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 07/31/2014
* USD 90,657.00

The proposed research will develop numerical methods for a variety of free
boundary problems. The research will take advantage of variational/finite
element methods, stability/energy estimates, and automatic meshing technology in
analyzing multi-physics flow problems that exhibit free interfaces and moving
contact lines. The project will push the theory of free boundary problems into
new and challenging application areas. Specific objectives are: (A) investigate
domain representation and deformation by variational front-tracking, level set
methods, diffuse interface, or a combination of these approaches; (B) develop
and analyze efficient discrete formulations of Electro-Wetting On Dielectric
(EWOD) driven fluid droplets in 2-D (with contact line pinning) and explore
well-posedness questions of the time-dependent interface motion; (C) explore
reduced order modeling of the electric field in EWOD and higher fidelity models;
(D) develop an adaptive phase-field method for electro-wetting in 3-D that
couples electro-statics to multi-phase fluid flow with contact line pinning; (E)
develop a model and numerical method for 2-phase droplets interacting with a
solid substrate that accurately handles the fine-scale details of the moving
contact line problem; and (F) advance multi-phase meshing technology to handle
3-D problems in a robust and automatic way with attention given to parallel
implementation issues. This project will investigate well-posedness of time
dependent domain-deforming problems and study mathematical properties of multi-
phase flows with non-smooth dynamics (e.g. contact line pinning).
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact of the work arises from its connection
with many physical/industrial processes that involve moving
boundaries/interfaces. Examples include industrial coating flows that apply a
protective layer to a substrate; fluid flows in micro-fluidic devices driven by
electric fields (important in the bio-medical field); motion of rigid bodies in
a fluid (particulate flows); dynamics of lipid bio-membranes (applications in
biology); the peeling of adhesive tape from a rigid support. The research will
enable system level modeling and simulation at macroscopic length and time
scales for a variety of applications, such as electrowetting 2-phase flow,
droplet impacting processes (painting/cooling of surfaces), and coating of
solids by films, which can include fine-scale fluid dynamics and chemistry. In
addition, the project will create new methods for automatic grid generation of
complex shapes that efficiently capture moving boundaries. One outcome of the
research will be an automatic meshing tool (i.e. code) which will be made
available to the public through the PI's web-site. Finally, a course on shape
optimization (with PDE-constraints) will be developed that gives graduate
students expertise in optimization with continuum models.