* 1115165
* 2011 MathematicalField of Dreams Conference
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2011,06/30/2012
* Erin McKiernan, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Pearl
* 06/30/2012
* USD 45,000.00

The fifth Mathematical Field of Dreams Conference will be held at Arizona State
University in Tempe, Arizona on October 14-16, 2011 with the support of the
National Science Foundation. The goal of this project/conference is to inspire
and facilitate the access of students underrepresented in quantitative
disciplines, to doctoral programs in the mathematical sciences while providing a
forum where the knowledge and information that facilitates the selection of and
application to relevant graduate programs is provided. The Field of Dreams
Conference is one of the principal activities of the National Alliance for
Doctoral Studies in the Mathematical Sciences (http://www.mathalliance.org/), a
conglomerate of colleges and universities dedicated to encouraging and
supporting students seeking doctoral degrees in the mathematical sciences. As
with previous Field of Dreams Conferences, the 2011 meeting will allow students
to identify opportunities for graduate study in mathematics, applied
mathematics, computational biology, statistics, biostatistics and
bioinformatics, mathematics education, and others. Participants will include
approximately 100 undergraduate students recruited nationwide from groups
underrepresented in the mathematical sciences, 30 undergraduate mentors, and at
least 22 faculty members from the National Alliance graduate programs. Priority
for support will be given to students from minority-serving institutions that
lack extensive resources and programs in the mathematical sciences, or related
research programs. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The US Department of Labor reports that
jobs for mathematicians are expected to increase more than 20% from 2008 to
2018. http://www.bls.gov/oco/ocos043.htm Further, "Ph.D. holders with a strong
background in mathematics and another discipline ? and who apply mathematical
theory to real world problems will have the best job prospects" (Ibid.) There is
a shortage of U.S. citizen and permanent residents applying to doctoral programs
in the mathematical sciences; the situation is worse for students from U.S.
underrepresented minority groups. The Field of Dreams Conference introduces
underrepresented undergraduates and their faculty mentors to relevant, exciting,
and important research in mathematical sciences and/or to scientific research
programs that required the participation of students with strong
quantitative/computational training. The Field of Dreams Conference provides
students with the knowledge and tools required to apply for doctoral studies in
the mathematical sciences. At the Field of Dreams Conference students will have
the opportunity to meet and interact with faculty, graduate students, and other
undergraduates doing quantitative scientific research. Students will be
encouraged to apply to graduate school and their faculty mentors will be
provided with information that they may disseminate at their home institution.
Therefore, doctoral studies in the mathematical sciences information will spread
beyond the conference throughout National Alliance for Doctoral Studies in the
Mathematical Sciences (http://www.mathalliance.org/). The participation of both
undergraduate mentors and graduate faculty from the Alliance facilitates (i) the
transition from undergraduate to graduate programs and (ii) the establishment of
partnerships (research, curricular development and coordination). The Field of
Dreams Conference will continue to be an important driving force in increasing
the number of underrepresented U.S. students obtaining doctoral degrees in
mathematical sciences.