* 1115421
* Novel Discretization Schemes for Fully Nonlinear Partial Differential Equations
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2011,08/31/2012
* Michael Neilan, Louisiana State University
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 08/31/2012
* USD 127,184.00

The aim of this project is to develop, analyze, and implement the finite element
method for fully nonlinear second order partial differential equations (PDEs).
The research is based on a recent discovery of the PI that Lagrange finite
element methods and discontinuous Galerkin methods can be used to approximate
the Monge-Ampere equation, the prototypical fully nonlinear second order PDE. As
these methods are simple to implement, the computation of the highly nonlinear
problem can be performed efficiently and accurately. The project will expand on
these results to obtain simple, efficient, yet accurate numerical schemes for a
general class of fully nonlinear equations. In addition, the PI will develop and
analyze various discretization methods including mixed finite element methods,
local discontinuous Galerkin methods, hybridizable Galerkin methods, and Petrov
Galerkin methods.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Mathematical
modeling plays a key role in the investigation and understanding of many
phenomena occurring in the natural sciences, the social sciences and
engineering. Yet even for simple problems, closed form solutions are
unavailable, and therefore their numerical approximations are the only viable
option. As the problems become ever more complex, the need for novel
computational methods and innovative analysis becomes imperative to put the
United States in the forefront in science and engineering. The class of problems
studied in this project arise in numerous mathematical modeling applications
including weather phenomena, determining the initial shape of the universe,
optimal reflector design, differential geometry, optimal transport, mathematical
finance, image processing, and mesh generation. Despite their significance in
the physical sciences and pure and applied mathematics, the numerical
approximation of these problems remains a relatively untouched area. Therefore,
there is a growing need to develop accurate schemes for these types of
equations. As progress of solving any of these application problems largely
depends on progress of solving their governing equations, and since numerical
methods for these equations are still in their infancy, any progress in the
design, implementation, and convergence analysis will have an immediate impact
in advancing these application areas.