* 1115772
* AF: Small: Efficient Exact/Certified Symbolic Computation By Hybrid Symbolic-Numeric and Parallel Methods
* CSE,CCF
* 08/01/2011,07/31/2015
* Erich Kaltofen, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Jack S. Snoeyink
* 07/31/2015
* USD 425,000.00

The solution of symbolic computation problems can be accelerated in at least two
ways: one is to integrate limited precision floating point arithmetic on the
scalars, and the other is to use parallel processes. We propose to investigate
those approaches on problems in real algebraic optimization and exact linear
algebra.

Semidefinite numerical optimization produces sum-of-squares representations for
polynomial inequalities, which express global optimality. But the
representations are numeric and approximate, and exact rational certificates for
the inequalities are derived via exact symbolic means, thus leading to truly
hybrid symbolic-numeric algorithms. When combining floating point arithmetic and
randomization, analysis of the expected condition numbers of the random
intermediate problems can guarantee success. We propose to introduce fraction-
free algorithms and analyze the arising determinantal condition numbers.

LinBox is a C++ library for exact linear algebra. We propose to participate in
the parallelization of the LinBox library by investigating problems with memory
contention and by creating interactive symbolic supercomputing environments.
Several related problems in computational algebraic complexity that will receive
attention are: quadratic-time certificates for linear algebra problems,
determinantal representation of polynomials by symmetric linear matrix forms,
and interpolation of supersparse (lacunary) rational functions.

The PI's research expands the infrastructure in symbolic computation and the
understanding of the underlying complexity. Aside from certifying optima, exact
sums-of-squares certificates have proved theorems in mathematics, physics and
control theory. Some of the important applications of LinBox are sparse linear
algebra over finite fields and integer Smith forms for computational topology
data. The PI is making the developed software freely available.

Algorithmic thinking and computation have become a cornerstone of modern science
(pure and applied) and modern life. Symbolic computation programs, such as
Mathematica, Maple, and the SAGE platform, have many applications, such as
modeling data sets by symbolic expression for Toyota and Shell Oil, generating
programs for signal processing, and program and protocol verification.