* 1115375
* TC: Small: Countering Location Spoofing Attacks: Multi-Model Architecture with Privacy-Enhancing Techniques
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2016
* Lance Fortnow, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* nan zhang
* 08/31/2016
* USD 500,000.00

Location is a type of information that can be used by various applications to
provides new opportunities for business and commercial success, and at the same
time may be misused. This proposed research aims at developing a multi-model
architecture with privacy-enhancing techniques for countering location spoofing
attacks while respecting location privacy of mobile users. The multi-model
architecture promotes the parallel use of alternative positioning models and
multi-beacon methods to make it harder to launch consistent location spoofing
attacks. A pseudo-identity obfuscation technique is incorporated into the multi-
model defense architecture based on mobility-aware mix-zones to address the
legal, social, and ethical implications of continuous location verifications. In
this technique, mobile users may customize the settings of mix-zones in order to
meet their personalized privacy preference.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
intellectual merit of the proposed research includes a transformative approach
that advocates privacy-aware and customizable defense architecture and
algorithms to detect and filter out compromised mobile nodes. This detection and
filtering is based on the amount of inconsistency between the client-claimed
location and the system-determined location as well as the amount of
inconsistency among multiple beacons. The broader impacts of this research are
two-fold. First, the development of a systematic and privacy enhancing approach
for countering location spoofing threats will help enabling a wide range of
subscription-driven location based services, such as location-based
advertisements, location-based content dissemination and billing, and location-
based entertainment. Second, the technical results and the proof-of-concept
prototype will be disseminated to a broader audience through educational
activities and involvement of women and minority in the proposed research. The
unique combination of location spoofing countermeasures with a location privacy
awareness is a direct contribution to the multi-disciplinary efforts aimed at
meeting the security and location privacy challenges with technical, legal,
social, and ethical considerations, and increases the societal confidence in the
cyber infrastructure.