* 1115363
* Fast multiscale Gaussian wavepacket transforms and multiscale Gaussian beams for high-frequency waves and inverse problems
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2014
* Jianliang Qian, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 08/31/2014
* USD 179,999.00

The investigator, with his students and collaborators, develops novel and
efficient numerical methods for modeling high-frequency wave propagation and
solution of associated inverse problems. These problems arise from seismic wave
propagation, geometrical optics, optimal control, computerized tomography (CT),
medical imaging, and material sciences. The proposal focuses on advancing fast
multiscale Gaussian wavepacket transforms and multiscale Gaussian beam methods,
a novel approach for this challenging problem, from theoretical, algorithmic,
and practical perspectives. This interdisciplinary research complements the PI's
educational goals by integrating education and research activities at
undergraduate and graduate levels. Problems under consideration include
exploring the deep connection between multiscale Gaussian beams and fast
multiscale Gaussian wavepacket transforms to devise new algorithms for
decomposing given data into Gaussian beams, developing new multiscale Gaussian
beam methods for modeling acoustic, elastic and anisotropic waves, analyzing
linearized inverse problems for acoustic and elastic wave equations by using
multiscale Gaussian beams in the high frequency regime, devising novel
algorithms to implement the resulting linearized inversion formulas, and
validating the resulting algorithms by using synthetic
data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Modeling of high frequency waves is of great
strategic value in diverse science and engineering disciplines, ranging from the
US petroleum industry, seismic imaging, radar, sonar, medical imaging, remote
sensing, submarine detection, material sciences to nanotechnology. The current
surge in price for crude oil and other earth resources increasingly demands
better imaging techniques in exploration seismology. The increasing amount of
data in global and exploration seismology requires more sophisticated
mathematical models. The techniques developed as part of this project provide
crucial tools for the development of the next-generation seismic imaging tools
with the potential to enable substantial cost savings in seismic explorations,
expedite routine data processing, and protect the environment by optimizing
drilling sites. Students from the PI's institution are involved in this
innovative interdisciplinary research project.