* 1115220
* III: Small: Algorithmic Tools for Spatial Positioning Studies in the Cell Nucleus
* CSE,IIS
* 08/01/2011,07/31/2015
* Ronald Berezney, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 07/31/2015
* USD 499,968.00

Spatial positioning has emerged as a fundamental principle governing nuclear
processes. Research on chromosome territories has indicated that the 3-D
arrangement of these territories within the architecture of the cell nucleus may
be closely linked to genomic function, regulation and cell differentiation.
Despite this progress, the degree of non-random arrangement of chromosome
territories remains unclear and no overall model at the global level has been
proposed. In addition, little is known about the gene positioning inside the
chromosome territories and its relationship to gene expression. This project is
for developing algorithmic tools to facilitate the study of three important
spatial positioning problems, (1) topology of chromosome territory, (2)
chromosomes associations and spatial positioning, and (3) topological structures
of associated chromosomes territories. The focus of this project is on designing
efficient algorithms for several challenging computational problems which are
essential for the spatial positioning problems, such as chromatic cone
clustering, realization, maximum median graph, and optimal surface extraction.

The project will use computational geometry techniques and optimization methods
to develop a set of efficient algorithmic tools for the proposed problems. The
designed and tested algorithms and techniques will be used as automatic (or
semi-automatic) tools to accurately and reliably determine the spatial
positioning information of genes and chromosome territories, and further
elucidate the coordination of genomic expression. Algorithms from this project
are also likely to be used in many other areas as information integration tools
and positively impact them. This project could lead to several long term
impacts. It could yield a much needed global model for studying the spatial
positioning of chromosome territories and genes. The obtained algorithmic and
biological results will be used to study and compare the difference of various
cancer and normal cells in topological structures and associations of chromosome
territories and genes. This could potentially lead to significant biological
discoveries and help better understanding the mechanism of diseases (such as
cancers) and their relationship to chromosome structures and associations.