* 1115616
* Collaborative Research: Inversion of the Broken-Ray Radon Transform and Applications
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2011,06/30/2014
* Vadim Markel, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 06/30/2014
* USD 162,944.00

This project assembles a team of applied and computational mathematicians and
physicists to develop, analyze and implement reconstruction algorithms for the
broken-ray Radon transform (BRT) and its generalizations. The BRT describes the
propagation of single-scattered particles or waves. This situation is typical of
x-ray imaging at clinical energies or optical imaging of nearly transparent
tissues and model organisms. The intent of the proposed research is to provide
theoretically, numerically justified and practically applicable reconstruction
algorithms for the BRT with applications to both x-ray computed tomography and
optical tomography in the weak-scattering regime. In particular, the
investigators propose to derive and analyze BRT-based scanning protocols and
corresponding inversion techniques to reconstruct the absorption and scattering
coefficients. Associated scanning protocols, which provide the optimum balance
between spatial resolution and stability to noise, are to be developed. In
addition, questions of uniqueness and stability (in the scale of Sobolev spaces)
are a concern. Techniques of microlocal analysis may be used to characterize the
propagation of singularities. Efficient numerical algorithms for inverting the
BRT are to be implemented and tested using data derived from radiative transport
forward solvers that account for both single- and multiple-scattering, hence
connecting the research to the experimental regime. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;One of
the grand challenges in imaging is to address the problem of scattering.
&lt;br/&gt;It is generally believed that only unscattered particles or waves
carry useful information about the medium through which they have traveled. The
Investigators aim to show that this is not the case. By making use of
mathematical methods and computational approaches that exploit the presence of
scattering, they seek to transform a variety of biomedical and security-related
x-ray and optical imaging technologies. This research is a collaboration between
applied and computational mathematicians and physicists and their work with
three graduate students. Broad dissemination of the results of the research is
anticipated through publications and generation of publicly available software.