* 1115288
* Local properties of the finite element solutions to PDE constrained optimal control problems
* MPS,DMS
* 10/01/2011,09/30/2014
* Dmitriy Leykekhman, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 09/30/2014
* USD 126,383.00

The research objective of this project is to develop a strong theoretical
&lt;br/&gt;foundation on local properties of finite element solutions for
advection-&lt;br/&gt;dominated optimal control problems. The advection-diffusion
partial &lt;br/&gt;differential equations (PDEs) are known to be difficult to
approximate because &lt;br/&gt;their solutions often exhibit discontinuities,
layers, and shocks. The &lt;br/&gt;structure of the solutions to optimal control
problems is even more &lt;br/&gt;complicated because of the coupling in the
optimality system of the governing &lt;br/&gt;advection-dominated PDE with an
advection-dominated adjoint PDE. It is known &lt;br/&gt;that convergence
behavior of finite element methods applied to single &lt;br/&gt;advection-
dominated PDEs can be very different from the convergence behavior &lt;br/&gt;of
finite element methods applied to advection-dominated optimal control
&lt;br/&gt;problems. Understanding the global and local convergence behavior is
crucial &lt;br/&gt;for reliable and efficient solution of advection-dominated
optimal control &lt;br/&gt;problems, especially in the presence of control and
state constraints, and &lt;br/&gt;objective functions that depend on pointwise
state information. This project &lt;br/&gt;intends to deepen our understanding
for various problems and to help develop &lt;br/&gt;reliable numerical methods.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Mathematics proved to be extremely useful in
modeling many real life problems &lt;br/&gt;coming from environment, technology,
climate, and etc. However, many &lt;br/&gt;mathematical models require special
parameters that can not be measured &lt;br/&gt;directly. Examples can be shapes
in modeling technological devises, physical &lt;br/&gt;coefficients in
environmental processes, controls in navigation and etc. and &lt;br/&gt;need to
be estimated. Mathematically, estimation of such paramters often
&lt;br/&gt;leads to optimization problems with constraints in the form of system
partial &lt;br/&gt;differential equations (PDEs). Usually, such system of PDEs
is well understood &lt;br/&gt;and there are many available numerical techniques
to solve it. However, it &lt;br/&gt;does not immediately apply that the method
that works well for the underlying &lt;br/&gt;system of PDEs will work for the
constrained optimization problem. In our &lt;br/&gt;previous work, we showed
such differences in the case of a simple model &lt;br/&gt;problem. In this
proposal we intend to investigate more complicated model &lt;br/&gt;problems
that cover a broader range of applications.