* 1115258
* 2011 GRC on High Temperature Corrosion; July 25 - 29, 2011; New London, New Hampshire, USA
* MPS,DMR
* 06/15/2011,05/31/2012
* Nancy Gray, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* Eric Taleff
* 05/31/2012
* USD 6,000.00

The 2011 Gordon Research Conference (GRC) and Gordon Research Seminar (GRS) on
High Temperature Corrosion will focus on scientific themes related to discovery
and modeling of phenomena associated with the exposure of materials (including
coatings) to extremes of temperature and environment. The stability of phases,
interfaces, and microstructure will be considered. Reaction pathways in single-
and multi-reactant systems, and fundamental coupling of mechanically and
chemically driven processes that affect the growth and integrity of protective
surface products are also current topics. The fundamental knowledge and
associated modeling and engineering developments that come out of the scientific
discourse and exchange of ideas at the GRC is essential in making progress
towards solving problems associated with high temperature materials for
efficient energy generation and conversion, as well as global security and space
exploration. Invited presentations by experienced and emerging scientists with
expertise in the areas described above, and in the application of advanced
experimental and modeling approaches, will cover recent work. These
presentations will be supplemented by posters on more specific topics related to
similar themes. Ample time will be provided for discussions and informal
information exchanges to stimulate ideas and expose promising directions for
high temperature corrosion science and associated materials development and
protection. For the first time, the 2011 GRC on High Temperature Corrosion will
sponsor a GRS for graduate students and postdoctoral researchers on the
preceding weekend to foster exchanges of ideas among young and established
professionals at a time when advances in experimental and computational
techniques provide unprecedented opportunities to make progress in corrosion
science and engineering and its integration into materials design. NSF funds
will be used in to assist graduate students, post-doctoral researchers, young
faculty and invited speakers in the form of registration waivers and travel
support. Attendees generally come from industry, academia and government and
have a variety of technical interests. The organizers target the participation
of women and underrepresented groups.