* 1115384
* Computational Theory and Methods for Solving Differential Multiple Solution Problems
* MPS,DMS
* 10/01/2011,09/30/2014
* Jianxin Zhou, Texas A&M Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 09/30/2014
* USD 153,160.00

The PI proposes to develop Computational Theory and Methods for Solving Multiple
Solution Problems representing four types of natures: (1) a general problem,
where a usual continuation transform used in a Newton continuation method fails
to do so, a singular transform is proposed to solve an augmented problem for a
New solution; (2) nonlinear eigen problems (NEP) in the nonlinear Schrodinger
equation, a basic model in physics, for both focusing and defocusing cases, an
implicit variational method is developed to solve NEP on its energy profile.
After discovering their mathematical structure, new local maxmin methods are
designed to solve the defocusing cases; (3) singularly perturbed problems from
math biology and other reaction-diffusion systems for both focusing/defocusing
cases, an adaptive local refinement method is developed to numerically solve the
problem. (4) Steklov nonlinear boundary-value problems in corrosion engineering
and scattering applications, a boundary integral equation approach is used to
develop a local minmax/maxmin-boundary element method for finding multiple
solutions. All the proposed problems have strong and wide application background
but are not yet solvable in the literature. New methods will be developed by
exploring the mathematical structure of the problems, deriving solution
characterizations, implementation tests, convergence and instability analysis.
The PI has conducted investigations on the projects. Preliminary
analysis/numerical results are very promising. Due to its unprecedented and
complex nature, the research in this proposal has to be creative and original;
multi-disciplinary knowledge and collaboration on advanced nonlinear analysis,
PDE, multi-level optimization, numerical algorithm
design/implementation/analysis, are required.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Multiple
(unstable) solutions to many systems have been observed and mathematically
proved to have a variety of configurations, instability/maneuverability, but are
not applicable with conventional technology. So traditional analysis/computation
focus on stable solutions. Scientists are now able to induce and control
unstable solutions with NEW advanced (synchrotron, laser, etc.) technologies and
search for new applications for higher performance index, in particular, for
MISSION CRITICAL SITUATIONS. So far people's knowledge on such solutions is
still very limited and unstable solutions are too elusive to traditional
numerical methods. The PI proposes to develop efficient/reliable numerical
methods to solve such problems and establish their related math justification.
The outcome of this proposal will (a) provide efficient/reliable numerical
algorithms for people to use and promote new application; (b) lay a solid math
foundation for solving such problems; (c) significantly enhance people?s
knowledge on the nature and properties of such problems and can be used in
computational math education due to their general setting. (d) The proposed
projects provide an excellent opportunity for multi-disciplinary collaboration
and to give Ph.D. students a balanced training on creative thinking, advanced
analysis, numerical computation and problem solving. Three Ph.D. students are
working the projects for their theses.