* 1115833
* US-UK Collab: Transmission and coevolutionary dynamics drive the evolution of generalist and specialist viruses
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2011,11/30/2014
* Samantha Forde, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Standard Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 11/30/2014
* USD 336,911.00

Jack-of-all-trades or master of one? Viruses show tremendous diversity in their
ability to infect different types of organisms including animals, plants and
bacteria. Some viruses are able to infect multiple host species while others can
only infect one. A major unresolved problem facing both the scientific community
and medical professionals is why do some viruses evolve to be specialists while
others are generalists? To answer this question, it is vital to understand the
complexities underpinning the interactions between hosts and their viruses. As
viruses and their hosts co-evolve, hosts develop resistance, and viruses in turn
find ways of overcoming host defenses. Whether the virus can successfully co-
evolve with its host also depends on the structure of the environment and how
the viruses are transmitted between hosts. This research will embrace the
complexity of virus and host interactions - from genes to cells to populations
to the community. A laboratory system consisting of a bacteria (Escherichia
coli) and its viruses will be used to gain understanding of the evolution of
naturally occurring viruses and their hosts. The experiments will be combined
with an innovative mathematical modeling framework designed to bridge the gap
between laboratory and nature. The results of this work will provide critical
insights into what dictates the diversity of viral strategies - a key step
towards a comprehensive theory of the ecology and evolution of infectious
diseases. This will further a general understanding of the dynamics of disease
in natural systems and help to improve public health initiatives. The project
will strengthen collaborations between US and UK scientists and train
undergraduate and graduate students in research.