* 1115872
* HCC: Small: Collaborative Research: Gestural and Linguistic Expressivity and Entrainment in Dialogue
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2015
* Michael Neff, University of California-Davis
* Continuing Grant
* William Bainbridge
* 08/31/2015
* USD 297,899.00

This research will advance the state of the art in conversational character
systems (Intelligent Virtual Agents) in two ways. First, it seeks to better
understand the interplay of gesture and language in both generating the
perception of personality and allowing participants to adapt to the ongoing
conversational context. Second, it will use this understanding to build novel
computational models for gesture and language generation that provide fine
grained control over the perception of personality and support agent adaptation
in response to the conversational context. The theoretical basis for the
personality-based modeling in this project is the well-established "Big Five"
model of personality, which consists of five orthogonal dimensions of individual
variation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The work on adaptation will be couched in the
collaborative theory of language use and communication accommodation theory,
which predict that communicative behavior varies based on partner specificity.
Initial work will form a motion capture, video and audio corpus of three kinds
of exchanges. This will be used to both study gestural entrainment during human
interactions, determining if audio-based findings extend to the gestural domain,
and to enhance scientific understanding of the relationship between gesture and
personality. This will inform the modeling work which will build a joint model
for personality-based language and gesture production. The model will extend a
pilot study on gesture generation for extraversion to three Big Five traits and
integrate it with personality-based language generation. An experimental stage
will validate these models and study the interactions of movement and language.
The research will also study the role of adaptation. Questions to be answered
include: (1) whether people gesturally entrain with computers, or indeed produce
any gestures while communicating with a computer, (2) whether computers?
gestural entrainment promotes similar levels of affiliation as observed with
vocal entrainment, and (3) whether changing gestural entrainment over the course
of an interaction is more powerful than aligning gestures from the outset of an
interaction. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Character systems are becoming increasingly
important for a range of applications, from virtual worlds to tutoring systems.
There is growing evidence that the way personality is presented through these
characters, and how well they mimic expected human behavior like entrainment,
has a direct impact on the effectiveness of the applications in which they are
used. For example, it will have a direct impact on student learning. As these
applications become more ubiquitous in society, particularly among children, it
is important to be able to harness their full benefit, and indeed, avoid
unintended negative consequences. This involves both advances in computational
models that allow an agent to reflect a given personality and adapt to a human
user, and also a deeper understanding of the role of personality and adaptation
in effective human-agent interactions.