* 1115704
* AF: Small: New and Improved Algorithms for Minimization and Subspace Tracking
* CSE,CCF
* 08/01/2011,07/31/2015
* Jesse Barlow, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Rahul Shah
* 07/31/2015
* USD 350,000.00

The Gram--Schmidt orthogonal factorization algorithm and the Golub--Kahan--
Lanczos (GKL) bidiagonal reduction algorithm produce two fundamental
factorizations for numerical linear algebra. Enhancements to these algorithm
provide the foundation for the ``New and Improved Algorithms for Minimization
and Subspace Tracking'' that are the subject of this proposal. These are both
orthogonal factorization algorithms designed to produce bases for subspaces of
interest and, for both algorithms, stability analyses are necessary to consider
what is necessary to keep these bases orthogonal. The algorithms are also
adapted to be based upon matrix--matrix operations, thereby making them
implementable using the level-3 BLAS and sparse BLAS routine necessary to make
them efficient on modern architectures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Based upon the new
Gram--Schmidt and GKL procedures, regularized least squares and algorithms for
tracking the leading principal subspace of a matrix are developed. Using
discrete cosine and fast Fourier transform&lt;br/&gt;based preconditioners
developed by the PI and collaborators in a previous NSF project, a regularized
least squares algorithm is extended into a Newton--based regularized total least
squares algorithm that is well suited to image deblurring problems.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;The research on the block Gram--Schmidt and GKL bidiagonalization
algorithms advance the scientific community's knowledge of how to develop
efficient software in modern computing environments for two fundamental
algorithms in numerical linear algebra, a core field that straddles
computational science and applied mathematics. The Gram--Schmidt algorithms are
important in the development of iterative methods for the solution of large
systems of linear equations arising in a long list of scientific and engineering
disciplines. The GKL bidiagonal reduction algorithm and subspace tracking work
is useful in the numerous applications of dimension reduction within statistics,
most notably web search algorithms. Bidiagonal reduction is also a key component
in the solution of the Netflix problem--the problem of identifying which films a
customer would enjoy watching among a very large sample based upon a smaller
sample of films which he/she has already rated. The image deblurring algorithms
are important in the reconstruction of high-resolution images. These images,
similar to those produced by high-resolution television, are expensive to
transmit. The total least squares research develops an algorithm that would be
useful in recovering a high-resolution image from cheaper-to-transmit lower
resolution images.