* 1115734
* Parallel Preconditioned Eigenvalue and Singular Value Solvers
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/2011,07/31/2014
* Andrew Knyazev, University of Colorado at Denver-Downtown Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Junping Wang
* 07/31/2014
* USD 180,000.00

This award, from the computational mathematics program of the Division of
Mathematical Sciences, supports the research of the principal investigator,
which covers a balanced mix of theoretical investigations, software support and
development, and advances for modern applications. The research focuses on
design of new efficient robust parallel preconditioned methods for interior
eigenvalue and singular value computations. The main emphasis is on the
following challenging issues: investigating availability and efficiency of
preconditioning; avoiding the folded spectrum approach, analyzing the
possibility of computing the singular values of an operator using
preconditioning; and establishing convergence theory for novel iterative
solvers. For the latter, a novel application of classical majorization theory
permits analysis of the convergence behavior of block eigenvalue and singular
value solvers. This work is also relevant for applications; the singular
vectors, corresponding to the largest singular values of a matrix are used for
performing the principal component analysis of data described by a data matrix.
Here the focus is on multi-dimensional image
segmentation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The topic of this research is
motivated by the fact that the class of problems under consideration describes
many phenomena in physics and mechanics, and for practical calculations may
require extreme computational power. Advances in the computational approaches
can provide noticeable improvements in the accuracy and efficiency of
calculations. Implementing the developments in publicly available software
enhances the potential for significant broader impact, due to the relevance of
the software for a large range of applications. The application specifically
targeted by the PI is image segmentation, such as occurs in tracking moving
objects in videos. Additional impact of the project is on graduate student
training. The research of the PI provides an opportunity to train students in
important computational research motivated by real practical applications.