* 1115663
* SHF: Small: Modeling and Preventing Electromigration-Caused Degradation in Cu Dual Damascene Scaled Interconnects
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2011,06/30/2015
* Malgorzata Marek-Sadowska, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 06/30/2015
* USD 350,000.00

Modern computer chips contain billions of tiny transistors connected by wires.
The massively integrated circuits (ICs) are prone to wear out and degradation
during their lifetimes. When electric current flows in a microscopic wire, the
moving electrons collide into diffusing metal atoms and cause a gradual ion
movement. This current-flow-induced material transport is called
electromigration (EM). The electromigration phenomenon is a major source of
interconnect degradation. Over time EM may cause wire breaks or shorts leading
to circuit malfunction. Greater current densities, wire geometry or material
imperfections, and increased temperature worsen EM. In the past, improvements in
interconnect manufacturing kept pace with interconnect scaling and allowed for
relatively simple ways of keeping EM at bay by capping current densities.
Interconnect scaling is now approaching the point where the existing models and
assumptions are no longer valid. At the same time chip?s thermal conductivity
decreases while the density of currents carried by the on-chip wires and the
operating power steadily increase causing significant self-heating. These
effects bring again EM to the forefront and cause that it now poses a serious
reliability threat for working chips. There is an urgent need to develop a
comprehensive chip-level EM analysis tool. The PI proposes to develop a physical
EM simulator to understand failure mechanisms in various interconnect
configurations. The PI will use the simulator to develop metrics for wire time-
to-failure estimates. The PI proposes to develop statistical models of
interconnect failure and a chip-level analyzer of electromigration degradation
effects. Interconnects whose expected lifetimes are shorter than desired can be
modified. The will develop such modification strategies as
well.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This work supports the US semiconductor industry by
addressing a vital research problem that may affect the integrated circuits
scaling trends. The proposed techniques would be useful for designers because
the worst circuit degradation conditions occur in small regions of the chip that
can be identified and resolved. In addition, the tools to be developed may also
help process engineers to study the effects of new materials on circuit level
properties. The proposed research activities will also serve as a platform for
training PhD students who will be well prepared to work in modern industry or
academia.