* 1115297
* Sparse Direct Methods on High-Performance Heterogeneous Architectures
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/2011,07/31/2015
* Sanjay Ranka, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 07/31/2015
* USD 310,000.00

Sparse direct methods form the backbone of many applications
in&lt;br/&gt;computational science, but the methods are not keeping pace with
advances&lt;br/&gt;in heterogeneous computing architectures. High end systems
can be built to&lt;br/&gt;contain multiple general-purpose CPU cores, coupled
with one or more&lt;br/&gt;Graphics Processing Units (GPUs) each with hundreds
of simple yet fast&lt;br/&gt;computational cores. This project develops high-
performance parallel&lt;br/&gt;sparse direct methods that can exploit GPU-based
architectures to achieve&lt;br/&gt;orders of magnitude gains in computational
performance. The focus is&lt;br/&gt;single and multiple GPU algorithms for
multifrontal sparse QR&lt;br/&gt;factorization. QR factorization has wide
applicability, is numerically&lt;br/&gt;very stable and is useful in many
application areas. The nonuniform and&lt;br/&gt;hierarchical structure of sparse
QR factorization along with the unique&lt;br/&gt;features of the GPU requires
the development of novel algorithms.&lt;br/&gt;These include managing the
simultaneous mix of regular computations inside&lt;br/&gt;the frontal matrix,
and irregular computations in the assembly process&lt;br/&gt;between nodes in
the computational tree and between concurrent
subtrees.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;An efficient sparse QR factorization
is an essential kernel in many&lt;br/&gt;problems in computational science. It
can be used to find solutions to&lt;br/&gt;sparse linear systems, sparse linear
least squares problems, eigenvalue&lt;br/&gt;problems, rank and null-space
determination, and many other mathematical&lt;br/&gt;problems in numerical
linear algebra. Application areas that can exploit&lt;br/&gt;the result of this
research include structural engineering, computational&lt;br/&gt;fluid dynamics,
electromagnetics, semiconductor devices, thermodynamics,&lt;br/&gt;materials,
acoustics, computer graphics/vision,
robotics/kinematics,&lt;br/&gt;optimization, circuit simulation, economic and
financial modeling, chemical&lt;br/&gt;process simulation, text/document
networks, and many other areas. QR&lt;br/&gt;factorization is representative of
many other sparse direct methods, with&lt;br/&gt;both irregular coarse-grain
parallelism and regular fine-grain parallelism,&lt;br/&gt;and methodologies
developed are very relevant for these other&lt;br/&gt;methods. The work has
broad impact on computational linear&lt;br/&gt;algebra, optimization, and
related application areas. The PI's research extends beyond these specific
applications of numerical linear algebra, demonstrating how problems with a
mixture of irregular and regular computation can be performed on the challenging
yet promising landscape of GPU computing, and opens the door to many other kinds
of applications. The investigator and his colleagues plan on producing and
distributing high-quality software as a result of this work, for which they have
a 20-year track record.