* 1115453
* Workshop on Verification and Validation in Computational Science
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2011,07/31/2012
* Andrew Sommese, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 07/31/2012
* USD 20,000.00

The proposed workshop will bring together participants from applied mathematics
and a wide range of computational science disciplines, mostly concerned with the
solution of nonlinear partial differential equations (PDEs), for the purpose of
sharing their expertise, techniques, and problematical issues with participants
of similar basic interest but differing application areas. Five keynote speakers
from diverse disciplines have accepted invitations to speak, with application
fields of bioengineering, autonomous vehicle dynamics, computational mechanics,
aerodynamics, and physics. Specific areas where applied mathematics plays a
strong role will be elicited, including multiscale and multiphysics problems,
single-grid error estimators with practical metrics for nonlinear problems and
uncertainty quantification. Participation by applied mathematicians, graduate
students, post-doctoral researchers, young faculty, and under-represented groups
will be encouraged through the application of NSF funds towards travel
&lt;br/&gt;grants. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of the work is
embodied in its addressing a fundamentally challenging topic: how to capture
complicated multiscale phenomena with computational tools in a fashion which
respects both the underlying mathematics as well as experimental observation.
For non-linear multiscale problems, these answers are not easy; however, their
understanding is critical in areas of importance to the nation where rigorous
predictive tools are now being used. Specific examples include flood and storm
surge dynamics, groundwater contaminant flow, human blood circulation response
to surgical interventions, combustion and fire safety, response of civilian
infrastructure such as bridges and roads to stimuli, as well as a variety of
aerospace applications. The workshop will bring together some of the world's
leading experts in a diverse set of fields in the physical, mathematical, and
computational sciences. The broader impacts of the Workshop are clear as well.
Since decision-makers and leaders, and thus society at large, are relying more
and more on computational methods to aid in decision-making process, it is in
the interest of all that the predictions of these methods can be used with
confidence by non-experts. The Workshop will raise awareness in a variety of key
scientific communities of some of the critical issues and methods for
verification and validation. Additionally, the Workshop will seek participation
from a broad range of the scientific community by making available NSF-supported
travel grants to members of under-represented groups.