* 1115245
* Increased Connectivity in a Polar Desert Resulting from Climate Warming:  McMurdo Dry Valley LTER Program
* GEO,OPP
* 04/15/2011,09/30/2017
* Michael Gooseff, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* Jennifer Burns
* 09/30/2017
* USD 6,281,806.00

The McMurdo Dry Valleys (MDV) is a polar desert on the coast of East Antarctica,
a region that has not yet experienced climate warming. The McMurdo Dry Valleys
Long Term Ecological Research (MCMLTER) project has documented the ecological
responses of the glacier, soil, stream and lake ecosystems in the MDV during a
cooling trend (from 1986 to 2000) which was associated with the depletion of
atmospheric ozone. In the past decade, warming events with strong katabatic
winds occurred during two summers and the resulting high streamflows and
sediment deposition changed the dry valley landscape, possibly presaging
conditions that will occur when the ozone hole recovers. In anticipation of
future warming in Antarctica, the overarching hypothesis of the proposed project
is: Climate warming in the McMurdo Dry Valley ecosystem will amplify
connectivity among landscape units leading to enhanced coupling of nutrient
cycles across landscapes, and increased biodiversity and productivity within the
ecosystem. Warming in the MDV is hypothesized to act as a slowly developing,
long-term press of warmer summers, upon which transient pulse events of high
summer flows and strong katabatic winds will be overprinted. Four specific
hypotheses address the ways in which pulses of water and wind will influence
contemporary and future ecosystem structure, function and connectivity. Because
windborne transport of biota is a key aspect of enhanced connectivity from
katabatic winds, new monitoring will include high-resolution measurements of
aeolian particle flux. Importantly, integrative genomics will be employed to
understand the responses of specific organisms to the increased connectivity.
The project will also include a novel social science component that will use
environmental history to examine interactions between human activity, scientific
research, and environmental change in the MDV over the past 100 years. To
disseminate this research broadly, MCM scientists will participate in a wide
array of outreach efforts ranging from presentations in K-12 classrooms to
bringing undergraduates and teachers to the MDV to gain research experience.
Planned outreach programs will build upon activities conducted during the
International Polar Year (2007-2008), which include development of an
interactive DVD for high school students and teachers and publication of a
children's book in the LTER Schoolyard Book Series. A teacher's edition of the
book with a CD containing lesson plans will be distributed. The project will
develop programs for groups traditionally underrepresented in science arenas by
publishing some outreach materials in Spanish.