* 1115887
* High Order Model, Computation, and Stochastic Hybrid Coupling Continuum-Particle Algorithm with Application to Micro-propulsion
* MPS,DMS
* 10/01/2011,09/30/2015
* Zhiliang Xu, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 09/30/2015
* USD 120,000.00

Micro-domain multi-scale flow simulation is one of the most difficult and
unresolved problems in today's computational mathematics. Simulating micro-
propulsion generated by the plasma flow from the micro-pulsed plasma thruster
(PPT) is one of the examples. Flow in a micro-PPT is partially ionized
collisional plasma exhibiting transition from continuum to rarefied (or non-
equilibrium) regime. To successfully simulate such multi-scale flow, a novel
stochastic hybrid algorithm combining direct simulation Monte Carlo (DSMC)
method suitable for highly non-equilibrium flow regime and continuum methods in
the rest of the domain for efficiency is proposed. Using the new algorithm, the
study will focus on numerical modeling the internal flow of the micro-thruster.
To the end, stochastic simulations are planned to optimize performance
characteristics of the thruster such as specific impulse and thrust. The
intellectual merit of the proposed activity lies in the development and analysis
of new numerical algorithms and application of these algorithms for large scale
simulations of multi-scale flow problems. Moreover, one significance of the
proposed research is to build a stochastic interface between kinetic and
continuum methods to exchange the statistical distribution instead of the
spatial-temporal average. Proposed tools will be applied to study the micro-
thruster to order to improve their performance by optimizing their geometry.

The proposed work will broadly extend the understanding of the behavior of
multi-scale flows in many applications of current interest. It will assist in
developing new micro-propulsion devices with improved efficiency, which is
important for next generation micro-spacecrafts. Moreover, the methods to be
developed can be applied to numerous applications in engineering, physics and
biology including, but not limited to, hypersonic re-entry vehicles, thermo-
fluids of fusion blankets and dissolution of a blood clot by ultrasound.
Proposed work will continue and expand the PI?s educational outreach activities
by building a strong collaboration between University of Notre Dame and Pacific
Northwest National Laboratory and providing interdisciplinary training for
students. An interdisciplinary training of undergraduate and graduate student
training is planned.