* 1115645
* CIF: Small: Novel (Channel Modeling, Feedback, and Cognitive) Approaches in Wireless Communications
* CSE,CCF
* 08/01/2011,07/31/2015
* Bhaskar Rao, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 07/31/2015
* USD 467,901.00

Wireless communication networks continue to get more complex. Communication over
unused TV bands (cognitive radios), self-organizing ad-hoc networks for military
and emergency applications, or the heterogeneous networks envisioned in the next
generation cellular (LTE advanced) systems all are clear evidence of this trend.
As consumer demands, dependence on wireless services, and the complexity of
networks continue to grow, there is a need to manage the resources efficiently
without overburdening the network owner and end user. To address these
challenges, this research involves significant and novel enhancements to the
building blocks of modern communication systems. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
modeling, feedback, and cognitive techniques being studied in this project are
essential for the development of robust and efficient wireless systems. The
research project involves the following three parts: 1) Development of novel
channel modeling methods that decompose the channel into a specular component
and a diffuse component. A key consideration in this work is developing a
rigorous framework for channel prediction and utilizing the insight to develop
robust feedback based Multiple Input Multiple Output (MIMO) systems that degrade
gracefully. 2) The development and analysis of feedback based multi-user MIMO-
OFDM systems. This includes novel channel estimation and representations
schemes, novel schemes for encoding sparsity, and performance analysis of
reduced feedback MIMO-OFDM systems. 3) The development of advanced cognition at
the physical layer. This includes waveform design in cognitive radios based on
timing consideration and more comprehensive models for channels to provide
awareness based on location, learning and memory.