* 1115054
* CNH: When Strengths Can Become Weaknesses: Emerging Vulnerabilities in Coupled Natural Human Systems under Globalization and Climate Change
* GEO,GEO
* 09/15/2011,08/31/2017
* Marco Janssen, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Sarah Ruth
* 08/31/2017
* USD 1,499,093.00

Long-lived coupled natural human systems (CNHs) are often distinguished by how
they have evolved the right fit between their biophysical and social sub-
systems. Researchers have characterized this fit in terms of the close feedbacks
that enable a system to function well when faced with a known set of disturbance
regimes. This project addresses a key question that naturally arises when these
systems are exposed to a new set of disturbance regimes or novel change as is
likely to occur with increased globalization and climate change: to what extent
do the interdependencies that developed to strengthen the system's capacity to
fit to a certain set of disturbances limit or enhance its capacity to refit to
new conditions? To address this question, the project team will focus on a
particular class of CNHs - small scale irrigation systems where the built
infrastructure plays a critical role in resource provision. A multi-method
approach will be employed that begins with the qualitative analysis of a large
number of case studies to develop a typology of irrigation systems. A subset of
previously examined exemplar cases will be revisited to examine how they have
coped with new vulnerabilities that have emerged. In parallel, field experiments
will be conducted with resource users and infrastructure providers that apply
principles of behavioral economics to social dilemmas that emerge in irrigation
systems in order to test the robustness of collective action to different
stressors. These will be followed by laboratory experiments with college
students to examine whether the findings can be generalized to other systems.
Finally, insights from the case studies and experiments will be used to develop
formal dynamic models of prototypical irrigation-based CNHs. Using tools from
dynamical systems and robust control complemented by numerical experiments and
simulation (including agent-based approaches), the qualitative dynamics and
associated robustness-vulnerability characteristics of these systems will be
studied in order to distill a set of institutional design principles for use in
the development of tools for anticipatory governance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In
addition to the study of coupled natural human systems (CNHs) in its own right,
this project is motivated by an important practical consideration. The pace at
which social and natural systems are currently changing - driven to a large
degree by globalization and climate change - has challenged the capacity of
several CNHs to self-organize and respond effectively to this change. Ongoing
field studies have shown that small scale farms (less than 2 hectares), which
constitute 90% of farms worldwide and consume an estimated 70% of developed
water supplies, are the most vulnerable to such changes. Since these farms also
produce 40% of agricultural output globally and support the majority of world?s
poorest people, it is essential to enhance their adaptive capacity in order to
maintain food security and alleviate poverty. Focusing on the in-depth study of
small-scale irrigation systems, this project pushes ideas of resource governance
beyond traditional approaches. Rather than seeking the "best" policies for a
specific system under a given set of shocks, it seeks to understand how CNHs
cope with change under a wide range of disturbance regimes. The theoretical
foundation for the project is based on a key insight from engineering: feedback
(of which management and governance in CNHs are examples) can be used to
stabilize a system and reduce its sensitivity to a given set of disturbances.
However, this stabilizing feedback can increase sensitivity to new types of
disturbances. By studying responses to a suite of disturbances, this project
helps advance a more nuanced understanding of evolution of CNHs in terms of
recognizing how in becoming finely-tuned to certain disturbances, systems become
increasingly vulnerable to others. Building on this insight through theoretical
modelling as well as case studies and field experiments from a wide variety of
settings in the southwestern US, India, Nepal and Thailand, this project will
develop a set of tools that will contribute to the capacity of policy makers to
better anticipate emerging vulnerabilities and design learning and adaptive
mechanisms to cope more effectively with change.