* 1115005
* Collaborative Research: Digitization TCN: InvertNet--An Integrative Platform for Research on Environmental Change, Species Discovery and Identification
* BIO,DBI
* 07/01/2011,06/30/2016
* Johannes Klompen, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Reed Beaman
* 06/30/2016
* USD 115,708.00

This project will create InvertNet, an on-line virtual museum comprising &gt;50
million insect and related arthropod specimens housed at 22 Midwestern
institutions, focusing on the research theme of effects of land use changes on
the biota of the Great Lakes and upper Mississippi River drainage basins. These
collections document 160 years of environmental change and are an invaluable and
irreplaceable resource but, at present, are largely inaccessible to scientists
and the general public. Most previous efforts to capture and disseminate
invertebrate collection data have focused on label data alone. InvertNet will
use advanced digitization and networking technologies to capture and display 2D
and 3D images of specimens and labels, and incorporate them into a searchable
database. These new techniques should reduce the cost of digitizing insect
specimens substantially.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;By allowing users to find and view
detailed images of specimens of particular species and their associated data
labels, InvertNet will provide universal access to collections previously
restricted to researchers. It will include links to the popular BugGuide.net
insect identification website and to other biodiversity data portals used by
researchers, educators, and the general public. This will facilitate and support
many aspects of biological research and education, including species discovery
and identification, pest management, ecology and biogeography. InvertNet will
serve as a model, applicable to other kinds of biological collections, for the
use of efficient, computer-assisted procedures to increase the speed and
accuracy of collection data capture. This award is made as part of the National
Resource for Digitization of Biological Collections through the Advancing
Digitization of Biological Collections program and all data resulting from this
award will be available through the national resource.