* 1115493
* III: Small: Collaborative Research: Using Large-Scale Image Data for Online Social Media Analysis
* CSE,IIS
* 08/01/2011,07/31/2014
* Fei-Fei Li, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 07/31/2014
* USD 311,797.00

Understanding and analyzing the way our world is connected is a critical but new
challenge in today's world, thanks to the technological advances of personal
computers, mobile devices, as well as local and global Internet connections.
Most current methods in the area of social media analysis, inference and
understanding are based on textual data. However, the image data makes an
increasingly large proportion of data in social media. Hence, there is an urgent
need for tools that can effectively use image data to extract important
information to infer patterns and activities of people, communities and society
at large. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project combines advances in computer
vision, machine learning, and social networks in novel ways for understanding
and analyzing large-scale social media data. The proposal brings together
computer vision and machine learning research in novel ways to develop new
methods for analyzing large-scale social media data. It pursues 4 inter-related
aims: (i) Establishing a large-scale visual concept ontology and structures for
the web-image world via crowdsourcing, taxonomy induction, and nonparametric
learning methods; (ii) Understanding activity in social networks by analyzing
image contents in the context of social media in large-scale and with
connectivity; (iii) Inferring the structure of social networks and communities
from image contents and activity of individuals in social networks; (iv)
Discovering and analyzing dynamic social media trends.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Anticipated products of this research include new tools
for analysis and modeling of socially generated content, with special emphasis
on image data. The resulting methods provide potentially useful insights that
characterize users, communities and societies, in a broad range of applications.
The project offers enhanced research-based advanced training opportunities for
graduate as well as undergraduate students and involves development of new
courses on related topics at both Stanford University and Carnegie Mellon
University.