* 1115057
* CNH: Interactive Dynamics of Wildlife Populations, Human Health and Household Wealth in Rural Africa
* GEO,GEO
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2017
* Claire Kremen, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Sarah Ruth
* 08/31/2017
* USD 1,460,000.00

This project integrates ecology, economics, sociology and public health to
illuminate and predict a) how human health and household wealth separately and
interactively affect human reliance on biodiversity, and b) how harvested
biodiversity impacts household wealth and human health. Data collection occurs
at the level of individuals and households at nine rural sites in Ghana, Kenya
and Madagascar where, like many regions of the world, communities are
economically marginalized and the sustainable use of natural resources is
essential to livelihoods, health and survival. The systems-based model developed
through this integration across disciplines will provide a framework to compare
the relative importance of ecological, socioeconomic or health factors for the
sustainability of ecosystems and societies. Furthermore, by quantifying and
incorporating nonlinear and coupled feedbacks among human and natural systems
this model also will inform efforts to assess the immediate and long term
impacts of environmental and social shocks (e.g., climate change, drought,
fisheries collapse, disease emergence, social unrest) on resource and livelihood
sustainability.

In addition to bringing together a group of researchers who venture beyond
disciplinary boundaries to build a new model of integration, this project will
have direct and prolonged impacts on education, international collaboration,
capacity building, health outcomes, poverty alleviation and sustainability. The
project?s commitment to outreach, engagement and capacity building in Africa
ensures that it will provide invaluable international experience to U.S.-based
students and lifelong collaborations and associations for all individuals and
institutions involved in the research effort. Project results and the framework
created by this research will be of great practical value to agencies (e.g.,
USAID, FAO, WHO, UNEP, IUCN) and non-governmental organizations (e.g., WCS, CI,
WWF, CARE, CRS) who can provide policy pathways for poverty alleviation, natural
resource sustainability, economic development, biodiversity conservation, and
the improvement of health outcomes.