* 1115252
* Computation of the Semiclassical Limit of Schroedinger's Equation, Anisotropic Grain Growth, and Epitaxial Growth Using Kinetic Monte Carlo
* MPS,DMS
* 07/15/2011,06/30/2015
* Peter Smereka, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 06/30/2015
* USD 149,999.00

This proposal involves three projects where each one builds from prior NSF
support. This first project involves the simulation of grain boundary motion in
two and three dimensions using our recently developed multiphase variational
level set framework. It is planned to extend this formulation to allow for the
possibility of arbitrary surface tension between grains. This will be
accomplished by combining this formulation with minimizing movements. The second
project concerns the efficient computation the semi-classical limit of the
Schroedinger equation. The proposed algorithm is based on the observation that
if one transforms the Schroedinger equation using a transformation inspired by
Gaussian wave packets, one arrives at another Schroedinger equation that is much
more amenable to computation in the semiclassical limit project. The third
project concerns modeling and efficient simulation of epitaxial growth using
kinetic Monte Carlo (KMC). We plan to model and simulate both liquid drop
epitaxy and heteroepitaxial growth. In each of these cases we aim to develop
highly efficient KMC algorithms to allow simulation on time and lengths not
previously possible, thereby facilitating model development and allowing
comparison with experiments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Each of the proposed projects
has the potential to have a significant impact on problems that are both
fundamental and technologically important. Epitaxial growth is scientifically
interesting since it has effects on both nanoscales and mesoscales. It is
technologically relevant since quantum dot materials are made in this way. Our
proposed techniques will greatly increase the simulation speed thereby
facilitating model development. The study of grain boundary motion using
curvature flow is a classic problem in applied and computational mathematics
which has importance in material science since various properties of
polycrystalline substances can crucially depend on the details of the grain
patterns. The fast simulation of the semi-classical limit of the Schroedinger
equation could provide deeper insight into chemical reaction dynamics,
molecular-surface scattering, and photodissociation, for example.