* 1115208
* Doctoral Dissertation: Integrating coalescent into the hypothesis testing of Neotropical diversification:  spiny-rats (Echimyidae: Proechimys)
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2011,08/31/2014
* Rafael Leite, Brigham Young University
* Standard Grant
* Simon Malcomber
* 08/31/2014
* USD 12,690.00

Neotropical lowlands harbor the richest fauna on Earth and several historical
hypotheses have been developed to explain present-day levels of biodiversity.
Molecular-based studies supporting each of these hypotheses usually have been
based on qualitative analyses that show genealogical relationships of species in
a geographic context. This method may be misleading because such interpretations
do not fully consider the inherent genetic variation contained within species.
More recently, inferences based on a rigorous statistical framework are
explicitly considering random effects and key genetic processes shaping biotic
evolution. This project will use these new methods to test historical hypotheses
concerning the evolution of a diverse group of spiny-rats, which are widely
distributed in Neotropical rainforests.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;These rodents are
poorly studied despite their critical role as seed dispersers in forest
regeneration and disease reservoirs. Applying biologically more realistic
methods to understand the evolutionary history of this group of mammals will
provide well-resolved patterns of their diversification and biogeography.
Moreover, at the unprecedented sampling scales of this project, key insights on
the evolution of Neotropical diversity will likely emerge, and can serve as a
strong basis for future research and conservation strategies in the Neotropics,
particularly in Amazonia and adjacent regions.