* 1115808
* CSR: Small: Collaborative Research: Improving Dependability of Multithreaded Distributed Programs
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2015
* Vijay Garg, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 08/31/2015
* USD 225,709.00

Nearly all modern processors now contain multiple cores and almost all modern
computer systems contain multiple processors. Thus future software is likely to
be both multithreaded (in which threads of a process communicate using shared
memory) and distributed (in which processes in a system communicate using
messages). Ensuring that a program works correctly under all possible scenarios
is a very dif&amp;#64257;cult task. Most real-world programs contain a large
number of components which makes their formal veri&amp;#64257;cation infeasible.
Effective tools for testing and debugging programs prior to their deployment are
indispensable. Bugs persist even after extensive testing and debugging
especially those that manifest under rare circumstances. Monitoring programs at
runtime and possibly controlling their execution to avoid bad states is an
important way to tolerate residual software bugs. &lt;br/&gt;In this project, we
are working on developing a theory and algorithms for monitoring, analyzing and
controlling a multithreaded distributed computation. Specifically, we are
developing (i) a unifying framework for modeling synchronization in multicore
distributed systems resulting from messages, locks and other synchronization
primitives (e.g., wait/notify), (ii) offline and online algorithms for detecting
and controlling predicates, expressed as temporal logic formulas, using slicing
and other approaches, and (iii) scalable approaches for tracking dependency
among events.&lt;br/&gt;Besides multicore computing, the work has applications
in a variety of other areas including cloud computing, distributed databases,
recovery, replica consistency and resource management. We are also developing
educational tools that can be used in courses to enhance the learning experience
of students working with multicore distributed systems.