* 1115948
* TC: Small: Server-side Verification of Client Behavior in Distributed Applications
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2016
* Michael Reiter, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 08/31/2016
* USD 472,502.00

This research will develop techniques that enable a server to verify the
behavior of a client with which it is communicating as being consistent with the
sanctioned client software. A client's behavior might deviate from the
sanctioned client software due to manipulation of the client software or its
data structures by an adversary with physical access to the client computer or
by malware that has infected the client. This manipulation may yield incorrect
state at the client; examples might include modifications to shared state in a
collaborative application that should not have been possible, or an input to an
imminent server-side invocation containing content that the sanctioned client
software would not have allowed. If this state is authoritative within a larger
distributed application or otherwise dangerous to the server or other clients,
then this incorrect state may compromise the integrity of the application. The
techniques developed in this proposed work will detect client behaviors arising
from such modifications or, more specifically, any client-to-server messages
that are inconsistent with the sanctioned client
software.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A central challenge in validating client behavior
is that this behavior is the result of client processing with inputs that are
potentially unknown to the server. These unknown inputs can include
environmental inputs at the client (e.g., values sensed at the client location),
user inputs (e.g., the user's keystrokes), and even which server messages were
processed by the client at the point at which it sent the message being
verified. To permit verification despite this obstacle, this project will
investigate the use of symbolic execution of the sanctioned client software and
constraint solving to enable the server to determine whether there are any
inputs that could have given rise to this client message. If it finds that no
inputs could have given rise to this message, then it detects the client
behavior as being inconsistent with the sanctioned client software. The project
will produce new research results and tools to enable this analysis to be
performed efficiently. Moreover, the use of computer games as one vehicle to
demonstrate this research makes this project ideal for outreach to high-school
students and undergraduates, with whom computer games are immensely popular.