* 1115638
* AF: Small: Approximate Augmented Lagrangians: First-Order and Parallel Optimization Methods, with Applications to Stochastic Programming
* CSE,CCF
* 07/15/2011,06/30/2015
* Jonathan Eckstein, Rutgers University Newark
* Standard Grant
* Rahul Shah
* 06/30/2015
* USD 358,499.00

Continuous optimization is a mathematical discipline with
extensive&lt;br/&gt;applications in engineering design and business/logistical
planning.&lt;br/&gt;Its currently most common solution techniques are difficult
to adapt&lt;br/&gt;to newly evolving computer architectures comprising dozens
to&lt;br/&gt;thousands of processing elements working in parallel.
Combining&lt;br/&gt;several existing techniques with some recent results of the
principal&lt;br/&gt;investigator, this project explores a means of solving
continuous&lt;br/&gt;optimization problems that should adapt more readily to
parallel&lt;br/&gt;computer architectures than present standard solvers,
allowing the&lt;br/&gt;architectures' full power to be brought to bear on
large,&lt;br/&gt;time-consuming problems. Without such new solution
approaches,&lt;br/&gt;solution of critical design and planning problems may not
benefit from&lt;br/&gt;most of the advances in computing power anticipated for
the next&lt;br/&gt;decade. The project will also involve cooperative work with
the&lt;br/&gt;Brazilian research community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The technical
approach is to capitalize on recent advances in&lt;br/&gt;augmented Lagrangian
and conjugate gradient algorithms to produce a&lt;br/&gt;new kind of modular
parallel continuous constrained optimization&lt;br/&gt;solver. The solver
consists of a classical augmented Lagrangian outer&lt;br/&gt;loop, with
subproblems solved by the a state-of-the art&lt;br/&gt;box-constrained conjugate
gradient method terminated by a recently&lt;br/&gt;developed relative error
criterion. The research consists of three&lt;br/&gt;stages: the goal of stage
one is to create an object-oriented, modular&lt;br/&gt;serial implementation,
test it extensively, and address some&lt;br/&gt;theoretical issues. Stage two
aims to evolve the stage-one substrate&lt;br/&gt;into a parallel solver for
which the user explicitly specifies how to&lt;br/&gt;map the problem structure
to multiple processing elements. Stage&lt;br/&gt;three's goal is to automate the
structure detection and mapping&lt;br/&gt;process. Stages two and three will use
stochastic programming&lt;br/&gt;problems as test cases.