* 1115698
* A new approximation for effective Hamiltonians
* MPS,DMS
* 10/01/2011,09/30/2015
* Hong-Kai Zhao, University of California-Irvine
* Continuing Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 09/30/2015
* USD 298,511.00

Hamilton-Jacobi equations are nonlinear hyperbolic partial differential equation
for which classical solution does not exist in general. Appropriate weak
solution, the viscosity solution, has to be defined. Hence traditional
homogenization techniques based on asymptotic expansion and assumption of
regularity do not work. Both mathematical theory and numerical method for
homogenization of nonlinear problem is far from adequate. Currently the
homogenization of Hamilton-Jacobi equation is through the definition of a cell
problem for each momentum variable. Hence many cell problems have to be solved.
The key motivation of this study is a new formulation proposed by the PI and his
collaborators that links the effective Hamiltonian to a suitable effective
equation. The main advantage of this formulation is that only one auxiliary
equation needs to be solved in order to compute the effective Hamiltonian for
all momentum variables. Furthermore, the effective equation in our formulation
is a standard Hamilton-Jacobi equation with boundary value for which many
efficient numerical algorithms are available. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Hamilton-
Jacobi equations have many important applications in classical mechanics,
dynamical systems, optimal control, geophysics, geometric optics, combustion and
image processing. For many applications the corresponding Hamiltonians may have
multiple scales, such as oscillatory potential in classical mechanics or
fluctuating velocity field in front propagation. In this project the PI proposes
a new formulation to study homogenization of a class of Hamilton-Jacobi
equations and develop efficient numerical algorithms for computing the
corresponding effective Hamiltonians. Results coming from this project will
provide important mathematical foundation and efficient numerical methods for
many applications in science and engineering. In addition integration with
education at different levels will be designed. Supervised research projects and
seminars related to the proposed research will be available to junior/senior
undergraduates and graduates.