* 1115210
* Digitization HUB:  A Collections Digitization Framework for the 21st Century
* BIO,DBI
* 07/01/2011,06/30/2018
* Gregory Riccardi, University of Florida
* Cooperative Agreement
* Roland Roberts
* 06/30/2018
* USD 12,611,986.00

The accelerated loss of biodiversity, the "Biodiversity Crisis", is one of the
leading environmental and social issues of the 21st century. Although natural
biological diversity is fundamentally important to a healthy and sustainable
planet, responses to the crisis have suffered from incomplete information and
inadequate policies for sustainable use of natural resources. Information
relevant to addressing the impact of declining biodiversity is housed within the
nation's natural history and related biosystematic collections, but is
inaccessible to most researchers and policy makers. The National Resource for
Digitization of Biological Collections (Integrated Digitized Biocollections;
iDigBio) was established to develop an integrated national infrastructure for
digitization of existing biodiversity collections in the U.S. The iDigBio
project team and infrastructure provides leadership, facilitates communication,
and coordinates digitization and educational activities at TCNs (thematic
collections networks) and many other biocollections throughout the U.S. Through
iDigBio, data for millions of biological specimens are being made publically
available in electronic format via customized cloud computing. Diverse data,
such as taxonomy, geographic location, 2- and 3-dimensional images,
vocalizations, and molecular resources, are tied to the specimens themselves.
These data promote integrative biodiversity research on living and fossil
species and provide an immense baseline for assessing the impacts of climate
change, invasive species, and other environmental issues. The iDigBio project is
thus changing the culture of the biocollections community to make digitization
become a standard practice through new technologies, techniques, training, and
standards of operation.

The iDigBio project serves several target audiences and stakeholders, including
the biological research community, young biologists entering the profession,
non-federal agencies, and the general public. These audiences are being engaged
through diverse activities, including workshops, small focus groups, training
sessions, symposia at professional meetings, on-line webinars, and related
e-learning opportunities developed via the iDigBio web-site. University students
are learning about, and are engaged in, this national digitization effort via
courses, seminars, mentoring, online resources, and individual research.
Graduate student assistantships and young faculty sabbaticals supported by
iDigBio are broadening representation and diversifying the professional
workforce. The iDigBio web-site, newsletter, and exhibits communicate advances,
discoveries and opportunities to the public. The goals, activities, outputs, and
outcomes of iDigBio are being evaluated by the Center for Informal Science
Education at UF. Although primarily focused on the target audiences described
above, the outputs and outcomes of iDigBio will also be available to federal
agencies and international stakeholders. The long-term vision for iDigBio is a
highly coordinated biocollections digitization community to serve the needs of
diverse stakeholders, from the professional systematist to the general public,
and communicate the importance of this national resource to advance research and
education in the 21st century.