* 1115011
* Turbulence Generation in Common Near-Calm Conditions
* GEO,AGS
* 10/01/2011,09/30/2016
* Larry Mahrt, NorthWest Research Associates, Incorporated
* Standard Grant
* Edward L. Bensman
* 09/30/2016
* USD 853,685.00

Turbulence near the earth's surface under low wind speed conditions (which are
common to nighttime and other stably stratified conditions) is primarily
generated by gravity waves and other small-scale non-turbulent motions. Although
such processes have received little attention and are poorly understood, the
nocturnal near-calm regime is common, particularly with high-pressure systems
over flat terrain and under a wider variety of synoptic conditions in small
basins and valleys with weak down-valley slope. The time-averaged surface flux
is then dominated by infrequent mixing events of unknown origin. Existing
methods of data analysis have generally failed to identify the basic physics of
generation of mixing events under such conditions. Proper attribution of the
root causes of the mixing events requires more emphasis on spatial variation
than provided in existing analysis strategies. This project will provide such
emphasis by initially focusing on dense networks of sonic anemometers and
auxiliary data to more comprehensively characterize the temporal and spatial
variability of the turbulence as well as mean turbulence quantities. Obtained
representations will include scale-dependent probability distributions and
stochastic models with extreme-value capabilities. Such approaches require very
large data sets, which have been recently acquired. Since the non-turbulent
motions and event mixing can be site dependent, a more limited version of the
analysis will be applied to ~20 different field programs representing a wide
range of surface conditions. To obtain more even finer spatial information, the
investigator plans to deploy fiber-optic cables capable of providing high
density information on temperature fluctuations and video based semi-Lagrangian
tracking of machine-generated fog elements, all embedded within a new network of
sonic anemometers and pressure sensors. These measurements will be integrated
with tower profiles of turbulence quantities and deeper profiling from sodars to
examine the generation of mixing events in a quasi-three dimensional
framework.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of this effort centers on
pioneering work to understand and stochastically describe those complex flow
features involving superposition of waves, microfronts and other complex non-
deterministic signatures thought to be common under near-calm conditions via
application of new observational tools and non-standard analysis techniques.
Broader impacts will include contributions toward improved model
parameterizations of surface fluxes and dispersion under weak winds conditions
and improved ability to anticipate localized surface cooling associated with
dense fog formation or frost damage to crops. An existing instructional video of
near-surface motions based on machine-generated fog, currently used by a number
of universities in boundary-layer course work, will be expanded into a set of
more professional instructional videos on local atmospheric flows for broader
distribution and use. A joint effort with a local high school will provide media
suitable secondary school settings and public demonstrations.