* 1115990
* Conference: Kokes Awards for the 20th North American Catalysis Society Meeting, Detroit, Michigan, June 5-10, 2011
* ENG,CBET
* 05/01/2011,04/30/2012
* Suljo Linic, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* George J. Antos
* 04/30/2012
* USD 25,000.00

Intellectual Merit: &lt;br/&gt;The NACS meeting is the prestigious meeting for
the catalysis community outside of the International Congress on Catalysis. The
NACS meeting is held each 2 years and is organized in turn by each of the Local
US Catalysis Societies. The 20th NACS meeting is being held in Detroit, MI. The
meeting topics typically cover many aspects of catalysis utilizing both oral and
poster presentations. Attendees can be immersed in various areas of catalysis,
whether they are currently working in the area or wish to gain an understanding
of catalysis work in a completely different arena. Some participants come from
outside the US, thereby allowing initial contact with the global catalysis
community. Prof. Suljo Linic from the University of Michigan is the chairman of
the Kokes Award Committee which seeks funds to partially offset the costs for
graduate students to participate in the NACS meeting. The support of graduate
student attendees is an excellent way to allow them to begin the understanding
of the diversity of work in the catalysis field. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts: &lt;br/&gt;The entire meeting is an educational event for those workers
in the field. This award would enable partial support of more than 100 graduate
students to attend the meeting. Many will be giving poster or even oral
presentations. There will be ample contact with existing and new colleagues in
catalysis. The work presented is current research at academic, industrial and
national laboratories. The support of graduate student attendance has been a
customary and well-placed investment from the Catalysis &amp; Biocatalysis
Program of CBET/ENG in NSF.