* 1115532
* HCC: Small: Design Methods: How They are Understood, Selected, and Used by Practitioners
* CSE,IIS
* 08/01/2011,07/31/2015
* Erik Stolterman, Indiana University
* Continuing Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 07/31/2015
* USD 467,066.00

Huge efforts and funds are today deployed, in both academia and industry, with
the purpose to develop new tools, techniques, and methods to support the design
of innovative and creative interactive digital products and services. However,
while a large proportion of these attempts lead to research insights, they are
not always successfully transformed into design methods that fit the reality
that practitioners experience. This lack of understanding of practice has in
many cases led to a substantial lack of trust from practitioners towards the
value of research contributions, while at the same time leading to frustrated
researchers not understanding the lack of enthusiasm from practitioners when it
comes to adapting new design methods emanating from research efforts. The
proposed research will develop a solid understanding of this unfortunate
situation by carefully investigating existing practice from the perspective of
practitioners. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The research proposal is made up of five
major studies and activities, conducted in parallel over three years. These
activities are a combination of analytical studies of design methods and
interview studies with practitioners (designers who employ design methods to
create products and systems) and researchers (design method developers). The
research will lead to insights and principles suitable for practitioners on how
to strategize and handle their choice and use of design tools, techniques, and
methods, and to insights and principles suitable for organizations for their
strategic choices of design methods. Most importantly, the research will lead to
educational guidelines suitable for design education on how to professionally
think about and handle design methods. With increased knowledge about what
constitutes appropriate design methods, these results will increase the
probability for more creative and innovative designs of interactive products and
systems.