* 1115188
* III: Small: Query Compilation on Probabilistic Databases
* CSE,IIS
* 08/01/2011,07/31/2015
* Dan Suciu, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Frank Olken
* 07/31/2015
* USD 500,000.00

The goal of probabilistic databases is to manage large databases where the data
is uncertain. Applications include Web-scale information extraction, RFID
systems, scientific data management, biomedical data integration, business
intelligence, data cleaning, approximate schema mappings, and data
deduplication. Despite the huge demand and the intense recent research on
probabilistic databases, no robust probabilistic database systems exist to date.
The reason is that the probabilistic inference problem is, in general,
intractable. Fortunately, in databases there are two distinct inputs to the
probabilistic inference problem: the query and the database instance. This has
led recently to the discovery of safe queries, which are queries that can be
evaluated efficiently on any input database, and to new probabilistic inference
algorithms that exploit the structure of the query. However, unsafe queries
remain a major challenge in probabilistic databases.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project studies novel algorithms for evaluating unsafe queries on probabilistic
database, with guaranteed performance. It uses a novel approach, query
compilation, which translates the query into one of four targets: OBDDs, FBDDs,
d-DNNFs, and circuits using inclusion/exclusion nodes. The project pursues two
thrusts: (1) It develops instance-dependent compilation techniques that
significantly extend the reach of instance-independent techniques used in safe
queries. (2) It develops approximate query compilation techniques , which always
run efficiently, even on intractable query, instance pairs, by sacrificing
accuracy. These algorithms are conservative, in the sense that they return
correct probabilities in all cases when the input query, instance pair is
tractable.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Intellectual Merit of this project consists
of new techniques for compiling queries into one of four compilation targets,
OBDD, FBDD, d-DNNF, and inclusion/exclusion-based inference, using both exact
inference (without performance guarantees), and approximate inference (with
performance guarantees). It expands our understanding of probabilistic
inference, and leads to practical approaches for probabilistic database engines.
As Broader Impact, the project benefits a large class of applications that
require general purpose management of uncertain data, ranging from large-scale
information extraction systems, to scientific data management, to business
intelligence. The project gradually incorporates topics from probabilistic data
into into a curriculum for graduate level education; query compilation is
already discussed in the PI's book on Probabilistic Databases (
http://dx.doi.org/10.2200/S00362ED1V01Y201105DTM016), a graduate-level
textbook.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;For further information see the project web site
at the URL: http://www.cs.washington.edu/homes/suciu/project-
querycompilation.html