* 1115903
* NIRT: 3D Hierarchical Nanomanufacturing for Active Photonics-on-chip
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2010,12/31/2011
* Yuankun Lin, University of North Texas
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Kramer
* 12/31/2011
* USD 119,341.00

The objective of this Nanoscale Interdisciplinary Research (NIRT) project is to
establish an interdisciplinary research and education program in the area of
nanomanufacturing for the fabrication of active photonics-on-chip where optical
properties can be controlled either optically, magnetically or electro-
optically. Several approaches will be combined to enable fabrication of photonic
bandgap crystals and active photonic devices. Imprint lithography will be
employed to create two-dimensional photonic crystals containing point defects
for creation of the cavity of laser sources and line defects for planar
waveguides. Three-dimensional photonic crystals will be fabricated through
multi-beam holographic lithographic techniques in which all beams come from the
same half-space. Two-photon stereolithography will then be used to fabricate
defects inside the three-dimensional photonic crystal for optical processing.
The two-dimensional and three-dimensional photonic bandgap crystals will be
hybridized to form a photonic band gap heterostructure containing engineered
defects, which enables active control of light generation, photon propagation,
and photon signal processing in optical circuits.

If these technologies are successful, the economies and scaling of today's
silicon electronics can be carried forward into tomorrow's silicon photonics.
Overall, these technologies can make optical circuit manufacturing commercially
feasible and contribute to the United States' global competitiveness in
photonics technology. University of Texas-Pan American (UTPA) is a minority
university which is second in the nation in the number of bachelor's degrees
awarded to Hispanics. Through this collaborative project, UTPA professors and
students can access the unique facilities at the University of Texas at Austin,
one of the top-ranked and best-equipped Universities in Texas. The research will
offer an excellent opportunity for Hispanic students to engage in multi-
disciplinary research and to pursue advanced degrees, increasing the number of
under-represented scientists.