* 1115203
* Northeast Regional Noyce Conference
* EHR,DUE
* 05/01/2011,08/31/2017
* Sheila Vaidya, Drexel University
* Standard Grant
* Keith Sverdrup
* 08/31/2017
* USD 504,367.00

The Northeast Noyce Regional Conferences are designed to advance the knowledge
base of teaching mathematics and science in high-need schools. Organized by
Drexel University, the University of Massachusetts at Boston, and SUNY Cortland,
the conferences serve the Noyce Scholarship Program community from over 40
projects in the Northeastern states. The conferences enable faculty, preservice
students and new science and mathematics teachers from Noyce projects to frame a
new area of research that provides stronger insights about the learning and
achievement of subgroups of students in high need schools who have been
historically marginalized in STEM fields. Participants convene to share ideas,
best practices and inspire one another to address the national needs of
supporting high quality, innovative and transformative mathematics and science
teaching and to advance urban and rural education. The conferences provide
opportunities for Noyce scholars and teachers to collaborate, share experiences,
expertise and skills with their peers and colleagues and continue to maintain
connections after the conference. The conferences aim to help Noyce Scholars and
teachers improve their teaching so as to make gains in closing the achievement
gap as they learn about practices that address needs of students in high-need
schools. The goal is to transform practices and policies to better support
science and mathematics learning for students in high-need schools. Conference
participants are contributing to the development of a web-based platform
designed to address the challenges of STEM education and STEM teaching in high-
need urban and rural schools.