* 1115148
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant: Botswana Iron Age Dynamics
* SBE,BCS
* 05/01/2011,10/31/2012
* James Denbow, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 10/31/2012
* USD 20,000.00

Under the supervision of Dr. James Denbow, Carla Klehm will conduct
archaeological excavations and analyses at the Iron Age sites of Bosutswe and
Khubu la Dintsa, Botswana. Her project investigates how the local political
economy at Khubu la Dintsa shaped and was shaped by the broader political,
economic, and social transformations at Bosutswe during the height of its
participation in the Indian Ocean trade network. The importance of the research
rests on the insight it will provide into how regional networks are established
between power centers and outlying regions in traditional societies. Archaeology
has the potential to place this process in deep chronological context. Such
issues are relevant in many regions of the world
today.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Bosutswe (CE 700-1700) was a major regional hub for
local and long-distance exchange that extended across the Kalahari Desert and
ultimately linked southern Africa to East Africa, the Middle East, India, China,
and Indonesia. Long-distance glass trade beads and local ostrich eggshell beads
at Bosutswe attest to a strong local economy supported by cattle herding,
subsistence farming, and iron and bronze manufacture. This trade peaked in the
Middle Lose period, CE 1300-1450, when class divisions sharply increased at
Bosutswe. Cattle herding strategies shifted to cope with long-term overgrazing
around permanent settlements, and may have included trade relationships to
dispersed hubs such as Khubu la Dintsa to maintain quality grazing. Khubu la
Dintsa, twelve kilometers from Bosutswe, fits into this slice of the Bosutswe
sequence.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research design considers the production,
use, and exchange of material goods to compare the social and economic
relationships that developed between Khubu and Bosutswe. Moreover, it emphasizes
the regional mosaic's crucial contribution to the rise of complex societies and
state formation in the region. Power is the capacity for collective action, and
a focus on local social and economic power relationships allows smaller-scale
settlements to play a more direct role in cultural construction. Broad-scale
horizontal excavations at Khubu la Dintsa investigate its function vis-Ã -vis
Bosutswe and variation within and between sites. The data is compared, using
spatial and quantitative analyses, to the results of previous archaeological
research conducted at Bosutswe. The material connections between the sites -
diet, access to cattle versus smaller stock, housing styles, luxury and
utilitarian goods like beads, metals, and ceramics - is used to construct and
maintain power strategies that underlay social life in an increasingly
interconnected world.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Outside the academic community, this
project has great potential for improving local education in archaeology,
preserving cultural heritage, mitigating disputes over cultural ownership of
sites, contributing to political debates on minority representation, and
enhancing peoples' understanding of their nation's past and its role in southern
Africa. This project coincides with a new government campaign in Botswana to
emphasize monuments as cultural heritage. Plans to build a prehistory exhibit
between the researcher and the nearby Khama Museum should deepen pride in
Botswana's history.