* 1115677
* AF: Small: Synopsis Data Structures for Data Analysis in Shape Spaces
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2011,06/30/2015
* Suresh Venkatasubramanian, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Jack S. Snoeyink
* 06/30/2015
* USD 347,717.00

Scientific inquiries generate many different kinds of shapes. Protein backbones
are represented as curves, MRI scans give us a three-dimensional representation
of the brain, and stress tensors in materials can be represented by point sets
in a curved manifold. Because of improvements in data gathering and sensing
technologies, we now have large databases of shapes, and have the chance to gain
a deeper understanding of scientific processes by performing detailed analysis
of these shape collections.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Shape databases are large and
complex. Thus, a core challenge when analyzing shape collections is finding
succinct descriptions, or synopses, of these collections. Such synopses give us
snapshots of the data, describe local and global variations in a population, and
provide the building blocks for advanced and rigorous data analysis. However,
shapes have complex representations, and the spaces that shapes inhabit are
mathematically intricate. Computing compact synopses with provable quality
requires new geometric and algorithmic ideas.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this
project, the PI, using experience in the areas of shape matching, data analysis,
synopsis data structures, and the geometry of non-Euclidean spaces, will develop
a suite of algorithmic techniques for producing synopsis structures on shapes,
including generalized means and medians, clusterings, subspace representations,
and approximate histograms and distributions. This research lays the foundations
for rigorous data analysis in shape spaces. It develops the algorithmic and
geometric building blocks that will yield a deeper understanding of these
spaces, and in doing so will yield many new ideas for computations in the non-
Euclidean spaces that shapes inhabit. More broadly, the computational study of
shape as a pathway to deeper scientific inquiry takes advantage of the power of
computational methods as well as growing stores of data, and creates new
opportunities for the emerging area of data-driven science.