* 1115915
* Topics in Geometric and Multiscale Numerical Methods
* MPS,DMS
* 07/15/2011,06/30/2015
* Thomas Yu, Drexel University
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 06/30/2015
* USD 230,825.00

There is an emerging interest in various disciplines&lt;br/&gt;of science and
engineering to develop parsimonious multiscale&lt;br/&gt;representations of data
that `lives' on a Riemannian manifold or&lt;br/&gt;Lie group. Such application
areas are growing by leaps and bounds&lt;br/&gt;and cognate application problems
are arising all the time.&lt;br/&gt;Diffusion tensor imaging and collaborative
motion modelling are&lt;br/&gt;simple examples of new sensor types and
deployments that give rise&lt;br/&gt;to massive volumes of data taking values in
nonlinear manifolds.&lt;br/&gt;We believe that many more such methods are going
to be seen in the&lt;br/&gt;future. The first proposed project allows a kind
of&lt;br/&gt;multiscale representation of nonlinear data that does for
such&lt;br/&gt;data what wavelets were able to do for images and signals.
The&lt;br/&gt;resulted multiscale representations are the key to
data&lt;br/&gt;compression, feature extraction, noise removal, fast search,
and&lt;br/&gt;many other important problems that arise in exploiting such
data.&lt;br/&gt;There is also an increasing need to extend the current
subdivision&lt;br/&gt;methods to handle also functions, vector fields, 1-forms,
etc. on&lt;br/&gt;2-D and 3-D manifolds of arbitrary topology. The second
proposed project&lt;br/&gt;addresses part of these needs. The holy grail is to
design&lt;br/&gt;numerical algorithms that, in an appropriate sense, respect
the&lt;br/&gt;geometric or topological characteristics of the
underlying&lt;br/&gt;problem. The third proposed project is motivated by
the&lt;br/&gt;vast interests in nanotechnologies. It is speculated
that&lt;br/&gt;computational nanoscience may gradually take the forefront
of&lt;br/&gt;scientific computing in the same way that computational
fluid&lt;br/&gt;dynamics was at the forefront of scientific computing
for&lt;br/&gt;several decades. In this project we study a central method
in&lt;br/&gt;electronic structure computation known as the Kohn-
Sham&lt;br/&gt;functional minimization problem. A specific geometric structure
is proposed to be studied. The ultimate goal is to take full advantage of the
smooth manifold structure underlying the problem to come up with linear scaling
methods that are more efficient, more robust and possess provable, well-
understood convergence properties.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Our immediate goal of
analysis and synthesis of many new types of data, especially those taking values
in nonlinear manifolds, as well as functions, vector fields, and differential
forms on free-form manifolds, fits right into the broad and fundamental goal of
finding efficient ways to organize and manipulate enormous and complex volumes
of high-dimensional geometric data. The need of such methods is ubiquitous in
science and engineering, so the potential impact of the project is even wider.
We also believe that our focused effort here will eventually find their way into
large scale scientific and engineering simulation problems, as the fields of
computer-aided geometric design and computer-aided engineering are currently
converging to each other. In a different direction, we combine rigorous
geometric and numerical ideas to attack a central&lt;br/&gt;problem in
electronic structure calculations. The broader impact of this project is evident
from the the world-wide interests in material sciences and nanotechnologies.
These projects also provide interdisciplinary research and training
opportunities for graduate students, and stimulates collaboration among
computational mathematicians, engineers and scientists. The publicly available
software implementation of our research results further facilitates such
training and collaborations.