* 1115856
* A Stochastic Multiscale Computational Framework for Multiphysics Systems
* MPS,DMS
* 10/01/2011,09/30/2014
* Ivan Yotov, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 09/30/2014
* USD 239,998.00

The primary objective of this project is to develop a stochastic multiscale
computational framework for modeling multiphysics systems arising in science and
engineering applications with multiscale and uncertain input parameters. The
mathematical models involve transient Stokes-Darcy systems coupled with systems
of reaction-advection-diffusion equations. A multiblock domain decomposition
methodology provides robust and efficient multiphysics and multinumerics
couplings. The simulation domain is decomposed into a union of subdomains, each
one associated with a physical, mathematical, and numerical model. Physically
consistent interface conditions are imposed using mortar finite elements. Coarse
scale mortar spaces lead to efficient and accurate multiscale approximations.
Stochastic partial differential equations are employed to model uncertainty in
the physical parameters. Sparse collocation methods are used for approximations
in probability space. The project will investigate 1) mathematically rigorous
and physically meaningful multiphysics models; 2) robust, accurate and efficient
multiscale physical space and stochastic space discretization techniques; 3) a
posteriori error estimates for adapting the models, the numerical grids in
physical space, and the set of collocation points in stochastic space; 4)
multiscale stochastic-based data assimilation and parameter estimation
algorithms; 5) multiscale parallel domain decomposition solvers and
preconditioners.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The work will emphasize computational
modeling of energy and environment applications, in particular coupling of
surface water with groundwater in hydrological systems, as well as biomedical
applications such as modeling the inflammatory response in the human body. Both
types of systems involve complex interactions of different physical processes
and exhibit variability and uncertainty in the input parameters on a wide range
of spatial and temporal scales. Computational modeling of coupled subsurface and
surface flows and transport can provide reliable and cost effective predictions
in contaminant remediation of rivers, lakes, wetlands, and aquifers.
Inflammation plays a major role in the response of the human body to trauma,
infection, or various diseases. Mathematical and computational modeling of these
very complex processes can provide better understanding of their dynamics and
spatial characteristics and may lead to the design of more effective treatments.