* 1115417
* III: Small: RUI: Improving Data Quality and Data Mining Using Noisy Micro-Outsourcing
* CSE,IIS
* 08/01/2011,07/31/2019
* Victor Sheng, University of Central Arkansas
* Continuing Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 07/31/2019
* USD 355,628.00

Machine learning currently offers one of the most cost-effective approaches to
building predictive models (e.g., classifiers for categorizing the millions of
messages, news articles, and blogs that are generated every day). However, the
effective use of machine learning methods in such settings is limited by the
availability of a training corpus (i.e., a representative set of instances that
have been labeled with the correponding categories). In domains where labeled
data are scarce or expensive to acquire, there is an urgent need for cost-
effective approaches to selectively acquiring labels for data samples used to
train predictive models using machine learning. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project explores novel techniques that take advantage of the low cost of micro-
outsourcing using systems such as Amazon's mechanical Turk, to engage a large
number of workers from around the world for acquiring the labels of instances to
be used to construct the training corpus. There is currently little
understanding of how to utilize the multiple noisy labels obtained using micro-
outsourcing. There is a need for advanced techniques for taking advantage of the
low cost of micro-outsourcing in order to improve data quality and the quality
of models built from the available data. It explores novel approaches for
utilizing multiple labels given to an instance by different labelers. It also
extends active learning techniques for active selection of samples to be labeled
to take into account the multi-sets of labels that have been already obtained
from a pool of labelers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Advances in techniques for active
selection of data instances to be labeled in a micro-outsourcing setting can
significantly improve the quality of data used to build predictive models in a
broad range of applications, including gene annotation, image annotation, text
classification, sentiment analysis, and recommender systems, where unlabeled
data are plentiful yet labeled data are sparse. The project will provide
research opportunities for students at University of Central Arkansas, a
primarily undergraduate institution and help expand the STEM pipeline.
Additional information about the project can be found at:
http://sun0.cs.uca.edu/~ssheng/.