* 1115849
* AF: Small: New Approaches to Fundamental Problems in Network Design
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2011,06/30/2015
* Michel Goemans, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Rahul Shah
* 06/30/2015
* USD 449,999.00

Networks, of all kinds, surround us in our modern existence. Telecommunications
networks, road networks, social networks, flight connections, and even the
circuits in the microprocessors in our computers and cellphones are just a few
examples. Some fundamental network problems appear again and again in a variety
of these settings, and better algorithms - and more importantly, keener insights
- into these problems are needed. Many of these problems are algorithmically
hard optimization problems, and we cannot expect optimal solutions in reasonable
time. Instead, approximations must be accepted, and the aim is to provide the
best possible guarantee efficiently.

The goal of this project is to explore new approaches and techniques for
fundamental optimization problems, both new and old, in network design. The
problems to be investigated include the classical traveling salesman problem,
the problem of finding a tour of minimum length visiting all the nodes in a
network, and the Steiner tree problem, which asks for the cheapest tree
connecting some collection of terminals within a network. These problems have
been intensively studied, but recently there has been some exciting progress.
Two main techniques underlying this progress are the study of "thin" spanning
trees, and advances in the design of strong rounding algorithms. In this
project, the PIs aim to continue investigation in these directions with the hope
of further breakthroughs. Another class of problems we consider relates to the
quite practical issue of provisioning a network to handle varied and uncertain
demands. This context has already demonstrated a combination of beautiful
mathematical structure and important practical implications, and one of the
goals of this project is to expand the class of such network design problems
that can be efficiently solved.

Due to their fundamental nature, progress on these problems would have an
immediate impact on the field, driving even further progress. There would also
be a broader impact, with theoretical advancements aiding and guiding practical
improvements in industry. In particular, part of the project will focus on
recent models of demand patterns and capacity requirements in telecommunication
networks. As bandwidth requirements increase rapidly, with the dramatic increase
in video and multimedia, ways need to be found to more efficiently utilize
network resources. Another central aspect of this project with broader impact is
the training and mentoring of graduate students and junior researchers.