* 1115234
* TC: Small: Robust Anonymization on Social Networks
* CSE,CNS
* 08/01/2011,07/31/2016
* Philip Yu, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* nan zhang
* 07/31/2016
* USD 495,935.00

Massive graphs arise in many social media applications, such as social networks,
E-commerce recommendation systems, e-mail communication patterns, and other
collaborative applications. Such data is often sensitive from a privacy point of
view. Recently there are many privacy preserving schemes being proposed to
protect the release of network data. The question is how effective these schemes
are on preventing the re-identification of nodes, i.e., preserving the identity
anonymization of the network nodes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will raise
the issue of the inadequacy of the current network anonymization schemes for
massive and sparse graphs. It is important to understand the theoretical
properties which make them susceptible to re-identification attacks. By a
systematic study of the re-identification risks of the existing approaches, and
development of new principles for anonymization of network data, we will deepen
our understanding of the problems and be better able to protect the data
privacy. By designing a new type of attack algorithms and raising the issue on
the privacy exposure of the current network anonymization schemes, the work can
lead to fundamentally different thinking on how to perform privacy preserving
data publishing on network data. It provides new insights on how to devise
anonymization schemes to protect the privacy of social network
data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;One of the biggest obstacles on sharing information
is the privacy concern. This project has the potential to make fundamental,
disruptive advances in protecting the privacy of network data. It provides new
insights on the inadequacy of the current anonymization schemes. Many
researchers need access to sensitive data, e.g., social network data, e-mail and
communication patterns, etc. By advancing the knowledge on privacy preserving
data publishing, the barrier of sharing data will come down to facilitate
scientific research activities.