* 1115352
* RI: Small: Model-Directed Hybridization: Principled Design of Hybrids of Model Building, Metaheuristics and More Traditional Optimization Techniques
* CSE,IIS
* 08/15/2011,07/31/2016
* Uday Chakraborty, University of Missouri-Saint Louis
* Standard Grant
* Weng-keen Wong
* 07/31/2016
* USD 446,022.00

This project focuses on the principled design, enhancement, analysis and
application of model-directed hybrids, which combine model-directed optimization
and traditional optimization techniques. The key idea is to use models of the
problem landscape constructed by model-directed optimization techniques to
facilitate decisions about the nature and likely effectiveness of particular
local search procedures and appropriate neighborhood structures for those
procedures. The importance of the developed techniques will be demonstrated in a
broad spectrum of applications, including problems in computational physics,
biology, chemistry and operations research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project
will have transformative effects on computational optimization mainly because it
will automate the design of advanced neighborhood structures and problem-
specific operators applicable to broad classes of optimization problems,
including problems with noise, dynamic landscape, complex structure and multiple
conflicting objectives. Besides advancing computational optimization, the
project will have a strong impact on a variety of other disciplines in science,
engineering and commerce because it will provide practitioners in these
disciplines with tools that allow practical solutions of problems intractable
with current techniques. Furthermore, the project will provide methodology for
development of advanced techniques for landscape analysis as well as theoretical
study of advanced hybrids of metaheuristics and traditional optimization
techniques.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To complement the research goals, the project
puts a strong emphasis on broader impacts with the focus on advising student
researchers, facilitating graduate mentoring of undergraduates, participating in
multidisciplinary and collaborative projects, ensuring effective dissemination
of research outcomes, organizing student competitions, boosting the local
research infrastructure, and supporting groups underrepresented in science and
engineering.