* 1115827
* Hybrid modeling in porous media
* MPS,DMS
* 09/15/2011,08/31/2016
* Malgorzata Peszynska, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Rosemary Renaut
* 08/31/2016
* USD 299,905.00

The PI proposes to use a variety of techniques for modeling processes in porous
media relevant to modeling methane evolution in subsurface. The PI will combine
traditional continuum partial differential equations (PDE)-based models at
mesoscale, i.e. lab or field scale, with continuum and discrete models at
porescale. In particular, coarse-grained statistical mechanics models are used
to develop better characterization of metastable phenomena such as adsorption
and phase transitions. The different models will be connected and, to the extent
possible, will exchange data dynamically and on demand. The challenges to
continuum models are in their nonlinear coupled character and handling
thermodynamics constraints, while the difficulties to the porescale and discrete
models include their enormous computational complexity. In the project the
project team shall develop ways to encapsulate microscale results in the form of
'library entries' available to continuum models by ensuring that they are
meaningful in a probabilistic sense. The project involves computational studies,
algorithm development, and rigorous analysis of the models and the associated
error.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This investigation shall focus on two applications
important for global climate and energy studies, namely, on Enhanced Coalbed
Methane (ECBM) recovery, and modeling methane hydrate evolution in subsea
sediments (MH). New computational models for these applications and their
mathematical analyses are needed for better understanding of various associated
hazards and for improved prediction of the fate of methane and its management.
Primary impacts of the project are in development of new paradigm of modeling
between the models in subsurface and in improved understanding of how porescale
phenomena affect the processes at mesoscale. Project results will directly or
indirectly aid the modeling efforts in subsurface hydrology, oil- and gas-
reservoir modeling, and geological carbon storage projects. In addition, various
other disciplines will benefit from the new hybrid discrete-continuum algorithms
developed in this project. Other community benefits include the Porescale
Benchmark project set up by the investigators, interdisciplinary training of
graduate and undergraduates, and development of new senior/graduate level
classes and seminars devoted to modeling of processes relevant to global energy
and climate issues.