* 1115865
* Mathematical Models and Adaptive Algorithms for Tumor Growth
* MPS,DMS
* 09/15/2011,08/31/2015
* J. Tinsley Oden, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 08/31/2015
* USD 319,987.00

The objectives of the proposed project are to develop physically sound and
mathematically rig-&lt;br/&gt;orous diffuse-interface models for tumor growth,
to analyze the well-posedness of problems based on&lt;br/&gt;these models, to
design efficient time-stepping schemes and finite-element discretization
algorithms,&lt;br/&gt;to build the computer software implementing these
algorithms, and to develop solution verification&lt;br/&gt;methods based on a
posteriori error estimation. The focus of the research work will be on the
devel-&lt;br/&gt;opment and analysis of mathematical models that describe at the
continuum scale avascular growth&lt;br/&gt;of tumors, i.e. in the absence of
nearby blood vessels, and aim at predicting the evolution of large
tu-&lt;br/&gt;morous regions while ignoring the behavior of individual cells.
Continuum models of tumor growth&lt;br/&gt;can be derived from first principles
through the continuum theory of mixtures. Mixture theory pro-&lt;br/&gt;vides an
elegant and general framework for modeling multicomponent media such, as living
tissue,&lt;br/&gt;composed of several species of interacting constituents. A
remarkable property of phenomenological&lt;br/&gt;models based on mixture theory
is that, when considering the concentration gradients of
various&lt;br/&gt;constituents into the Helmholtz free energy functionals, one
obtains diffuse-interface models that&lt;br/&gt;introduce smooth transitional
boundaries between the various constituents. The resulting equa-&lt;br/&gt;tions
are systems of the Cahn-Hilliard type, namely complex systems of nonlinear time-
dependent&lt;br/&gt;fourth-order partial-differential equations. Such diffuse-
interface tumor-growth models have been&lt;br/&gt;proposed only recently in the
literature and the mathematical analysis and development of
efficient&lt;br/&gt;discretizations for such systems are only in the initial
stage. The main objectives in this research&lt;br/&gt;project are thus to
address several important open issues related to the development of
spatio-&lt;br/&gt;temporal diffuse-interface phase field models for computer
predictions of tumor growth, including:&lt;br/&gt;(1) development of
formulations that satisfy thermodynamical properties of the system; (2)
devel-&lt;br/&gt;opment of a rigorous mathematical framework for the analysis of
tumor-growth models based on&lt;br/&gt;gradient ow theory; (3) development of
new stable and high-order accurate time-stepping schemes&lt;br/&gt;by using
semi-implicit splitting approaches; and (4) development of efficient goal-
oriented error&lt;br/&gt;estimation algorithms for the control of spatial and
temporal discretization errors for the highly&lt;br/&gt;nonlinear time-dependent
coupled problem embodied by the proposed tumor-growth
models.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Cancer is a disease of the genome, characterized by
uncontrolled cellular growth and invasion,&lt;br/&gt;that afflicts every year
millions of Americans from all age categories. The primary
motivation&lt;br/&gt;of the research project is thus concerned with one of the
grand challenges of our times, that&lt;br/&gt;is, to understand the mechanisms
of cancer so that reliable treatments, or better,
preventative&lt;br/&gt;measures, can be determined to relieve the impact this
disease has on so many people. It has&lt;br/&gt;turned out to be a difficult
endeavor, due to many reasons, but the most important ones could&lt;br/&gt;be
that there are more than one hundred different types of cancer and the causes
and effects of&lt;br/&gt;each type occur on a wide range of scales-specific
mutations happen at the molecular scale while&lt;br/&gt;tumors may invade a
significant portion of the human body. It is not too uncommon to
believe&lt;br/&gt;that biologists or medical physicians are the main players in
cancer research; however, more and&lt;br/&gt;more scientists from other
disciplines, such as mathematics or physics, are getting involved
in&lt;br/&gt;the investigation of possible causes of tumor development and
behavior. It is in fact our hope&lt;br/&gt;that mathematical and computational
tools could provide new insights that could help guide
more&lt;br/&gt;fundamental research issues to be addressed by biologists and
medical physicians. We believe that&lt;br/&gt;computer simulations represent
powerful means for furthering discovery and acquiring
scientific&lt;br/&gt;knowledge. These simulations will help in the future
explore detailed mechanisms of tumor growth&lt;br/&gt;in natural environments
that cannot be directly studied in patients.