* 1115353
* Symposium: Visioning the Future of Water & Energy Research, Urbana-Champaign, November 30 - December 1, 2010
* ENG,CBET
* 02/01/2011,01/31/2013
* Mark Shannon, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Rosemarie D. Wesson
* 01/31/2013
* USD 14,537.00

The Visioning the Future of Water & Energy Research symposium will bring
together program directors from Federal agencies and leading researchers from
national research facilities and academia who focus on water research. The
participants will explore the issues facing water and energy production in the
coming decades and discuss the national research agenda that is critical to
addressing those issues. As part of the symposium, the next generation of water
researchers within WaterCAMPWS will be given the unique opportunity to present
their research to, and gain valuable feedback from, these leading researchers.

Topics addressed include:

-- Challenges and Federal Policies Driving Water and Energy Research --
Water/Energy Research at NSF ? Environmental Sustainability -- Water/Energy
Research in EPA?s Office of Research and Development -- Water/Energy Research at
Sandia National Laboratories -- Water/Energy Research Supporting Our Nation?s
Armed Forces -- Science and Technology for Safe Global Water -- Water /Energy
Research at ARPA-E -- Water/Energy Dual Purpose Plants and Sustainability -- The
Global Water/Energy Landscape: Where does the US Fit? -- The role of
nanotechnology: intelligent integrated microfluidics and nanofluidics -- STC's
and Cultivating the Next Generation of Researchers -- The WaterCAMPWS legacy:
its mark on the water research landscape and path forward

Ensuring the availability of clean, abundant fresh water for human use is among
the most pressing issues facing the United States and the world. The Oct. 10,
2005, Nature web editorial Global Water Crisis declared "More than one billion
people in the world lack access to clean water. Over the next two decades, the
average supply of water per person will drop by a third, possibly condemning
millions of people to an avoidable premature death." In the United States, water
has broad impact on our economy, health, food, and energy. Aquifers throughout
the U.S. are suffering from declining water levels, saltwater intrusion in
coastal areas, and inadequately replenished fresh groundwater. Many of these
aquifers are being overdrawn and will experience severe supply problems in the
next 20 years. Major rivers and watersheds are also being overdrawn and are
becoming saltier downstream.