* 1115294
* Materials by Design: A Proposal for an NSF-Sponsored Workshop to be held in the University of California, Santa Barbara; Thursday, March 17 through Saturday 19, 2011.
* MPS,DMR
* 03/01/2011,12/31/2014
* Ram Seshadri, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Michael J. Scott
* 12/31/2014
* USD 80,388.00

TECHNICAL A workshop, to be held in the University of California Santa Barbara
in March 2011 on the topic of Materials by Design, is supported by programs in
the Division of Materials Research (Solid State and Materials Chemistry and
Condensed Matter Physics), Division of Chemistry (Macromolecular,
Supramolecular, and Nanochemistry), and the Mathematical and Physical Sciences
Directorate (Office of Multidisciplinary Activities). Research in Solid State
and Materials Chemistry spans the full spectrum of exploration from constituent
atoms, to bonding, to physical properties in extended materials. The strong
links to physical properties and the functional behavior of materials is a key
aspect that distinguishes solid state and materials chemists from other
practitioners of chemistry, physics, and materials science: a unique approach
that includes inorganic and organic materials research, incorporating both
crystalline and amorphous materials, and probed at the deepest level. The goal
is frequently to achieve the desired physical properties in materials that
enable a given application. In this context, we employ the term Materials by
Design (MbD) to refer to research that seeks to create new materials for
specific applications by design. The materials may range from solution-prepared
nanoparticles, to small-molecule and polymer advanced electronic materials, to
organic/inorganic hybrid materials, bulk oxides, main-group compounds, and
intermetallics. One of the central goals of MbD is to make extensive routine use
of computational techniques applied at multiple length scales to understand and
predict new materials properties. Clearly, a vision for MbD needs to be
inclusive and would rely heavily on collaboration with allied disciplines within
Condensed Matter Physics (CMP) and Materials Science which will be discussed at
this workshop.

NON-TECHNICAL The workshop offers the opportunity for junior and senior
researchers from the disciplines of chemistry, condensed matter physics, theory
and materials science to come together and discuss new mechanisms for working
together to advance the concept of Materials by Design. The outcome of the
workshop will be better approaches to materials discovery and a path to
restoring the US to a position of preeminence in this area.