* 1115639
* Interdisciplinary Summer School:  Granular Flows-From Simulations to Astrophysical Applications; University of Maryland, College Park; June 13-17, 2011
* MPS,DMR
* 02/15/2011,01/31/2012
* Derek Richardson, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Daniele Finotello
* 01/31/2012
* USD 6,000.00

An Interdisciplinary Summer School will take place at the University of Maryland
College Park June 13-17 2011 entitled "Granular Flows - From Simulations to
Astrophysical Applications". The aim is to bring together experts and students
from both granular physics and astrophysics and focus on state-of-the-art
experimental and simulation approaches for granular flows that are emerging in
both physics and astrophysics. Granular flows are encountered in a wide range of
astrophysical applications from asteroids to planetary rock avalanches. Our
knowledge about these flows is exploding due to recent and planned robotic
missions to various asteroids, comets, and other planetary bodies. The trove of
data is being analyzed now, with patterns of granular arrangements and samples
of granular materials returning for analysis. At the same time, significant
progress has been made over the last two decades to elucidate the physics of
granular flows, from the description of the jamming transition, to analysis of
segregation and 3-D flows. For basic physics of granular flows, these new
observations offer an unprecedented opportunity to apply the knowledge gained in
the last decades on granular flows, and to expand the test of models into a
regime of varying gravity, in particular the very low gravity of asteroids. The
school will include hands-on components where students will learn how to
simulate granular flows and how to evaluate results from flow simulations
critically. Corey O?Hern (Yale University) and Derek Richardson (UMD) will lead
hands-on afternoon training sessions for students on direct numerical
simulations. In addition, experts in experimental studies of dense granular
flows will train students in experimental measurements of granular flow fields
and forces.