* 1115939
* HRI Pioneers Workhop
* CSE,IIS
* 02/01/2011,01/31/2012
* Nicholas Roy, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 01/31/2012
* USD 26,022.00

This is funding to support a Young Pioneers Workshop (doctoral consortium) of
approximately 18 graduate students and 2 postdocs from diverse research
communities (e.g., computer science and engineering, psychology, cognitive
science, robotics, human factors, human-computer interaction design, and
communications), along with distinguished research faculty. The event will take
place on Sunday, March 6, 2011, immediately preceding the Sixth Annual Human
Robot Interaction Conference (HRI 2011) to be held March 7-9, 2011, in Lausanne,
Switzerland, and which is jointly sponsored by ACM and IEEE. The theme of HRI
2011 is "Real World HRI," which highlights HRI in which basic scientific
research is further tested in real world settings or applied to questions that
arise in real world settings. One central aspect of this type of research, in
contrast to other realms of applied research, is that it is theoretically driven
and feeds back to our theoretical understandings; as such, real world research
fortifies our understanding of people, robots, and interaction between the two.
More information about the conference is available at
http://hri2011.net.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Young Pioneers Workshop is designed
to complement the conference, by providing a forum for students and recent
graduates in the field of HRI to share their current research with their peers
and a panel of senior researchers in a setting that is less formal and more
interactive than the main conference. During the workshop, participants will
talk about the important upcoming research themes in the field, encouraging the
formation of collaborative relationships across disciplines and geographic
boundaries. To these ends, the workshop will include sessions in a variety of
formats. Attendees will hear short talks from 5 selected student participants;
those students not invited to give an oral presentation will participate in an
interactive poster session. A panel of four senior researchers will share their
expertise and insights on how to address the interdisciplinary challenge of HRI.
In the afternoon, workshop attendees will be divided into groups of 3-5 members
with diverse backgrounds for a breakout session in which they will be asked to
design integrative projects that build upon their own submissions and which span
the various sub-fields of HRI (e.g., assistive robotics, urban search and
rescue, etc.) The presentation session afterward will allow 10-15 minutes for
each breakout group to present a summary to the entire workshop; the organizers
anticipate that the discussions will continue during
dinner.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: This workshop will afford a unique
opportunity for the best of the next generation of researchers in human-robot
interaction to be exposed to and discuss current and relevant topics as they are
being studied in several different research communities (including but nor
limited to computer science and engineering, psychology, robotics, human factors
and ergonomics, and human-computer interaction). This is important for the
field, because it has been recognized that transformative advances in research
in this fledgling area can only come through the melding of cross-disciplinary
knowledge and multinational perspectives. Participants will be encouraged to
create a social network both among themselves and with senior researchers at a
critical stage in their professional development, to form collaborative
relationships, and to generate new research questions to be addressed during the
coming years. Participants will also gain leadership and service experience, as
the workshop is largely student organized and student led. The PI will act
aggressively to recruit young researchers from minority and underrepresented
groups in order to assure diversity of the participants across a variety of
dimensions, so that the students' horizons are broadened to the future benefit
of the field. The PI will conduct pre- and post-workshop surveys in order to
validate the effectiveness of the 2011 Young Pioneers Workshop.