* 1116826
* NeTS: Small: Networking over Random Fields: A Statistical Model for Cognitive Radio Networks
* CSE,CNS
* 08/01/2011,07/31/2014
* Husheng Li, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* Min Song
* 07/31/2014
* USD 302,685.00

Experiments have demonstrated the temporal and spatial correlations of spectrum
availability, which are of key importance in the design and analysis of
cognitive radio networks. Motivated by the observation, this research applies
the theory of random fields, which describes the behavior of multiple correlated
random variables, to model the spectrum availabilities in time and space
domains. For global spectrum activity, a homogeneous random field like Ising
model is used to model the spatial correlation and analyze the performance. For
local spectrum activities, Bayesian networks are used to describe the causality
in spectrum and statistically infer the future spectrum situations. Furthermore,
the model of controlled random fields is employed to design the networking
protocols in cognitive radio networks. A low-cost spectrum sensor is designed to
collect the real spectrum measurement in multiple locations simultaneously. The
research promotes the understanding of frequency spectrum activities and
enhances the design and analysis of the next generation cognitive radio
networks. The research involves aspects of wireless communications, networking,
artificial intelligence and imaging processing; thus the inter-disciplinary
essence of the research also lends itself to cross-disciplinary education. Novel
courses will be devised, which involve the topics of cognitive radio networks,
machine learning and image processing. This project also expects to attract
traditionally underrepresented groups, as well as outreach high school students.