* 1116139
* CIF: Small: Collaborative Research:  A New Approach to Joint Source-Channel Coding
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2014
* Young-Han Kim, University of California-San Diego
* Continuing Grant
* richard brown
* 08/31/2014
* USD 236,518.00

Shannon's source-channel separation theorem states that separating the source
coder (compressor/decompressor) and the channel coder (error correction
coder/decoder) via the universal digital interface of 'bits' is optimal for
point-to-point communication of a single data source. While this modular design
principle has inspired the basic architecture for most of today's communication
systems, it is outperformed by more complex 'joint' source-channel coders for
communication of multiple sources over networks---an important task in today's
explosive demand and supply of distributed information sources. At the same
time, many emerging applications involve computing a summary of data from
multiple nodes, making a coordinated decision, and performing a joint action
among these nodes, rather than merely communicating sources. This research
establishes a hybrid source-channel coding architecture for these applications
that is as simple as Shannon's separation architecture, yet achieves much
improved performance. The new architecture will eventually lead to the discovery
of practical algorithms for distributed computation, sensing, decision making,
and coordination over networks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specifically, this research
focuses on and develops new approaches for tackling the following problems: 1)
hybrid coding for communicating correlated sources over multiuser channels (a
unified approach for joint source-channel coding), 2) hybrid coding for network
communication (a new relaying scheme based on joint source-channel coding), 3)
implementation issues for hybrid coding (design of a practical code that is a
good channel code and a good source code simultaneously), and 4) a mathematical
framework for performance analysis and code design (information theoretic tools
when the codebook and the message are entangled).