* 1116551
* SHF: Small: Single Assignment Architecture / Single Assignment Compiler
* CSE,CCF
* 08/01/2011,07/31/2013
* Soner Onder, Michigan Technological University
* Standard Grant
* Almadena Chtchelkanova
* 07/31/2013
* USD 153,000.00

Today, practically all processors employ instruction set architectures which are
functionally equivalent to each other. Compiler/micro-architecture cooperation
using these traditional representations has already reached the point of
diminishing returns. This project therefore investigates the domain of single
assignment program representations and direct support of this domain through
micro-architecture implementation as a key concept that can break the barriers
between the compilers and architectures. If successful, this new approach can
have a significant impact on the design of future processors, design of compiler
internal representations as well as the back-end of the compilers. It can also
affect how parallelism is exploited at various granularities and how various
optimizations are carried out. The investigated framework can help revitalize
computer architecture and compiler optimization research by opening up
unexplored paths for research in high-performance systems. Consequently, it can
affect every field of science and commerce which rely on high-performance
computation.

Compiler/hardware integration around the concept of single-assignment form has
many benefits spanning three fields. First, in the area of process
synchronization it provides the opportunity to eliminate the need for explicit
synchronization. Second, in the field of micro-architecture renaming of
instruction streams becomes substantially simpler, micro-architectures can
become loop-aware, renamed instruction streams can be re-renamed and compiler
techniques such as partial redundancy elimination or constant propagation can
dynamically be performed by the micro-architecture. Finally, the compilers can
focus on what they do best by sharing a common representation with the micro-
architecture. As a result, many key optimizations can be efficiently performed.
Within this paradigm, it becomes possible to develop new optimization algorithms
which will rely on the micro-architecture to perform the optimization using
analysis performed by the compilers.