* 1116450
* SHF: Small: Arbitration, Coherence, and Consistency for Nanophotonic Multicore Processors
* CSE,CCF
* 06/15/2011,05/31/2015
* Mikko Lipasti, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Hong Jiang
* 05/31/2015
* USD 430,000.00

In recent years, the microprocessor design industry has made an aggressive
transition to chip-multiprocessor designs, where additional device resources
provided by continued semiconductor fabrication process scaling are dedicated to
providing ever-increasing numbers of processor cores per die. These cores are
expected to maintain a view of shared memory that is easy for programmers and
users to work with; that is, the memory contents must be updated only in ways
that are coherent and consistent across the whole chip. Similarly, the multiple
processing cores must coordinate their accesses to shared resources like
input/output subsystems as well as off-chip connectivity to other chips and main
memory. Providing a scalable and low-overhead communication substrate, or
network on chip, for such activities is one of the most pressing challenges
faced by designers today. Existing and proposed designs are adapting numerous
techniques and lessons learned from prior off-chip networks, but these solutions
are far from ideal given the radically-different opportunities and constraints
that exist in both electrical and nanophotonic on-chip
networks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project investigates novel on-chip networks
and hardware protocols for communicating and coordinating the activities of
multiple on-chip processor cores. These networks and protocols provide highly-
scalable performance while minimizing power and area overheads, hence enabling
processor chips that deliver unprecedented levels of performance. The research
work is focused on networks built with nanophotonic devices packaged in a 3D
chip stack, with an emphasis on efficient arbitration protocols based on high-
speed optical mechanisms as well as arbitration-free implementations that rely
on coding of message contents to enable robust delivery even when the
communication channel is under contention. The project also shows how to utilize
the benefits of optical on-chip networks--ultra-low latency, massive bandwidth,
and ultra-fast global coordination and consensus--to streamline the hardware
protocols that provide a coherent and consistent view of
memory.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Without dramatic innovations in the design and
online management of multicore chip interconnects, the continued device scaling
of future nanometer technologies may no longer provide substantial returns in
utility or performance. As a result, the microprocessor industry, and by
extension, the computer industry as a whole faces a serious challenges in
maintaining the growth-based business model that has sustained it for four
decades. This research has broad industry- and economy-wide impact since it
helps to address or avert these challenges