* 1116447
* CIF: Small: Collaborative Research: Compressed Sensing for Coherent Designs under Gaussian/Non-Gaussian Noise
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2011,06/30/2015
* Yiyuan She, Florida State University
* Standard Grant
* John Cozzens
* 06/30/2015
* USD 251,000.00

The recent explosion of large amounts of high dimensional data in science,
engineering, and society demands new technologies to recover sparse signals from
high dimensional noisy observations. To address it, this project aims to develop
efficient and robust methods for analyzing high-dimensional data, which have
wide applications in signal processing, communication, computational biology,
machine learning, image/video coding, sensor networks, social science,
etc.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Recently, compressed sensing (CS) has attracted a good
deal of attention from computer science, engineering, and statistics
communities. However, the CS recovery only makes sense when the features are
weakly correlated. A single rogue outlier may break down the reconstruction
completely. The computational procedures cannot meet the challenge of ultrahigh
dimensional problems in terms of statistical accuracy, algorithmic stability and
computation expediency. To address these challenges, the investigators develop
novel nonconvex regularization techniques to attain prediction accuracy and
model parsimony for coherent statistical models that go much beyond Gaussianity.
Theoretical analysis of its performance in estimation, prediction, and sparsity
recovery is conducted. A class of simple algorithms feasible for solving
essentially any nonconvex penalized generalized linear models is developed,
together with a randomization technique of nonmarginal feature screening for
ultra-high dimensional data. Furthermore, the investigators explicitly study the
critical effects of outliers and develop a robust CS for handling high leverage
points and gross outliers. A unified framework that applies to small-sample-
size-high-dimension problems is provided for simultaneous variable selection and
outlier identification under Gaussian/non-Gaussian noise. Finally, this project
involves rich motivating examples and widespread applications in various areas
including spectral analysis, network topology and dynamics modeling, graphical
models, computational biology, machine learning, and image compression, as an
essential component.