* 1116676
* RI: Small: Collaborative Research: Statistical Learning of Language Universals
* CSE,IIS
* 08/01/2011,07/31/2015
* Benjamin Snyder, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Tatiana Korelsky
* 07/31/2015
* USD 339,978.00

As modern technology infrastructure spreads throughout the world, the quantity
of electronic text, written in hundreds of different languages, continues to
grow in size and diversity. Building effective information retrieval,
extraction, and translation systems across this vast array of languages
currently requires time-consuming and expensive linguistic annotations for each
language. Generic, fully unsupervised, methods are unlikely to provide a
language independent solution to this problem.

Focusing on part-of-speech prediction, this project undertakes a novel approach,
combining elements of supervised and unsupervised learning without assuming any
specific knowledge of the target language. Instead of treating individual
languages as closed systems, language-independent "universals" are statistically
estimated from dozens of languages for which annotated corpora exist, and these
learned universals are used to predict the part-of-speech categories of
unannotated languages. At the heart of the project is a data-driven exploration
of language-independent corpus characteristics that relate cross-lingual
linguistic categories to surface statistics of text. These learned patterns are
incorporated into expressive structured prediction models using novel
approximate learning and inference methods developed by the Principal
Investigators of the project.

Of the world?s spoken languages, hundreds are at risk of immediate extinction
and thousands more are likely to disappear over the coming decades. By
facilitating the rapid creation of language-independent linguistic analysis
tools, the technology developed under this project has the potential to
revolutionize the documentation of endangered languages. In the long-term, this
research direction will also help realize the full social benefits of the global
technology infrastructure by creating intelligent text processing tools for
hundreds of low-resource languages.