* 1116886
* III: Small: Exploring Social and Behavioral Contexts for Information Retrieval
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2015
* Hongyuan Zha, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 08/31/2015
* USD 508,025.00

Web Search engines have become indispensible for people from all walks of life
for locating information on a broad range of topics. Data from user's
interactions with the search engines, web pages, and among each other provide a
rich source of information for understanding and profiling users. This project
develops a novel probabilistic framework and the associated machine learning
algorithms for modeling users and their behavior on the web to improve the
ranking of results returned in response to user queries.

This project addresses three closely related technical topics in behavioral and
social data modeling, covering the underlying theory, algorithm development and
evaluation on real-world data: 1) Developing rich models of user interactions
with search engines, information sources, with each other that can handle
multiple types of relationships among the entities; 2) Exploiting the resulting
models of user behavior to improve the ranking of web pages returned in response
to a user query; 3) Modeling the temporal dynamics of user behavior to detect
and respond tp changes in the social environment of the user or context-
dependent changes in the user's behavior. The resulting algorithms will be
evaluated using (i) real-world data available in the public domain (ii) real-
world data sets from industrial collaborators and (iii) simulated data that
preserve the relevant statistical properties of their real-world counterparts.

The project advances the current state of the art in information retrieval, with
potentially large impact on web search and related applications. Collaborations
with industry leaders in Web search and e-commerce such as Yahoo!, Microsoft,
Tencent and Alibaba can potentially lead to significant impact on information
retrieval, web search and ranking, recommender systems, and related areas. The
project offers enhanced research-based training opportunities for graduate and
undergraduate students at Georgia Tech. Additional information about the project
can be found at: http://www.cc.gatech.edu/~zha/socialL2R.html