* 1116898
* SHF: Small: Adapting Dataflow Analysis for Efficient and Precise Parallel Program Monitoring
* CSE,CCF
* 08/01/2011,07/31/2016
* Todd Mowry, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Anindya Banerjee
* 07/31/2016
* USD 491,399.00

Due to the industry-wide shift to multi-core processing,
future&lt;br/&gt;applications will only run faster if they are written as
parallel&lt;br/&gt;software (i.e. where the work for a single program is
accomplished by&lt;br/&gt;simultaneously performing different parts of that work
on different&lt;br/&gt;processors). Unfortunately history has taught us that
writing&lt;br/&gt;parallel software is a very error-prone task for programmers.
To&lt;br/&gt;address this challenge, this research project is creating a
powerful&lt;br/&gt;new mechanism for identifying and hopefully fixing bugs in
parallel&lt;br/&gt;software on large-scale production systems. Hopefully the
resulting&lt;br/&gt;framework will not only support the parallel execution of
existing&lt;br/&gt;monitoring tools, but it will also spawn the creation of new
classes&lt;br/&gt;of powerful tools that can recognize subtle bugs in parallel
software.&lt;br/&gt;Such tools can help programmers continue to reap the
performance&lt;br/&gt;benefits of future microprocessors, thereby continuing to
enable all&lt;br/&gt;of the benefits that increasingly-faster computation has
had on the&lt;br/&gt;economy, science and technology, and our everyday lives in
an&lt;br/&gt;Internet-connected world.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;More specifically,
the focus of this project is on sophisticated&lt;br/&gt;online program
monitoring tools that model various aspects of program&lt;br/&gt;correctness at
an instruction-by-instruction granularity. To strike a&lt;br/&gt;practical
balance between performance, precision, and convenience for&lt;br/&gt;the tool
developer, this research has developed a novel framework
that&lt;br/&gt;introduces explicit "windows of uncertainty" combined with a
new&lt;br/&gt;approach for avoiding a state space explosion in the
analysis&lt;br/&gt;(inspired by Tarjan's interval analysis approach to dataflow
analysis).