* 1116747
* CGV: Small: Modeling and Analysis of Multidimensional Shapes
* CSE,IIS
* 08/01/2011,07/31/2017
* Leila DeFloriani, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 07/31/2017
* USD 491,951.00

Title: Modeling and Analysis of Multidimensional
Shapes&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The media
world can be classified into one-dimensional media, like text and sound, and
multidimensional media. Among these latter, digital shapes are characterized by
a visual appearance and by a geometric nature. Examples of shapes are pictures,
images, 3D models of solid objects, videos, animations, etc. The general goal of
the project is defining and developing innovative tools for modeling and
analyzing shapes that evolve over time, such as animations of 3D objects, or
descriptions of time-varying phenomena arising from scientific simulations.
Application areas benefitting from this research include medicine, biology,
earth sciences, physics, and chemistry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A large amount of
research has been done on modeling and analyzing 2D shapes in image processing
and vision, 2.5D and 3D shapes in computer graphics and geographic data
processing, and 3.5D shapes (representing the graph of volume data sets) in
scientific visualization. Most of this research has been focused on a geometric
representation of a shape. More recently structural representations based on
topological tools have been developed. This project is developing geometric and
structural representations and algorithms for modeling and analyzing 4D shapes,
which describe the evolution of a shape over time, and 4.5D shapes, which
represent the graph of 4D scalar fields. Examples of the latter are time-varying
dynamic three-dimensional scalar fields, examples of the former are animation
sequences or isosurfaces of 3D scalar fields varying over time. Specifically,
the project is developing effective multi-resolution geometric representations
for 4D scalar fields and 4D shapes, new approaches to the segmentation of such
shapes based on Morse theory and a generalized notion of curvature, and multi-
scale structural modeling of 4D and 4.5D shapes based on segmentation.