* 1116858
* SHF:Small:Collaborative Research: Algorithmic Techniques for Post-Silicon Characterization Using Infrared Emissions
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2011,06/30/2015
* Farinaz Koushanfar, William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 06/30/2015
* USD 200,000.00

Aggressive technology scaling has brought new challenges to the design and
manufacturing of Integrated Circuits (ICs). A mounting challenge is the modeling
and characterization of power consumption in face of possible operating and
manufacturing variabilities. Accurate power characterization leads to extended
battery life for mobile devices and to enhanced device reliability. A second
challenge arises because manufacturing is increasingly outsourced to external
foundries. Verifying that the manufacturer has not inserted any malware or
"Trojan" circuitry that compromises the security of the final product is
essential. The proposed research provides a unifying framework for these two
challenges by detailed algorithmic analysis of infrared emissions from the
backside of ICs. We propose techniques to convert the infrared emissions into
accurate spatial and temporal power estimates, and to use the power and infrared
?fingerprints? to verify that the chip does not contain extra circuits inserted
by the manufacturer, unbeknownst to the designer, that could cause a security
breach. The successful completion of this project will lead to improved power
modeling and characterization tools and increased confidence that there are no
added malware in manufactured chips. The project will also lead to design
prototypes and a large volume of valuable data and benchmarks that will be
openly disseminated via NSF-funded Trust-Hub and other web-based portals.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The methods and tools will find broad usage in
the industry, government, and in academia. They will also impact the daily lives
by increasing the battery lifetime and by improving the system's reliability and
integrity. Education plan includes research experience for undergraduates,
curriculum development, integration of material into graduate courses and
emphasizing entrepreneurship within education. Recruitment and development of
under-represented groups of students will be targeted.