* 1116322
* CIF:  Small:  Collaborative Research: Signal processing for enabling high speed probe based nanoimaging
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2011,06/30/2015
* Aditya Ramamoorthy, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* John Cozzens
* 06/30/2015
* USD 245,437.00

A key enabler of Nanoscience and Nanotechnology is the Atomic Force Microscope
(AFM) that has opened up new realms, of interrogation and manipulation of matter
at the atomic scale. It has resulted in breakthroughs in understanding sub-
atomic molecular structure, protein folding dynamics and materials
characterization. The potential impact of significantly faster AFM based imaging
is immense, e.g., it will allow the study of dynamics of material at the
nanoscale that was hitherto not accessible. The aim of this research is to study
modern signal processing techniques that achieve gains in imaging speeds by an
order of magnitude. The investigators will push the synergistic transfer of
knowhow between the engineering and the AFM communities through student visits
and specialized workshops. The findings will be integrated at appropriate levels
into the undergraduate and graduate curriculum.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The main
component of an AFM is a cantilever that deflects in response to forces at the
pico-Newton scale. The focus of this research is the dynamic mode AFM operation,
where the cantilever gently taps the sample being imaged; the mode of choice for
imaging biological samples. Even though forces do form a good indicator of
sample topography, the system memory and the nonlinearities of the AFM system
dynamics preclude a direct mapping of the cantilever forces into a finer
description of topography, especially at high imaging speeds. The investigators
model the complex nanoscale interactions in a mathematically tractable manner
that facilitates the development of maximum a posteriori (MAP) sequence
detection of the sample features. Factor graph representations and the
development of appropriate inference schemes will be studied. The algorithms
will be implemented on FPGAs and tested exhaustively with experimental data.