* 1116458
* III: Small: Spectral Methods for Active Clustering and Bi-Clustering
* CSE,IIS
* 07/01/2011,06/30/2014
* Aarti Singh, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 06/30/2014
* USD 388,765.00

Clustering or organization of data into groups is a fundamental problem that
forms the basis of exploratory data analysis and aids in data management.
However, there is often a significant resource and computational cost associated
with obtaining and analyzing large-scale datasets that routinely arise in modern
systems, such as the Internet, biological and social networks. The ability to
discover meaningful clusters in high-dimensional data that is plagued with high
noise, outliers and missing observations, will have a significant impact on
understanding these systems. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This project aims to develop
robust clustering methods that can identify clusters very efficiently by
selectively querying for the most informative data measurements. Spectral
clustering is a popular technique that identifies clusters by analyzing the
eigenvectors of a matrix of similarity values between the data points. This
project investigates the effect of missing and erroneous data on the eigenvector
structure, and leverages this understanding to develop active methods that
intelligently guide subsequent data queries.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Robust and
efficient clustering methods are crucial for identifying groups of proteins and
drugs that interact with each other, paving the way for transformative health
technologies. These methods are also important for learning and maintaining the
organization of computer and social networks, thus promoting seamless exchange
of ideas and technology. This PI is involved in disseminating the research
through collaborations with the CMU Lane Center for Computational Biology,
publishing results and software online
(http://www.cs.cmu.edu/~aarti/research_projects), developing and teaching inter-
disciplinary courses, as well as the Opportunities for undergraduate women
research in Computer Science (OurCS) program at Carnegie Mellon University.