* 1116682
* TC: Small: WATCHDOG: Hardware-Assisted Prevention of All Use-After-Free Security Vulnerabilities
* CSE,CNS
* 08/01/2011,07/31/2017
* Stephan Zdancewic, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 07/31/2017
* USD 499,961.00

A use-after-free error is a software flaw that potentially allows an attacker to
remotely inject malicious software or corrupt memory values. Such attacks can
result in the theft of private data, propagation of worms and viruses, or the
creation of botnet nodes that can be programmed to spew spam or disrupt Internet
traffic. Recently, use-after-free vulnerabilities have been found in crucial
software such as Microsoft's Internet Explorer, Adobe Acrobat Reader, and
Firefox among others. The goal of the Watchdog project is to devise hardware and
software mechanisms to prevent all such vulnerabilities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To
prevent use-after-free vulnerabilities, the researchers will develop hardware
for enforcing safe manual memory management, without compromising system
performance. They will study a formal model of their designs to establish the
correctness of the techniques. The hardware designs will be prototyped using
detailed micro-architectural simulations. The researchers will evaluate
correctness and performance by using a suite of benchmark tests and off-the-
shelf software. The tools and prototypes will be openly distributed for others
to build upon, and the research findings will be integrated into the security
and hardware courses taught by the researchers. If successful, the technology
developed by this research will have significant societal impacts, improving the
security of our computing ecosystem by eliminating an important class of
vulnerabilities that is actively being exploited to compromise systems and
spread malware.