* 1116790
* III: Small: Collaborative Research: Making Databases Green - An Energy-Aware DBMS Approach
* CSE,IIS
* 07/01/2011,10/31/2011
* Xiaorui Wang, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Continuing Grant
* Frank Olken
* 10/31/2011
* USD 58,050.00

Maintaining a sustainable society via technological innovations has been a major
challenge for computing system design. In this project, we focus on the energy
efficiency of an important type of computer applications, the database
management systems (DBMS), which often consume a large portion of the computing
resources and energy in modern data centers. The goal of this project is to
design and implement a DBMS that enables significant energy conservation with
graceful degradation of query processing performance. The project achieves its
goal using the following approaches: (1) Dynamically exploit the energy-
performance tradeoffs in DBMS as well as low-power modes of hardware systems for
improved energy efficiency with performance guarantees; (2) Formulate the
energy-efficient DBMS design as a feedback control problem, and adopt
appropriate formal control techniques to achieve the desired performance and
energy efficiency with theoretical analysis and guarantees; (3) Apply advanced
multi-stage optimization methods to solve complex energy-aware storage
management problems; and (4) Coordinate various control and optimization loops
in different layers of the DBMS for maximized energy savings and global system
stability. The broader impacts of the project are at two levels. At the society
level, the reduction of energy consumption and CO2 emission by implementing the
proposed energy-aware DBMS can be substantial. The project can benefit a large
number of industrial sectors, the operations of which depend heavily on
database-supported software such as online retailing systems, financial
management software, and social networking platforms, by significantly lowering
their electricity cost. At the education level, the project trains Ph.D.
students in an interdisciplinary environment and enhances several courses taught
at the University of Florida and the University of Tennessee at Knoxville by
providing a rich set of application examples, software tools, and project
opportunities. Publications, technical reports, software and experimental data
from this project can be found at www.cse.usf.edu/~ytu/EDBMS.