* 1116501
* CIF: Small: Foundations for Intrinsically Secure Networks: the Role of Network Interference
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2016
* Moe Win, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* richard brown
* 08/31/2016
* USD 483,083.00

The ability to transfer information securely, to guarantee privacy, and to
authenticate users in wireless networks forms the basis for confidentiality and
economic advantage in today's information society. Contemporary wireless
security systems evolved from schemes developed for traditional wireline
applications, ignoring the special features of radio propagation channels.
Meanwhile, the secrecy of wireless networks can be strengthened by exploiting
the physical properties of these radio channels. Current research activities in
this direction have largely ignored radio interference that can affect the
secrecy of communication in a fundamental way. Therefore, it is crucial to
characterize the various effects of interference (conventionally considered
deleterious for communications) on network secrecy, as well as to develop
techniques that exploit intrinsic properties of interference and radio channels
for improving network secrecy.

This research establishes foundations for the intrinsically secure exchange of
information within wireless communities formed by spatially distributed
legitimate users, interferers, and eavesdroppers. Principles and concepts from
multiple disciplines such as communication theory, information theory,
statistical inference, probability theory, stochastic geometry, and graph theory
are employed to characterize the role of interference on network secrecy. In
particular, this research (1) establishes a framework to determine the secrecy
rate in large-scale wireless networks; (2) determines the properties of the iSI-
graph, a random geometric graph that characterizes intrinsic secrecy in the
presence of interference; (3) analyzes network secrecy in the presence of
colluding eavesdroppers; and (4) evaluates the performance of secrecy enhancing
techniques, including deliberate interference generation and sectorized
transmission. This research provides a deeper understanding of the advantages
and disadvantages of interference on network secrecy, paving the way to a more
secure and safer information society.