* 1116897
* CCF: Small: Improving Trace Based Simulation of On-Chip Networks
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2011,06/30/2015
* Venkatesh Akella, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* tao li
* 06/30/2015
* USD 448,835.00

Future computing chips inside mobile devices such as smart phones, and servers
used in data centers will contain many processors, memories and specialized
functional units, connected by a sophisticated on-chip network. The on-chip
network is a critical design element that influences the performance, power
consumption, and cost of the chip. Hence, there is a compelling need for tools
and techniques to explore the design space of an on-chip network quickly to
create networks that are optimized for a given application and/or a market
segment. Trace-based simulation is used widely to design and optimize on-chip
networks. However, trace-based simulation can result in incorrect and misleading
conclusions about network behavior because, a trace does not model the packet
injection rate of the application accurately. In this project, the investigators
develop techniques to overcome this limitation of trace-based simulation, which
allows for rapid design space exploration of on-chip networks with accuracy
approaching that of full-system simulation but with simulation time similar to
trace-based simulation.&lt;br/&gt;Dependencies between packets are inferred by
sampling multiple runs of an application on a fully connected network topology
with different link latencies. Traces augmented with dependency information,
model the packet injection rate of an application more accurately. FPGA-based
acceleration is used to collect and analyze traces and a fast multithreaded
network simulator that is capable of processing traces augmented with packet
dependency information, is developed.&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact of the work
will be through a validated repository of benchmark traces augmented with the
packet dependency information and a multi-threaded network simulator that can be
used by the research community to design and optimize on-chip networks with
hundreds of processors.