* 1116515
* Gordon Research Conference:2011 Enzymes, Coenzymes and Metabolic Pathways July 10-15, 2011 Waterville, New Hampshire
* BIO,MCB
* 06/01/2011,05/31/2012
* Anne-Frances Miller, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* Dagmar Ringe
* 05/31/2012
* USD 5,000.00

Intellectual Merit:&lt;br/&gt;The Gordon Research Conference on Enzymes, Co-
enzymes, and Metabolic Pathways will be held July 10-15, 2011 at the Waterville
Valley Resort in Waterville, New Hampshire. There may be no other field of
science that requires such a wide range of experimental approaches, theoretical
frameworks and creative problem solving than the study of enzymes. The simple
and fundamental question of "How do enzymes obtain their tremendous rate
accelerations and specificities?" is simple to ask, but after over 100 years of
study, is still enigmatic. Despite many areas of science being revolutionized by
genomics, proteomics and metabolomic approaches, the understanding of enzyme
mechanism and function still requires carefully designed integrated experiments
that cover the spectrum of physics, chemistry, and biology. The practical
importance of understanding enzymes is enormous because of their value as drug
targets and industrial catalysts. Moreover, understanding and exploiting the
processes of life requires that individual reactions be understood in the
contexts of their metabolic pathways. It is at this level that life becomes
genuinely more than the sum of the chemistry. The sessions and speakers in this
conference will explore both fundamental and applied aspects of enzymology in
the context of single enzymes and entire metabolic
pathways.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts:&lt;br/&gt;The Gordon
Research Conference on Enzymes, Coenzymes, and Metabolic Pathways is one of the
most influential meetings in the broad area of enzymology and has thrived for
more than 60 years.This year's conference is co-chaired by a female
enzymologist, and a significant proportion of the speakers and discussion
leaders have been chosen from underrepresented groups. In addition, the eight
short talks over the week will be populated with speakers from underrepresented
groups. The unrushed, open format of the conference facilitates networking
opportunities and intellectual development for graduate students and postdocs.
In many important ways this unique gathering each year provides the seeds for
growing this field of research and fostering the development of new
investigators.