* 1116801
* SHB: Small: Social Tools for Everyday Adolescent Health
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2015
* Elizabeth Mynatt, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Maria Zemankova
* 08/31/2015
* USD 485,694.00

The increasing numbers of overweight and obese adolescents is a key health
challenge in 21st century America. Since the 1980s, rates of overweight
adolescents have doubled, and rates of obese adolescents have tripled;
adolescent obesity is now the single biggest predictor of adult obesity. At the
same time, adolescents are spending increasing portions of their lives
interacting with video games and social network sites, incorporating computing
into their leisure and social communication practices on a large scale. This
project uses computing technology to address adolescent obesity through the
development and study of social tools to promote sustained everyday healthy
practices by adolescents. The research demonstrates how social computing can
enable offline healthy behaviors, using peers as motivators in contrast to "top-
down" approaches. The work is in partnership with DeKalb County Schools,
Georgia's most urban school district and a leading awardee of research-focused
programs.

Research in this project is exploring the effects of various social computing
tools and features on a set of validated outcome measures grounded in our
previous work and best practices. During the school year the project deploys a
series of pedometer-based social health applications and games for 8th graders
in two middle schools. In the summers between deployment cycles, a small subset
of participants takes part in design sessions for the next school year.

Research focuses on three main topics: 1. The role of online social identity
presentation in intrinsic motivation.

2. The ability of social computing interventions to facilitate offline rituals
and habits.

3. The impact of collective experiences.

This research will contribute to our understanding of the connections between
social media activity and offline behavior. It will also demonstrate
improvements in health behaviors and attitudes for adolescents. Moreover by
deepening the connection between the Dekalb School System in Atlanta and Georgia
Tech, the project enriches the educational environment of these middle school
students.