* 1116583
* RI: Small: Clustering, Classification and Alignment of Time Series for Human Sensing
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2015
* Fernando De la Torre, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Todd Leen
* 08/31/2015
* USD 458,000.00

Time series analysis is central to the study of computer vision, signal
processing, computer graphics, machine learning, and social sciences, among
other fields. This project entails original contributions towards algorithms for
unsupervised pattern discovery and temporal alignment of time series, and its
applications to model human motion. In particular, the PI proposes three new
methods: (1) a discriminative temporal clustering that factorizes a set of time
series into segments belonging to one of k temporal clusters, (2) a method for
discovering the set of most discriminative segments between two sets of time
series, and (3) an unsupervised algorithm for temporally aligning multi-modal
time series. The PI proposes an energy minimization framework to encompass these
three problems. This framework should provide researchers with a thorough
understanding of a large number of existing time series techniques, and it may
serve as a tool for dealing with other problems in time series as they
arise.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Enabling computers to understand human behavior has
the potential to revolutionize many areas that benefit society such as clinical
diagnosis, human computer interaction, and social robotics. Advances in time
series to model human actions and events from sensory data have been critical to
the success of systems that can recognize and characterize human behavior.
However, most existing algorithms have been supervised in nature. Supervised
learning typically requires large amounts of human annotation, that is typically
labor intensive and is difficult to standardize across coders. In this proposal
the PI explores the use of unsupervised learning techniques for aligning and
discovering patterns in time series of human motion that have been captured with
accelerometers, video or motion capture technologies. The PI will show how the
proposed algorithms outperform state-of-the-art techniques in several human
sensing tasks such as temporal alignment of human motion, temporal clustering of
human activities from video, learning motion primitives, and joint segmentation
and classification of human behavior. In the educational aspect, the PI will
continue to provide support to the Carnegie Science Center to demonstrate human
sensing technologies, as well as incorporate a large number of undergraduates in
his research. The research source code will be made available to the scientific
community.