* 1116430
* NeTS: Small: Target Monitoring with Low-Cost Sensor Networks
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2015
* Duc Tran, University of Massachusetts Boston
* Standard Grant
* Thyagarajan Nandagopal
* 08/31/2015
* USD 383,887.00

Most research on target monitoring using sensor networks requires the geographic
locations of the sensors to be known. However, in practice, it is not always
possible for every sensor node to have a built-in GPS-like capability. On the
other hand, applying a localization procedure to all the sensor nodes can be
expensive for large networks. Even if the location information of many sensors
can be computed, it may never be used because targets usually appear very
sparse. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project, therefore, tackles the target
monitoring problem in the context of low-cost sensor networks, where a sensor
node does not need built-in capability to determine its location. Instead,
hopcount information serves as the primary source of information to track the
target. The challenges result from the unknown mobility and nature of the target
and the coarseness of the hopcount data. The matter is more sophisticated if
there are multiple moving targets and it is not known whether they move in
groups or independently.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research objective of the
project is to design and implement a novel solution framework to address these
challenges. This framework, based on a machine-learning approach, can be applied
to a wide range of sensor networks which can have modest resource capacities or
be deployed in non-conventional physical settings such as under the water or on
wet ground. Building on the research, an education plan is proposed that seeks
to transfer knowledge to younger generations, improve student enrollment and
retention, and encourage active participation from students of under-represented
groups.