* 1116534
* TC: Small: Collaborative Research: Exploiting Network Dynamics for Secret Key Generation
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2011,02/28/2013
* Lifeng Lai, University of Arkansas Little Rock
* Standard Grant
* Jeremy Epstein
* 02/28/2013
* USD 198,128.00

Key management in wireless networks is a very challenging problem because of the
unreliable transmission medium, the lack of network infrastructure, and
stringent energy and complexity limitations at terminals. Recently, there has
been increased interest in exploiting physical layer dynamics to generate keys.
However, existing schemes exploit only the channel dynamics in the point-to-
point channel or basic small wireless systems, but not other rich dynamics
inherent to multiuser wireless networks. Furthermore, current studies focus
mainly on the pairwise key agreement problem, and did not address issues arising
from user interactions in networks. This project develops practical key
generation schemes for large scale networks, which 1) fully exploit rich
opportunities inherent to network dynamics, and 2) properly address issues
arising from interaction among multiple users in networks. Topics including
unicast and/or multicast key generation, oblivious relay-assisted key
generation, and secret sharing among multiple users are investigated. The goal
of this project is to design transmission protocols and algorithms that have
engineering impact and practical feasibility. Furthermore, these protocols and
algorithms are implemented and tested on a testbed. This project also has strong
education components. In addition to providing thesis topics for graduate
students, this project provides hands-on lab opportunities for undergraduate
education on communication security. &lt;br/&gt;