* 1116208
* CIF: Small: Fast Stagewise Learning of Sparse Hierarchical Data Representations
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2011,06/30/2015
* Peter Ramadge, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* John Cozzens
* 06/30/2015
* USD 372,000.00

Increasingly, real-world data has many dimensions or features but rather than
filling out all dimensions equally, the data distributed on or near a surface of
much lower intrinsic dimension. Examples include fMRI data and natural image and
video data sets. This research will push the boundary of what is currently
possible in the analysis of such large data sets by incorporating hierarchical
structure into what is known as a "sparse dictionary representation" of the
data. The results will include both basic intellectual contributions to machine
learning methods and computational advancements that will aid the investigation
of complex real world data. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;A fundamental problem in
learning the structure of complex data is how to effectively extract a set of
features that reflects the underlying structure of the data. In many
applications, including face recognition and object recognition, sparse
dictionary representations have proved effective for this purpose. However,
since solving large-scale sparse representation problems is very expensive, the
method is generally limited to problems of moderate scale. This research
reformulates the method into an incremental, multi-stage, hierarchical
dictionary learning process. This approach incrementally extracts information
from the data and uses this to refine the data representation in an organized
hierarchical fashion. This enables the building of large-scale dictionaries in a
computationally efficient way. The method hence extends the power of sparse
dictionary representation methods to a wider variety of real world applications.
It also has the flexibility to incorporate an existing state-of-the-art sparse
coding algorithm as the basic solver and hence can extend the functionality of
existing sparse coding algorithms to multi-stage, hierarchical dictionary
learning.