* 1116055
* SHF: Small: Ordering-Based Semantics for Emerging Models of Parallel Computing
* CSE,CCF
* 08/01/2011,07/31/2015
* Michael Scott, University of Rochester
* Standard Grant
* Anindya Banerjee
* 07/31/2015
* USD 497,530.00

With the proliferation of multicore processors has come resurgence&lt;br/&gt;of
interest in parallel programming languages and models,&lt;br/&gt;particularly
those intended to make it easier for non-expert&lt;br/&gt;programmers to
correctly implement important classes of parallel&lt;br/&gt;applications.
Unfortunately, most such languages and models are &lt;br/&gt;informally -- and
thus imprecisely -- defined. The aim of the &lt;br/&gt;sponsored research is to
develop more formal definitions, which will&lt;br/&gt;be needed in order to
truly understand and reason about programs,&lt;br/&gt;guide language
implementations, and verify implementation&lt;br/&gt;correctness. Within
computer science and allied fields, formal&lt;br/&gt;definitions will facilitate
the transition to ubiquitous parallel&lt;br/&gt;computing. For society at large,
this transition will be essential&lt;br/&gt;to maintain the momentum of the IT
revolution, across government,&lt;br/&gt;industry, science, the arts, and
entertainment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The technical core of the sponsored research
is the use of&lt;br/&gt;history-based executions to capture both the behavior of
individual&lt;br/&gt;threads of control and the interactions among those
threads. In a&lt;br/&gt;departure from previous work, the interactions are
always expressed&lt;br/&gt;in terms of atomic blocks, which can capture
arbitrary&lt;br/&gt;language-level synchronization mechanisms. Specific topics
being&lt;br/&gt;addressed include transactional memory (including the concepts
of&lt;br/&gt;publication and privatization), explicit speculation, and
&lt;br/&gt;determinism. The notion of determinism, in particular, is
central&lt;br/&gt;to several emerging languages and models specifically intended
for &lt;br/&gt;non-expert programmers. A formal framework for the definition
of&lt;br/&gt;determinism will allow alternative definitions to be
compared,&lt;br/&gt;contrasted, and correctly implemented.