* 1116836
* SHF: Small: Collaborative Research: Formal Analysis of Distributed Interactions
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2011,09/30/2015
* Samik Basu, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Nina Amla
* 09/30/2015
* USD 164,966.00

A crucial problem in dependability of concurrent and distributed software
systems, which have become prevalent with the advances in service-oriented
architecture, cloud computing, multi-core hardware, is the coordination of
different components that form the whole system. In order to complete a task,
components of a software system have to coordinate their executions by
interacting with each other.&lt;br/&gt;Message-based communication is an
increasingly common interaction mechanism used in concurrent and distributed
systems where components interact with each other by sending and receiving
messages. The objective of the proposed research is to develop novel techniques
for specification, analysis, and verification of message-based
interactions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research will develop a
hierarchy of communication contract specification models and investigate
analysis and verification problems for each class. Within the proposed framework
the interactions among components of a software system (called peers) will be
modeled as conversations describing the global sequence of messages exchanged
among the peers. The proposed research will result in a toolset for analyzing
communication contracts and verifying properties of conversations generated by a
set of peers that follow a&lt;br/&gt;given communication contract. The research
will have broader impact&lt;br/&gt;in at least three areas. By developing
techniques for analysis and verification of message-based interactions in
concurrent and distributed systems, the research will improve the dependability
of software systems in a wide variety of application domains, including
e-commerce, consumer applications, and telecommunications. Secondly, the
research activity will help to expose graduate and undergraduate students to
analysis and verification problems in concurrent and distributed systems, and
message-based communication, through a variety of educational activities
including courses, seminars and individual research mentoring. Finally, the
research activity will help to disseminate the knowledge, techniques and tools
developed for analysis and verification of communicating systems through
publishing in the open literature, and making the software tools available in
public domain.