* 1116411
* RI: Small: Hierarchical Probabilistic Layers for Visual Recognition of Complex Objects
* CSE,IIS
* 08/01/2011,07/31/2015
* Trevor Darrell, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* Jie Yang
* 07/31/2015
* USD 450,000.00

Learning visual representations remains a challenge for systems which interact
with the real world and/or analyze visual information available on the web.
Significant progress has been made with simple visual features based on gradient
histograms: these models work extremely well on objects that have highly
textured and nearly planar patterns or parts. However, these systems suffer when
faced with certain classes of real world objects that do not have discriminative
locally-planar opaque texture patches, especially objects with complex
photometric models. This project develops layered visual models for visual
recognition, which can model these classes of phenomena. The research team
grounds the methods in a probabilistic foundation, primarily exploiting a sparse
Bayesian approach to factoring observed image features into a set of component
layers corresponding to an additive image formation process. Considering both
local descriptor and local feature detector variants of the model, the research
team offers a new concept for interest point detection in the case of
transparent objects: extrema detection in a latent-factor scale space. This
model has the potential to find invariant local detections despite transparency,
and could be useful in a range of vision applications beyond pure recognition
for which sparse local feature detectors have proven valuable (e.g.,
registration, mosaicing, SLAM). Robotic vision systems can use this
representation for enhanced recognition of everyday objects, supporting domestic
and industrial applications. These representations also facilitate intelligent
media processing and indexing.