* 1116360
* HCC: Small: Assistive Social Situational Awareness Aids for Individuals with Disabilities
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2015
* Terri Hedgpeth, Arizona State University
* Continuing Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 08/31/2015
* USD 515,284.00

The PI's goal in this project is to enable a quantum leap towards next-
generation social assistive aids that enrich the lived social experiences of
individuals with visual impairments. Social interaction is a central component
of the human experience. The ability to communicate effectively with fellow
individuals is a fundamental necessity for professional success as well as
personal fulfillment. But nonverbal cues (including prosody, environment
attributes, the appearance of communicators and their physical movements)
account for a substantial and important part of the information conveyed during
social interactions. As a consequence, the more than 1.3 million individuals in
the United States (and 37 million worldwide) who are legally blind have only a
limited experience of social interaction. This "social disability" often
isolates them from their social environments. Existing assistive technologies
are focused on problems such as navigation, reading text, and access to everyday
appliances as well as to computers and the Internet, whereas little or no work
has been devoted to real-time accessibility to social and behavioral cues.
Providing real-time access to nonverbal communication cues to visually impaired
users poses fundamental challenges in several related fields including affective
computing, human communication engineering, behavioral modeling, machine
learning, human-machine interaction, multimodal interfaces, usability
engineering, multimedia computing, and assistive technology design and
development&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As a first step towards practical and viable
social assistive solutions, the PI will focus in this project on the design and
development of a social situational awareness assistive prototype for dyadic
(one-on-one) interactions, with an emphasis on head/face-based nonverbal cues.
The research will be accomplished through the following specific objectives: (1)
Design and development of a dyadic interpersonal mediation interface; (2)
Extraction and understanding of nonverbal communication cues; (3) Visuo-haptic
sensory substitution for delivering high-bandwidth socio-behavioral data; and
(4) Evaluation of the social assistive prototype system in dyadic interaction
scenarios representing real-world conditions. The project draws upon
intellectual synergies among the team members, who are experts in human-centered
multimedia computing, human-computer interfaces and machine intelligence
(Panchanathan, Computer Science); assistive technology design and usability
engineering (Hedgpeth, Disability Resources Center); and human communication
modeling and socio-behavioral analysis (Ramirez, Human Communication). The work
will build on the team's past successes in developing assistive technologies
that have been designed, prototyped, deployed and tested for individuals who are
visually impaired. Project outcomes will be evaluated through the Arizona State
University Disability Resource Center and the Arizona Center for the Blind and
Visually Impaired.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: This project will
pioneer the development of next-generation social assistive aids for individuals
with visual impairments and thus will have a significant impact on their lives.
The research to these ends will result in the advancement of computational
thinking within and at the confluence of the component disciplines, namely
socio-behavioral computing (through the introduction of novel methodologies for
computational analysis and evaluation of human communication dynamics in general
and social behavior in dyadic interactions, specifically), human-computer
interfaces (through the design of novel interfaces that deliver high-bandwidth
social data), machine intelligence (through the study of algorithms that elicit
various levels of interaction semantics) and assistive technology/usability
(through the development and evaluation of social assistive prototypes). The
concepts and technologies developed will also provide pathways to technologies
for individuals with other disabilities, such as autism, dementia, and (in the
most general sense) a very large portion of society. The methodologies developed
will provide a wealth of data and information that will be made publicly
accessible to promote and catalyze further research in the component
disciplines.