* 1116318
* TC: Small: Theory and Applications of Min-Entropy Leakage
* CSE,CNS
* 08/01/2011,07/31/2015
* Geoffrey Smith, Florida International University
* Standard Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 07/31/2015
* USD 502,236.00

In this age of identity theft, Facebook, and TSA screening, protecting
confidential information from improper disclosure has emerged as a fundamental
issue for trustworthy computing, involving both technical and social dimensions.
While it is sometimes possible to stop undesirable information flows completely,
it is perhaps more typical that some undesirable flows are unavoidable. For
instance an ATM machine that rejects an incorrect PIN thereby reveals that the
secret PIN is not the one that was entered. Similarly, revealing the tally of
votes in an election reveals some information about the secret ballots that were
cast. More subtly, the amount of time taken by a cryptographic operation may be
observable by an adversary, and may inadvertently reveal information about the
secret key. As a result, there is growing interest in quantitative theories of
information flow, which allow us to talk about "how much" information is leaked
and (perhaps) allow us to tolerate "small" leaks. But while it is tempting to
base such theories on classic information-theoretic concepts like Shannon
entropy and mutual information, these turn out not to provide very satisfactory
confidentiality guarantees. As a result, several researchers have developed an
alternative theory, based instead on Renyi's min-entropy, which gives strong,
direct operational security guarantees.

This project aims to deepen our understanding of the theory and applications of
min-entropy leakage by pursuing several themes concurrently. In the theory of
min-entropy leakage, uncertainty is measured in terms of a random variable's
vulnerability to being guessed in one try by an adversary; note that this is the
complement of the Bayes Risk. The mathematical properties of this theory will be
explored for both deterministic and probabilistic systems, with the goal of
better understanding the relationship to other theories, such as mutual
information leakage and differential privacy. A variant called smooth min-
entropy leakage will be developed, giving a measure that is less sensitive to
extremely unlikely events. To support the compositional analysis of complex
systems, leakage bounds will be established for channels in cascade, where the
output of one channel becomes the input to another; moreover, algorithms will be
developed for approximately factoring a channel into a cascade, giving a
technique for automatic sanitization. Techniques will be developed for computing
the min-entropy leakage of systems, giving a way to verify whether they conform
to a given quantitative flow policy; both model-checking and statistical-
sampling based techniques will be considered. Finally, applications of min-
entropy leakage will be explored, for example to accountability systems that use
logging and auditing to identify misbehaving entities. These efforts will
develop new theory, enforcement techniques, and applications of min-entropy
leakage, contributing broadly to a rigorous science of quantitative information
flow.