* 1116724
* HCC: Small: Better Tools for Authoring Interactive Behaviors
* CSE,IIS
* 08/01/2011,07/31/2014
* Brad Myers, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 07/31/2014
* USD 495,153.00

Web pages and most other things created for computers are interactive, in that
they respond to what people do with them. They have animations, buttons that
cause information to change, and game characters that move around under a
person's control. Creating these "interactive behaviors" has usually required
writing programs, usually in a conventional programming language such as C++,
JavaScript, or Adobe's Flash. However, this is a barrier to the vast majority of
people who do not know how to program. In particular, there is a large class of
people, often called "interaction designers", who are trained in how to make
more aesthetic and usable interactive behaviors, but who are not professional
programmers, and therefore cannot create these parts by themselves. Research
shows that they do identify programming as the main barrier to creating and
improving interactive behaviors. One reason that it is important that
interaction designers be able to create the behaviors themselves is because by
quickly creating, trying out and modifying the behaviors, they are able to
creatively explore and develop new and better designs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
ultimate goal of this research is to provide a new tool that enables interaction
designers and other non-professional programmers to create systems with
interactive behaviors in a more natural way. To achieve this, investigators will
first study how designers and other people think about interactive behaviors.
This will provide insight about how such behaviors can be expressed more
"naturally", which means how a person can instruct a computer in a way that is
close to the way the person is thinking about the desired result. Preliminary
studies show that designers do not think about behaviors in the same way as
professional programmers. Next, the investigators will use this knowledge about
the natural expressions to create a new authoring tool which will make it much
easier for designers to create their own interactive behaviors. The initial
design for the tool uses techniques that are familiar to designers, such as the
drawing model of programs such as Adobe Photoshop or Microsoft PowerPoint, the
computation style of spreadsheets such as Microsoft Excel, and the event-based
style (such as: "when a bullet intersects a spaceship, then the spaceship should
start the blowing-up animation"), which has been found to be a natural way to
express these behaviors. The result will be new knowledge and tools that will
make programming more accessible to more people, and thus broaden the range of
people who can program, while specifically enabling interaction designers to
create their own behaviors.