* 1116584
* RI: Small: Endowing Graph-Based Image Segmentation with Global 'Advice': Applications to Diffusion Tensor Images
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2015
* Vikas Singh, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Jie Yang
* 08/31/2015
* USD 363,146.00

The primary goal of this project is to enable identification and segmentation of
specific structures of interest from imaging data (such as DTI MR brain images).
These regions may be small and inconspicuous with poor contrast, therefore,
direct application of classical unsupervised segmentation (designed to extract
"salient" regions) is problematic. The alternative pursued here is a system to
leverage expert-like high level advice within the image segmentation process: to
do this, the underlying engine is endowed with global constraints encoding (a)
effort already expended by the user in segmenting similar images in the past, as
well as (b) aggregate knowledge from a cohort of similar images. The key
algorithmic component is the design of mechanisms to translate such constraints
(as best as possible) to a combinatorial framework so that the resultant models
can be optimized efficiently for high resolution 3-D imaging data. This research
produces the methodology and accompanying software for this important image
analysis task. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project has broad scientific impact.
Wide distribution of code produced from this research can enable improvements in
various computer vision and medical imaging problems where image segmentation is
a key step. Additionally, the algorithms developed here have applications in
other problems such as object recognition and image categorization. The project
is also well suited to involve undergraduate and graduate students from a
diverse spectrum of backgrounds in cutting edge inter-disciplinary computer
vision and image processing research.