* 1116209
* NeTS: Small:  Protection and Restoration in Wireless Mesh Networks
* CSE,CNS
* 01/01/2012,12/31/2016
* Eytan Modiano, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Wenjing Lou
* 12/31/2016
* USD 425,000.00

The project develops mechanisms for reliable communications over wireless mesh
networks, which have recently emerged as a promising solution for providing
last-mile Internet access. Such networks operate at the edge of the Internet and
consist of wireless routers that provide a backbone over which users can access
the Internet. While wired networks are highly dependable, wireless networks are
notoriously unreliable due to interference, obstructions, jamming, and mobility.
The goal of this project is to develop mechanisms for reliable communications in
this challenging environment. In particular, the project adapts some of the
techniques that have been successfully used to provide reliability in wired
networks to the wireless environment. An important aspect of this research is
the design of protection and restoration mechanisms that are tightly integrated
with the wireless transmission medium, and take into account interference
affects. These mechanisms include protection along preplanned backup paths,
diversity routing along multiple paths, and spare capacity allocation for
providing reliability guarantees. Methods from stochastic network control will
be used to develop autonomous restoration algorithms, and techniques from the
field of robust optimization will be used to design reliable network
architectures. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project develops mechanisms for making
wireless networks reliable, and thus, tightly integrated with the wired
Internet. Such mechanisms will help increase Internet access to locations
worldwide lacking in communication infrastructure. The results will be widely
disseminated through publication in conferences, journals and the web. The
broader impacts include training of graduate and undergraduate students and
technology transfer to industry and government laboratories.