* 1116541
* RI: Small: Addressing Visual Analogy Problems on the Raven's Intelligence Test
* CSE,IIS
* 08/01/2011,07/31/2015
* Ashok Goel, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Hector Munoz-Avila
* 07/31/2015
* USD 450,000.00

This proposal aims to create purely image-based reasoning methods for solving
visual analogy problems, particularly so-called Raven's Progressive Matrices
(RPM) problems. The project draws on recent results from the study of human
cognition as well computer science and mathematics. Raven's Progressive Matrices
consist wholly of visual analogy problems in which a matrix of geometric figures
is presented with one entry missing, and the correct missing entry must be
selected from a set of answer choices. Recent analysis of RPM data suggests that
although in general the performance of individuals with autism on most
intelligence tests is significantly inferior to that of typically developing
individuals, on the Raven's test the performance of the two groups is
comparable. This data is consistent with the "Thinking in Pictures" hypothesis
that has been proposed as a potential, partial cognitive explanation of autism.
In both artificial intelligence and psychology, current theories of solving RPM
problems first convert the visual inputs into verbal representations and then
process the verbal representations. In contrast, this project explores the
hypothesis that many RPM problems can be solved using only visual
representations, without extracting any verbal representations from the input
images. This project will develop and analyze computational techniques for
addressing RPM problems with only visual representations.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In particular, this project will develop a novel algorithm
based on affine transformations for addressing RPM problems as well as a second
algorithm that makes use of fractal encodings. With both approaches -- affine
and fractal -- the project seeks to achieve human-level performance on RPM in
terms of percentages of problems solved correctly. The two algorithms will also
be tested on the "odd-man-out" corpus that contains thousands of visual analogy
problems. The project will formally characterize the set of visual analogy
problems for which the affine and fractal algorithms are applicable, analyze the
computational properties of the algorithms, construct proofs of their
correctness for specific classes of problems, and compare the errors made by the
two algorithms with those made by two groups of humans -- typically developing
individuals and individuals with autism. The project will parameterize the
visual algorithms to detect the settings under which the patterns of errors made
by an algorithm on RPM problems most closely match the error patterns of the two
human groupings. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Autism is an important problem of growing
social concern. While the thinking-in-pictures hypothesis has long been a
significant insight into cognition in autism, and empirical evidence -- both
behavioral and neuroimaging -- in its favor is increasing, there have been no
computational models for it. The proposed research would help provide a
computational form to this hypothesis and may help establish a disposition
towards visual thinking with autism. RPM is considered one of the core tests of
intelligence, and although there have been several suggestions about the
visuospatial nature of RPM problems, all current computational models addressing
such visual analogy problems use sequential processing on propositional
representations of the input images. The algorithms from this project that rely
on visual representations for RPM could provide new insights into intelligence
testing. Lastly, while fractal encodings have been used in computer graphics for
generating images and in computer vision for texture analysis in image
processing, this project's use of fractal encodings for visual analogies on
intelligence tests will contribute to knowledge of fractal computing.