* 1116190
* CSR: Small: Nested Distributed Software Transactional Memory: Protocols, Mechanisms, and Java Package
* CSE,CNS
* 08/01/2011,01/31/2015
* Binoy Ravindran, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 01/31/2015
* USD 481,600.00

In this project, protocols, mechanisms, and a Java implementation of
&lt;br/&gt;nested distributed transactional memory (TM) are developed.
Distributed TM promises &lt;br/&gt;to alleviate the programmability,
scalability, and performance challenges of lock-based &lt;br/&gt;distributed
concurrency control. Emerging distributed TM implementations export &lt;br/&gt;a
simple programming interface that precludes locks and are yielding performance
&lt;br/&gt;comparable to, or better than lock-based distributed concurrency
control. Nesting is &lt;br/&gt;essential to distributed TM for composability,
functionality, fault-management, and &lt;br/&gt;performance.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project is developing protocols and mechanisms to
support closed and open &lt;br/&gt;nesting in distributed TM. Closed nesting
allows a nested transaction to be aborted &lt;br/&gt;without aborting the parent
transaction, but not vice versa. Open nesting allows a &lt;br/&gt;parent
transaction to be aborted without aborting the nested transaction, and vice
&lt;br/&gt;versa, permitting greater concurrency. To support these nesting
models, the project &lt;br/&gt;is developing distributed transactional conflict
resolution protocols, distributed &lt;br/&gt;cache coherence protocols, and
mechanisms for transparently executing &lt;br/&gt;compensating transactions to
undo the effects of committed transactions. The &lt;br/&gt;project is
implementing these techniques in the open-source, HyFlow distributed
&lt;br/&gt;TM Java package (hyflow.org). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project is
also transitioning this technology (techniques and HyFlow
&lt;br/&gt;implementation) to US Navy's Aegis Combat System, which uses
distributed &lt;br/&gt;concurrency control. Additionally, the project's results
are being incorporated into &lt;br/&gt;advanced graduate courses at Virginia
Tech that includes students at Blacksburg, &lt;br/&gt;VA, scientists and
engineers at US Naval Surface Warfare Center Dahlgren Division
&lt;br/&gt;(NSWCDD), VA (through Virginia Tech's graduate outreach program at
NSWCDD), &lt;br/&gt;and students in the Middle East and North Africa through
Virginia Tech's VT-MENA &lt;br/&gt;program at Egypt.