* 1116825
* SHF: Small: Collaborative Research and RUI: Static and Dynamic Analysis for Cooperative Concurrency
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2011,06/30/2015
* Stephen Freund, Williams College
* Standard Grant
* Nina Amla
* 06/30/2015
* USD 134,059.00

The widespread adoption of multicore processors requires
multithreaded&lt;br/&gt;software to exploit these hardware resources.
Unfortunately, the&lt;br/&gt;construction and validation of reliable concurrent
software currently&lt;br/&gt;requires extraordinary effort, due to unanticipated
interactions&lt;br/&gt;between concurrent threads. Thus, developing better
programming&lt;br/&gt;techniques and tools for concurrent programming is
essential. This&lt;br/&gt;research develops a cooperative programming
methodology for&lt;br/&gt;multithreaded software, based on the philosophy that
all thread&lt;br/&gt;interference must be explicitly documented via source-level
"yield"&lt;br/&gt;annotations by the programmer.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project will investigate both static and dynamic checking&lt;br/&gt;techniques
to verify the correctness of yield annotations. Once&lt;br/&gt;verified, these
annotations guarantee that code executed between&lt;br/&gt;successive yields is
serializable and thus amenable to sequential&lt;br/&gt;reasoning. Moreover,
yield-free code is deterministic. Despite&lt;br/&gt;provided these strong safety
guarantees, this methodology does not&lt;br/&gt;impact program performance. The
cooperative methodology provides a&lt;br/&gt;robust foundation for multithreaded
software and can potentially&lt;br/&gt;transform the principles and practices of
multithreaded software&lt;br/&gt;engineering. This work on cooperability will
also provide research&lt;br/&gt;opportunities for graduate and undergraduate
students, and it will&lt;br/&gt;support endeavors to provide access to science
education for all&lt;br/&gt;students.