* 1116544
* TC: Small: Collaborative Research: Influencing Mental Models of Security
* CSE,CNS
* 08/01/2011,07/31/2017
* Richard Wash, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 07/31/2017
* USD 314,193.00

Over 80 million households in the United States have a home computer and an
Internet connection. The vast majority of these are overseen by people who have
little computer security knowledge or training, and many users try to avoid
making security decisions because they feel they don't have the knowledge and
skills to maintain proper security. Nevertheless, home computer users still make
security-related decisions on a regular basis --- for example, whether or not to
click on a link in an email message --- without being aware that is what they
are doing. Their decisions are guided by how they think about computer
security,their mental models. Interestingly, these models do not have to be
technically correct to lead to desirable security behaviors. In other words,
sometimes even "wrong" mental models produce good security decisions. This
project will explore the implications of that insight. By eliminating the
constraint that non-technical users must become more like computer security
experts to properly protect themselves, this project will identify and create
more effective ways of helping home computer users make good security
decisions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will help advance our understanding
of how mental models of security are formed and how ideas are incorporated into
mental models and transmitted from person to person. What kinds of information
are incorporated into home computer users' mental models? Work will initially be
focused on experimentally testing two hypotheses: a) stories about experiences
have a larger influence on behavior than behavioral advice, and b) information
from friends and colleagues has a stronger influence on mental models, and
therefore behavior, than information from security experts. Additionally, the
prevalence of particular mental models will be measured and correlated with
actual user security behaviors. Through these investigations, this project will
characterize the reasons that many home computer users choose not to act
securely --- a question which is one of the biggest challenges of home computer
security. Finally, this project will explore ways of encouraging behaviors that
support secure system use by developing a prototype socio-technical system that
is capable of influencing their mental models and moving people toward models
that lead to greater security.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Home computer security and
personal information security are large problems today. Current education
campaigns have failed to effect widespread changes in the security behaviors of
non-technical users. New technologies are being developed, but will do nothing
if users intentionally choose to ignore the technology or to work around it.
This project will find better ways of informing people about security issues,
altering their understanding of security threats and thereby their security
behaviors, which will ultimately create more secure home computers. It will
produce research tools, including survey instruments and security behavior
measurement software that can be used by other security researchers. It will
train a number of students, both graduate and undergraduate, in working on
multi-disciplinary, distributed teams. The results from this study will be
disseminated broadly to multiple academic communities.