* 1116653
* HCC: Small: Website Design, Content, and Ideological Communication
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2014
* Norah Dunbar, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Standard Grant
* William Bainbridge
* 08/31/2014
* USD 499,979.00

This interdisciplinary research seeks to understand how website design and
content influence psychological processes and attitudinal and behavioral
outcomes on violent and non-violent ideological websites. A content analysis
study will be conducted to identify and compare the level and nature of website
credibility, interactivity, and persuasion tactics for ideological websites
(violent and non-violent) and for non-ideological websites. Relationships of
these variables to website usefulness for ideology dissemination and
psychological processes such as identity expression, and dehumanization will
also be examined. Next, a series of experiments examining causal influences of
key website characteristics (credibility, interactivity, and persuasion) on
website users' knowledge, attitudes, and behavioral intentions will be
conducted. These studies will compare the effects of these characteristics for
ideological websites advocating violence versus non-violence. Relevant user
characteristics (e.g., demographics, social identity, self-esteem, physiological
arousal) will be captured for purposes of model building and testing for
moderating influences. In these experiments, simulated websites will be
developed to represent varying facets of credibility, interactivity, and
persuasion. Human participants will be asked to navigate through these websites
and respond to discussion threads, explore related links, fill out short
questionnaires, and engage in other activities intended to assess key outcomes.
Measures of knowledge, attitudes, and intentions will be assessed before and
after website exposure for comparison. By leveraging an interdisciplinary
approach to the growing number and presence of ideological groups online, this
series of studies will lead to new theories and models for future research and
dissemination of educational websites serving public interests.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;New knowledge will be developed by examining the specific
facets of credibility, interactivity, and persuasion, which have not previously
been studied with respect to ideologically motivated attitudes and behavior. An
important comparison of violent and non-violent ideological websites will also
contribute uniquely to better understanding the perceptions of and responses to
ideologies through human-centered computing. This collaborative effort will also
develop and demonstrate methods for future integrated research, for team members
and the broader research community. Although the investigation and findings will
focus on ideological website design and communication, the framework developed
will also be relevant to studying the impact of website design on outcomes in
other areas such as online education. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The combination of
theoretical and methodological backgrounds required to conduct the experiments
will contribute to the research training of doctoral students and undergraduate
research assistants in Psychology, Communication, and Management Information
Systems. Findings from this research are likely to also have a number of
practical implications for educating the general public about ideological
websites and how they attempt to influence and persuade individuals who visit
these sites. In addition, dissemination of the results through the professional
channels of several sciences will achieve the broader impact of contributing to
multiple academic fields.