* 1116904
* NeTS: Small: Understanding Network Failure
* CSE,CNS
* 08/01/2011,07/31/2014
* Stefan Savage, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Darleen Fisher
* 07/31/2014
* USD 450,000.00

This project seeks to quantify the frequency, duration, causes, and impact of
faults across a variety of network classes. Unlike previous efforts that have
relied on substantial special-purpose instrumentation and monitoring
infrastructure, the PIs are conducting their analysis using only commonly
available data sources, such as device logs and configuration records maintained
by network operations staff. In this way, they hope not only to provide concrete
data regarding the particular networks being evaluated, but to define a
repeatable methodology that can be employed by other researchers and even
commercial operators to assess the reliability of other networks. Through
partnerships with an academic backbone network (CENIC), an enterprise network
services company (Hewlett-Packard), and large-scale Web services provider
(Microsoft), the PIs have obtained access to device logs, operational
maintenance records, and configuration information for a significant number of
real networks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Concretely, this project is working to
deliver a fault analysis methodology based on readily available data like device
logs, configuration information, and operator records such as email lists and
trouble tickets; comparative studies regarding the differing failure
characteristics of wide-area, enterprise, and data center networks; and a
generative model of network faults that can be used to evaluate the suitability
and efficacy of different applications and protocols to various network
designs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: In addition to these concrete
technical contributions, the broader impacts of this project include the
potential to cause network operators to reconsider how current networks are
designed to make them less likely to fail, or to fail in more straightforward
and easily manageable ways. Moreover, the research effort is imparting onto the
next generation of computer scientists the skills necessary to assess, analyze,
and model the performance characteristics of operational networks. This project
supports two graduate students who assist the PIs in conducting the described
work, and receive significant exposure to commercial network environments
through industrial internships.