* 1116013
* CIF: Small: Causal Secrecy-A Theoretical Basis for Secrecy of Signals
* CSE,CCF
* 08/01/2011,07/31/2015
* Paul Cuff, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 07/31/2015
* USD 490,000.00

Communication technologies have taken a central role in daily life, business,
government, industry, and social interactions over recent decades. Technology is
used not only to allow people to communicate with each other from across the
world but to allow machines to interact automatically---processing internet
search queries, managing warehouse inventory, forecasting severe weather,
updating computer software, and controlling complex systems such as a network of
electric power stations. The need for secure communication has increased
accordingly. Currently, technology is designed around the concept that a secure
or private communication signal must be invisible to the outside world unless
the security is compromised. This matches the Hollywood image of a top-secret
classified conversation taking place over a "secure line." However, in many
emerging applications where machines transmit important information signals to
each other, a less expensive type of privacy is adequate---one that simply
distorts the view of the signal for any unintended eavesdroppers to the point
where they cannot use the information to disrupt the system. This research
involves a mathematical analysis of the secrecy of signals. The investigators
derive fundamental minimum requirements to protect the communication of
signals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research uses information theory to provide a
theoretical foundation for secrecy of signals, using secret keys and physical
layer security. However, this work differs from previous theoretical work in a
number of ways. One key difference is that metrics for secrecy based on abstract
or intangible mathematical quantities are omitted. Instead, secrecy is evaluated
based on what an adversary would be able to do with information gleaned from the
system. This research is theoretical and broad, yet the novelty of the results
bring new insights to applied cryptography.