* 1116944
* CIF: Small: Collaborative Research: Entropy Rate for Source Separation and Model Selection: Applications in fMRI and EEG Analysis
* CSE,CCF
* 08/01/2011,07/31/2014
* Vince Calhoun, The MIND Research Network
* Standard Grant
* John Cozzens
* 07/31/2014
* USD 159,182.00

Blind source separation (BSS) has found wide use in many disciplines including
signal processing as it starts from a simple generative model minimizing
assumptions on the data generation mechanism and achieves useful decompositions
of the observed data. In particular, independent component analysis (ICA) has
been the most commonly used approach to achieve BSS since statistical
independence of the underlying components is plausible in many applications.
Besides independence, sample correlation is another inherent property of many
signals of interest. Traditionally, these two properties are addressed
separately when developing methods for source separation. Entropy rate, on the
other hand, is a natural cost that allows one to account for independence and
sample correlation jointly, and hence promises to result in a new class of
powerful solutions with wide applicability. In addition, it enables one to
easily incorporate model selection---another key problem complementing the power
of BSS---into the problem through the use of information theoretic criteria.

The focus of this research is the development of a class of powerful methods for
source separation and model selection using entropy rate so that one can take
both the higher-order-statistical information and sample correlation into
account to achieve significant performance gains in more challenging problems.
The main application domain is one that can truly take advantage of this fully
combined approach: the analysis of functional magnetic resonance (fMRI) data and
the rejection of gradient and pulse artifacts in electroencephalography (EEG) in
concurrent EEG-fMRI data. Both are applications that have proven challenging for
the traditional model-based approach due to the unique nature of the noise and
artifacts in these problems. Hence, they provide a unique testbed for the
performance evaluation of the new class of methods developed under this study.
Since independence and sample correlation are intrinsic properties of many other
types of data, the new set of methods will be attractive solutions for many
other problems as well.