* 1116224
* CSR: Small: RUI: A Fast Backing Store System on top of Network RAM, Flash, and other Cluster-wide Storage
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2011,09/30/2016
* Tia Newhall, Swarthmore College
* Standard Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 09/30/2016
* USD 213,224.00

It is increasingly important to design cluster systems that efficiently support
data-intensive computing. Parallel scientific and multimedia applications often
perform large amounts of I/O either indirectly, due to swapping, or directly,
due to temporary file accesses. As the disparity between the speeds of magnetic
disk and other hardware such as RAM, interconnection networks, and flash
continues to grow, the cost of accessing disk will increasingly become the
bottleneck to system performance.

The objective of our project is to design and implement a fast backing storage
system for clusters and local area networks. Our system provides a single device
interface on top of multiple heterogeneous cluster-wide physical storage,
particularly targeting fast random-access storage such as Network RAM and flash.
Our work will free the OS from requiring multiple device-specific policies in
its paging and file systems for every combination of underlying physical storage
devices. As new technologies are developed, the low-level part of our system
will incorporate them into its set of heterogeneous physical storage, but the OS
will continue to use the same high-level interface of our system, that of a
single, fast, random-access device.

The main goals of our work are: to take advantage of all types of fast storage
in a cluster; to provide a single device interface that is independent of the
underlying physical storage; to create a storage system that can adapt to
changes in resource utilization and capacity; and to develop and examine
policies for data placement and data migration between underlying devices.