* 1116740
* SHF: Small: Empirical Studies, Principles and Techniques for Software Systems with Complex Configuration Spaces
* CSE,CCF
* 07/15/2011,06/30/2016
* Adam Porter, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 06/30/2016
* USD 500,000.00

Today's software systems are increasingly built from flexible combinations of
components that can be configured in a multitude of different ways. For example,
the popular Firefox web browser has more than a thousand configuration options.
While a high degree of configurability has many benefits, it also makes testing
and reasoning about configurable software a major challenge. The goals of this
proposed work are 1) to develop new techniques to efficiently discover the
structure of software systems' configuration spaces, and 2) to exploit that
information to improve common software engineering tasks, specifically testing
and program understanding. In particular, this work will allow software
developers to quickly and accurately answer questions such as, What are the
"right" configurations to test a system under? How can we avoid testing a system
under "unnecessary" configurations? How does software configuration change as
systems evolve? We expect that, as much of the software used today is
configurable, the advances made in this project in understanding and testing
configurable systems will have widespread benefits in the reliability and
trustworthiness of critical software.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed
technical approach will pursue four main directions. First, the PIs will develop
a representation of "effective" configuration spaces---the configurations needed
to achieve a specific goal---that is both usable by software engineering tools
and understandable to developers. Second, the PIs will develop novel techniques
that compute the effective configuration space of a system. Third, the PIs will
explore a number of software engineering applications that will make use of
effective configuration space information, including configuration-aware test
case selection, configuration-aware regression testing, and several program
understanding tasks for configurable systems. Finally, the PIs will conduct a
wide range of fundamental empirical studies that will test the research
hypotheses and evaluate the proposed approach on large scale subject systems.
Among others outcomes, these studies will examine the effective configurations
of a range of systems; investigate how those configurations evolve over time;
and determine how failures relate to system configurations. The results will
impact both practice and education.