* 1116782
* RI: Small: A Bayesian Approach to Dynamic Lexical Resources for Flexible Language Processing
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2015
* Martha Palmer, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* Tatiana Korelsky
* 08/31/2015
* USD 300,000.00

This project uses statistical models and human judgment to determine dynamic,
probabilistic representations of extensible usages of words; these
representations are suitable for incorporation into VerbNet, a lexical resource
widely used in the Natural Language Processing (NLP) community. Existing lexical
resources reflect a binary notion of usages as grammatical or not. However, in
actual language use, forms vary in acceptability; moreover, the process of
coercion extends words beyond their standard usages. For example, a strictly
intransitive action verb such as 'sneeze' may be used as in 'She sneezed the
foam off the cappuccino', expressing manner of motion. This research has a two-
pronged approach involving extensive use of machine learning and a fundamental
shift in the development and use of VerbNet. Specifically, the research develops
probabilistic methods for: (1) analyzing usages of verbs in large corpora and
incorporating the resulting probabilistic information into VerbNet classes; and
(2) representing information about the likelihood of potential constructional
coercions and the productivity of such extensions. These developments use the
Hierarchical Bayesian Model of Parisien and Stevenson, which are an ideal
framework for marrying probabilistic reasoning about complex, real-world data
within the hierarchically-organized VerbNet lexicon. In addition to statistical
models, the representations are also informed by human judgments with respect to
the use of such constructions. Thus, this research enriches the current symbolic
verb representations in VerbNet with probabilistic distributional information,
which becomes salient through the influence of construction grammar.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Encoding verb knowledge probabilistically provides the
necessary flexibility to represent extensional constructions and support their
appropriate interpretation by NLP systems. This is especially useful for
interpretation in new domains and genres, leading to advances in NLP
technologies, such as question answering and machine translation, thus improving
information access. Additionally, insights into statistical properties of
constructions gained through this research are valuable for psycholinguistic
models of language acquisition and second language learning.