* 1116802
* SHF: Small: HotBench: An Optimization Workbench for Hotspots
* CSE,CCF
* 08/01/2011,07/31/2015
* Franz Franchetti, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Almadena Chtchelkanova
* 07/31/2015
* USD 500,000.00

The last decades have seen an enormous growth in the performance capabilities of
computing platforms. One important driver in the computing revolution was
productivity enabled by higher-level languages and software engineering methods
that allow building and maintaining complex software systems. However, unable to
fully utilize modern computer systems, software built that way can under-perform
by several orders of magnitude on top-end workstations. With CPU frequency
scaling coming to a halt and the switch to multicores, high-end systems become
increasingly energy-constrained. In addition, as more computing is becoming
mobile, inefficiency directly translates into wasted energy and shorter battery
life, and ultimately, less usefulness.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Today, high
efficiency is mostly achieved through heroic human programming by a small number
of experts. This research studies how to go beyond this unsustainable situation
and how to make a high level of efficiency accessible to average programmers
across a wide range of platforms and algorithms. The Hot Bench system developed
in his research provides interactive optimization capabilities for the
generation of highly efficient programs, for both average and expert users. It
includes a comprehensive library of optimization strategies for targeting
various kinds of algorithms, data structures, and target platforms. Expert users
can add optimization strategies, target new instruction sets, or add new output
languages. Less experienced programmers can learn how optimization works and how
complicated architectures are programmed. The system is designed to be
extensible to virtually any program type and target hardware, and to be able to
encode all the necessary optimization methods and tricks. Hot Bench is in spirit
similar to computer algebra/mathematics systems like Matlab, Maple, or
Mathematical, and interactive theorem proves, applying their concept to hotspot
tuning.