* 1116213
* SHF: Small: Methods for Diagnosis of Non-Classical Faults in Digital Circuits
* CSE,CCF
* 08/01/2011,07/31/2014
* Vishwani Agrawal, Auburn University
* Standard Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 07/31/2014
* USD 299,999.00

The research in this project focuses on diagnostic test generation methods for
non-classical faults, such as transition delay and bridging faults, which
represent the fault behaviors of modern VLSI devices. Although, the existing
tools for VLSI circuit testing incorporate years of research they only deal with
classical stuck-at faults. A stuck-at fault is detectable by a single input
pattern. Detection of a transition fault is more complex because it requires a
sequence of two patterns. Also, the existing tools find tests that detect faults
and may not diagnose them, i.e., identify the exact cause of a failure. The
traditional metric used in testing is fault coverage. This research investigates
the use of a new metric termed diagnostic coverage for the effectiveness of
tests in their role of fault diagnosis. For example, to distinguish between two
faults one must use a test that detects one fault but not the other; such a test
is called an exclusive test. This research provides new algorithms to generate
tests for diagnosis of non-classical faults while allowing the use of the
available testing tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Moore's law prediction of the
number of devices on a VLSI chip doubling every eighteen months simply follows
the trend of minimum cost per transistor. The enabling technology driver is the
shrinking geometry of features allowing higher transistor density and speed.
Nanometer geometries have, however, led to greater process variations. Two
characteristics separate the testing of modern VLSI technologies. First, the
complex fault mechanisms are no longer represented by the classical stuck-at
faults. Second, the impact of increased process variation on yield requires
testing to be diagnostic-oriented; faults must be identified so that their
causes can be eliminated. The research in this project addresses both needs of
the advancing VLSI technology.