* 1116015
* SHF:  Small:  Collaborative Research:  A Systematic Approach to Multicore Parallel CAD
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2014
* Li Shang, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 08/31/2014
* USD 210,000.00

This project aims at a systematic approach that integrates multi-level IC design
automation &lt;br/&gt;flow by leveraging the parallel computational power in
current and upcoming multi-core/many-core &lt;br/&gt;processors. The main
challenge in this approach is to provide responsive high-level design decisions
&lt;br/&gt;while incurring the massive computational cost of lower-level design
algorithms. Fortunately, recent &lt;br/&gt;trends in processor architectures
provide a solution. Compared with traditional uniprocessor systems,
&lt;br/&gt;emerging multi-core/many-core microprocessors have far more
computational power but limited global &lt;br/&gt;memory access capabilities.
Parallel computational power may make it possible to break &lt;br/&gt;the
boundaries of the existing IC design hierarchy and to vertically integrate the
IC optimization fow. &lt;br/&gt;The potential benefits of an integrated solution
are significant - accurate high-level design decisions &lt;br/&gt;become
possible as low-level design details are derived concurrently, and low-level
designs can also &lt;br/&gt;greatly benefit from high-quality high-level
decisions. Together, an efficient and high-quality design flow
&lt;br/&gt;becomes feasible, making design closure faster, thus saving time and
reducing costs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed work has the potential to
overcome the key limitations of existing hierarchical IC CAD
&lt;br/&gt;technologies and enable new IC design automation solutions, which in
turn can benefit the IC and &lt;br/&gt;semiconductor industry. The PIs will work
together with their industrial collaborators to develop
and&lt;br/&gt;commercialize the proposed work. The project will have beneficial
impact on education.&lt;br/&gt;The PIs intend to educate the next generation of
software developers and practicing engineers &lt;br/&gt;in the design and
innovation of IC design automation and parallel computing.