* 1116303
* CGV: Small: Collaborative Research: Sparse Reconstruction and Frequency Analysis for Computer Graphics Rendering and Imaging
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2011,09/30/2014
* Fredo Durand, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 09/30/2014
* USD 250,000.00

A broad range of problems in computer graphics rendering, appearance
acquisition, and imaging, involve sampling, reconstruction, and integration of
high-dimensional (4D-8D) signals. Real-time rendering of glossy materials and
intricate lighting effects like caustics, for example, can require pre-computing
the response of the scene to different light and viewing directions, which is
often a 6D dataset. Similarly, image-based appearance acquisition of facial
details, car paint, or glazed wood requires us to take images from different
light and view directions. Even offline rendering of visual effects like motion
blur from a fast-moving car, or depth of field, involves high-dimensional
sampling across time and lens aperture. The same problems are also common in
computational imaging applications such as light field cameras. While the PIs
and others have made significant progress in subsequent analysis and compact
representation for some of these problems, the initial full dataset must almost
always still be acquired or computed by brute force which is prohibitively
expensive, taking hours to days of computation and acquisition time, as well as
being a challenge for memory usage and storage.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PIs'
goal in this project is to make fundamental contributions that enable
dramatically sparser sampling and reconstruction of these signals, before the
full dataset is acquired or simulated. The key idea is to exploit the structure
of the data that often lies in lower-frequency, sparse, or low-dimensional
spaces. Their recent collaboration on a Fourier analysis of motion blur has
shown that the frequency spectrum of dynamic scenes is sheared into a narrow
wedge in the space-time domain. This enables novel sheared (not axis-aligned)
filters and a sparse sampling. The PIs will build upon these preliminary results
to develop a unified framework for frequency analysis and sparse data
reconstruction of visual appearance in computer graphics. To these ends, they
will first lay the theoretical foundations, including a novel frequency analysis
of Monte Carlo integration and 5D space-time analysis of light fields. They will
then develop efficient practical algorithms for a variety of problem domains,
including sparse reconstruction of light transport matrices for relighting,
sheared sampling and denoising for offline shadow rendering, time-coherent
compressive sampling for appearance acquisition, and new approaches to
computational photography and imaging.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts:
From a theoretical perspective, this project will develop a fundamental signal-
processing analysis of light transport and appearance and imaging datasets,
which will provide the foundation for further work not just in computer graphics
but in signal-processing, computer vision, and image analysis as well. Project
outcomes will apply to diverse sets of problems and will lead to transformative
advances across the spectrum of rendering and imaging applications. The PIs will
leverage existing collaborations with industry to transition the new
technologies to practical production use. Outreach to K-12 students and the
public will be enabled by a new science popularization blog that will leverage
the public's excitement for advances in digital photography to introduce novel
technical concepts, as well as by events such as the Computer Science Education
Day for high school students at UC-Berkeley. The new algorithms and datasets
resulting from this work will be made available to the research community;
moreover, imaging algorithms will be released in open-source format to work with
consumer digital and cell-phone cameras.