* 1116988
* HCC: Small: Collaborative Research: The Influence of Self-Avatars on Perception and Action in Virtual Worlds
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2016
* Robert Bodenheimer, Vanderbilt University
* Standard Grant
* William Bainbridge
* 08/31/2016
* USD 266,000.00

The objective of this research is to enable more effective design and use of
virtual worlds. The pervasiveness of visually-oriented online and interactive
digital media allows people to represent themselves increasingly through
surrogates in virtual worlds. These digital personae are called "avatars," and
when they closely represent the user, "self-avatars." Self-avatars enable forms
of learning, interaction, and skill development that can increase a user's
effectiveness in a virtual world. This project will explore how self-avatars
play a significant role through three key components of perception and action:
the relationship between action and the perception of space and objects, active
acquisition of spatial memory, and the planning and execution of actions
themselves. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will consider three properties
of self-avatars themselves, each likely to have an effect across a broad range
of situations: (1) the virtual perspective from which the avatar is seen, (2)
the nature of the coupling between user size and motion and avatar size and
motion, and (3) the naturalness of the interface system by which the user
controls the avatar. The work builds on a growing body of knowledge about the
role of body ownership in perceptual and cognitive tasks. This framework
provides a theory in which to ground the research, a body of empirical knowledge
about perception and action in the real world, and established methodologies
that can be used for assessing the results of the research. The ability to
utilize work from cognitive and perceptual science to solve a problem in
computer graphics and user interaction is a major strength of the research.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Virtual environments are important in many domains,
including architecture, education, medicine, simulation, training, and
visualization. The core impact of this research is to enable self-avatars to
enhance user experience in virtual environments, which are a major category of
computer simulations. A broad impact of this project is that enhancing the user
experience will lead to more capable applications of virtual environments in the
aforementioned domains. This research will also have utility in entertainment
systems, the dominant environments for avatars. It advances discovery and
understanding while training students in cross-disciplinary research methods in
an innovative intellectual environment. The interdisciplinary nature of the
research and its consequent applications, together with the close integration of
two research groups, will aid in bringing new students to computer science,
beyond the students traditionally attracted to that field.