* 1116475
* RI: SMALL: Modeling Voice Source Transformation in Monolingual and Crosslingual Non-parallel Voice Conversion Applications
* CSE,IIS
* 07/15/2011,06/30/2015
* Elliot Moore, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Tatiana Korelsky
* 06/30/2015
* USD 252,637.00

Voice conversion (VC) systems transform segments of speech from a given source
speaker so that it&lt;br/&gt;can be identified as spoken by a specified target
speaker. Currently, standard VC systems require&lt;br/&gt;parallel training on
extensively labeled sets of speech data where the source and target speaker
share&lt;br/&gt;equivalent content for building direct mapping models. This
project builds on the concepts of nonparallel&lt;br/&gt;VC systems reducing the
need for labeled and shared speech content between source and
target&lt;br/&gt;speakers as well as allowing for both intra-lingual and cross-
lingual conversion scenarios. This project&lt;br/&gt;focuses on two main areas:
(1) Building a framework for non-parallel VC without explicit
phonetic,&lt;br/&gt;sound, word, or sentence level labels, and (2) Providing
effective target speaker mapping to obtain&lt;br/&gt;converted speech with as
good as or better quality compared to current VC systems. The
VC&lt;br/&gt;framework consists of three main components: (1) A speaker
independent language model; (2) An&lt;br/&gt;algorithm for model adaptation to
target speaker; (3) A speech synthesis block to generate
converted&lt;br/&gt;speech from a target-adapted language
model.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will provide a broad framework for
applications such as personalization of assistive textto-&lt;br/&gt;speech (TTS)
systems, foreign language learning, and as a possible component in speech-to-
speech&lt;br/&gt;translation systems. This project will support graduate student
research and provide results for&lt;br/&gt;community distribution through
conference and journal submission. Additionally, an open-
source&lt;br/&gt;software toolset will be developed and freely distributed. The
project will also be used in outreach for&lt;br/&gt;underrepresented groups in
Science Technology Engineering and Mathematics (STEM) disciplines.