* 1116040
* AF: Small: (Nano) Tera Hertz (THz) Plasmonic Technologies for the Beyond Moore's Laws Era
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2017
* Jack East, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 08/31/2017
* USD 400,412.00

To meet the ever increasing demands of Information Technology, the development
of terahertz (THz) transmission and interface technology is expected to bring
about on-chip convergence of optical communication and digital computing in the
future-generation VLSI chips. The proposed research envisages studying Plasmon
propagation through meta-material structures with periodic array of grooves in
order to develop THz switch/waveguide technology which may enhance the
computational capabilities in the Beyond-Moore's-Law (BML) era when charge-based
CMOS transistors cannot be scaled down anymore.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
proposed research involving EM theory, photonics, SPICE circuit simulation, and
numerical analysis, encompasses several ideas that define its core intellectual
merits. For example, new spoof surface Plasmon polar ton (SSPP) transport
mechanism may enable THz signal propagation on global interconnect, dispersion
engineering will develop dynamically-controlled SSPP tri-state buses by fine
tuning materials to modulate their refractive index, and compact SSPP wave-
guide-cavity-waveguide structures may lead to THz digital and mixed-signal
circuits. Theoretical modeling and simulation methods to be developed in this
project in conjunction with concomitant on-going research in new materials may
potentially lead to the design of THz computing, ultrafast Boolean logic
circuitry, and biological sensor networks. Furthermore, the proposed
dynamically-controlled SSPP waveguide capable of transmitting information at THz
speed can potentially be adopted to solve the ?communication bottleneck? problem
in future multicore VLSI chips. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The educational
objectives of this research project will involve interdisciplinary training for
undergraduate and graduate students, thereby enabling them to meet the
challenges of electronic, photonic and computer product design in a fiercely
competitive global market. Promotion of women and minority students in the
doctoral degree program in electrical and computer engineering will be given
high priority in this research to fulfill its education and societal objectives.
The PI will develop computer animation and colorful images for K-12 students in
local schools thereby stimulating their interest in Science and Engineering. The
audio visuals, instruction materials, and laboratory courseware will be made
available to other universities through the Internet and will be uploaded at the
Nano Hub website.