* 1116023
* CSR: Small: Resource Management for 3D Communication Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 08/01/2011,07/31/2012
* Zhenyu Yang, Florida International University
* Standard Grant
* Anita La Salle
* 07/31/2012
* USD 98,454.00

This project addresses 3D communication which is becoming a viable medium for
collaborative activities between geographically dispersed users. Supported by 3D
realistic video reconstruction and real-time media transmission, fusion and
rendering, this technology creates a shared visual cyberspace and delivers a
strong sense of "being-there" for participants. Despite incremental progress,
realization of this technology has not yet occured. One fundamental barrier is
the need for investigating how to effectively connect multiple sites, aggregate
and disseminate visual contents to the end user.

Research in this area is critical because of the following challenges:

-3D communication is very resource-intensive in data, transmission and
rendering, especially when multiple sites are connected.

-3D communication represents a highly user-centric and interactive system.
Traditional system-based resource management assuming limited set of user
interests and quality-of-service measures becomes less effective. Instead, we
need to investigate resource management to deliver quality-of-experience under
the dynamics of user view.

-3D communication represents a content-rich system where each site generates a
set of 3D video streams. The correlation among these streams is more complicated
as their importance is determined dynamically by the user interest. Traditional
systems assuming a fixed multi-stream prioritization will fail.

-Finally, the nature of physical collaboration requires the interconnection in a
seamless way such that they operate like a single environment. However, the
information needed to achieve desired global system behavior is scattered at
each site which makes it a non-trivial problem to coordinate content
dissemination among all sites.

The project will make contributions to enabling multi-party 3D communication via
the investigation of a view-based multi-party/multi-stream management framework
with two components: content organization methods (COM) and content
dissemination services (CDS).

The project will provide valuable insights into building multi-party 3D
collaborative systems through the perspective of resource allocation, content
organization and dissemination, and user experience. The work will be evaluated
using a real testbed involving multiple institutes across the Internet, the
success of which will enable the rapid development and deployment of 3D
communication.

The project will also provide a natural platform to incorporate research
findings into curriculum development on distributed multimedia systems and
engage graduate/undergraduate students into related research. The testbed will
also serve high-school teachers and students via an outreach program. Florida
International University is one of the largest minority institutes in the
country but has a relatively small number of minority Ph.D. recipients. The PI
is currently working with one Hispanic and one female Ph.D. students. It is the
PI's plan to leverage the funding and his prior experience to enlarge the
presence of students from minor groups in computer science research.