* 1116565
* SHF: CSR: Small: Automated Refactoring Techniques for Efficient and Reliable Distributed Execution
* CSE,CCF
* 07/15/2011,06/30/2016
* Eli Tilevich, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 06/30/2016
* USD 502,693.00

The software marketplace is striving to accommodate the impending shift from
traditional desktop applications to a model dominated by cloud computing. This
paradigm shift will enable users to access computing resources from any location
using an increasingly diverse set of clients, a growing number of which are
mobile devices. Because traditional software development is tailored toward
centralized execution, many centralized applications need to be adapted to serve
remote users efficiently and reliably. Traditionally such adaptations require
modifying application source code by hand, which is difficult, costly, and
error-prone. To address this problem, this project develops automated program
transformations that programmers can use to achieve efficient and reliable
distributed execution. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will help answer the
following fundamental research questions: (1) How can one distribute Object
Oriented software even though objects do not distribute naturally? (2) How can
distributed applications effectively leverage the latency/bandwidth trade-offs
of modern networks? How can one alleviate inefficiencies imposed by use of
remote pointers? (3) How can one effectively harden a distributed application
against network volatility? This project will develop automated refactoring
techniques, semantics preserving transformations performed under the
programmerÂ¹s control. These techniques will (1) remodularize monolithic
applications into service modules to exploit natural distribution boundaries,
(2) optimize distribution middleware as guided by program analysis to reduce the
aggregate latency of remote calls and efficiently transfer object graphs as
parameters, and (3) enhance distributed applications with the ability to cope
with network volatility. These techniques will help achieve efficient and
reliable distributed execution with reduced software development costs and
improved programmer productivity, thus benefiting enterprises, researchers, and
the general public alike.