* 1116970
* NeTS: Small: QoS Assured Multimedia Communication over Non-stationary Wireless Channels
* CSE,CNS
* 08/01/2011,07/31/2016
* Dapeng Wu, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Wenjing Lou
* 07/31/2016
* USD 383,143.00

The next-generation wireless networks are targeted at supporting various
applications such as voice, data, and multimedia. However, wireless channels are
unreliable and the capacity of a wireless fading channel is time-varying, which
may cause severe degradation to video/audio quality. Therefore, it is
particularly challenging to design quality of service (QoS) assurance mechanisms
and multimedia compression techniques for multimedia communication over wireless
networks. This project aims to develop new theories and techniques for QoS
assured multimedia communication over non-stationary wireless channels. To
accomplish this goal, the following research tasks are conducted: 1) developing
a novel evolutionary spectrum approach, which is able to accurately model the
dynamics of general non-stationary fading channels; 2) developing QoS-assured
sliding-mode congestion control and scheduling mechanisms for multimedia
communication over non-stationary fading channels; and 3) developing gamma rate
theory for causal rate control in source coding, and developing cross layer
design to achieve both network friendliness and viewer friendliness for
multimedia coding and transmission. Techniques developed in this project will
fill some important gaps in fundamental understanding of QoS-assured multimedia
communication over non-stationary wireless channels, and provide the theoretical
underpinning for system design and algorithm implementation.