* 1116104
* SHF: Small: Footprint Models and Techniques for Multi-core Cache Management
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2015
* Chen Ding, University of Rochester
* Standard Grant
* tao li
* 08/31/2015
* USD 386,360.00

This research aims at developing new theories and techniques to&lt;br/&gt;better
understand and manage shared memory cache in multi-core architectures.
&lt;br/&gt;The core concept is program footprint, which is the amount of memory
access in a period of&lt;br/&gt;execution. Complete measurement requires
counting data access in all&lt;br/&gt;execution windows, which is too costly.
This&lt;br/&gt;research develops computational methods to first make all-
window&lt;br/&gt;analysis feasible through a set of new profiling algorithms and
then&lt;br/&gt;make this analysis cost-effective by reducing the cost through
statistical&lt;br/&gt;inference, sampling, and parallel profiling and
effectively obtaining&lt;br/&gt;this information in real time as a program
executes. Footprint&lt;br/&gt;information is essential in analyzing cache
sharing between programs&lt;br/&gt;and program tasks. It enables the second part
of the project, a set&lt;br/&gt;of tools that predict the performance of
parallel workloads without&lt;br/&gt;parallel testing. In addition, the
footprint information enables a&lt;br/&gt;fundamentally different approach to
common techniques. In the third&lt;br/&gt;part, the project develops a new
cache-hint insertion tool to&lt;br/&gt;approximate optimal caching and
a&lt;br/&gt;memory-performance tuning tool to be used by software
developer.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As multi-core processors become commonplace and
cloud computing is&lt;br/&gt;gaining acceptance, more applications are run in a
shared environment.&lt;br/&gt;The outcome of this research will fundamentally
alter the way&lt;br/&gt;programmers understand and improve memory performance on
multi-core&lt;br/&gt;systems. Software developers and hardware engineers will
have a new&lt;br/&gt;tool set to tackle the complex problem of managing on-chip
memory for&lt;br/&gt;not just sequential but also parallel code and for not just
achieving&lt;br/&gt;good performance but also for ensuring stable performance in
a dynamic&lt;br/&gt;environment. The broader impacts of this research will
include&lt;br/&gt;deeper understanding and more precise characterization of
locality&lt;br/&gt;in computational processes, which has implications in
other&lt;br/&gt;computing-related disciplines, and memory efficient software
and&lt;br/&gt;hardware design, which saves energy and cost and has broad
economical&lt;br/&gt;and social benefits.