* 1116298
* AF: Small: Parallel Global Optimization  Algorithms with Asynchrony, Adaptive Re-Planning, and Response Surfaces for Costly Simulations
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2016
* Christine Shoemaker, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Jack S. Snoeyink
* 08/31/2016
* USD 499,867.00

Optimization can be used for designing lower cost or more efficient strategies
and selecting model parameters so that models can accurately predict system
behavior. However, for computationally expensive simulation models, conventional
optimization can require infeasibly long computation times (months or years) The
focus of this research is to develop a method (called POARS) to use parallel
processors to find the global minimum of a function with relatively few
simulations. Examples of such computationally expensive simulation models are
systems of nonlinear partial differential equations used to describe fluid flow
and reactive chemistry transport that arise in many applications including
groundwater and atmospheric modeling. Because such models can take hours or even
days to complete a single simulation, it is important to have algorithms that
find good optimal solutions with few simulations, which the proposed research
achieves by integrating surrogate response surfaces into the optimization. The
algorithm will be applied to real models (based on field data) including a
groundwater model (partial differential equations) and two watershed models
(spatially distributed difference equations).

The POARS algorithm incorporates multiple novel features including Ensembles,
Asynchronous Parallelism with Adaptive Re-planning and the use of multiple
optimization methods on the response surface, where many evaluations can be made
cheaply. The asynchronous aspect enables new simulations to start before
simulations on other parallel processors are complete. The response surface is
based on an ensemble of response surfaces including mixture models based on
Dempster-Schafer theory. A proof of almost sure convergence of POARS will be
given. The research will couple the optimization method on M processes with
parallel simulations each on N processes to efficiently use MN processors.