* 1116776
* TC: Small: An Empirical Study of Text-based Passwords and Their Users
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2014
* Lorrie Cranor, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 08/31/2014
* USD 494,492.00

Text-based passwords are the most commonly used mechanism for authenticating
users to computer systems, but are often easy for attackers to compromise. To
mitigate the danger of such attacks, system administrators use password-
composition policies, which force newly created passwords to adhere to a set of
requirements intended to make them harder to guess. Although it is generally
believed that reasonable password-composition policies make passwords harder to
guess, and hence more secure, research has not been able to precisely quantify
the level of resistance to password guessing provided by different password-
composition policies or the individual requirements of which they are comprised.
Beyond their affect on the guessability of passwords, password-composition
policies also affect users' behavior. For example, certain password-composition
policies that lead to more-difficult-to-predict passwords may also lead users to
write down their passwords more readily, reuse them across accounts, or forget
them more often. Such behavior can both affect an adversary's ability to guess
passwords, and raise the cost of administering a
system.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will substantially contribute to the
understanding of the effects of password-composition policies on the security
and usability of text-based passwords. The results of this research will be
applicable to almost all computer systems that use text-based passwords, and
will allow administrators to better select suitable password-composition
policies, thus rendering them less susceptible to account compromise. More
specifically, this project will involve collecting sets of passwords (or data
about passwords) created under different password-composition policies and data
about the associated user behaviors, and analyzing them for security and
usability. Sets of up to tens of thousands of passwords or statistics about them
will be collected via online studies, actual field data from two institutions,
and from paper-and-pencil surveys and lab studies. This data will be analyzed
using several new methods, including an approach for calculating how long it
would take for various state-of-the-art password-guessing tools or algorithms to
guess the passwords, and a new method for approximating the entropy of passwords
from smaller datasets than was previously feasible. Based on this methodology,
this research will: (1) measure the guessability of passwords generated under
multiple different password-composition policies more accurately than was
previously possible; (2) empirically assess the usefulness of entropy
approximations (a common, but questioned, measure of password strength) as a
measure of password guessability by state-of-the-art password-guessing
algorithms; and (3) compare the usability of and user sentiment engendered by
each password-composition policy to develop a holistic understanding of the
merits of policies. This will enable the development of a set of actionable
guidelines for administrators that will help them select password-composition
policies appropriate for their user populations and security requirements. Two
graduate students will be directly involved in this research project.