* 1116976
* CSR:  Small:  Collaborative Research:  An Architecture for the Emergency Retasking of Wireless Sensors Networks (ALERT)
* CSE,CNS
* 08/15/2011,07/31/2015
* Jason Hallstrom, Clemson University
* Standard Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 07/31/2015
* USD 81,451.00

This project focuses on the development of ALERT: An Architecture for the
Emergency Re-tasking of Wireless Sensor Networks. The novelty of this work lies
in the theoretical foundation of re-tasking independently-deployed sensor
networks, leading to a fundamental understanding of the design principles of
capability reallocation and sharing to best satisfy the needs of emergency
applications. Both re-tasking and integration of sensor capabilities will be
transparent to the emergency applications. The resource-constrained nature of
sensors, the wireless communication medium, and the failure-prone networking
environment, combined with the dynamic QoS requirements of the emergency
applications pose formidable challenges for the design of ALERT. &lt;br/&gt;The
understanding acquired from developing ALERT will promote a wider adoption of
sensor network systems in support of guarding our national infrastructure and
public safety. This project will result in significant scientific and
technological advances that will provide invaluable help with disaster
management and search-and-rescue operations. ALERT will have a broad societal
impact as sensor networks are being integrated into the fabric of the society.
The project will integrate research and education and will lead to the
development of new graduate and undergraduate courses in sensor networks and
embedded and distributed systems. In turn, these courses and their focus on
information integration will introduce novel research topics to undergraduate
and graduate students in computer science and engineering that fit within the
overall missions of Old Dominion University and Clemson University. Focused
efforts will be undertaken to stimulate interest and to facilitate the academic
progress of women and underrepresented minorities.