* 1116343
* EAGER: Time Traveler
* BIO,IOS
* 06/01/2011,12/31/2012
* Warren Porter, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* William E. Zamer
* 12/31/2012
* USD 29,866.00

This project will develop a bioinformatics computational platform that crosses
the disciplinary boundaries of art and science. It connects 3-D object animation
with computational fluid dynamics, heat and mass transfer engineering,
morphology, physiology, behavior, ecology, evolution, earth sciences, remote-
sensing and GIS technologies. This research addresses the question: "What has
been/is/will be the role of climate, topography and plant environments in
defining animal body sizes, shapes and distributions in the geological past, the
present and future?" This work will include the use of state-of-the-art
mechanistic models of global and local environments and selected terrestrial and
marine vertebrates and invertebrates. The approach is very cross disciplinary
involving genetics, biochemistry, and engineering/physics-based heat, mass and
momentum transfer models of animals in terrestrial and marine environments. The
investigators will be modeling mobile animals that can select their local
physical environments on an hourly basis throughout the year and for multiple
years to define growth potential, reproductive potential and distribution
limits. The results of this project will generate computational and database
resources and tools for scientific research, high school and college student
instruction and interactive lay public access to computer explorations of how
ancient, modern and future environments have altered, or will alter how and
where species can successfully exist on earth. This research will develop
resources useful to governmental regulatory agencies, university and NGO
scientists as well as policy specialists, and will lead to advances in
understanding the biophysics, energetics, behavior, ecology and evolution of
animals. This work will create opportunities to pique the curiosity of young
students and the lay public, and create a virtual environment where they can
explore the constraints that define the kinds of animals that can successfully
survive, grow and reproduce in local environments. These computer resources will
be developed and made available on a website accessible via
http://www.zoology.wisc.edu/faculty/Por/Por.html.