* 1116892
* AF: Small: Frameworks for Design and Analysis of Heuristics
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2014
* Avrim Blum, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Balasubramanian Kalyanasundaram
* 08/31/2014
* USD 358,000.00

At the core of many of the tasks we need computers to solve lie a collection of
important, though difficult, optimization problems. These problems can be hard
to solve optimally, and as a result they have typically been attacked through
two distinct approaches. The first is to construct algorithms with provable
worst-case approximation guarantees. This approach has the advantage of provable
guarantees but the disadvantage that these guarantees can be fairly poor. The
second approach is to develop natural heuristics and to test them on benchmark
problems. This approach has the advantage of producing techniques that can work
well in practical settings similar to the benchmarks, but the disadvantage that
the conditions needed for good performance are often not well understood. This
project aims to bridge the gap between these approaches: to develop new
theoretical foundations for the analysis of non-worst-case guarantees, as well
as new tools for the design of formally-justified
heuristics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specifically, this project will pursue four
main directions. The first is the analysis of implicit assumptions in problem
formulations. Often the objective function used in an optimization problem is a
proxy for a goal that cannot be directly measured by the algorithm, and thus the
instance already needs to have the property that these two are related. This
relation is often not explicitly stated and yet can potentially provide usable
structure an algorithm can use. The second is analysis of natural conditions on
inputs due to how they are constructed. For example, if certain parts of the
instance given to the algorithm are the result of noisy measurements, then the
algorithm can be flexible to their exact values. The third is development of
fast methods to test the "niceness" of an instance, which can then be used in
the selection of an appropriate algorithm for that instance. Finally, the last
direction is the development of algorithms that provide a smooth transition
between their performance on stable and unstable instances with applications to
privacy-preserving data analysis.