* 1116079
* CSR: Small: Highly Efficient, Pipeline-oriented Data-intensive Scalable Computing
* CSE,CNS
* 08/15/2011,07/31/2014
* Amin Vahdat, University of California-San Diego
* Continuing Grant
* Anita La Salle
* 07/31/2014
* USD 350,000.00

Intellectual Merit: Data-intensive Scalable Computing (DISC) is increasingly
important to peta-scale problems, from search engines and social networks to
biological and scientific applications. Already datacenters built to support
large-scale DISC computing operate at staggering scale, housing up to hundreds
of thousands of compute nodes, exabytes of storage, and petabytes of memory.
Current DISC systems have addressed these data sizes through scalability,
however the resulting per-node performance has lagged behind per-server capacity
by more than an order of magnitude. For example, in current systems as much as
94% of available disk I/O and 33% of CPU remain idle. This results in
unsustainable cost and energy requirements. Meeting future data processing
challenges will only be possible if DISC systems can be deployed in a
sustainable, efficient manner.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project focuses on two
specific, unaddressed challenges to building and deploying sustainable DISC
systems: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; -a lack of per-node efficiency and cross-
resource balance as the system scales, and &lt;br/&gt; -highly-efficient storage
fault tolerance tailored to DISC workloads. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project's
approach is to automatically and dynamically ensure cross-resource balance
between compute, memory, network, and underlying storage components statically
during system design, as well as dynamically during runtime. The goal is to
support general DISC processing in a balanced manner despite changing
application behavior and heterogeneous computing and storage configurations.
This work will result in a fully functional prototype DISC system supporting the
Map/Reduce programming model to support general-purpose application
programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts include:&lt;br/&gt; -training
diverse students, such as undergraduates and underrepresented groups - to
understand DISC services as an interesting part of the overall curriculum and as
a resource for interdisciplinary collaboration.&lt;br/&gt; -a public release of
the proposed balanced runtime system, including support for higher-level
programming models;&lt;br/&gt; -working with industrial partners as part of
UCSD's Center for Networked Systems to address sustainability and efficiency
issues in this critical portion of industrial and governmental data processing.