* 1116186
* SHB: Small: Collaborative Research: Reducing Alcohol Use Among College Students Using Virtual Role Playing
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2015
* Jennifer Epstein, Joan and Sanford I. Weill Medical College of Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 08/31/2015
* USD 240,686.00

The project's main objective is devising a means to meet the challenge of
excessive alcohol use by college students. The transition to the first year of
college, in particular, is a critical age and life period when health and
wellbeing are put to the test by the convergence of opportunity and peer
pressure to drink heavily. Specifically, the project hypothesizes that adding
the opportunity for role play in a web-based required online alcohol prevention
program will improve the results compared to the web-based program only in a
secondary prevention trial. All participants receive the standard alcohol
prevention program required at the University of Central Florida (UCF),
AlcoholEdu. Half of the randomly assigned participants have the opportunity to
practice cognitive-behavioral skills through role plays. These immersive
practice sessions are realistic in presenting situations that college students
face in the real world. Armed with these skills and practice it is expected they
will engage in less excessive alcohol use than those participants lacking this
experience.

A unique aspect of the proposed treatment is the use of a state-of-the-art
interactive role play experience based on digital puppetry of virtual
characters. Here, digital puppetry refers to the use of a human to control the
actions of animated characters in real-time. Such artistry has been employed for
several decades in a number of venues including television and location-based
entertainment. Digital puppetry is currently employed by one of the PIs in
education and peer-pressure resistance programs. By affording natural and highly
versatile behaviors, puppetry greatly increases interactivity and immersion
while affording flexibility in the appearance and traits of the characters and
choices for the interactive scenes.

An evaluation of this type of alcohol secondary prevention technique with
college students is an advance in the field. Specifically, it allows the
investigation of whether one-on-one virtual role-plays (e.g., a party scene in
which college students can practice refusing to join a drinking game) can help
students avoid difficult peer pressure situations. It could provide a new method
to enhance and complement the programs currently used for alcohol secondary
prevention.