* 1116589
* CIF: Small: Approximate Message Passing for Systems with Linear Mixing and Randomization
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2015
* Sundeep Rangan, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 08/31/2015
* USD 481,472.00

A fundamental challenge in many engineering and science problems today is to
find tractable methods to handle large scale, complex nonlinear systems. This
research considers large systems with linear mixing, where the system components
interact through aggregates of small, linearizable perturbations. For such
systems, the research investigates a promising new class of algorithms called
generalized approximate message passing (GAMP) that exploits the nature of the
linear mixing interactions to iteratively decompose large-scale problems into
smaller, more tractable, problems. The GAMP methodology provides a systematic
procedure applicable to a large class of systems that is computationally
scalable to very high dimensions and admits a tractable mathematical analysis in
the case of certain high-dimensional random systems. The potential for the GAMP
algorithm is thus far reaching, and the research explores applications in
diverse fields including scheduling in cellular wireless systems, image
recovery, pattern recognition and detection of connectivity in neural
networks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The GAMP methodology is based on a Gaussian and
quadratic approximations of loopy belief propagation on large, dense graphs. The
resulting algorithm is a general, but computationally simple, iterative
procedure that alternates between scalar optimization and estimation operations
based on the local behavior of the system, along with linear transforms that
capture the interactions between system components. The theoretical components
of the research are to characterize the algorithm's asymptotic behavior,
convergence and optimality along with developing extensions to the systems with
mixes of linear and nonlinear interactions. The research will leverage tools
from and contribute to the broader fields of optimization, graphical models,
numerical methods and random systems.