* 1116075
* SHB: Small: An Assistive, Robotic Table [ART] Promoting Independent Living
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2015
* Keith Green, Clemson University
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 08/31/2015
* USD 271,250.00

In hospitals, technology has become pervasive and indispensable during medical
crises. At home, technology proliferates as computerized health monitoring
systems and, perhaps in the future, as assistive "humanoid" robots. Meanwhile,
our everyday environments remain essentially conventional: low-tech and ill-
adaptive to dramatic life changes. This social condition places strain on
healthcare and family support systems, and represents a failure of scientists,
engineers and architects to support independent living. The overall aim of this
effort is to enhance everyday environments with intelligent hardware promoting
independent living. This project is focused on a discrete component of an
envisioned suite of networked, robotic furniture integrated into existing living
environments: an Assistive, Robotic Table [ART]. ART is the hybrid of a typical
nightstand and the over-the-bed table found in hospital rooms, comprised of a
novel "continuum robotic" table surface that gently folds, extends, and
reconfigures to support work and leisure activities; a smart storage volume that
physically manages and delivers personal effects; and an accessorized headboard.
These components of ART recognize, communicate with, and partly remember each
other in interaction with human users and with other components of the suite.
The key deliverable for this award is the full-scale, working ART prototype
performing "going-to-bed" and "awaking" scenarios for three target groups. Our
trans-disciplinary team will develop this complex physical-digital artifact by
way of iterative design and evaluation activities that recognize engineering
design, architectural design and human-centered design as inseparable. Key
outcomes of the research are the "continuum robotic" surface as well as an
innovative approach to human mobility and its metrics for intelligent, physical
artifacts. The key broader impact of the research is intelligent "architectural
robotic" ART, empowering people to remain in their homes for as long as
possible, even as their physical capabilities alter over time; and, in more
grave circumstances, affording people some semblance of feeling "at home" as
user and ART move to assisted care facilities. This work is jointly funded by
the Office of International Science and Engineering.