* 1116060
* AF: SMALL:  Developing Novel Computational Methods for Investigating Protein Dynamics Using a Multi-Scale Approach
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2011,12/31/2014
* Nurit Haspel, University of Massachusetts Boston
* Standard Grant
* Mitra Basu
* 12/31/2014
* USD 249,774.00

Proteins are the workhorses of the cell, involved in virtually every process in
life. Many proteins are flexible molecules that undergo structural changes as
part of their function. In other words ? they can assume various possible
structures (conformations) via changes that range from small-scale movements to
large domain motions. The question of how the structure and dynamics of proteins
relate to their function has challenged scientists for several decades but still
remains largely open. Existing computational methods for simulating protein
dynamics can sample atomic level dynamic processes, yet their usefulness is
limited as they require large computational resources, and they only allow for
modeling of interactions that take place on very small time scales (e.g.,
several hundreds of nanoseconds). There is promise that understanding the
connection between protein structure, dynamics and function can contribute a lot
to the understanding of how molecular machines function and may aid in drug
design and functional analysis.

A computational framework for an efficient large-scale exploration of protein
conformational changes is proposed in this work. Given a protein structure, the
aim is to efficiently generate a diverse set of conformations representing the
low energy landscape of this protein under physiological conditions. The
suggested methodology can be used to explore the conformational space of
proteins and protein complexes and gain better understanding of protein dynamics
and function.

To overcome the computational demands of a full scale conformational search, the
search will be done in two stages: first, conduct a fast and approximate
geometry-based exploration of the low energy landscape of proteins and protein
complexes in an efficient way, temporarily sacrificing small-scale details for
efficiency. The approximate search is enhanced with a novel biasing scheme that
drives the search towards more flexible regions of the protein, reducing the
huge search space into a manageable size. The reduced representation of the
conformational landscape will be enhanced and complemented with detailed,
physics based simulations applied to interesting and important regions in the
proteins or to intermediate structures. This last stage will take advantage of
massive parallel computing. The combination of fast, approximate search
techniques and detailed physics-based simulation methods will create an
enhanced, more complete picture of the low-energy landscape of those proteins
and will improve understanding about how proteins perform their function. The
methodology can be applied to problems related to protein interactions and
rational drug design.

The broader impact of this project is partly due to the central role of proteins
in virtually every basic biological function. This project addresses a
significant question of the biological research community. Educational and
outreach activities will be implemented through the following: a)
Interdisciplinary collaborations with members of the CS department and other
departments in the College of Science and Mathematics at UMass Boston. b)
Training and mentoring the research of undergraduate and graduate students,
including women and students from under-represented groups in science. c) Help
setting up a Bioinformatics research and teaching program at UMass Boston.