* 1116134
* NeTS:  Small: Foundations of Energy Efficient Wireless Multimedia Broadcasting
* CSE,CNS
* 08/01/2011,07/31/2015
* Jie Luo, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* Wenjing Lou
* 07/31/2015
* USD 349,806.00

Wireless multimedia broadcast has been the central of human entertainments for a
century. While the broadcasting signaling is being transformed to digital, its
infrastructure is still incapable of supporting the full potential of wireless
digital broadcast. This project develops a comprehensive framework to enable
scalable and adaptive wireless multimedia broadcasting for an envisioned
cellular-type infrastructure, as well as for infrastructures in transitional
stages. The project consists of three components: 1) an adaptive channel coding
scheme, 2) a stochastic power control and antenna beamforming algorithm, and 3)
a feedback channel medium access control protocol. In the first step, the
research develops an adaptive coding scheme to enable efficient and scalable
broadcast communication over dynamic wireless channels with minimum channel
information at the transmitters. In the second step, the research develops a
stochastic power control and antenna beamforming framework to optimize energy
efficiency of the broadcast system under communication throughput and delay
constraints. In the third step, the research develops a medium access control
protocol to feedback necessary channel information without sacrificing system
scalability using a minimum amount of feedback channel bandwidth. This project
also develops a demonstration system in wireless computer networks.