* 1116707
* SHF:  Small:  Collaborative Research: Computing with cells-the neuron case
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2011,06/30/2015
* NONE NONE, NONE
* Standard Grant
* Mitra Basu
* 06/30/2015
* USD 200,000.00

The work will focus on models of computing with brain cells, more specifically
the neurons and their major support cells in the brain, the glia. The major
novelty of the project is the consideration of the glia cells in these models of
computation. The interplay between glia and neurons has not been considered in
the domain literature until now. Thus the project will not only look at how to
perform computation taking inspiration from the organization of the neurons and
glia into networks, but also explore topics such as investigating the power
related to sequentiality/parallelism of such devices, synchronization, data
processing and manipulation such as considering different types of output
encoding for the computation. Several other topics considered already for
neuronal systems such as universality/non-universality of networks with various
restrictions, normal forms and consideration of the refractory period of neurons
will also be investigated for the new devices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project
will incorporate an experimental part in the second year of the timeline when
with the help of the senior researcher on the project, Dr. Mark DeCoster
(professor of Biomedical Engineering) the results of the first phase of the work
will be validated in the lab. The work holds promise to significantly impact
several research areas as well as the emerging area of computing with cells. In
Computer Science, the research may yield new paradigms and new computing
techniques (as has happened in the discovery of genetic algorithms and neural
networks). In Biology, the project is likely to provide insight into the
organization of brain cells networks, including the support cells for neurons,
the glia. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;One of the major objectives of this project is
to gain more knowledge and insight into the extraordinary biological systems ?
the cells and also to understand in a systemic way how the sub-cellular
processes work and how the cell-cell communications can be useful for performing
distributed computations. Algorithms, source codes and results of the project
will be freely disseminated to the public through the project's website.