* 1116294
* CSR: SHF: Small: Propagator-Based Computing, A Programming Foundation for Decentralized Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 08/01/2011,07/31/2014
* Harold Abelson, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 07/31/2014
* USD 200,000.00

This project develops the Propagator Model, a concurrent
decentralized&lt;br/&gt;framework designed to support computing in large, open,
dynamic&lt;br/&gt;environments. It provides powerful tools for organizing
computations&lt;br/&gt;to operate effectively in a world of rapidly changing and
globally&lt;br/&gt;inconsistent data by adopting a fundamental shift in
viewpoint: the&lt;br/&gt;things manipulated by basic computing elements are not
fixed values.&lt;br/&gt;Rather, they are information about values, and this
information is&lt;br/&gt;continually refined as new information becomes
available.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project creates the architectural and
linguistic foundations for&lt;br/&gt;systems that can operate effectively in
environments where there is no&lt;br/&gt;central management, and where one
cannot rely on resources being&lt;br/&gt;consistently available or consistently
operating, and where the data is&lt;br/&gt;rapidly changing and globally
inconsistent. Using three mechanisms&lt;br/&gt;implicit in the computational
substrate: (1) constraint propagation,&lt;br/&gt;(2) partial information
structures, and (3) dependencies, systems&lt;br/&gt;built on the propagator
model automatically have the ability to&lt;br/&gt;support their conclusions with
arguments and report on the provenance&lt;br/&gt;of the ingredients. They can
automatically discover and use&lt;br/&gt;consistent subsystems of inconsistent
data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project erects a naturally concurrent and
distributed model and&lt;br/&gt;infrastructure for computation that makes it
easier to build systems&lt;br/&gt;that are reliable in the face of natural
failures and deliberate&lt;br/&gt;attacks. It provides support for auditable and
accountable systems&lt;br/&gt;that are robust and adaptable to novel
applications.