* 1116736
* AF: Novel Methods for Fundamental Matrix and Polynomial Computations
* CSE,CCF
* 07/15/2011,12/31/2016
* Victor Pan, Research Foundation Of The City University Of New York (Lehman)
* Standard Grant
* Jack S. Snoeyink
* 12/31/2016
* USD 350,000.00

Matrix and polynomial computations are the backbone of modern computing in
sciences, engineering and signal and image processing. This project shall
advance the known algorithms in two central subject areas of this
&lt;br/&gt;field, namely the solution of linear systems of equations and
polynomial root-finding. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Solving linear systems will be
advanced by the development of novel preconditioning techniques, which will
enable faster and more accurate solutions. The proposed novel methods of
randomized preconditioning are highly promising for the important class of input
matrices that have small numbers of small singular values. Known methods are
substantially more costly for this class. The same randomization techniques, as
well as alternative methods using homotopic continuation, promise substantial
advance in solving structured (e.g. Hankel and Toeplitz) linear systems of
equations. The cited promise relies on the results of the initial but quite
extensive formal and experimental study that motivated the project. Immediate
applications of the proposed methods include the computation of polynomial
greatest common divisors (GCDs) and approximate GCDs. These are themselves
highly important subjects of symbolic and symbolic-numerical computing having
applications to control, image and signal processing and the computation of
algebraic curves and surfaces.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The classical problem of
polynomial root-finding has been intensively studied for four millennia (since
the Sumerian times) but is still the subject of intensive research, motivated by
important applications to algebraic and geometric computations and signal
processing. Besides the task of advancing complex root-finding, a well known
challenge, motivated in particular by problems in algebraic geometric
optimization, is the approximation of the R real roots of a polynomial having C
complex roots, when the ratio C/R is large. Interestingly, the leading numerical
polynomial root-finding packages and programs MPSolve and Eigensolve can save at
most 10% of their running time by restricting the task to real root-finding.
&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The recent progress in polynomial root-finding largely
relied on matrix methods. Some of them can be advanced by employing new
preprocessing techniques for linear systems of equations. Such preprocessing
enables parallel acceleration of root-finding. Another direction, also based on
matrix methods, enables the design of numerical techniques that approximate just
the real roots of univariate polynomials. This novel algorithmic feature implied
the acceleration of the known numerical methods by the cited large factor C/R.
Further research directions include the design of new matrix algorithms for
polynomial roots as well as matrix-free variations of the recent novel
algorithms, their extension to root-finding for the systems of multivariate
polynomials, and the implementation work.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The expected
progress in two central areas of modern computing will have interdisciplinary
impact; it will combine numerical and symbolic methods, thus promoting their
symbolic-numerical combination; the project will demonstrate the power of some
important general techniques of algorithm design, such as randomization and
homotopic continuation, and will bring together the energy and resources of a
geographically diverse group of scientists, who are working in various subject
areas but are interested in participation in the project. Last but not the
least, the project assumes participation of students from Lehman College of CUNY
and the Graduate Center of CUNY; for such students this project will be an
excellent research experience. Participation of students from minorities and
underrepresented groups is also expected and they will be supported both by the
NSF and CUNY.