* 1116850
* CSR:Small: Enabling Aggressive Voltage Scaling for Real-Time and Embedded Systems with Inexpensive yet Efficient Power Conversion
* CSE,CNS
* 08/15/2011,07/31/2014
* Alexander Dean, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 07/31/2014
* USD 250,000.00

This project seeks to improve the energy efficiency of cost-sensitive embedded
computer systems by splitting them into multiple separate voltage domains and
running each as efficiently as possible by adjusting voltage and frequency
dynamically. Improving energy efficiency allows a designer to extend a system?s
operational life, reduce battery size and weight, and/or improve functionality.
Switch-mode power supplies are commonly used to convert power efficiently from
one voltage level to another. However, existing switching power supplies are
often quite expensive compared with the microcontrollers and peripherals which
they power. The major challenge in exploiting multiple voltage domains to save
energy is to make power supplies that are efficient yet inexpensive enough to be
practical for low-cost devices. The innovation here is to move control of the
power supply into software and a low-cost generic microcontroller, which can be
shared by the embedded application. Real-time systems scheduling techniques
ensure that the entire system works reliably and that the power supply does not
emit electromagnetic noise during periods that the system needs to perform
noise-sensitive operations. Advanced Gallium Nitride (GaN) transistors are used
to achieve high switching frequencies, enabling the use of smaller and less
expensive components. New, highly efficient methods are developed to store and
use energy from energy-scavenging devices (photovoltaic, thermoelectric, ambient
radio).

Improvements in power supply technology mean lower energy consumption and longer
battery life for electronic devices, and lower production costs. Beyond
developing such technology, the project advances education in it.