* 1116089
* Osmium Isotope and Highly Siderophile Element Abundance Studies of Mantle Sources Sampled by Ocean Island Basalts
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2011,06/30/2015
* James Day, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Continuing Grant
* Sonia Esperanca
* 06/30/2015
* USD 263,126.00

Osmium isotope and highly siderophile element abundance studies of mantle
sources sampled by ocean island basalts&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual merit
of the proposed activity: This project will address the fundamental question of
whether fractionation of highly siderophile element (HSE = Os, Ir, Ru, Rh, Pt,
Pd, Re, Au) and Sr-Nd-Os-Pb isotopes can be used to identify unambiguously
recycled or primitive materials present in some ocean island basalt (OIB) mantle
sources. Data for Hawaiian and western Canary Island lavas suggest this is
possible, but more data are required to test this hypothesis fully.
Understanding of HSE behavior in the mantle, and in the sources of OIB in
particular, is limited, and Os isotope data are lacking for many OIB samples for
which Sr-Nd-Pb isotope data are available. Collection of new Os isotope and HSE
abundance data on OIB lavas is therefore an important task for better
understanding of mantle heterogeneity. The project will; (1) provide further
constraints on the range of variation of 187Os/188Os in OIB mantle sources; (2)
establish whether Os isotopes and HSE abundances can be used to constrain
recycling of crust and lithosphere back into the mantle; and (3) better define
the distribution of HSE in OIB mantle sources. Suites of lavas from the eastern
Canary Islands (La Gomera, Tenerife, Gran Canaria, Fuerteventura, Lanzarote),
Cook Islands (Mangaia, Atiu, Rarotonga), and Mascarene Islands (Réunion,
Mauritius) will be systematically examined for petrology, mineralogy, whole-rock
major- and trace-element abundances, HSE (Os, Ir, Ru, Pt, Pd, Re) abundances,
and Sr-Nd-Os-Pb isotope systematics using state-of-the-art analytical
techniques. These islands were selected for study because there is strong prior
evidence for recycled (Canary Islands, Mangaia, Atiu) or primitive (Mascarene
Islands; Rarotonga) material in their mantle sources, and appropriate samples
are in hand for this study. New data will be used to assess effects of crustal
contamination versus mantle heterogeneity, and to model the nature and
proportions of recycled material in local mantle sources.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts of the proposed activity: Components of
training and teaching are a strong theme of the proposal, with direct
involvement of graduate and undergraduate students. The project will serve as
the core of a PhD thesis for a graduate student, and will equip a number of
undergraduates with highly transferable quantitative analytical and
communication skills. Students involved in this project will gain extensive
experience in several state-of-the-art analytical techniques, and the graduate
student will participate in fieldwork, receiving training in field methods. This
proposal will also support a recently appointed early-career non-tenured
Assistant Professor (start date, January, 2011). Research results will be
incorporated into classroom lectures and in inquiry-based learning activities at
Scripps Institution of Oceanography. Outreach for the project will include
contributions at both scientific and public-domain levels, through educational
website material, and in talks at high schools and public events in the San
Diego area.