* 1116124
* SHB: Small: Cell Phone-Based Activity Tracking for Telehealth
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2016
* Warren Tryon, Fordham University
* Standard Grant
* John Cozzens
* 08/31/2016
* USD 420,000.00

SHB: Small: Cell Phone-Based Activity Monitoring for
Telehealth&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Contemporary smart
cell phones contain a tri-axial accelerometer, which makes it possible to
measure the acceleration of a smart phone user in all three spatial dimensions.
Modern data mining methods permit the construction of an activity recognition
classifier from this acceleration data, so that a user's physical activity
(e.g., walking, jogging, standing, etc.) can be automatically inferred from the
accelerometer values. This research project will build an activity recognition
system that can be deployed as a downloadable cell phone application. Users will
then be able to access a description of their activities via a web interface and
can use this information to monitor and change their behavior. Thus this
research can be used to address the many health-related problems that result
from physical inactivity. It can also assist with other health-related problem,
such as falling in the elderly, by detecting falls and providing automatic
notification to caregivers. The data generated via the cell phone activity
recognition system will also enable large scale epidemiological studies of
activity levels and health that, due to prohibitive costs, were not previously
possible.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Building a successful activity recognition system
will require addressing many technical challenges. This research will require
improved feature construction methods for transforming time-series data into
representations suitable for example-oriented classification algorithms. It will
also require the evaluation of alternate architectures for performing wide-scale
real-time data mining, in order to determine how much of the activity
recognition work should be performed on the client (i.e., smart phone) versus a
centralized server. The adequacy of smart cell phones for performing reliable
activity recognition will also be evaluated given the many constraints (e.g.,
limited battery life) imposed by these devices.