* 1116882
* SHF: Small: Variational and Bound Performance Analysis of Nanometer Mixed-Signal/Analog Circuits
* CSE,CCF
* 08/01/2011,07/31/2016
* Sheldon Tan, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 07/31/2016
* USD 287,800.00

Analog and mixed-signal circuits are very sensitive to the process variations as
many matching and regularities of the layout are required. This situation
becomes worse as technology continues to scale to sub-40nm owning to the
increasing process-induced variability. Transistor level mismatch due to process
variation is the primary barrier to reach a high-yield rate for analog designs
in sub-90nm technologies. Analog circuit designers usually perform a Monte-Carlo
(MC) analysis to analyze the statistical mismatch and predict the variational
responses of their designs under variations. As MC analysis requires a large
number of repeated circuit simulations, its computational cost is expensive.
Efficient variational performance analysis of mixed-signal/analog circuits such
as worst-case, bounding case and statistical analysis will become imperative for
nanometer analog/mixed-signal designs. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research seeks
to develop novel and efficient non-Monte-Carlo techniques for worst-case and
statistical analysis of analog/mixed-signal circuits. The PIs propose to develop
novel worst-case analysis methods for analog/mixed-signal circuits based on
graph-based symbolic analysis technique, affine-like interval arithmetic and a
control-theoretic method. The new method will first build variational transfer
functions from linearized analog circuit by determinant decision diagram (DDD)
based symbolic analysis and affine-like interval arithmetic. Then the
performance bounds will be computed by control-theoretic theory based on the
variational transfer functions. More conservative affine-like interval
arithmetic to reduce conservation will also be investigated. The performance
bounds in the time domains given frequency domain bounds will be investigated as
well. The PIs plan to develop fast non-Monte-Carlo stochastic analysis methods
to calculate statistical responses such as mismatch due to process variations.
The problem is to be modeled as solving nonlinear stochastic differential-
algebra-equations. Nonlinear stochastic methods (Galerkin or collocation
methods) and new nonlinear macromodeling method will be investigated to solve
the resulting problems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The outcome of this research will
add significantly to the core knowledge of variational and statistical analysis
techniques for analog/mixed-signal circuits, which will enable more efficient
statistical optimization and design of analog/mixed-signal systems. By working
with the industry partner, the PI expects that the developed techniques will
bring immediate impacts on the design community to improve the design
productivity for nanometer integrated analog/mixed-signal systems. The
interdisciplinary nature of proposed research and relevant training will allow
students to gain critical skills in the highly competitive high-tech job market.
This grant will enable the PI to hire more female and underrepresented minority
students to further contribute to the diversity in America's science and
technology workforce.