* 1116140
* RI: CGV: Small: Multiview Reconstruction and Calibration Using Differential Geometry of Curve Fragments and Surface Patches
* CSE,IIS
* 08/01/2011,07/31/2014
* Benjamin Kimia, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* Jie Yang
* 07/31/2014
* USD 450,000.00

This project investigates the use of image curve fragments to augment the use of
isolated features in multi-view calibration and reconstruction tasks. The
research team develops infrastructure based on differential geometry that
utilizes curves and surfaces beyond lines and planes to correlate structure in
multiple images of a scene: a pair of corresponding curve fragments in two views
initiates a candidate 3D curve fragment whose presence can be validated in
additional views. This results in a 3D curve sketch. A significant advantage of
the 3D curve sketch over an unorganized cloud of point reconstruction is that it
can correlate with image curve structure in novel views without referring back
to the original views. This allows both incremental reconstruction
(incorporating one additional view at a time) and simultaneous reconstruction
from numerous views. Calibration methods are also being explored by using curve
fragments under a RANSAC regime by using differential geometry in three views or
more, and differential geometry together with appearance in two views. In a
similar vein the correlation of surface patches by matching observable intensity
local form in images is being investigated as a method for reconstruction of
local surface patches. The project provides a core technology for many
applications in the computer vision field. The developed technology can be also
applied to other fields such as archaeology and art.