* 1116297
* SHF:  Small:  Energy Efficient Reconfigurable Logic for Ultra Low Power Ubiquitous Computing Systems
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2015
* Benton Calhoun, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* tao li
* 08/31/2015
* USD 400,000.00

Emerging ubiquitous computing systems require numerous small wireless nodes to
be integrated into our surroundings. In order to provide both a small size and a
long lifetime on limited energy, these nodes must use circuits that are ultra
low power (ULP), offer substantial processing capabilities, provide flexibility
to meet different application needs, and allow for low development and
deployment costs. Existing approaches to circuit design such as ASICs, off the
shelf parts, or sub-threshold processors fail to provide all of these traits at
once. This project is developing an energy efficient field programmable gate
array (FPGA) capable of operating into the sub-threshold voltage region to
provide a computational platform that meets the needs of ubiquitous computing
systems. Commercial FPGAs are usually designed to compete with high performance
processors, so they operate at high voltages and use circuit structures that do
not permit low voltage sub-threshold operation. To re-target FPGAs for energy
efficient operation at low voltage, this project replaces conventional
programmable interconnect circuits with non-buffered single pass-transistor
switches. These switches create a voltage drop in the interconnect lines that is
recovered using asynchronous sense amplifiers at the inputs to configurable
logic blocks. Furthermore, the voltage of the configuration bit cells that turn
on the interconnect switches is boosted. This new knob increases the speed
exponentially and reduces variations in the sub-threshold region and does not
incur substantial energy overhead since the configuration bit cells only switch
rarely when the FPGA is reprogrammed. The configurable logic blocks are re-
designed to take advantage of this new interconnect fabric.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will result in an FPGA capable of energy
efficient low voltage operation. The FPGA device will be demonstrated in
ubiquitous computing applications. Since it is both low energy and
reconfigurable, it will allowubiquitous computing nodes to employ substantial
processing to extract information from locally sensed data and then make
decisions based on that information, reducing use of power intensive radio
communication to extend the node lifetimes. The flexibility of the FPGA allows
rapid re-targeting of the energy efficient hardware for different application or
contextual requirements, providing a new computing platform to enhance the
ability of software and hardware developers to create ubiquitous computing
systems.