* 1116067
* CIF:  Small: Adaptive signal representation for accelerated multidimensional imaging
* CSE,CCF
* 08/01/2011,09/30/2011
* Mathews Jacob, University of Rochester
* Standard Grant
* John Cozzens
* 09/30/2011
* USD 433,897.00

The acquisition of high resolution multi-dimensional image data is becoming
increasingly important in several bio-medical applications (e.g., spectroscopic
imaging and cardiac imaging). Very often, imaging devices are pushed to their
limits in the quest for high spatio-temporal/spatial-spectral resolution,
resulting in several artifacts and SNR loss. Recently, the recovery of the image
data from sub-Nyquist sampled measurements using constrained image models has
emerged as a promising alternative. A challenge in using pre-determined models
is the misfit between the representation and dataset; many coefficients are
often required to represent the signal at hand. The main focus of this work is
to develop a novel theoretical framework and efficient algorithms to adapt image
representations to under-sampled measurements. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;We
specifically focus on blind or adaptive representations, which are a significant
departure from classical approaches based on pre-determined dictionaries. By
adapting the signal model to measurements, we expect to obtain unbiased
reconstructions from far smaller numbers of measurements. We formulate the joint
estimation of the representation and the signal from the entire under-sampled
data as a single optimization problem, where the criterion is only dependent on
the recovered signal. This enables the development of efficient optimization
algorithms, performance optimization using tailored cost functions, and
determination of the conditions for perfect recovery. This approach is expected
to considerably improve the resolution in several multi-dimensional imaging
schemes, which will facilitate several basic science and clinical applications
of very high significance; the proposed research is truly transformative. The
impact of this work is strengthened by the sharing of software and data-sharing,
integration of research and teaching, and well-designed out-reach program.