* 1116296
* CGV: Small: Collaborative Research: From Virtual to Real
* CSE,IIS
* 08/01/2011,07/31/2014
* Wojciech Matusik, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 07/31/2014
* USD 257,998.00

From Virtual to Real&lt;br/&gt;Wojciech Matusik, MIT, and Hanspeter Pfister,
Harvard University&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Novel and innovative digital output
devices, such as stereoscopic TVs, passive (e-Ink) displays, and 3D printers,
are entering the mass market. They are rapidly improving in quality and
decreasing in price. This trend empowers users to consume and produce digital
media like never before. However, while there has been tremendous progress in
the hardware development of these output devices, the provided digital content
creation software, algorithms, and tools are largely underdeveloped. For
example, creating a 3D hardcopy of an animated computer graphics character is
well beyond the reach of consumers, and to approximate the character's
appearance and deformation behavior using multi-material 3D printers is
difficult or perhaps even impossible for professionals. The main issues are a
lack of accurate previews of how the output will look like, a lack of
standardization between devices with similar capabilities, and a lack of
accurate conversion tools and algorithms to go from the virtual (i.e., the
computer model) to the real (i.e., the physical
output).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research involves the development of a
complete process and software framework that allows moving from abstract
computer models to their physical counterparts efficiently and accurately.
Designing this process is posing the following fundamental computational
challenges: (1) accurate and efficient simulation methods that can predict the
properties and behavior of an output without physically generating it; (2)
efficient methods to compute an output gamut that describe physically-realizable
outputs for a given device; (3) general gamut mapping algorithms that convert
abstract computer models to realizable points in the device gamut; and (4)
accurate perceptual metrics that allow comparing different output elements
during the gamut mapping algorithm. This research is focusing on two emerging
classes of important output devices: multi-view auto-stereoscopic displays and
multi-material 3D printers. The research is creating a complete and general
software architecture that will support both existing and future output devices.