* 1116610
* SHF: Small: Integrating Compiler and Architecture Design to Boost Timing Speculation
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2016
* Robert Findler, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Almadena Chtchelkanova
* 08/31/2016
* USD 501,349.00

This project examines the art and science of co-designing compilers and hardware
for circuit-level timing speculation thereby enabling reliable, high-performance
computer systems. Timing speculation, an exciting, forward-looking hardware
design alternative, allows designers to abandon pessimistic design guidelines
and consequently extract more performance from the silicon. Unfortunately,
timing speculation has been under-served by contemporary compiler technologies.
This research develops novel design paradigms that allow the compiler and
architecture to be jointly optimized to build highly effective timing
speculative systems, a significant industrial and societal benefit. Outreach
efforts motivate students to pursue graduate study in computer science and
engineering. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Given the promise of timing speculation but
the prevailing downward focus of existing work, targeted code generation
addresses neglected portions of the system stack and offers enticing
possibilities. This research develops timing-aware compilation that applies
instruction-level error rate models to analyze and optimize instruction
sequences. By generating binaries specifically targeted for timing speculation,
the compiler aims to significantly reduce incidence of timing errors which
demand dynamic correction. This extends the reach of timing speculation by
reducing recovery cost. This allows systems to operate at higher clock
frequencies or enables better energy-efficiency through lower supply voltages.
The research develops compact timing error rate models through machine learning
techniques and determines how existing flow analysis present in modern compilers
could be used to drive these error rate models. The compiler extends existing
code optimizations to include the estimated impact of timing errors generated
during analysis phases. The compiler technology is being used to examine new
design paradigms for integrated timing speculative systems which include co-
designed and co-optimized architectures and compilers.