* 1116115
* CIF: Small: The Informational Limit of Eigen-Analysis Based Dimensionality Reduction, Learning and Classification
* CSE,CCF
* 08/01/2011,07/31/2015
* Rajesh Nadakuditi, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* John Cozzens
* 07/31/2015
* USD 278,353.00

We are confronted with richer, more detailed and more forms of data than ever
before. Eigen-analysis based techniques constitute a powerful class of
algorithms for discovering statistical signatures in mountains of data. Such
techniques are used widely for the detection, estimation and classification of
weak signals in a variety of applications that span the breadth of science and
engineering such as gene microarray analysis, and climate science among others.
This research will uncover the fundamental limits of these techniques and
develop new techniques that can tease out weaker signals from large, noisy
datasets. The results of this research will be disseminated broadly to advance
relevant technology and clarify both advantages and limitations of eigen-
analysis based dimensionality reduction.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Eigen-analysis
based dimensionality reduction techniques are ubiquitous in statistical signal
processing and machine learning applications. Their popularity is due to a sound
theoretical justification, near-optimal computational complexity and strong
performance guarantees in regimes where the techniques are known to work well.
This research will provide a deeper understanding of when eigen-analysis based
dimensionality reduction techniques fail so that these limitations can be
potentially overcome. The project focuses on high-dimensional, noisy settings
and uses random matrix theory as an enabling mathematical tool in this endeavor.
The informational limits developed will provide a principled way of comparing
eigen-analysis based algorithms with other techniques, and allow for an
objective quantification of any performance losses due to fast implementations,
measured in terms of how weak the signal or statistical signature is that can be
identified. The research is interdisciplinary - powerful, new tools from random
matrix theory are used to prove theorems and establish sharp, asymptotic
performance bounds.