* 1116777
* TC: Small: Automatically Identifying Botnet Command and Control Infrastructures
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2015
* Engin Kirda, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Shands
* 08/31/2015
* USD 485,878.00

Unfortunately, cyber crime has become a business today. In contrast to the
Internet security situation ten years ago, most of the significant Internet
attacks today aim to make a financial profit. A popular and effective choice of
criminals today for sending spam, stealing data, and launching attacks are so
called bots -- a type of malware that is written with the intent of compromising
and taking control of hosts on the Internet. The main distinguishing
characteristic of a bot compared to other types of malware is that a bot is able
to establish a command and control (C&amp;C) channel.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
goal of this project is to develop novel techniques and tools to detect
malicious connections from compromised machines to the C&amp;C servers of
botnets. The key insight is that when looking at very large volumes of netflow
and DNS data over an extended period of time, connection attempts to benign and
malicious addresses should exhibit enough differences in behavior so that they
can be automatically distinguished. A key challenge in this project is to
identify behavioral features that will allow the detection of connections that
exhibit botnet-like behavior.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The ability to identify
malicious C&amp;C connections and to potentially block and disrupt the
communication of the attackers with their bots presents rich opportunities for
industrial and societal impact. Furthermore, the research will have a broad
effect though education and outreach. The PI will seek broad dissemination of
research results through both top publications and industry connections.