* 1116109
* CSR:Small:Parallelism and Concurrency in Scripting Languages
* CSE,CNS
* 08/15/2011,07/31/2014
* Michael Scott, University of Rochester
* Standard Grant
* Anita La Salle
* 07/31/2014
* USD 250,000.00

The past decade has seen an explosion of interest in so-called "dynamic" or
"scripting" programming languages, which emphasize programmer productivity at
the possible expense of run-time performance. Among other applications,
scripting languages are central to much web-based and mobile computing. With
increasing use, and with the proliferation of multicore processors, there will
be inevitable pressure to improve the performance of these languages through
parallel execution. Unfortunately, the state of the art in parallel scripting
has not kept pace with parallel architecture developments. While many scripting
languages support asynchronous handling of events from the external world,
programmer-centric features, like dynamic typing, make it very difficult for
event handlers and the main program&lt;br/&gt;-- or multiple aspects of the main
program -- to execute efficiently and simultaneously on separate cores of a
modern processor.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to build a
detailed understanding of the tradeoffs between scripting language design and
the performance of parallel execution. This goal is accomplished through two
main tasks: (1) minimizing the overhead necessary to safeguard the language
implementation in the face of parallel execution, and (2) quantifying the
marginal cost of different models of data sharing and memory consistency. The
bulk of the work takes place in the Ruby scripting language, widely used for
Internet server development. This approach will leverage recent developments in
transactional memory, read-mostly synchronization, and high-performance data
structures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will contribute directly to the
training of students at both the graduate and undergraduate level, and to
curricula for courses at both the advanced and introductory level. More broadly,
effective support for parallelism in mainstream scripting languages can be
expected to produce significant improvements in productivity across the full
range of computer applications, in government, industry, science, the arts, and
entertainment.