* 1116081
* NeTS: Small: Collaborative Research: Boosting Inter-Domain Scheduled Dynamic Circuit Services (SDCS)
* CSE,CNS
* 08/01/2011,07/31/2016
* Malathi Veeraraghavan, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Darleen Fisher
* 07/31/2016
* USD 250,000.00

A variety of applications in the nascent field of cloud computing and in other
fields requires stable, low-delay network connectivity together with
capabilities of co-scheduling network and server resources. As a result, several
network providers have recently started to deploy scheduled dynamic circuit
services (SDCS). Under such services, a network provider allows its customers to
place scheduling requests for a fixed-rate circuit lasting for a fixed duration,
for either earliest possible usage or scheduled usage at a desired point of time
in the future.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;While carrying significant potential impact,
SDCS currently provide little support for dynamic routing and scheduling of
circuits across different administrative domains. This lack of adequate support
for inter-domain routing represents a major hurdle to the full-scale deployment
of SDCS. The main objective of this project is to tackle this challenge by
devising distributed solutions supporting scheduled dynamic circuit services
across domains. The project consists of two inter-related thrusts: (i) theory,
which focuses on the problem of devising distributed routing algorithms for SDCS
that provably converge and provide performance guarantees on user-performance
metrics; and (ii) protocol design and implementation, which focuses on the
design, development, and real network prototyping of a new inter-domain routing
protocol for SDCS, referred to as the scheduled circuit routing protocol
(SCRP).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: Successful completion of this
project promises to impact a wide array of high-throughput and real-time
applications belonging to medical, scientific and commercial domains, and
facilitate the creation of a new ecosystem for communication networks. The
project is further striving for high impact through collaborations with
international academic and industrial partners, and network operators. Students
at all levels will be engaged in real network experiments and in the development
of innovative applications enabled by SDCS, such as haptic-based communication.