* 1116862
* TC: Small: Building an Infrastructure for Computer Security History: Phase One -- Mainframes to the Advent of the World Wide Web, 1965-early 1990s
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2015
* Jeffrey Yost, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Jeremy Epstein
* 08/31/2015
* USD 452,230.00

This project will aid understanding of the emergence of computer security. It
will examine key computer-security concepts and approaches in the domains of
government, universities, industry, and criminal justice. Project activities
include: [A] Conducting 30 detailed Òresearch gradeÓ oral histories with key
figures in the field. Transcripts will be publicly available on the website of
the Charles Babbage Institute. [B] Collecting and archiving valuable documentary
materials, including reports, correspondence, and grey literature, again to be
accessible at CBI. [C] A knowledge networking wiki will describe and discuss key
computer-security concepts, approaches, institutions, and frameworks, with input
from experts in the computer-security field. The wiki will benefit computer
security professionals, policymakers, scholars, students, and the broader
society. [D] Publication of peer-reviewed scholarly articles will stimulate
further historical attention of this vital area of computing. Collectively these
four components will create a much-needed research infrastructure for computer
security history. Work has been planned and will be done in close cooperation
with an Advisory Committee of recognized leaders in the computer security field.
With regard to training, we will carefully mentor a GSRA in the craft of
conducting research-grade oral histories. The project team is attuned to
documenting and analyzing the role of underrepresented groups in computer
security, and disseminating narratives of role models to inspire future
scientists. The chief result of the project will be the creation of a public,
accessible, and permanent infrastructure of historical materials for better
understanding the emergence of computer security.