* 1116237
* CSR:  Small:  A Framework for Advanced Concurrency Debugging
* CSE,CNS
* 08/01/2011,07/31/2015
* Josep Torrellas, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Anita La Salle
* 07/31/2015
* USD 430,000.00

This work addresses the capture of concurrency bugs that can occur in parallel
software, focusing on four types of concurrency bugs that are frequent, have
received little attention, and are hard to fix.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The first
type is atomicity violations -- bugs that occurs when the programmer fails to
enclose in the same critical section all of the memory accesses that should
occur atomically. As a result, during execution, such accesses get interleaved
with accesses from another thread that make the program state
inconsistent.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The second type is over-synchronization -- a
defect that implies that there are redundant synchronization operations or that
the synchronization operations are performed at a grain that is too coarse. As a
result, the program's performance is poor.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The third type
is ordering violations ? these occur when there is a correct order between
memory accesses from different threads and, in an execution, such order is
flipped, usually due to not using the correct form of
synchronization.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The final type is asymmetric data races ?
bugs that occur when a thread accesses shared variables inside a critical
section with appropriate synchronization. However, a second thread concurrently
accesses the same shared variables without synchronization, and makes the state
inconsistent.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The approach taken by this project involves
characterizing these bugs and proposing techniques to detect and fix them. A
deliverable of this work is a unified framework for bug
detection.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The realization of parallel programming is a
Grand Research Challenge and is crucial to our computer industry's ability to
continue to make progress. The University of Illinois is a leader in parallel
computing and the outcomes of this proposal will be used to enhance courses on
parallel computing. In addition, this project will involve close collaboration
with Intel and provide students with the opportunity to engage in internships at
Intel.