* 1116540
* SHF: Small: Towards a Versatile Analytical Modeling Toolset for Evaluating Memory Hierarchy Design
* CSE,CCF
* 08/01/2011,07/31/2015
* Yan Solihin, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* tao li
* 07/31/2015
* USD 399,999.00

Today, the primary tool used for evaluating future computer system designs is
simulation, where each machine instruction and its impact on processor and
memory state are simulated in great details. While powerful and versatile,
processor simulation is exceedingly slow: roughly four to five orders of
magnitude slower than native execution. In the future, solely relying on
processor simulation will be too constraining, due to simultaneous increase in
the complexity of hardware and software systems, and variety of workloads.
Analytical modeling is an attempt to capture fundamental relationships between
various parameters of a design and to capture how they affect performance or
power/energy consumption. An analytical model is much faster to run and can be
reasonably accurate. Unfortunately, widespread uses of analytical models have
been hampered by the lack of widely available toolset that researchers can use
and build upon, and the high barrier of entry into using and developing them.
The objective of this proposal is to integrate various disparate analytical
models into a single toolset that can be used by researchers for computer
architecture design and evaluation. The expected outcome of this project is a
tool that aids processor simulation through three important roles: providing
ability to reason about what parameters determine the outcome of a performance
phenomenon, discovering insights into how architecture parameters fundamentally
relate to one another, and providing first-order approximation that allows
narrowing down the search space for simulation studies.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project enables computer design and evaluation to be
improved significantly in terms of quality (deeper insights can be obtained), as
well as resource efficiency (less simulation time is required to arrive at the
same observations). A deliverable of the project includes a toolset that
integrates components of the project into a software package that is easy-to-use
and has intelligent interface, and classroom materials suitable for
undergraduate and graduate courses. These materials will be made available for
public download, community enhancement, and community extension.