* 1116416
* SHF: Small: Reconditioning: Optimizing Conditional Communication in Asynchronous Design
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2011,06/30/2015
* Peter Beerel, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 06/30/2015
* USD 300,000.00

This proposal addresses the grand challenge of reducing power consumption of
digital electronic circuits leveraging off of a promising new automated design
flow for asynchronous circuits. This novel flow actively manages data-flow
within the circuit and is capable of disabling computational blocks that would
otherwise perform unnecessary calculations and waste power. The proposed
research is to develop mathematical software algorithms that will optimize the
partitioning of the circuit into computational blocks to maximize the blocks
that are disabled and thereby minimize power
consumption.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The impact of this research will
span engineering, scientific, and social values. First, it will enable
synthesized asynchronous designs to be lower-power and faster and thus more
compelling. Moreover, because the research is based on a formal framework of
communicating processes it is generally applicable to many computational
systems, including next-generation beyond-CMOS computational platforms. At the
social level it will enable the enrichment of students at USC and other
institutions as the tool flow is made more widely available. Lastly, it will
provide a rich context for a pre-college outreach program in which the principal
investigator teaches high-school students about the world of electrical
engineering, integrated chip design, and in a greener economy and helping form a
sustainable society