* 1116021
* CIF: Small: A New Coding Paradigm for Communication Over Broadcast Channels Using Nested Linear Codes: A Duality of Structure and Randomness
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2015
* Sandeep Sadanandarao, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 08/31/2015
* USD 329,727.00

In the recent past, several application scenarios have emerged that require
large-scale deployment of communication network infrastructure such as packet-
switched wireline networks, mobile cellular wireless networks, and distributed
sensor networks. In this project, the problem of efficient communication of
information in multiterminal systems, where a multiuser channel must be shared
among several users in the network is addressed. The new coding methods
developed in this project shed light on intricate structural aspects of abstract
groups. The development of efficient coding techniques has broad impact on the
next generation of communication networks. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this
project, the development of a unified framework to address a class of network
communication problems based on new multiuser code ensembles constructed from
nested linear codes is studied. In particular, the problem of transmission of
information over general discrete memoryless broadcast channels is considered.
This problem has received a great deal of attention in the last thirty years.
This approach is then applied to other multiuser channels such as the
interference channel. For these problems, the average performance of nested
linear code ensembles is strictly better than that of the standard unstructured
code ensembles. The development of a methodology to compute the performance
limits of such coding schemes (which are finite dimensional yet non-convex
optimization problems) efficiently with current technology is considered. This
project also considers the development of practical constructions of codes with
computationally efficient encoding and decoding algorithms and procedures. This
is accomplished by putting additional sparsity constraints on the generator and
parity-check matrices of these codes.