* 1116980
* SHF: Small: Collaborative Research: Automating the Detection of Architectural Degradation in Software Systems
* CSE,CCF
* 08/01/2011,07/31/2015
* Yuanfang Cai, Drexel University
* Standard Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 07/31/2015
* USD 196,245.00

Over time, software systems architecture eventually deviates from the original
designers intent and degrades through unplanned introduction of changes that
invalidate original design decisions. Architectural degradation increases the
cost of making new modifications and decreases systems reliability, until
engineers are no longer able to effectively evolve the system. At that point,
the systems actual architecture may have to be recovered from the implementation
artifacts, but this is a time-consuming and error-prone process, and leaves
critical issues unresolved: the problems caused by architectural degradation
will likely be obfuscated by the systems many elements and their
interrelationships, thus risking further degradation.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This
collaborative project aims at pinpointing locations in software systems
architecture that reflect architectural degradation. The proposed research
comprises four integrated research tasks: (1) Develop a catalog of commonly
occurring symptoms of degradation. (2) Develop an architecture recovery
technique that automatically extracts both systems major building blocks and the
concerns that influence, drive, and interact with these building blocks. (3)
Devise a technique for formally capturing the recovered architectural design
decisions, their involving concerns, and the identified causes of degradation.
(4) Devise a suite of techniques that leverage the catalog to automatically
identify system-specific instances of degradation. As a result, this project
will have a potential for broad impact by providing a rigorous, scientific basis
for software engineers to streamline the currently prohibitively expensive and
error-prone system maintenance and evolution tasks.