* 1116993
* SHF: CSR: Small: Integrated Design and Verification of High-Confidence Interactive Systems
* CSE,CCF
* 08/15/2011,07/31/2016
* Sanjit Seshia, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Nina Amla
* 07/31/2016
* USD 499,977.00

High-confidence computer systems are those that require a high level of
assurance of correct operation.&lt;br/&gt;Many of these systems are interactive
- they interact with a human being - and the human operator's role is central to
the operation of the system. Examples of such systems include fly-by-wire
aircraft control systems (interacting with a pilot), drive-by-wire automobile
systems (interacting with a driver), medical devices (interacting with a
doctor), and electronic voting machines (interacting with a voter). The costs of
incorrect operation in all such systems can be very severe. It is essential to
develop techniques to ensure correct operation of such systems. However, this is
very challenging due in part to the difficulty of formally specifying all parts
of an interactive system.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is developing an
approach for the principled design of high-confidence interactive systems where
correctness is certified through a combination of formal verification and
testing by humans. The approach has three components. First, systems are
designed according to a set of guiding principles that ease verification and
testing, including determinism, independence, and unambiguity. Second, new
algorithmic techniques are being developed to perform formal verification of the
above determinism, independence, and unambiguity properties on system designs.
Finally, the above design principles and formal verification are leveraged to
test the human-computer interface with a tractable number of tests. The approach
is applicable to a range of high-confidence interactive systems, including
avionics, medical devices, and electronic voting
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Human/operator error is one of the major sources
of failures in high-confidence systems, and this project seeks to reduce the
occurrence of such failures through a tight integration of principled design,
formal verification, and systematic testing. The approach is being integrated
into the curriculum and projects in undergraduate and graduate courses at UC
Berkeley.