* 1116809
* CSR:Small:Kalipers-Deep Energy Inspection of Operating System Components
* CSE,CNS
* 08/15/2011,07/31/2014
* William Kaiser, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 07/31/2014
* USD 449,998.00

The electrical power used by all classes of computers is becoming of increasing
importance. A major component of the cost of running large server operations is
power, and, on the other end, the utility of laptops, palmtops, pads, and other
portable devices is highly constrained by their batteries? capacity to power
operations. One important element of the power used by computers is that burned
by the operating system, the software that controls the computer?s operation.
Little is known about the impact different operating system options have on a
machine?s power budget, due to difficulties with existing technology in
precisely measuring power use and correctly ascribing power expended to its true
source. Thus, determining if scheduling algorithm alternatives, different forms
of memory management, or different security options offered by the operating
system have good, bad, or neutral power impacts has been difficult. The Kalipers
project will address this issue by using new technology to obtain detailed and
reliable information about how important operating system components affect
machine power use. Kalipers will achieve this goal through a program of
experimentation using a unique hardware/software platform called LEAP. The LEAP
platform, which we have already built and tested, allows fine-grained
assignments of power use to particular piece of code. It also measures the
differing power consumption by important system components, such as the CPU, the
memory, and the hard drive. We will use the LEAP?s capabilities to determine how
operating system actions and decisions affect the power use of platforms that
have strong needs to minimize their power budget. Our experiments will be
concentrated in three areas: file systems, memory management, and security
services. These are areas we have experience in and where we have reason to
believe power savings can be found. We will investigate alternative technologies
(such as the power costs of different file systems, or software vs. hardware
full disk encryption). The LEAP technology will allow us to dive more deeply
into the power costs of different system components, allowing us to shed light
on issues like the degree to which higher power costs for ext3 are due to its
implementation details and the degree to which they are inherent in the
journaling nature of that file system. We will also reimplement key components
of the operating system to demonstrate how the knowledge we have gained can be
used to improve a system?s power consumption.