* 1116856
* SHF: Small: Lifetime Aware System Architecture Design of Single-Chip Embedded Multiprocessors
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2015
* Donald Thomas, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* tao li
* 08/31/2015
* USD 385,959.00

The improvements in manufacturing processes for silicon integrated circuits,
through the reduction in transistor and interconnect sizes, also give rise to
integrated circuits that will wear out if not designed and used properly. That
is, they will fail to continue to work over a long period due to factors such as
increased operating power and temperature, and un-ideal scaling effects as the
sizes are reduced. The number of failures, when left uncompensated, is expected
to grow exponentially. Thus, the increasing wear-out failure rates will require
design-for-lifetime reliability methodologies for all systems, not just those
with safety critical missions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A novel design-for-
reliability methodology to aid in the design of cost-effective lifetime-enhanced
systems is being developed for embedded computing applications. The systems
being designed are multiprocessors that are interconnected with a network on the
chip. Network switches in the network are used to route information among the
processors. The design methodology includes choosing the number of switches and
their interconnection, choosing the types of processors and memories to be
connected to the switches, selecting which processors the software programs will
run on, and selecting the voltage and clock rate that each of the processors
will operate at. Each of these design decisions can have a major impact on the
lifetime of an integrated circuit. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The design methodology
requires searching through an enormously large set of design alternatives, each
requiring a computationally expensive calculation of the mean-time-to-failure
for the system being designed. An ant colony based optimization technique is
used to explore this large design space and hardware acceleration techniques,
such as graphics processing units and field programmable gate arrays, are used
to speed the mean-time-to-failure calculations. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
application of embedded single-chip multiprocessing systems will continue to
grow across a broad spectrum of applications from personal computing devices, to
biological monitoring systems, to consumer electronics. This continued growth in
embedded computing applications is a major driver in the economy as it improves
personal productivity. This research enables deeper scaling in the manufacturing
process, and thus more capable systems, since these new integrated circuits will
continue to be implementable even when individual components within them are
expected to fail early or possibly are not fully working when manufactured. The
research results will be disseminated through graduate courses and research
articles, with some topics being introduced into a Junior/Senior level course.