* 1116820
* CIF: Small: Polar Codes --- From Theory to Practice
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2014
* Alexander Vardy, University of California-San Diego
* Continuing Grant
* richard brown
* 08/31/2014
* USD 494,628.00

Digital communication pervades our daily lives while digital storage devices
have become the principal means of preserving our information. During the
"information age," in which we now live, the need for reliable transmission and
storage of digital data is of paramount importance. What makes such reliable
transmission and storage possible are error- correcting codes, first conceived
by Claude Shannon over 50 years ago. The recent invention of polar codes is,
without doubt, the most original and profound development in the theory of
error-correcting codes in the past decade. Polar codes provably achieve the
capacity of any memoryless symmetric channel, with low encoding and decoding
complexity, thereby providing the first deterministic and constructive solution
to the problem posed by Shannon in 1948. Nevertheless, the impact of polar codes
in practice has been, so far, negligible. The objective of this project is to
advance the theory of polar codes on one hand, and to bring polar codes much
closer to practice on the other hand. If successful, the outcome of this
research is likely to become an enabling technology for numerous communications
applications, both commercial and for national security.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In
order to make polar codes practical, major obstacles must be resolved. The first
key problem in the field is how to efficiently construct polar codes. This
project aims to develop a linear-time construction algorithm, with explicit
guarantees on the quality of its output. The investigators also study algebraic
and combinatorial structure of polar codes, with the goal of developing a good
analytical handle on the rate of channel polarization. Currently available
empirical results indicate that the rate of channel polarization is too slow for
many applications. Thus the investigators intend to drastically improve the
performance of polar codes, at short to moderate code lengths, by introducing
certain key modifications in the successive-cancellation decoding algorithm. One
especially promising idea in this regard is list decoding. A concerted effort is
devoted to the analysis of list decoding algorithms for polar codes.
Furthermore, a full implementation of such decoding algorithms in high-speed and
low-power VLSI is pursued. This part of the research involves algorithmic
transformations for the key steps of the decoder, effective high-throughput
design techniques, careful VLSI complexity/area analysis, and new computation
scheduling ideas. Finally, applications of polar codes and channel polarization
beyond point-to-point communications are considered. Such applications include
multiple-access channels, relay channels, Slepian-Wolf coding, and information-
theoretic security.