* 1116667
* SHF: Small: Research on Architecture-Level Estimation and Optimization for Networks-On-Chip Building Blocks
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2015
* Andrew Kahng, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* tao li
* 08/31/2015
* USD 450,000.00

Networks-on-chip (NoCs) are an on-chip interconnection fabric of choice for
general-purpose chip multiprocessors and application-specific multiprocessor
systems-on-chip. This project focuses on network-on-chip modeling and
optimization to enable early-stage design exploration that fully elaborates the
achievable envelope of NoC power, area, speed, reliability and cost. An
architectural estimation thrust develops new architecture-level estimation
methods that are portable to different router microarchitectures and that can
accurately capture implementation effects. The thrust addresses the automatic
generation of architectural estimation models, the modeling of chip design
implementation flow choices and their impacts, and new trace-aware and workload-
dependent estimations. An architectural optimization thrust develops new
methodologies for trace-driven optimization of router configurations, packet
routing and network topology, with consideration of runtime network resource
contentions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Successful completion of this project will
help network-on-chip and multiprocessor system-on-chip designers reduce design
effort while improving chip area, delay and power metrics. This will be enabling
to the efficient design of more complex, higher-functionality integrated-circuit
products within given cost and power limits. The research will also produce
software tools to establish a foundation for further work by other research
groups. Through research participation, both graduate and undergraduate students
will be trained in this emerging aspect of system-on-chip design.