* 1116561
* UniformMu:    A Transposon Resource for Functional Genomics of Maize
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2018
* Karen Koch, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Eric Lyons
* 08/31/2018
* USD 2,522,911.00

PI: Donald R McCarty (University of Florida -
Gainesville)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;CoPI: Karen E. Koch (University of Florida -
Gainesville)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Collaborators: Carolyn Lawrence (Iowa State
University/USDA-ARS) and Marty Sachs (University of Illinois at Urbana-
Champaign/USDA-ARS)&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A public resource for
functional genomics of maize will be constructed by sequencing and mapping of
thousands of transposon insertions in the maize genome. By generating mutations
in genes, transposons provide an important tool for dissecting the functions of
maize genes. The resource will be based on the UniformMu population. UniformMu
is a large inbred maize population developed specifically for transposon
mutagenesis of the maize genome. Thousands of unique, heritable transposon
insertions in the population will be mapped in the maize genome using Next
Generation DNA sequencing technology. The precisely mapped insertions will be
searchable online using the MaizeGDB.org genome browser and database tools.
Insertions are linked online to high-quality, sustainable seed stocks
distributed to the public without charge by the Maize Genetics Cooperation Stock
Center (maizecoop.cropsci.uiuc.edu). By achieving the following objectives the
project will approximately double the size and genome coverage of the UniformMu
resource:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1) Create sustainable seed stocks of 5,760 mutant
enriched UniformMu F3 lines for the Maize Genetics Cooperation Stock
Center;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;2) Map the unique germinal transposon insertions in
the F3 lines using Next Generation sequencing methods; and, &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;3) Enhance public awareness and accessibility of the UniformMu
resource via MaizeGDB and the Maize Stock Center.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
impacts: The broad relevance of the UniformMu resource is founded on 1) the
importance of maize to basic and applied biological research in the US; 2) the
uniqueness of the UniformMu resource inside and outside the US as a tool for
functional genomics of maize; 3) the breadth of expected usage by the research
community including scientists working with other plant species; and, 4) the
dissemination of the resource through established community and national
resource centers (MaizeGDB, Maize Genetics Cooperation Stock Center and Genbank)
ensuring long-term public accessibility and sustainability of the UniformMu
resource. In addition, the project provides a rich training environment that
engages diverse undergraduates and postdoctoral mentors in integration of large
scale field genetics, transposon biology, next generation sequencing technology,
bioinformatics and genomics methods. The resource is accessible online at
MaizeGDB.org and seed stocks are distributed by the Maize Genetics Cooperation
Stock Center (maizecoop.cropsci.uiuc.edu). Consensus sequences used to map the
transposon insertions are deposited in Genbank (www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov).