* 1116963
* AF: Small: RUI: Ranking and Clustering by Integer and Linear Optimization
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2016
* Amy Langville, College of Charleston
* Standard Grant
* Rahul Shah
* 08/31/2016
* USD 399,897.00

The research component of this proposal is about ranking and clustering. A given
collection of items is to be ordered according to some criterion (e.g., from
most to least important). In clustering, the goal is to group items so that
similar items appear together. Though well-studied, ranking and clustering
research has been dominated by heuristic methods that produce approximate
results quickly. Optimization methods that produce exact optimal results have
been far less studied, possibly because these methods require longer
computational times, and the gains in accuracy do not outweigh the computational
costs in many applications. This is unfortunate since optimization methods are
based on a beautiful theoretical framework and can lead to novel and interesting
results. For example, preliminary work by the PI on a ranking optimization
method, indicates that multiple optimal solutions can be linked to ties in the
ranked list. On the other hand, heuristic methods are not designed to handle
ties in the output ranking. Two main goals of the proposed research are: (1) to
reveal interesting theoretical connections, and (2) to increase the size limits
of optimally solvable problems using both classical and clever new relaxation
techniques.

Ranking, also known as linear ordering (LOR), is close in spirit to the
Traveling Salesman Problem (TSP): both are simple to state, yet hard to solve
optimally. Over several decades, huge gains have been made on the size of
solvable TSPs, that have resulted in new and unforeseen uses. Notable examples
occur in the transportation industry (involving thousand-city TSPs) and in the
microprocessor industry (with even larger TSPs routing copper wiring on circuit-
boards). Similar progress is expected for the LOR, whose current limit is a few
hundred to a few thousand items in some cases. Yet applications for much larger
LORs abound, e.g. rankings of genes, products, and webpages. Furthermore,
breakthroughs for the TSP (and likewise the proposed LOR work) have not solely
been related to scale, but theoretical advances and progress in understanding
connections to other problems and fields have been equally crucial in the
development of general purpose methods for integer programming, such as cutting
plane and branch and cut techniques.

The proposed research has great impact. Ranking and clustering have become
standard data analysis tools with many uses. For example, Google uses ranking to
order webpages resulting from user queries, and also uses clustering for its
"Find Similar Pages" function. Amazon uses clustering in its "Customers Who
Bought X Also Bought Y" feature. Facebook and Twitter can generate ads and
friend recommendations based on ranking and clustering algorithms. To ensure the
results of the proposed research reach these consumers, the work will be widely
disseminated through journal publications and two books. The project's novel
student training plan, which includes peer mentoring and an international
exchange program, will broaden participation of underrepresented groups. The
educational component and its Calculus Activity Book, being aimed at changing
students attitudes towards the sciences and at instilling confidence in
scientific ability, will have the stronger impact on those students who more
commonly fail to be retained (likely a relatively large number coming from
underrepresented groups), and thus will help further diversify and broaden
participation in STEM disciplines.