* 1116569
* Conference: 2011 Microfluidics, Physics &amp; Chemistry of Gordon Research Conference and Gordon Research Seminar, Waterville Valley, NH, July 1, 2011
* ENG,CBET
* 10/01/2011,09/30/2012
* Brian Kirby, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* Geoffrey Prentice
* 09/30/2012
* USD 15,000.00

1116569&lt;br/&gt;Kirby&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The sixth Gordon Research
Conference (GRC) and associated Gordon-Kenan Research Seminar (GRS) on the
Physics and Chemistry of Microfluidics will be held from June 25th through July
1st, 2011 at Waterville Valley Resort, Waterville Valley, NH. The meeting will
involve participants from all research sectors, including academia, industry,
and the federal government. This conference will offer a unique forum (and
intimate professional setting) for the exchange of new ideas, presentation and
discussion of unpublished results, speculative discussions, and opportunities
for new interdisciplinary collaborations among attendees. The development of the
GRS is an exciting enhancement that should greatly expand the impact of the
conference on earlycareer researchers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The GRC on the
Physics and Chemistry of Microfluidics provides a unique intellectual experience
in which scientific researchers from many different disciplines come together in
an intimate forum to discuss research and forge partnerships that are critical
to the health and growth of our highly multidisciplinary field. The 2011 Gordon
Research Conference will address topics that represent the latest advances in
the field of microfluidics and nanofluidics over the past year. Topics that will
be discussed in invited oral and poster sessions include micro- and
nanoseparations, bioanalytical devices, low-Reynolds-number fluid mechanics, and
nanoparticles and colloids. Young scientists, including graduate students,
postdoctoral fellows and young faculty, are invited to present their latest work
during several poster sessions at the conference, and the GRS has been
implemented this year to provide a two-day conference for early-career attendees
only. The Gordon Research Conferences provide facilities and support that allow
for the highest level of interaction among all participants. New funding is
being requested from the National Science Foundation for this meeting. It is
anticipated that with the financial support of NSF, the sixth conference in this
series will be unparalleled in transforming our community?s scientific
understanding and application of micro- and nanofluidic technologies.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts that result from the 2011 Gordon
Research Conference on the Physics and Chemistry of Microfluidics include but
are not limited to: (1) providing an unparalleled opportunity (both in the
Gordon Research Conference and in the Gordon-Kenan Research Seminar) for early-
career researchers to interact closely with more established scientific
researchers to broaden their scientific education and to promote their future
careers as scientific researchers; (2) fostering and promoting long-term
relationships between researchers in diverse fields including bioengineering,
chemical engineering, mechanical engineering, electrical engineering, chemistry,
and physics; and (3) promoting the development of multidisciplinary teams that
can address difficult problems in biological, chemical, and physical sciences by
use of micro- and nanotechnologies