* 1116673
* SHF: Small: Collaborative Research: ShapeShifting and PubSub for Tailoring Memory Access and Communication in Heterogeneous Multiprocessors
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2016
* Kevin Skadron, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* tao li
* 08/31/2016
* USD 270,000.00

Over the past decade or more, microprocessors have faced increasing challenges
in achieving high-performance for current and emerging software applications
while abiding by severe power and thermal limits. In response, industry has
turned to approaches that use specialized graphics and computational hardware
and complex memory organizations. The end result is that computer systems have
become more heterogeneous and complex, in ways that make it difficult for
programmers to write efficient and high-performance software. Software tuned to
run on one implementation will often not run at all or will perform poorly or
unpredictably when ported to even a different implementation in the same chip
family. The objective of this research effort is to design and evaluate system
and hardware support that tailors memory and data access/movements to improve
performance and power efficiency, while also easing the issues of
programmability and of tuning software for individual chip
characteristics.&lt;br/&gt;The two key themes of this work are ShapeShifting and
PubSub data abstractions. ShapeShifting refers to optimizations and hardware
support structures that allow data to be transformed in layout, in order to
support faster access, more efficient use of memory, and other attributes that
improve power and performance. In some preliminary experiments, even a software-
only implementation of ShapeShifting improves performance by 15%-2.8X. PubSub
data abstractions offer methods for individual processors to indicate interest
(or disinterest) in updates regarding other program variables. These
abstractions form the underpinning for memory optimizations that are tailored to
the application?s memory usage patterns. By mitigating false sharing,
encouraging coarse-grained fetches, and reducing coherence broadcasts to
uninterested cores, PubSub has the potential to improve the power and
performance efficiency of multi-core implementations by a factor of 2X or
more.&lt;br/&gt;The research program is targeting several types of broad impact.
First, the simulators and tools developed by this project will be released as
free, open-source software. Second, the results can enhance performance and
energy efficiency of future parallel hardware. Energy-efficiency is of
particular concern from a national economic and strategic standpoint, given the
growing electricity consumption of computer systems and the important role of
the memory hierarchy in influencing computer power
consumption.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;