* 1116248
* SHF: Small: CGRAs - Control and Architecture for Next-Generation FPGAs
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2015
* Scott Hauck, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* tao li
* 08/31/2015
* USD 450,000.00

This research effort is developing new electronic devices and mapping software
to improve the speed, power-efficiency, and cost of digital electronics. They
start with the concept of the Field-Programmable Gate Array (FPGA), logic chips
that can be programmed and reprogrammed to implement complex digital circuits.
FPGAs are an important driver for the semiconductor industry, reaching almost
$3B in annual worldwide sales. Current FPGAs are essentially seas of 1-bit
compute units, each configured to do one function over and over. To support more
complex operations modern devices have a sprinkling of more complex units,
including multipliers and memories, which have a more multi-bit flavor. All the
components of these devices are interconnected via a static, single-bit routing
network, and are primarily programmed in hardware description languages such as
Verilog or VHDL. An FPGA single-bit programmability provides a great deal of
flexibility for creating arbitrary logic, but has significant inefficiencies as
well.&lt;br/&gt;Word-based architectures, that compute and route multi-bit
values simultaneously, can be much more efficient than standard FPGAs. Word-
based alternatives to FPGAs exist, such as CGRAs and MPPAs, but limitations in
their control systems significantly reduce their quality and usefulness for many
applications.&lt;br/&gt;One of the major thrusts of this work is to merge
together the customizable logic of FPGAs with the time-multiplexing ability of
MPPAs and CGRAs, as well as the complex control flow supported by modern multi-
core CPUs. Unlike a standard FPGA, that statically configures all of its
resources to do a single task, this system allows each compute element in the
device to run a small program. This provides a significantly greater compute
density in these devices. However, to boost this even further, they are
exploring mechanisms to make use of branching and conditional operation.
Specifically, where a microprocessor might take a branch based upon a loop
condition or as part of an if-then-else construct, their hardware system can
either change the instructions loaded during that cycle, or branch to a
different portion of the overall operation. However, unlike MPPAs and CGRAs,
their system can perform data-dependent instruction selection within a large,
automatically mapped computation region operating in lock-step. Alternatively,
for control-heavy portions of a computation they can embed complete, simple VLIW
processors into the fabric of their system.&lt;br/&gt;To support these efforts,
they are developing new compilation strategies to convert computations into
efficient implementations on these architectures. They are also looking at the
hardware resources required to support these operations. This includes methods
for stalling portions of the array when their communication demands temporarily
cannot be met, as well as mechanisms to synchronize the program counters of
regions of the array operating in lock-step.&lt;br/&gt;When combined, they
estimate these systems will provide an order of magnitude improvement in area-
power product, and at least a factor of 2 performance improvement, over FPGAs.
The resulting hardware and software systems should be able to significantly
reduce the power consumption, lower the cost, and increase the speed of a large
swath of electronic systems. Also, their improved programming models will make
these systems easier to develop and maintain.&lt;br/&gt;This effort also
includes a focus on improving the diversity of the engineering workforce at both
the graduate and undergraduate level, with mentoring and research opportunities
at each level. All of these activities are done within an overall effort towards
outreach to underrepresented groups.