* 1116546
* AF: Small: A Framework For Algorithmic Design of Self-Stabilizing Network Protocols
* CSE,CCF
* 08/01/2011,12/31/2015
* Ali Ebnenasir, Michigan Technological University
* Standard Grant
* Rahul Shah
* 12/31/2015
* USD 254,015.00

This research focuses on facilitating the design of Self-Stabilizing (SS)
network protocols, where a SS protocol eventually recovers from any troubled
configuration to a legitimate configuration (i.e., convergence) and stays in
legitimate configurations as long as there are no perturbations (i.e., closure).
This is an important problem as today's complex distributed systems (e.g., the
Internet) frequently reach illegitimate configurations due to the occurrence of
the transient faults that perturb the protocols without causing permanent damage
(e.g., bit flips in memory, bad initialization). Most existing methods are based
on the manual creation of an initial design and after-the-fact verification of
the manual design. This research presents a paradigm shift based on a philosophy
of 'synthesize in small scale and generalize'. Specifically, the investigators
study (i) the automatic generation of small instances of SS protocol, and (ii)
the generalization of the synthesized instances to larger
protocols.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Instead of designing and verifying problem-
specific SS protocols, this research provides a reusable repository of synthesis
methods for the addition of convergence to nonstabilizing protocols. Moreover,
this research presents three techniques for the generalization of the small
instances of the synthesized protocols, namely synthesized convergence stairs,
cutoff theorems and structural induction. For evaluation, the investigators
study the automated design of convergence for real world protocols and classic
distributed computing problems (e.g., mutual exclusion and leader election)
under different topologies and distinct fairness assumptions. The investigators
also identify complexity criteria and compile them in a public benchmark.