* 1116427
* RAPID: Developing Computational Thinking through Digital Storytelling: Coping with the Effects of the Oil Spill
* CSE,OAC
* 04/01/2011,03/31/2012
* Shaundra Daily, G84 Consulting
* Standard Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 03/31/2012
* USD 169,399.00

The dual motivations for this proposal are to address a nationally recognized
need to prepare a computationally savvy 21st Century workforce, and the
immediate need to respond to the emotional impact of the Deepwater Horizon Oil
Spill. There is a growing recognition of the importance of computational
thinking, a set of strategies, skills, and capacities that draw on ideas from
the computing disciplines. These skills are valuable for understanding and
solving problems in a wide range of contexts beyond the field of computer
science, and can help students to be competitive in the global innovation
economy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Since the Deepwater Horizon rig exploded in April
2010 and oil began gushing into the&lt;br/&gt;Gulf of Mexico, individuals,
families, and communities along the coast of the Gulf have been stressed by
threats to their livelihoods, their health, and their immediate environment.
Confronted with 206 million gallons of oil, the water, fishing and tourism
industries took a downturn. Impacted students in the region were not in school
during much of the time of the disaster, and when they returned, many may not
have had the opportunity to share their personal experiences with their peer
groups. Although the spill was stopped, the aftereffects still loom. The time is
ripe, then, to aid students in documenting, reflecting, and grappling with the
specifics of the disaster, their emotional responses to it, and productive ways
to cope, as well as study the spill in the immediate environment in which it is
taking place.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project, the PI partners with an
urban elementary school site (&gt; 98% minority population) in New Orleans,
Louisiana, to develop, implement, and study new instructional materials that
place the cultivation of computational thinking into the context of social and
emotional learning. More specifically, the strategic aims are the
following:&lt;br/&gt;-SA1. Develop new instructional materials geared toward the
cultivation of computational thinking in the context of social and emotional
learning.&lt;br/&gt;-SA2. Study the potential of these materials to develop
computational competencies and support emotional reflection when utilized with
students in an informal setting.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;These strategic aims will
be assessed utilizing nominal group techniques, semi-structured interviews, and
artifact analysis. Most social-emotional learning or coping programs are
separated from the academic context, while many computational thinking programs
are devoid of meaningful context. The intellectual merit of this research is a
new program that fuses twenty first century learning skills with social and
emotional learning which can transform the way students engage with each of
these areas. The broader impact, in part, is a curricular framework for blending
these areas that will be disseminated through an online website for teachers
interested in supporting students in building computational thinking skills.
Further, as Scratch becomes available online, students will be programming in
the cloud, and begin to participate in our nation's cyberinfrastructure.