* 1116787
* CSR: Small: Designing Mechanisms for Resource Allocation in Competitive Real-Time Open Environments
* CSE,CNS
* 08/15/2011,07/31/2014
* Daniel Grosu, Wayne State University
* Standard Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 07/31/2014
* USD 250,000.00

Recent trends in computing systems, such as cloud computing, virtual execution
environments, and grid computing, have been away from centralized designs
towards highly extensible, open, and distributed systems comprising multiple
independently-developed and operated subsystems. Such systems present a
fundamental design challenge for applications that require real-time guarantees,
due to the reliance upon all subsystem owners and developers to truthfully
express their resource requirements. Currently, no real-time open system
environment framework prevents a user from obtaining an ``unfair'' allocation of
system resources by simply misrepresenting their subsystem's resource
requirements. A solution is needed, that formally guarantees an
efficient/equitable resource allocation among subsystems. The approach taken
here is to apply a novel combination of real-time scheduling and game theory
(i.e., algorithmic mechanism design) techniques, to design truth-inducing
allocation mechanisms for shared real-time processing platforms. These
techniques are proven and evaluated by developing a middleware implementation
and a grid simulation for a real-time setting.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A
trustworthy scheme for allocating time-critical resources among independently
developed subsystems is a key to reducing development and operational costs, and
increasing the reliability of the complex computing systems upon which our
society and economy increasingly depend. Beyond direct benefits of the
technology, this project furthers educational goals by actively involving
undergraduate and underrepresented students in research.