* 1116102
* SHF: Small: Device-Circuit-Architecture Co-Design for Reconfigurable Computing at the Extreme
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2015
* Mehran Mehregany, Case Western Reserve University
* Standard Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 08/31/2015
* USD 416,000.00

The objective of this project is to explore technology for low-power
reconfigurable computing at extreme environment, i.e. at a temperature &gt;
250°C and at high radiation (1-30 Mrad), where conventional electronics fail to
work reliably. The project seeks to develop the computing platform through a
device-circuit-architecture co-design approach. The platform uses
polycrystalline SiC nanoelectromechanical system (NEMS) switches to achieve
nanoscale dimension, superior mechanical and chemical stability at extreme
conditions and virtually zero leakage. The project studies a novel switch
structure with multi-layer cantilever beams to realize the reconfigurable
building blocks with high density and robustness. Possible hybridization with
SiC junction field effect transistor (JFET) will be explored to address the
issue of cascading mechanical logic blocks with limited driving capability. The
project also investigates a novel computational model and architecture to adapt
to failures and to achieve low interconnect overhead. Considering the lack of
simulation models for NEMS switches and circuits, it will develop appropriate
circuit-compatible models. Operation of the building blocks at high temperature
will be validated through simulation as well as fabrication and measurements of
test chips. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed low-power reconfigurable hardware
design approach can provide enabling technology for extreme-environment
computing in number of application areas including automotive and industrial
applications, space, avionics, combustion engine, and intelligent propulsion
systems. It can provide an order of magnitude lower power and area than state-
of-the-art SiC transistor based electronics. The simulation models can be
valuable research tool for analysis of nanoscale mechanical switches. The
research will integrate education and training through development of a new
undergraduate course, interdisciplinary senior projects, and an internet group
on harsh environment electronics.