* 1116374
* WORKSHOP: HCC: VL/HCC 2011 Doctoral Consortium
* CSE,IIS
* 06/01/2011,05/31/2012
* Christopher Scaffidi, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 05/31/2012
* USD 20,903.00

This is funding to support a Doctoral Consortium (workshop) for about 10-14
graduate students, along with a panel of 4-5 distinguished research faculty
mentors, which will take place in conjunction with the 2011 IEEE Symposium on
Visual Languages and Human-Centric Computing (VL/HCC 2011), to be held September
19-21, 2011, in Pittsburgh, and sponsored by the IEEE Computer Society. The
long-running VL/HCC series occupies a unique niche among HCI and Programming
Language conferences, in that it focuses specifically on how to help end users
successfully develop and use software. Recent advances in computing have led to
continually deeper integration between computers and human society. People now
swim in a "sea" of socio-technical systems that synthesize large numbers of
contributing users with vast amounts of source code. Examples include social
media systems, open source repositories, online marketplaces and massively
multiplayer online games. Yet as the socio-technical systems in this sea have
grown in complexity, they have become increasingly difficult for end users to
understand and direct toward productive ends. Thus, when users put data into a
system they may be unable to anticipate and control how their data will be used
by other people or by software in the system; when users take actions in the
system they often cannot foresee and manage unintended effects on other users,
software, or the system as a whole, particularly because the system's software
often contains defects. These problems are further complicated by the fact that
different users simultaneously might take actions toward differing goals, while
autonomous software such as agents might meanwhile also take actions toward
goals of their own. These and similar problems reflect a fundamental lack of
sufficient methods, models and tools to help end users visualize, analyze,
tailor, and manage large socio-technical systems. At a deeper level,
insufficient theory is available for predicting the complicated, unstable,
sometimes-emergent behavior that results when large numbers of diverse,
unpredictable humans are coupled to unreliable
software.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This year's VL/HCC Doctoral Consortium, the ninth
to be funded by NSF in this series, will focus on advancing knowledge and
understanding of solutions to these problems. The workshop will bring together
and build community among young researchers working on different aspects of
these problems from the perspectives of diverse fields including computer
science, the social sciences, and education. It will guide the work of these new
researchers by providing an opportunity for experts in the research field (as
well as their peers) to give them advice, in that student participants will make
formal presentations of their work during the workshop and will receive feedback
from a faculty panel. The feedback is geared to helping students understand and
articulate how their work is positioned relative to other human-computer
interaction research, whether their topics are adequately focused for thesis
research projects, whether their methods are correctly chosen and applied, and
whether the results are appropriately analyzed and presented. As in prior years
the VL/HCC 2011 Doctoral Consortium will be part of the regular conference
program. A 2-page extended abstract of each participant's work will be published
in the conference proceedings. More information about the VL/HCC conference may
be found at http://www.cs.cmu.edu/~vlhcc2011. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts: The workshop will help shape ongoing and future research projects aimed
at alleviating a pressing problem of relevance to a great many people within our
society. This event will promote discovery and learning, by encouraging the
student researchers to explore a difficult and challenging open problem, through
involvement of a panel of well-known researchers whose task is to provide
constructive feedback, and through inclusion of other conference participants
who will also learn from and provide additional feedback to the students and to
each other. The PI and the members of the organizing committee will make special
efforts to attract a diverse and interdisciplinary group of student
participants, with special attention paid to recruitment of women and
minorities. The PI expects that most of the students supported by this award
will come from U.S. universities but as in past years, due to the highly
international make-up of the research community, a few non-U.S. students may be
invited to participate as well.