* 1116394
* III: Small: RanKloud: Data Partitioning and Resource Allocation Strategies for Scalable Multimedia and Social Media Analysis
* CSE,IIS
* 08/15/2011,07/31/2015
* K. Selcuk Candan, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Maria Zemankova
* 07/31/2015
* USD 499,410.00

Today, multimedia data are produced and consumed in massive quantities in a
broad range of applications with significant economic and societal benefit,
including e-commerce, surveillance, education, web services, and social media.
Hence, there is an urgent need for systems to provide highly scalable processing
and efficient analysis of large media data collections. The RanKloud prototype
system, developed in this research project, focuses on the needs and
requirements of applications that deal with large quantities of multimedia data
in a cloud-based scalable environment. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Most multimedia
applications share a few core operations, including integration/fusion,
classification, clustering, graph analysis, near-neighbor search, and similarity
search. When performed naively, however, these core operations are often very
costly, because the number of objects and object features that need to be
considered can be prohibitive. Avoiding this cost requires that redundant work
is avoided. This research focuses on the next generation cloud-based massive
media processing and analysis systems where the fundamental principles that
govern their design include an awareness of the utilities of data and features
to a particular analysis task. Incorporating data and feature utilities for
performing a particular utility task is expected to significantly reduce the
overall cost of the analysis task. The RanKloud project research plan includes:
(1) data model and query language to specify multimedia data processing
workflows; (2) adaptable, rank-aware parallel multimedia data processing
primitives; (3) run-time data sampling strategies to support adaptation to data
and resource; and (4) waste- and unbalance-avoidance strategies for utility-
aware data partitioning, resource allocation, and for incremental batched
processing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;RanKloud bridges an important gap in our
understanding of cloud-based computing in general, and efficient processing of
multimedia data in particular. The results are expected to enable new tools and
systems supporting scalability in a large class of problems in content-aware
multimedia and social media analysis with impact in web intelligence, business
intelligence, and scientific and sensor applications all of which need to handle
imprecise multimedia data for more effective decision making. This project
provides research experience opportunities for graduate and undergraduate
students and includes research results and challenges in courses, including
Capstone projects. Arizona State University (ASU) recruits top-quality
undergraduates through a nationally recognized residential Honors College and
the Minority Access to Research Careers program. The national and international
dissemination of the project results includes premier conference and journal
publications, as well as open source software licenses at the RanKloud Web site
(http://aria.asu.edu/rankloud).