* 1116385
* SHB: Small: Toward Verifying Smart-Health Infrastructure Safety from their Impact on Human Physiology
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2016
* Sandeep Gupta, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 08/31/2016
* USD 504,615.00

This project, investigating formal modeling and analysis of medical device
control operations to verify patient safety, aims to advance the state-of-the-
art in guaranteeing patient safety impacted by Smart Health Infrastructure
(SHI). Medical devices and their networks directly interact with human
physiology and often control physiological parameters. As such, any failure in
medical device control systems can cause abnormal physiological conditions
resulting in health hazards and patient injury. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
physiological parameters controlled by medical devices are usually governed by
complex physical processes and often vary over both space and time. For example,
the concentration in blood of a drug administered by an infusion pump is
governed by the drug diffusion process and varies with time and distance from
the site of infusion. Further, the physical processes themselves are time-
variant processes, e.g. the diffusion process changes with time depending on the
past history of infusion. Any formal method should characterize the time-variant
processes and spatio-temporal variations to analyze the impact of the control
operations in medical devices on human physiology. This renders traditional
formal methods, such as hybrid automata, inapplicable for patient safety
verification. The problem gets exacerbated when two or more medical devices
operate simultaneously, exhibiting aggregate effects of their individual control
operations. Composition of formal models for individual medical device has to
characterize the aggregate effects, which themselves can vary over space and
time. To address all these challenges, the PI proposes the development of
Spatio-Temporal Hybrid Automata (STHA), that migrates from the conventional
perspective of temporal event based state transition to a spatio-temporal
perspective where state transitions are instigated over both time and
space.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: With the increasingly aging
population and a linear increase in life expectancy the need for health-care
anywhere anytime is immense. Further, the cost of health-care rises
exponentially when diseases are identified at a later stage. Thus, early
detection of diseases can lead to better health at a lower cost. SHIs, enabling
health-care anytime anywhere, and early detection of diseases require complex
medical control systems to be deployed on the human body. Unsafe operation of
these medical device control systems can lead to hazards within the human body.
Increasing cases of such hazards leads to decreased social acceptance of these
devices. Further, it also leads to stricter compliance rules on these devices
from regulatory agencies such as FDA. A methodology for providing guarantees on
safety of a medical device control system will make a stronger case for their
reliable operation. This will help the regulatory agencies to perform a better
evaluation of the device and will lead to increased social acceptance. The PI
also has a history of employing underrepresented populations, particularly women
and Hispanics, at both the graduate and undergraduate levels.