* 1116378
* HCC: Small: Modeling the Validity and Transfer of Eye-Scanning Patterns for Hazard Perception from Virtual Reality Training Environments to Reality
* CSE,IIS
* 08/01/2011,07/31/2015
* Laura Stanley, Montana State University
* Standard Grant
* William Bainbridge
* 07/31/2015
* USD 499,610.00

Visual search skills for hazard perception are critical in many domains. They
are used by pilots to maintain situation awareness, by doctors reviewing screen
images to diagnose health disorders, and by security screeners inspecting for
hazardous materials. They are also critical to a novice driver's ability to
detect roadway hazards. For novice drivers, poor visual search skills can
increase the risk for traffic fatalities, which are the leading cause of death
for teenagers nationwide. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Virtual reality can be used to
provide visual search training during driver education. However, the success of
these training programs depends on the validity of eye-scanning patterns in the
virtual environment and on the simulation parameters employed to elicit those
patterns. The overall objective of the research is to assess the validity of
search patterns in the virtual world as they apply to the physical realm, and
then to identify which simulation parameters are critical for successful
simulator-based hazard perception training. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
merit: The project will integrate theory and data to advance our knowledge of
which parameters of virtual reality-based hazard perception training promote the
greatest transfer of training to real world driving. Specifically, the project
will (a) examine the relationship between visual search in driving simulators
vs. that in the real world, using specially equipped vehicles; (b) test which
aspects of the driving simulator lead to the best training and transfer of
learning; and (c) examine how age and experience influence hazard perception
skills. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts: The findings from the project
will advance scientific understanding of how virtual reality training
simulations can be used to improve driver education, thereby leading to better
drivers and fewer traffic accidents. The results will also be applicable to
other areas in which virtual reality training can be valuable, such as medical
diagnosis and security screening. In addition, the project will enable a number
of disadvantaged students to take part in engineering and technology research
and includes a high school outreach component to engage students in research at
an early age.