* 1116786
* SHF: Small:  Collaborative Research:  Unified Framework for Adaptive Analog and Digital Performance Characterization Using Learned Information from the Circuit Under Test
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2011,10/31/2015
* Linda Milor, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 10/31/2015
* USD 200,000.00

As semiconductor technology scales to make smaller circuits in order to reduce
circuit fabrication costs, a by-product is that it is very hard to make circuit
components that match specifications exactly. Displacement of a single atom can
make the circuit behave differently. The diversity of devices being produced
from the same process with the same design makes it un-economical to test them
with a "one size fits all" test program. Because each component is unique, we
also need a test strategy that is fine-tuned to the circuit being tested. The
proposed work involves adjusting the test program to devices under test
iteratively as we gather information about each device throughout the testing
process. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Keeping a leading edge in information technology
is essential for the economical and social well being of the nation. Our most
advanced technologies produce statistically diverse devices from the same design
and manufacturing specification. Future technologies will produce even more
diverse devices. Thorough testing of these increasingly complex devices is a key
component in maintaining an edge in information technology. This project will
explore new testing methodologies by developing methods to enable a shift from
static to dynamic test procedures. In addition, this project will pilot a set of
undergraduate design projects involving collaboration between Georgia Tech and
Arizona State to mimic the prevalent need to collaborate over long distances in
industry.