* 1116703
* SHF: Small: Foundations and Applications of Higher-Dimensional Directed Type Theory
* CSE,CCF
* 08/01/2011,07/31/2015
* Robert Harper, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Anindya Banerjee
* 07/31/2015
* USD 542,965.00

A central objective for computer science is to develop methods for
building&lt;br/&gt;reliable and maintainable software. The most important
technique for ensuring&lt;br/&gt;these properties is abstraction, the
decomposition of a system into separable&lt;br/&gt;and reusable components. The
theory of abstraction in programming is called&lt;br/&gt;type theory. A type is
a specification of the behavior of a software component;&lt;br/&gt;type checking
ensures that programs obey these specifications. This ensures&lt;br/&gt;that
components can be modified or replaced without fear of disrupting
the&lt;br/&gt;behavior of other components. By supporting the expression and
enforcement of&lt;br/&gt;component behaviors, type theory integrates programming
with verification, the&lt;br/&gt;process of ensuring compliance with
specifications. All modern programming&lt;br/&gt;languages and development
methodologies are based on, or draw inspiration from,&lt;br/&gt;type theory. The
broad goal of this project is to extend the capabilities of&lt;br/&gt;type
theory to a wider range of properties, and to use type theory to
facilitate&lt;br/&gt;the development of reliable
software.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specifically, the research will develop the
theory of higher-dimensional type&lt;br/&gt;theory, and explore its application
to generic programming, a technique&lt;br/&gt;for generating programs from their
specifications. Higher-dimensional&lt;br/&gt;type theory draws on recent
advances in category theory and algebraic&lt;br/&gt;topology that emphasize the
algebraic structure of relations between&lt;br/&gt;programs, and relations
between such relations, in direct analogy with&lt;br/&gt;the higher-dimensional
structure of topological spaces. In this setting&lt;br/&gt;dependent families of
types must respect the algebraic structure of such&lt;br/&gt;relations, and in
doing so, they implicitly provide transformations that&lt;br/&gt;correspond to
generic programs whose behavior is determined by their&lt;br/&gt;type. More
broadly, the project will apply ideas from category theory&lt;br/&gt;and
topology to improve software development, and apply ideas from
type&lt;br/&gt;theory to facilitate computer-verified proofs of mathematical
theorems.