* 1116631
* RI: Small: Collaborative Research: Visual Attributes for Identification and Search in Images
* CSE,IIS
* 07/01/2011,06/30/2015
* David Jacobs, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Jie Yang
* 06/30/2015
* USD 250,000.00

The automatic identification in images of people, places, objects, and
especially object categories is a central and ongoing challenge within computer
vision. This project addresses this problem using low-level image features to
learn intermediate representations, ones in which objects in images are labeled
with an extensive list of highly descriptive visual attributes. This work
demonstrates this approach in three domains: faces, plant species, and
architecture. In each domain, it develops techniques for deriving visual
attribute vocabularies, training attribute detectors, and building compositional
models to automatically label attributes in images.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project is making four fundamental contributions to the use of visual
attributes. 1) It is developing new methods by which automatic systems and
humans can interact to select domain-appropriate attribute vocabularies and
label large image collections. 2) It is developing compositional models that
capture dependencies between attributes. This provides more accurate attribute
detection and enables inference of global properties of objects. 3) Using
compositional models, the project is developing new, localizable attributes that
capture the geometric relations between object parts and landmarks. 4) The
project is designing algorithms that combine attributes to identify objects,
search through image vast collections, and automatically annotate image
databases.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Not only is this research generating large
datasets of labeled images that should help catalyze new research, it is also
demonstrating the feasibility of new systems for analyzing images in specialized
domains such as faces, plants, and architecture. For example, the project
develops new software applications for analyzing and searching images of faces
as well as free mobile apps for plant species identification.