* 1116943
* SHF: Small: Promoting Efficient Debugging and High-Quality Software through Contextual Understanding of Faults
* CSE,CCF
* 08/01/2011,07/31/2015
* James Jones, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Anindya Banerjee
* 07/31/2015
* USD 499,600.00

Software defects, or bugs, are a significant issue in software development and
society. The cost of dealing with the faults caused by these defects is
significant. Once a software fault has been identified, either by a failing test
case or due to a failure in use, it can be difficult and time consuming to
identify the defect responsible for the fault and how to repair it. This
research will combine information from analysis of the program and the failing
run to help understand the context of the fault, and provide a developer with
visualizations and other information to help them understand the fault and
repair the software.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The technical focus of this work
consists of novel software analyses, software models, and software-development
interfaces and visualizations to support software development, comprehension,
and fault repair. These techniques capture and utilize static and dynamic
information about the program and its execution to model relations among
software elements and their functionality. These hybrid static/dynamic models
can be used as the basis for the exploration of a program when attempting to
understand the nature and context of software faults so that they may be
effectively and efficiently repaired. These software models utilize lightweight
and commonplace dynamic information, thus making them practical and ready for
near-term adoption. The interfaces and visualizations present the program to
software developers in a way to reveal interactions within software, thus
allowing them to comprehend larger and more complex systems than is currently
possible. As such, the research will enable software-development industry to
better understand and repair software faults, thus producing higher quality
software, which will benefit society at large.