* 1116719
* SHB: Small: Collaborative Research: Electronic Textiles for Ambulatory Health Monitoring
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2016
* Lucy Dunne, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 08/31/2016
* USD 233,397.00

Ambulatory health monitoring has been demonstrated to provide significant
benefits to patients in a number of studies. The biggest promise for improved
results for patients lies in the long-term, ambulatory monitoring of patients
with chronic illnesses to help doctors and patients identify health issues
before they reach a crisis stage. This project pursues the design of garments
for ambulatory health monitoring that have the look and feel of every day
clothing, together with an approach to monitoring that removes some of the
barriers to patient compliance by automatically annotating physiological data
with activities and motions, collecting data only during specific conditions,
and having minimal impact on daily routine. The intellectual merits lie in the
algorithms, design methodologies, and evaluation methodologies that enable wear-
and-forget garments for ambulatory health monitoring. The approach developed by
this project uses a computationally intensive pose estimation algorithm that
automatically adapts a more computationally efficient algorithm for activity
classification. This project addresses the challenges of providing garments that
look and feel like everyday clothing by developing design and evaluation
methodologies for incorporating fiber-based sensors into garments. These have
significant advantages over discrete sensors by being woven or sewn into the
fabric, covering much larger areas of a garment, and draping naturally. The
broader impacts of the research lie in the potential to remove barriers that
prevent the effective use of ambulatory health monitoring to improve the quality
of life for patients and their families.