* 1116554
* Collaborative Research: Provenance and Thermal Evolution of the Chugach-Prince William Terrane Flysch, Southern Alaska
* GEO,EAR
* 06/15/2011,05/31/2018
* John Garver, Union College
* Continuing Grant
* Stephen Harlan
* 05/31/2018
* USD 231,779.00

The Chugach-Prince William terrane is an extensive accretionary complex that
formed along the western margin of North America during subduction (under-
thrusting) of oceanic lithosphere in the Cretaceous to Eocene. It was intruded
by near-trench igneous rocks inferred to be related to the subduction of an
oceanic ridge (where new ocean crust is formed), but the location of this
terrane at the time of ridge interaction is under considerable debate. There are
two prevailing hypotheses for its position at the time of formation: 1) The
Chugach-Prince William terrane formed more or less in place and ridge
interaction was related to the now-subducted Resurrection plate; or 2) the
Chugach-Prince William terrane formed far to the south, was intruded by near-
trench igneous rocks near a latitude of 48-49Â°N, and was subsequently translated
along the continental margin to Alaska by strike slip faults similar to the San
Andreas fault in California. The possible formation of the Chugach-Prince
William terrane far to the south and subsequent translation along the
continental margin is a defining event in western North American tectonics and
makes testable predictions for the origin and thermal evolution of these rocks.
We use geochronology, stratigraphy, petrology, structural geology, and
geophysics to unravel the source region of this accretionary complex and
subsequent thermal history. Together, these data are yielding important
constraints on the accretion and translation history of the Chugach-Prince
William terrane and has implications for the history of flanking basins such as
the hydrocarbon-rich Cook Inlet basin.

This research directly addresses several key problems in North American
tectonics related to terrane formation, translation, accretion, and basin
formation, and is helping advance geochronologic methods used for tracking the
origin and thermal evolution of sedimentary rocks. The results from this work
are providing a better tectonic framework for understanding the timing and
nature of basin formation (including hydrocarbon-rich strata), and the timing
and extent of precious metals deposits (gold) associated with intrusive rocks.
This project also has a strong educational component aimed at increasing the
number of students in the geoscience pipeline and ultimately the workforce, and
our effort is partly focused on recruiting students under-represented in the
Geosciences. We are involved in the direct training, mentoring, and assessment
of undergraduate students through the Keck Geology Consortium. Students are
recruited, and assessed through the existing framework of the Consortium and
this effort includes involvement of 30% of the students from non-Keck schools.
There is a strong commitment to increasing the number of under-represented
students in the Geoscience pipeline (this group includes African American,
Hispanic, and Native American) and the new diversity initiative at the Keck
Geology Consortium guarantees greater participation by this cohort. The Keck
Consortium is dramatically increasing the number of under-represented student
participation by several strategies including internal recruitment and external
partners. The Keck Geology Consortium plays a leading role in the research
training of promising students, and the majority of these students pursue a MSc
and/or PhD in the geosciences. Thus the Consortium supplies the geoscience
pipeline with bright, talented, well-trained students and many become leaders in
the field. It is well known that research active faculty provide a successful
and productive learning environment, and that student research at the
undergraduate level provides students with the motivation, capability, and
preparation for graduate school that typically leads to a productive career in
the geosciences.