* 1116997
* CIF: Small: Efficient Satellite Relaying
* CSE,CCF
* 08/01/2011,07/31/2014
* Stephen Wilson, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 07/31/2014
* USD 340,955.00

Data networking via satellite relays remains an important means of linking
globally-distributed network terminals for both commercial and governmental
applications, especially in remote regions. Modern applications demand both
spectrum and power efficiency in the network. The archetype network model in
such networks is one with two terminals wishing to exchange data via a single
satellite transponder. Relative to traditional time-sharing or frequency-sharing
for the bidirectional communication paths, information-theory reveals that
spectrum efficiency gains of up to 100% can be obtained for a given set of link
power resources. These gains are possible when non-orthogonal transmission
methods are adopted, and the decoders exploit side-knowledge on previously-
transmitted information. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project codifies various
protocols appropriate to this two-terminal data exchange model, including
amplify-forward, as well as protocols that involve satellite decoding/re-
encoding. The possible gains depend on link resources as well as the desired
bidirectional rate targets. Existing research for this problem presumes perfect
synchronization and side-information at both terminals, but practical issues of
large round-trip delay, carrier phase/frequency synchronization, and symbol
synchronization are important obstacles to achieving the promise of information
theory. So the investigators develop realistic synchronization protocol designs
that approach the ideal information-theoretic limits. In addition, the project
studies a new decode-and-forward relaying protocol based on nested LDPC coding
on downlinks that is flexible in terms of rate-asymmetry.