* 1116955
* SHF: Small: Overcoming Nanoscale Modeling Challenges in Analog Synthesis: A Data-Driven Paradigm for Optimization of Approximate Functions
* CSE,CCF
* 08/01/2011,08/31/2015
* Michael Orshansky, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 08/31/2015
* USD 400,000.00

Increasing productivity in the area of analog integrated circuit design requires
the development of a new generation of circuit synthesis tools. A major
challenge is that continued scaling of transistor dimensions following Moore's
Law makes it difficult to describe the physical behavior of transistors in the
form suitable for circuit optimization. The work under this proposal will
develop a new approach for optimization over approximate descriptions of
transistor behavior, which is the only realistic way to capture analog circuit
behavior in a manner appropriate for automated synthesis. The approach is based
on explicitly modeling the divergence between the exact model and the
approximate model. The research will specifically develop: (1) a new analog
synthesis framework for model-based optimization over approximate functions that
is able to explicitly take into account the distribution of errors between the
approximate and exact models to drive optimization to a solution guaranteed to
be true with respect to the exact model; (2) a new model-fitting algorithm,
tailored for highly-constrained optimization over approximate functions, that
will further enhance the ability of the synthesis tool to produce a good
solution.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The outcomes of the work under this proposal
will lead to increased automation of analog and mixed-signal design, and result
in higher design productivity, as well as more power-efficient and cheaper
integrated circuits. Thus, this work will help sustain the evolution and growth
of semiconductor technology that has had enormous social implications over the
last fifty years. The concepts to be developed will also benefit other
scientific domains in which optimization using approximate functions is used.
The educational component of this proposal aims to combine the active research
program and research experience in this field with the creation of an
instructional and teaching infrastructure. Specifically, the graduate courses
offered by the PIs will incorporate the aspects of design methodologies
developed in this research.