* 1116405
* SHF: Small: A Register Transfer Level Toolset for Low Power Asynchronous Design Using Null Convention Logic
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2011,06/30/2014
* Mitchell Thornton, Southern Methodist University
* Standard Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 06/30/2014
* USD 350,000.00

Modern information processing circuits found in devices such as cell phones and
laptop computers run a fixed speed, known as a clock speed. As clock speeds
increase, more data can be processed in a shorter time allowing for intensive
applications such as streaming video and audio to be used. As clock speeds
increase, the amount of power required to run the circuits also increases. A new
approach would require no clock signal at all. In this approach, called
asynchronous processing, data would be processed as soon as it is available.
Asynchronous circuits can provide very fast data processing capabilities while
also reducing the amount of power consumed. Another advantage is that recently
methods have been devised that monitor signals radiated from clocked circuits
that can allow thieves to obtain copies of the data being processed.
Asynchronous circuits make this form of data theft much harder and are therefore
more secure circuits. Unfortunately, the methods used to design asynchronous
circuits are very immature and several important research problems must be
solved to enable this technology to become widely used. This project has
proposed solutions to these problems and the research will allow asynchronous
design methods to be more fully developed and will ultimately enable
asynchronous circuits to be commonly used. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The impact of
having asynchronous data processing circuits in devices such as notebook
computers and cell phones is that these devices will consume less power allowing
them to operate much longer before recharging their batteries. For some
applications, the performance of asynchronous circuits will increase since
processing will occur on the data as soon as it is available. In contrast, a
clocked circuit must wait until the next clock cycle before further data
processing can occur. Finally, asynchronous circuits offer more security against
certain data stealing attacks known as "side channel" attacks. This will prevent
data thieves from accessing your data by listening to the signals emanating from