* 1116001
* Travel Support: 7th International Symposium on Bioinformatics Research and Applications
* CSE,IIS
* 04/01/2011,03/31/2012
* Yi Pan, Georgia State University Research Foundation, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 03/31/2012
* USD 20,000.00

This grant will provide partial travel support for US graduate students, post-
doctoral scholars, and keynote speakers attending the International Symposium on
Bioinformatics Research and Applications to be held on May 27-29, 2011 at
Central South University in Changsha, China. The symposium aims to bring
together faculty, students, junior and senior researchers, including women and
members of underrepresented groups, for three days of scholarly communication on
latest advances in all aspects of bioinformatics and computational biology and
their applications. A main objective of the 2011 symposium is to promote
communication between researchers in the US and China and particularly
engagement of life scientists, statisticians, and computer scientists in cross-
disciplinary transnational collaborations. The Chinese participation will be
supported by the National Science Foundation of China (pending
approval).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In addition to contributed abstracts, the
technical program will include tutorials, panel discussions, and poster
sessions, and will feature invited keynote talks by distinguished researchers in
the field. The program will provide ample opportunities for interaction between
researchers with complementary expertise and foster joint US-China research
projects and scientific collaborations after the symposium in all areas of
bioinformatics research, ranging from comparative genomics and population
genetics to structure prediction and protein-protein interaction networks.
Participation in the symposium will be particularly beneficial to US graduate
students and post-doctoral scholars, by providing them with a critical formative
experience and preparing them to become future leaders in the field.