* 1116105
* Climate Variability and Impacts on Regional Surface Runoff in High Asia Mountains
* GEO,AGS
* 08/15/2011,01/31/2017
* Charles Jones, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Ming Cai
* 01/31/2017
* USD 563,506.00

The current state and future fate of the 'High Asian water towers' (i.e.,
freshwater reservoirs at high elevations) are of central importance for water,
food, and power supply of densely populated regions in south, east, and central
Asia. In addition to the highly seasonal summer rainfall, winter precipitation
is important for snowmelt and discharge in the pre-monsoon season. Runoff from
snow is especially significant in the central Asian and western Himalayan
regions, where hundreds of millions of people reside.

This project aims to advance our current understanding of climate processes on
regional-to-continental scales and how they affect the water balance in the High
Asia Mountains. It focuses on multiannual-to-decadal variations in the Indian
Summer Monsoon (ISM) and winter western disturbances (WD) and their impacts on
rainfall, snow and runoff variability in High Asia. The investigators will: 1)
characterize and investigate multi-annual-to-decadal variations in the ISM and
WD and their regional impacts on the surface water budget, 2) examine the
spatiotemporal variability of the surface water budget including changes in
rainfall and snow and their relative roles in driving runoff variations in High
Asia, and 3) develop case studies to investigate changes in ISM and WD and their
influences on the long-term variability of snow and associated runoff in the
High Asia Mountains.

The broader impacts of this project involve scientific and educational
components. This work will characterize and analyze the physical and dynamical
processes associated with multi-annual-to-decadal variations in the Indian
Summer Monsoon, winter western disturbances, rain, snowfall and surface runoff
in the High Asia Mountains. It will produce unique observational and modeling
data and validation results that will be available to the climate, hydrology,
and geomorphology research community. Further understanding of the physical
processes associated with rain, snow, glacial and snowmelt waters in the High
Asia will bring significant benefits for society. The nature of this problem
requires scientific expertise and educational training in different disciplines:
meteorology, hydrology, and geomorphology. The project will support and involve
two Ph.D. graduate students and broaden graduate classes in the Department of
Geography at the University of California in Santa Barbara.