* 1116725
* SHF: Small: Reversible Concurrency
* CSE,CCF
* 08/01/2011,07/31/2014
* Geoffrey Brown, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Nina Amla
* 07/31/2014
* USD 317,477.00

We face a future in which computational resources at the processor level are
"free" with hundreds or thousands of cores, yet we have little idea how to
utilize these resources except for well-structured and highly parallel
applications. This research aims, in the long term, to provide programmers with
the same computing power that Nature exploits to seemingly solve difficult
problems efficiently. The dominant programming model in Nature is that of a
massive number of "cheap" computing elements collaborating by message passing.
One such strategy to solving complex problems is to speculatively pursue many
possible solutions in parallel, discarding (partial) computations that lack
promise or violate necessary constraints. Unfortunately concurrent speculative
algorithms are challenging to develop because of the intermingling of execution
paths with concurrency and communication. The goal of this project is to take
significant steps towards a theory of speculation for concurrent algorithms and
to develop an experimental framework for their development. This research will
enable the study of novel applications to utilize the vast computational
resources that future processors seem destined to
provide.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is inspired and informed by recent
work on reversible computing which is itself inspired by reversibility in the
laws of Physics. Research on reversible concurrency, while illuminating key
properties that a system must satisfy (e.g. causal unwinding of communication),
has neither yielded models that can reasonably be implemented in a distributed
environment nor provided necessary details for a practical language. This
project will develop concurrent programming languages that support explicit
speculation in concurrent systems using the ideas from reversible concurrent
programming to factor out the mechanisms used to realize speculation from
speculative algorithms. The project will also leverage ideas from backtracking
monad and monad transformers to isolate the interactions between speculation and
computation effects including communication, and ideas from process algebras to
develop a model for understanding language constructs supporting speculative
execution. The research includes experimental work to implement and test
linguistic constructs and theoretical work to provide both formal models for
these constructs, and algebraic tools to enable reasoning about programs that
utilize them.