* 1116143
* AF: Small: Classical Simulation of Quantum Algorithms and Approximation of Permanents
* CSE,CCF
* 07/15/2011,06/30/2015
* Jon Yard, New Mexico Consortium
* Standard Grant
* Dmitri Maslov
* 06/30/2015
* USD 357,366.00

This research will develop new computational methods for simulating quantum
mechanical systems, while identifying fundamental obstacles preventing efficient
algorithms. These methods will be applied to simulating quantum computers and
other devices, which in turn will provide new algorithmic paradigms for hard
computational problems of practical importance. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Quantum
computers are known to solve problems that are believed to be intractable by any
conventional computer. These include cryptographic problems such as factoring
large numbers, as well as simulating quantum systems with many degrees of
freedom. This research will utilize recently discovered connections between
quantum mechanics and the matrix permanent. Like the determinant, the permanent
of a square matrix is also defined as a sum over permutations, only without
signs. But it is fundamentally different. While the determinant can be
efficiently computed using basic linear algebra, computing the permanent is
among the hardest computational problems, and is even believed to be intractable
on a quantum computer. Nevertheless, it is known that any procedure for
approximating permanents to a certain accuracy will immediately give a method
for efficiently simulating any quantum algorithm. This project will thus develop
new classical randomized methods for simulating quantum mechanics through the
study of the algorithmic complexity of the approximations of permanents, while
determining complexity-theoretic obstacles to such approximations. This research
will uncover fundamental truths about matrix permanents and their relation to
computer science and computational physics. It will provide new lower and upper
bounds on the permanent and related quantities, while establishing new hardness
results for computing and approximating permanents. The new bounds on permanents
will provide deeper theoretical and algorithmic understandings of measurement
probabilities in quantum optics. The mathematical part of this research will
have impact on many areas such as quantum information theory, combinatorics,
semidefinite programming, multilinear algebra, operator theory. In turn, this
research will contribute to our theoretical understanding of the capabilities
and limitations of computers, both classical and quantum.