* 1117800
* SHF: Small: Discovering New Mapping Strategies and Architectures for Coarse-Grained Reconfigurable Devices Through Crowdsourcing and Data-Driven Techniques
* CSE,CCF
* 08/01/2011,07/31/2013
* Gayatri Mehta, University of North Texas
* Standard Grant
* Almadena Chtchelkanova
* 07/31/2013
* USD 194,996.00

Coarse-grained reconfigurable fabrics have great promise for achieving energy-
efficient flexible designs for an application domain. In order to use these
fabrics for practical applications, however, there is a great need to develop
smart mapping algorithms to implement applications of interest onto these
fabrics. This research is focused on discovering new mapping strategies for
customized coarse-grained devices through crowd sourcing.

The main thrust of the proposed research is to develop a science game to
discover better mapping algorithms by making use of human intuition and ability
to recognize patterns and opportunities even in complex problems. Players are
presented with successively more difficult mapping problems in a game
environment, and the vast dataset of players. Moves are analyzed to recognize
common patterns used by successful game players. The insights gained from
strategic moves humans make while solving problems based on their visual
intuition and experience can be used to discover new mapping approaches that are
beyond what can be conceived with traditional algorithms. If time permits,
architectural innovations will also be investigated by giving players
opportunities to make architectural changes in the game environment. New energy-
efficient architectures and mapping algorithms that are developed in this
research will spur development of a broad range of portable/wearable computing
applications critical to health, safety and security, personal multimedia, and
aerospace.