* 1117190
* NeTS: Small: Recovery and Transformation of Human Mobility Traces for Mobile Wireless Experimentation
* CSE,CNS
* 08/01/2011,07/31/2015
* Mostafa Ammar, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Wenjing Lou
* 07/31/2015
* USD 407,581.00

The advent of cheap, ubiquitous, portable, multi-radio devices means that mobile
wireless networking will be the predominant future method for network access and
edge network formation. Many of these devices will have mobility that is
dictated by the movement of the humans who carry them. Hence, capturing real-
world human mobility patterns is essential for improving our understanding of
the new networks and communication opportunities that will arise. However, even
small-scale measurements carry a significant organizational overhead in
preparing, distributing and collecting contact loggers, not to mention non-
technical issues related to legality and participant consent. This research
program addresses two key issues: the recovery of mobility information from
contact traces, and the transformation of traces collected under one set of
circumstances to realistic alternative scenarios. The basis for the recovery
work is a dynamic, force-based heuristic to recover plausible mobility from a
contact trace. The basis for the transformation techniques is the combination of
the original trace and the plausible mobility, plus models for real-world
alternative settings. In both cases, the work addresses fundamental questions
about efficient computational methods and the limits to computational capability
for recovery and transformation. Answers to these two questions will allow
researchers to collect and transform traces so as to extract maximum value from
expensive measurement methods, enabling trace-driven simulation of mobile
wireless networks to play a central role beside analysis and direct
experimentation. In addition, the trace collection experiments used in
validation will provide a valuable resource to researchers in mobile networking.