* 1117210
* AF: Small: Collaborative Research: Active DNA Assembly of Aperiodic Structures
* CSE,CCF
* 08/01/2011,07/31/2015
* Nadrian Seeman, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Mitra Basu
* 07/31/2015
* USD 295,750.00

AF: Small: Collaborative Research: Active DNA Assembly of Aperiodic Structures
PIs: N.C. Seeman, N. Jonoska

The science of computing and information processing is rapidly proliferating
within established disciplines that at first glance appear unrelated. Examples
include biochemistry and biology through the areas of bioinformatics and
algorithmic molecular assembly, or physics, through quantum computing. Current
top-down photolithographic methods of electronic component construction are
likely to encounter severe barriers as miniaturization requires features at very
small sizes. An alternative approach to such construction is programmable
bottom-up assembly on the molecular scale. The most popular basis for bottom-up
assembly is DNA self-assembly, because DNA contains information through which
assembly can be controlled in a variety of ways. This approach has been explored
by a variety of laboratories in recent years, but was pioneered by the PI
Seeman's laboratory roughly thirty years ago. Robust DNA motifs can be self-
assembled into objects, lattices and devices, using the information content
inherent in the DNA molecules (or their analogs) themselves. Notable milestones
include the self-assembly of DNA polyhedra, the self-assembly of 2D DNA periodic
lattices, the self-assembly of high-resolution 3D DNA crystals, the development
of clocked and autonomous cascade-like DNA walkers, the development of DNA
origami, and the construction of 1D and 2D algorithmic assemblies.

This project aims to combine several of these developments to produce robust
aperiodic structures that will enable nano-scale construction of computational
machinery. The goal of the project is to introduce a new paradigm in the self-
assembly of nano-scale devices by DNA self-assembly: active (rather than
passive) recursion-based assembly of aperiodic structures. The project will
incorporate elements of DNA walkers into DNA origami-based tiles as signals that
guide hierarchical active assembly of aperiodic arrays.

The proposed hierarchical algorithmic assembly would be the first demonstration
of recursion in molecular self-assembly that can be seen as a physical
incarnation of programmed recursion. It is known that self-similar and fractal-
like structures have advantages in material design, heat exchange and
information processing, e.g., the very significant advances obtained by
miniature fractal-like antennas. Consequently, the possibilities for self-
similar arrangements at the nano-scale can be expected to advance further the
design of materials and electronics, while decreasing the costs involved in
their construction.