* 1117900
* AF: Small: Accurate, Biochemically-Relevant, and Robust Scoring Functions for Protein-Ligand Binding Affinity Prediction
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2011,06/30/2017
* Nihar Mahapatra, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Mitra Basu
* 06/30/2017
* USD 342,000.00

Protein-ligand binding affinity is the principal determinant of many vital
processes, such as cellular signaling, gene regulation, metabolism, and
immunity, that depend upon proteins binding to some substrate molecule.
Consequently, it has a central role in drug design. Due to prohibitive costs and
delays associated with experimental drug discovery, academia and pharmaceutical
and biotechnology companies rely on virtual screening using computational
molecular docking. Typically, this involves docking of tens of thousands to
millions of ligand candidates into a target protein receptor?s binding site and
using a suitable scoring function to evaluate the binding affinity of each
candidate to identify the top candidates as leads or promising protein
inhibitors. Since a scoring function (SF) is used to score, rank, and identify
drug leads, the fidelity with which it predicts the affinity of a ligand
candidate for a protein?s binding site and its computational complexity have a
significant bearing on the accuracy and throughput of virtual screening.
However, current state-of-the-art scoring functions have a number of
deficiencies, including either mediocre accuracy for affinity prediction or low
throughput, inconsistent accuracy, inflexibility in accuracy-throughput trade-
off provided, and reliance on only a single category of scoring
function.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;INTELLECTUAL MERIT: Accurately predicting the
binding affinities of large sets of diverse protein-ligand complexes remains one
of the most challenging problems in computational biomolecular science, with
applications in drug discovery, chemical biology, and structural biology. We
seek to address this problem by developing efficient discrete optimization
algorithms that facilitate: (1) the design of accurate, high-throughput single
and multi SF methods with provable optimality for a given protein-ligand complex
dataset; (2) determination of biochemically-relevant SFs through novel
biochemical rule filters that suitably constrain the protein-ligand complex
features selected; (3) prediction robustness through a novel multi-SF approach
that reduces the variance in accuracy associated with relying on only a single
SF; and (4) flexibility in accuracy-throughput tradeoff provided through a new
integrated dynamic multi-SF approach. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;BROADER IMPACTS:
This project will have a number of broader impacts: (1) public health benefits
by facilitating efficient and cost-effective drug discovery, which in turn helps
lower drug costs and improves affordability; (2) impact on other domains where
scoring function type approaches are used; (3) interdisciplinary training of
students in an important application area; (4) dissemination of research and
software artifacts developed during the project; and (5) participation and
training of underrepresented groups and K-12 outreach.