* 1117997
* HCC: CGV: Small: Semi-Regular Volumetric Parameterizations , Meshes, and Datafitting
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2016
* Elaine Cohen, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 08/31/2016
* USD 449,998.00

Project Title: Semi-Regular Volumetric Parameterizations, Meshes, and
Datafitting &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Project PI: Elaine Cohen, University of
Utah&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Volumetric models are increasingly pervasive in
computer graphics, computer-aided geometric design, visualization, and medical
data analysis. Formulating high quality parameterizations and smooth
representations is a difficult problem. Although it is possible to create
unstructured tetrahedral based C0 bases, there are many problems for which semi-
structured smooth hexahedral based representations give higher fidelity
simulations, model representations, and analyses. However, automatic creation of
such representations is still a challenge problem. At least partially because
they require much manual interaction and effort, current techniques to create
smooth representations have not been widely adopted. Our successful initial
results in using mathematical theory to create representations for special
classes of volumes has opened a door for extending the theory to create
algorithms that deal with more complex volumetric shapes. A semi-regular
parameterization facilitates many geometric processing and analysis algorithms,
allowing their extension to volumetric processing, and it supports the use of
smooth higher-order bases for simulation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research is
creating automatic parameterization and data fitting techniques for
heterogeneous volumes through i) developing a theoretical basis for techniques
to represent volumetric models using semi-regular tensor product
parameterizations, and ii) fitting higher order smooth representations of the
volumes over the parameterizations and then using associated smooth bases for
simulation. We are addressing domain matching, shape distortion, and issues in
computational geometry for such algorithms. Shapes that are being investigated
include multi-boundary polygonal models derived from scanned data and designed
boundary models represented as smooth NURBS surfaces. Algorithms and software
tools to help transform surface models to tensor product volume
parameterizations and smooth representations of volumes were lacking, one issue
that this research is overcoming. The results are being tested on a meaningful
subset of graphics simulation problems, particularly in the case of elastic
deformations of objects.