* 1117381
* AF: Small: Applied Algorithims: Tech Transfer from the Algorithims Toolbox II
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2011,09/30/2015
* David Karger, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Tracy Kimbrel
* 09/30/2015
* USD 400,000.00

Over the past decades, the field of algorithms has developed a toolbox of
theoretical techniques that let computer systems to do more with less---to solve
harder problems more quickly, using less memory, less communication with other
computers, and less of a human user's assistance. One measure of algorithms'
research success has been the large number of implemented systems whose designs
have been impacted by contributions from the algorithms community. There are
many more such successes waiting in the wings for individuals or groups who can
draw the connection between an existing algorithmic technique and an existing
applied problem. Often, the biggest challenge is recognizing the connection
between the practitioner's problem statement and the proper algorithmic solution
techniques. This research addresses the process of ``technology transfer'' from
the algorithmic toolbox to other computer science
domains.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigator is working closely with
practitioners in various areas of computer science to identify computational
problems whose efficient solution would advance their research agendas, dig
through the theory toolbox to find techniques that, properly adapted, can be
used to efficiently solve those problems, and assist in such adaptation. Domains
being addressed include natural language processing, detection of influence
pathways in biological networks, traffic route planning that accounts for
uncertain delays, network coding for efficient use of communication bandwidth,
and efficient use of crowdsourced computation. But rather than being driven by a
particular problem domain, the investigator is interested in the overall process
for applying theoretical work in algorithms to problems in the practical domain,
and is always seeking new applied problems that can benefit from this
approach.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Successful completion of the proposed work will
contribute advancement to many different branches of computer science. The
contributions to other branches of computer science will, in turn, allow them to
achieve their goals of broad impact on society. The investigator also hopes to
increase the general sense of connection between theoreticians and
practitioners, yielding increased collaborations and successful applications of
algorithms to theory beyond those made directly during this project. The project
will contribute to research training by continuing to employ large numbers of
students with attention given to gender diversity.