* 1117546
* CIF: Small: Distributed Function Computation and Multiterminal Data Compression
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2016
* Prakash Narayan, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* richard brown
* 08/31/2016
* USD 416,188.00

This research addresses the theory and design of algorithms for an efficient
local computation by multiple network terminals of shared functions of all their
observed correlated data. Efficient communication among the terminals
facilitates efficient computation. Applications include: computing the average,
variance, maximum, minimum and parity of observed data in a colocated network of
wireless sensors that make correlated measurements. This objective is connected
closely to the design of algorithms for the efficient compression of data for
storage and transmission purposes, as well as of algorithms for assuring data
security. A main goal of the project is to characterize explicitly these
connections, thereby leading to the development of new and efficient algorithms
for data compression, function computation and network
security.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The technical approach involves a formulation of
the underlying problems and their analysis, using an information theoretic
framework. This will enable the development of a principle of "entropy
decomposition of total shared randomness" in a network model to address
difficult problems in multiuser information theory of which rate-efficient
function computation is a leading example. In particular, an application of
source coding algorithms in distributed function computation will be studied.
Specific groups of open problems chosen for investigation address a general
class of multiterminal models for function computation and data compression.
This choice is motivated by, and is of compelling interest to, the theory and
engineering practice of network function computation and source coding, as well
as network security.