* 1117167
* TC: Small: Collaborative Research: Viewpoints: Discovering Client- and Server-side Input Validation Inconsistencies to Improve Web Application Security
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2011,09/30/2014
* Alessandro Orso, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 09/30/2014
* USD 199,994.00

Web applications are an increasingly important part of many aspects of the
society, from social interactions to business transactions. Hence, security of
web applications is an extremely important and urgent problem. Since web
applications are easily accessible, and often store a large amount of sensitive
user information, they are a typical target for attackers. In particular,
attacks that target input validation vulnerabilities are extremely common and
effective. Some of these attacks exploit well-known vulnerabilities, such as
cross-site scripting and SQL injection, whereas some others exploit application-
specific vulnerabilities that are hard to identify because they depend on the
particular input validation logic of the target application. In general, these
attacks exploit erroneous or insufficient input validation and sanitization to
inject malicious data that can result in execution of harmful commands and
access to sensitive information.

This research aims to identify and mitigate these vulnerabilities in web
applications by performing automatic checking of input validation and
sanitization operations. The key insight for this work comes from the
observation that developers often introduce redundant checks in both the front-
end (client) and the back-end (server) component of a web application. Client-
side checks are fast and can improve performance and responsiveness of the
application, but can be easily circumvented; server-side checks are hard to
circumvent, but require network round-trips and additional server-side
processing. Our intuition is that the checks performed at the client and server
sides should enforce the same set of constraints on the inputs: if client-side
checks are more restrictive, the server may accept inputs that legitimate
clients can never produce, as malicious users can easily bypass client-side
checks. Conversely, if server-side checks are more restrictive, the client may
produce requests that are subsequently rejected by the server, which is not
ideal from a performance point of view. This research will develop new
techniques based on program analysis, string analysis, and code synthesis that
can identify, map, model, and compare the set of checks performed on the client
and server sides. These techniques will be able to identify and report
inconsistencies between the two sets of checks and (semi)automatically extend
the checks to eliminate such inconsistencies. By making web applications more
secure and efficient, this research has the potential to benefit the
increasingly large part of the society that relies on the use of web
applications for its daily activities.