* 1117695
* AF: Small: Splines on Optimal Crystallographic Lattices
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2011,12/31/2016
* jorg peters, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Jack S. Snoeyink
* 12/31/2016
* USD 447,121.00

Crystallographic lattices are nature's way to partition space into uniform cells
with high symmetry. The equilateral triangulation of the plane, the face-
centered and the body-centered cubic lattice in 3D and the lattice based on the
24-cell in 4D, all partition space more isotropically than the commonly-used
Cartesian grid. Higher isotropy means higher efficiency, in that sparser data
allows reproducing the same functions as data on the Cartesian grid. To take
advantage of this increased efficiency, for material, medical, biological and
even algebraic computations, we need to explore and make practically accessible
multi-variate `crystallographic' splines that honor the structure of the
crystallographic lattices. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With emphasis on dimensions 3
through 8, where the number of spline coefficients is still manageable, this
research seeks to derive efficient analogues of the computational tools, data
structures and algorithms that are currently available only for tensor-product
splines on Cartesian grids. This includes algorithms and data structures to
support quasi-interpolation for reconstruction, evaluation of functionals,
refinement and adaptive subdivision, multi-resolution in the presence of
singularities, conversion to localized polynomial form, and treatment of
structural singularities. As proof of concept and extensions in their own right,
these tools will be tested on multi-variate algebraic real-root finding, error-
bounded approximation of level-sets, generalized subdivision and the
computational formulation of partial differential
equations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dissemination of the underlying theory,
algorithms and coded examples will lower the barrier for the use of
crystallographic splines and thereby enable more efficient computing for
simulation and modeling. Progress in real root finding will benefit applications
from geometric constraint solving to charting molecular conformation spaces.
Finite elements based on crystallographic splines will honor boundary data when
solving differential equations on crystallographic lattices. The impressive
structure of crystallographic lattices &lt;br/&gt;will engage undergraduate and
graduate students in digital arts and computer graphics classes; and videos of
volumetric fly-throughs and projections from higher dimensions will make this
research accessible to the wider public.