* 1117259
* AF: Small: New Challenges in Geometric Search and Retrieval
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2016
* David Mount, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Rahul Shah
* 08/31/2016
* USD 348,573.00

Geometric retrieval is the problem of preprocessing multi-
dimensional&lt;br/&gt;geometric data for rapid access. Efficient geometric
search and&lt;br/&gt;retrieval are of fundamental importance in engineering and
science, and&lt;br/&gt;have numerous applications in areas as diverse as
knowledge discovery&lt;br/&gt;and data mining, pattern recognition and
classification, machine&lt;br/&gt;learning, data compression, multimedia
databases, document retrieval,&lt;br/&gt;and statistics. Given the high
complexity of exact solutions to these&lt;br/&gt;problems, researchers have been
led to consider these problems in the context&lt;br/&gt;of approximation, where
small errors in distance are tolerated.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Over recent years,
there have been many advances in our understanding of&lt;br/&gt;the
computational complexity of approximation algorithms for
proximity&lt;br/&gt;searching. This has ranged from the development of a theory
of the best&lt;br/&gt;space-time tradeoffs achievable for these problems to
practical software&lt;br/&gt;systems. Nonetheless, there are still many
important, challenging&lt;br/&gt;problems that remain. Research under this award
will both deepen and broaden&lt;br/&gt;our understanding of the computational
complexity of approximate&lt;br/&gt;proximity searching. In particular, PI will
study new data&lt;br/&gt;structures for polytope membership queries, polytope-
based approaches to&lt;br/&gt;approximate nearest neighbor searching,
simplification and unification&lt;br/&gt;of proximity data structures, dynamic
data structures for proximity&lt;br/&gt;searching, and software implementations
of these algorithms and data&lt;br/&gt;structures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In
addition to the contributions of new algorithms and data
structures,&lt;br/&gt;software systems and libraries will be developed as part
of this&lt;br/&gt;research, which will be made freely available over the Web to
help&lt;br/&gt;scientists and engineers in other disciplines solve their
own&lt;br/&gt;application problems that involve nearest neighbor and range
searching.&lt;br/&gt;The geometric retrieval algorithms, developed as a part of
this&lt;br/&gt;research, will be incorporated into a graduate-level course
in&lt;br/&gt;computational geometry. Course materials will be made available
over the&lt;br/&gt;Web as a resource for researchers interested in learning
about this&lt;br/&gt;area.