* 1117937
* SHF: Small: Phase-Based Tuning for Better Utilization of Performance-Asymmetric Multicores
* CSE,CCF
* 08/01/2011,07/31/2016
* Hridesh Rajan, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* tao li
* 07/31/2016
* USD 416,000.00

This project focuses on the problem of making it easier to program performance-
asymmetric multicore processors (AMP). A multicore processor is called
performance-asymmetric when its constituent cores may have different
characteristics such as frequency, functional units, etc. High-performance
Computing (HPC) community has demonstrated significant interest in the AMPs as
they are shown to provide nice trade-off between the performance and power. On
the other hand, asymmetry makes programming these platforms hard. The
programmers targeting these hardware platforms must ensure that tasks of a
software system are well matched with the characteristics of the processor
intended to run it. To make matters even more complicated, a wide range of AMPs
exist in practice with varying configurations. To efficiently utilize such
platforms, the programmer must account for their asymmetry and optimize their
software for each configuration. This manual, costly, tedious, and error prone
process significantly complicates software engineering for AMP platforms and
leads to version maintenance nightmare. To approach this problem, this project
is developing a novel program analysis technique, phase-based tuning. Phase-
based tuning adapts an application to effectively utilize performance asymmetric
multicores. Main goals are to create a technique that can be deployed without
changes in the compiler or operating system, does not require significant inputs
from programmer, and is largely independent of the performance-asymmetry of the
target processor. The broader impacts are to help realize the potential of
emerging AMPs and other novel extreme-scale computing architectures, which in
turn will enable researchers in the scientific disciplines to analyze, model,
simulate, and predict complex phenomena important to society.