* 1117058
* SHF: Small: PAPI-V Hardware Performance Monitoring for Virtualized Environments
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2014
* Heike Jagode, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* Almadena Chtchelkanova
* 08/31/2014
* USD 425,000.00

Cloud computing involves use of a hosted computational environment that can
provide elastic compute and storage services on demand. Virtualization is a
technology that allows multiple virtual machines (VMs) to run on a single
physical machine and share its resources. Virtualization is increasingly being
used in cloud computing to provide economies of scale, customized environments,
fault isolation, and reliability. To address performance concerns with the use
of cloud computing for scientific computing, the PAPI-V project is developing a
system for hardware performance monitoring in virtualized environments to enable
software developers to understand and optimize system and application
performance and adapt to changing conditions. To accomplish this goal, the
project is extending the widely used Performance API (PAPI) cross-platform
library for accessing hardware performance counters.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
PAPI-V project is addressing the following aspects: &lt;br/&gt;1. Timing: The
PAPI timing routines are being extended to provide standard real and virtual
timers across different Virtual Machine Monitors (VMMs). &lt;br/&gt;2. Component
measurements: The existing PAPI I/O, network, and other shared resource
components are being extended to provide relevant information in virtualized
environments. &lt;br/&gt;3. Virtualization of selected processor hardware
counters: A selected set of processor counters considered being most relevant
for application performance analysis and tuning in virtualized environments is
being implemented across VMMs. &lt;br/&gt;4. Interpretation of data: A mechanism
for defining metrics that correctly quantify the contributions of various
factors to overall performance is under development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
research results will be implemented in the publically available and widely used
PAPI library. The PAPI-V extension will allow application and tool developers to
use a familiar interface to obtain relevant information for achieving the best
possible performance in cloud computing environments.