* 1117766
* III: Small: On the Conceptual Evaluation and Optimization of Queries in Spatiotemporal Data Systems
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2016
* Walid Aref, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Maria Zemankova
* 08/31/2016
* USD 496,889.00

The goal of this project is to research and develop techniques for the correct
conceptual evaluation, processing, and optimization of multi-predicate spatial
(MPS) queries in support of location-based services. The project achieves its
goal using the following approaches: (1) Study the characteristics of MPS
queries and develop a new consistent and provably correct conceptual evaluation
strategy for MPS queries similar to the one for relational SQL queries; (2)
Develop various query transformation rules that not only retain correctness but
also transform MPS query execution plans into more efficient ones; (3)
Investigate the validity of well-known relational optimization heuristics in the
context of MPS queries and develop innovative optimization algorithms unique to
MPS queries; (4) Develop a cost model to aid the query optimizer in selecting
the best query execution plans for MPS queries and study the impact of the
variation on temporal and spatial moving object distributions on MPS query
execution plans; (5) Develop new adaptive spatiotemporal query processing
techniques that can cope with the dynamic nature and scale of moving object
environments; (6) Prototype an MPS location server that reflects the correct
evaluation and efficient optimized execution of continuous and adaptive MPS
operators; and (7) Develop simulators and analytical models to evaluate the
performance of the developed techniques. The research results are beneficial to
many applications including location servers, intelligent transportation
systems, smart cities, supply chain management, and emergency response and
recovery.

This project supports Ph.D. students to pursue research in the areas of
spatiotemporal data management systems and advanced location servers, and
involves undergraduate students in related research projects. The project
develops and introduces a new entry-level undergraduate programming course
around 2D and 3D map operations and queries that utilizes MPS queries and
integrates the research results from the project to increase the interest in
programming of students from Computer Science as well as from other Science
disciplines. The project involves minority students through the Discovery
Learning Center at Purdue Discovery Park and the Louis Stokes Alliance for
Minority Participation (LSAMP) project and Alliances for Graduate Education
Program (AGEP). Publications, technical reports, software and experimental data
from this research are available at the project web site
(http://www.cs.purdue.edu/~aref/MPS).