* 1117039
* NeTS: Small: Understanding Communication Strategies for Ad hoc Networks
* CSE,CNS
* 08/01/2011,07/31/2015
* Mark Crovella, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* Wenjing Lou
* 07/31/2015
* USD 390,853.00

Ad-hoc networks hold great promise, but there is a vast array of competing
proposals for organizing such networks. Unfortunately it is unclear, in general,
how to choose among the various proposed designs in any given deployment. In
response, this project is asking a fundamental question: how should a collection
of nodes decide what basic architecture to adopt in organizing into a network?
Candidate basic architectures include those that organize via traditional
routing protocols, employ epidemic protocols, or use delay-tolerant networking
protocols. This project approaches the question as one of deciding what state
should be maintained, and how long that state should be maintained, in the
network. Relevant state includes both control state (properties of the network)
and data state (the data in transit). The project is connecting dynamic
properties of the network with the nature of control and data state to be
maintained. A key project output is an identification of the network and traffic
characteristics that can be used to determine an appropriate level of control
and data state maintenance. The effect of these characteristics on the different
classes of communication strategies is being rigorously evaluated. Using the
characteristics that are identified, the project is developing signaling
mechanisms to ensure that communication strategies optimally adapt to changing
network conditions.

The result of the project will be more robust and broadly effective methods for
creating ad hoc networks in new environments. Such environments can include
battlefields as well as post-disaster deployments, where networks must be
created quickly under unanticipated conditions.