* 1117411
* CSR: Small: User Centric Policy Management for Social Networks
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2014
* Mohamed Shehab, University of North Carolina at Charlotte
* Standard Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 08/31/2014
* USD 200,000.00

Social networks (SNs), including Facebook, Twitter and LinkedIn have developed
on the Internet to become a leading paradigm of online interaction. SNs have
been successful in attracting users, and providing a medium where users can
easily share and distribute content. Such open availability of data exposes SN
users to a number of security and privacy risks. Current SN architectures adopt
a simple user centric policy management approach, where a security aware user is
able to specify a policy that manages access to their posted content. However,
the majority of users lack appropriate information to make informed privacy
decisions. The goal of this project is to develop a comprehensive and compelling
framework that leverages data mining approaches and policies composed by other
community members to provide the user with appropriate information required when
making policy decisions. The wisdom of the community is aggregated and
summarized to assist users when making policy decisions related to user-to-user
interactions, and third party applications. The principal intellectual products
resulting from this project will be the development of novel policy management
frameworks that focuses on both usability, and leverages data mining,
recommendations and policy sharing techniques to consult the SN community to aid
in enhancing users? privacy policies.

This project has a broad societal impact on new business and community models
for sharing on SNs, providing mechanisms that enable users to make more informed
access decisions. In addition this project will support graduate and
undergraduate students, and will engage K-12 students and enhance their
understanding of privacy in SNs.