* 1117365
* CCF: Small: Sensing-Based Dynamic Spectrum Access Networks: Modeling, Algorithms, and Experimental Validation
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2015
* J. Nicholas Laneman, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 08/31/2015
* USD 473,132.00

The FCC released its National Broadband Plan citing the exponentially growing
demand for mobile data services and the critical need to better utilize the
radio spectrum. Beyond retargeting certain frequency bands, the FCC is
considering a paradigm shift of dynamic spectrum access (DSA) technology and
policy. DSA allows 'secondary' radios to transmit in underutilized 'white space'
provided they create minimal interference to 'primary' radios. Significant white
space, as much as 85%, has been observed across time, frequency, and location.
However, even in the TV bands, the challenge of inconspicuous utilization of
white spaces has not yet been achieved by the two leading solutions, distributed
spectrum sensing and centralized emitter databases.

This project focuses on a comprehensive approach to DSA based upon spectrum
sensing that combines the following in a feedback loop: novel modeling of
primary and secondary transmissions; design of optimal spectrum sensing
algorithms and secondary access protocols based upon these models; and
experimental validation within a testbed of software-defined radios. Preliminary
results develop primary Markov models and optimal sequence detection algorithms
for spectrum sensing that build upon the well-known Viterbi and forward-backward
algorithms and expose fundamental limitations due to primary mismatch for the
commonly used energy detector. The connections to trellis- and graph-based
algorithms from the channel coding community should introduce a sizable new
toolbox to DSA researchers. Secondary access protocols that take advantage of
Markov process models for the primary users similarly exhibit improved
performance tradeoffs between primary interference and secondary throughput.
Collaborators in industry and regulatory bodies will be kept informed of the
research results with an aim toward impacting DSA technology and policy
development at national and international levels.