* 1117214
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant: A Zooarchaeological Investigation at Creve Coeur
* SBE,BCS
* 04/15/2011,03/31/2012
* Kenneth Kelly, University South Carolina Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 03/31/2012
* USD 18,500.00

Under the direction of Dr. Kenneth Kelly, Diane Wallman will collect and analyze
data for her doctoral dissertation. Her project integrates archaeologically
recovered faunal remains and historical data from 18th and 19th century slave
and post-emancipation Afro-Caribbean households on the plantation site of
Habitation Crève Coeur to examine how the enslaved laborers, and later free
Afro-Caribbeans, negotiated the social and physical constraints of the
plantation and island landscape through daily subsistence strategies. Many
societies exhibit social stratification of which slavery is the most extreme
form. Through archaeological examination of such cases it is possible to gain
insight into how, over the long term, different social classes interact and how
power relationships are negotiated among them.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Crève Coeur
is situated in the commune of St. Anne on the French island of Martinique in the
Lesser Antilles chain of the Caribbean Sea. The plantation relied on the labor
of enslaved African and African-descended peoples and operated from the mid 18th
through the late 19th century, primarily for the production of sugar and its
byproducts for export to the métropole and French colonies. The objective of
ongoing archaeological investigations at the site is to reconstruct the lifeways
of the enslaved laborers at the plantation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Ms. Wallman's
analysis relies on zooarchaeology combined with historical data.
Zooarchaeologists identify, analyze and quantify animal remains recovered from
archaeological contexts to investigate the system of food procurement,
processing/preparation, distribution, preservation, consumption, and discard.
Through revealing the daily practices of slave laborers, Ms. Wallman's research
explores historical processes and social change, situated in a context of severe
assymetrical power relations. Her project contributes to anthropological
discussions of colonialism and comparative slavery, as it begins to deconstruct
individual and community negotiations of the oppressive power structure of
plantation slavery. The examination of slave subsistence strategies supports
anthropological inquiry emphasizing that everyday practices are the processes of
history that produce change, providing material evidence of the local
consequences of and responses to the structures of power and domination
constructed with the rise and spread of European Colonialism.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Through the continuing collaboration with local heritage
and cultural agencies in Martinique, this research will engage community
interest in Martinique with regard to local history and culture. Collaboration
will continue with the completion of this project, as the local community has
taken interest in the ongoing archaeological investigations (http://pagesperso-
orange.fr/mac2/patrimoine3.html), through the organization of multiple public
talks and open tours of the site (Portes Ouvertes). These meetings provide a
platform for the local descendant communities on the island to discuss their
concerns and interest in the research of their largely undocumented history and
past. Crève Coeur represents a locus of growing local awareness of the
contribution archaeology can provide to the history of slavery and Afro-
Caribbean identity. The project will provide Ms. Wallman with further training
in the methods of analysis noted above, and foster internationally cooperative
research.