* 1117179
* TC: Small: Collaborative Research: Exploring a Robust Quantum Cryptography Protocol for Securing Optical Burst Switching Networks
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2015
* Pramode Verma, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Shands
* 08/31/2015
* USD 166,666.00

This proposal explores a robust quantum cryptography protocol for securing
optical burst switching (OBS) networks, providing a means to make the OBS-based
future Internet trustworthy from the ground up. Since the OBS network has a one-
to-one correspondence between the header and its associated burst, the same
relationship can be exploited for encryption. The quantum-based methodology
makes it possible to distribute keys securely so that each burst is encrypted
and decrypted with a unique key. As the well-known BB84 quantum cryptography
protocol is susceptible to siphoning attacks on the multiple photons emitted by
practical sources, we use a new 3-stage quantum cryptography protocol which is
immune to such siphoning attacks, for it is based on random rotations of the
polarization vector. The new 3-stage quantum cryptography protocol allows
practical photon sources to be used in the quantum key exchange, making it
feasible to extend quantum cryptography services beyond trusted routers. The
3-stage all quantum protocol is being investigated for its performance in
different noise situations for different key generation rates. The
implementation of the protocol uses quantum phase modulation rather than
polarization modulation which is not stable in the long transmission over fiber.
The research conducted in this proposal includes the design of an integrated
secure router and investigation of quantum cryptography protocols for specific
services. This research will be verified on a reconfigurable optical burst
switching test bed.