* 1117489
* SHB: Small: Machine Learning Models for Blood Glucose Prediction in Diabetes Management
* CSE,IIS
* 08/01/2011,07/31/2016
* Razvan Bunescu, Ohio University
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 07/31/2016
* USD 389,999.00

The goal of this project is to develop machine learning models that leverage
underutilized data and account for individual patient differences to improve
diabetes management. Diabetes is a chronic disease, which must be treated and
managed over a lifetime. In type 1 diabetes, the pancreas does not produce
insulin, an essential hormone needed to convert food into energy. The disease is
treated with insulin and managed by monitoring and controlling blood glucose
levels. Good blood glucose control is key to avoiding serious diabetic
complications, but achieving and maintaining good blood glucose control is
difficult. Patients are highly individual in their responses to treatment and to
life events that affect blood glucose levels. Large volumes of blood glucose
data are collected automatically, but automated analysis is lacking. Patients do
not always know when problems are impending; problems occurring while patients
are asleep are especially dangerous. Machine learning models that predict blood
glucose levels would enable or facilitate new applications of direct benefit to
patients, including: alerts to immediately notify patients of impending
problems; decision support systems recommending actions to prevent problems; and
educational simulations showing the effects of different treatment choices or
lifestyle options on blood glucose levels.

The task of blood glucose prediction is approached as a time series forecasting
problem. Blood glucose is predicted based on a patient's prior blood glucose
levels, insulin data, meal data, exercise data, sleep patterns and work
schedules. Batch and incremental time series regression models, including
support vector machines and neural networks, are being investigated. To account
for individual patient differences, separate models are trained for each
patient. However, transfer learning may enable data from multiple patients to
aid in building models for patients with limited historical data. Models are
sought that are robust in the face of imperfect data, including missing life
events, inaccurately recorded life events, and noisy glucose sensors. Disjoint
sets of training and testing data extracted from non-overlapping time intervals
are used to build models that are compared against baselines such as
autoregressive integrated moving average models. Standard metrics for comparing
models, such as root mean square error and coefficient of determination, will be
supplemented with domain dependent measures of goodness, including the Clarke
error grid.

This work aims to improve the overall health and wellbeing of the nearly two
million Americans with type 1 diabetes. Predicting blood glucose problems in
advance gives patients time to take steps to prevent the predicted problems from
occurring. This improves blood glucose control, which is known to reduce the
risk of serious diabetic complications, including blindness, amputations, kidney
disease, strokes, heart attacks, and death from severe hypoglycemia. In
addition, this research project forms the cornerstone of a new Smart Health and
Wellbeing Laboratory at Ohio University. This new laboratory is designed to
promote further interdisciplinary research among computer scientists and health
care professionals as well as to attract more women to careers in computer
science. Additional information about the project and the laboratory is
available at http://oucsace.cs.ohiou.edu/~marling/shb.html.