* 1117281
* HCC: Small: An Analytical Framework for Provenance-Rich Social Knowledge Collection
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2014
* Yolanda Gil, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* William Bainbridge
* 08/31/2014
* USD 490,000.00

This project will investigate a new generation of provenance-rich social
knowledge collection systems that will greatly improve the ability of people to
create online communities of interest and share information. The research will
transform the state of the art in social content collection in several important
ways. First, social knowledge collection systems will be augmented to support
contributors to structure factual content, so that information can be aggregated
to answer reasonably interesting albeit simple factual queries. We will build on
a semantic wiki framework to allow users to create structured factual content as
object-property-value triples. It will not assume pre-defined ontologies, but
rather develop algorithms that analyze current content and suggest opportunities
for structuring contributions so they can be aggregated to answer simple
queries. Second, they will include detailed provenance records that reflect how
the content was created, allowing contributors to enter alternative viewpoints
and enabling consumers to make quality and trust judgments. The research will
include developing algorithms that derive trust metrics from the provenance
records, and to allow users to define views on the content based on provenance
criteria. It will create novel approaches to propagate trust across content
topics and categories and complement existing algorithms that propagate trust in
social networks. Third, the systems will proactively guide contributors to
invest effort where it is most needed, developing novel algorithms to detect
knowledge gaps, and by allowing users to define queries that will be used to
drive further contributions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This work has the potential
for a broader impact in many areas where social content collection is already
widely used, not only in scientific communities but also for societal issues,
such as citizen participation in local communities, health, and governance. All
these communities would benefit from further structure, provenance models, and
guided knowledge collection. Despite their popularity, social content collection
sites currently have important limitations. First, because the content has very
little structure they cannot aggregate information and answer many simple
questions. Second, contributors have uneven expertise and skills and therefore
the content is of very varying quality, yet there is no assistance for consumers
to tell apart the valuable from the dubious. Third, these sites depend on the
initiative of contributors to figure out how the content needs to grow, and
there is no systematic analysis to expose knowledge gaps and guide contributors
proactively. This research project addresses all three of those issues.