* 1117055
* AF: Small: Fast and Memory-Efficient Dimensionality Reduction for Massive Networks
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2015
* Inderjit Dhillon, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Jack S. Snoeyink
* 08/31/2015
* USD 360,000.00

Many systems take the form of massive networks, i.e., a set of nodes joined
together in pairs by links. Examples include social, communication and
biological networks. Research on such complex networks has attracted broad
scientific disciplines. While many sophisticated mathematical tools for network
analysis have been developed, many such tools are not directly applicable due to
the sheer size of modern-day networks. In addition, these networks may be
dynamically evolving and may have extra node information and/or auxiliary links
between the same group of nodes obtained from heterogeneous data sources. Our
proposed research aims to develop mathematical ideas novel to the analysis of
massive networks. In particular, we plan to develop a novel dimensionality
reduction method that proceeds by conducting a very fast clustering of the
graph, extracting local latent subspaces of the graph, and then "gluing"
together these subspaces to get a dimensionality reduction scheme for the entire
network. Building on our new method, we plan to develop methods for handling
time-evolving networks, multiple sources of information, supervised
dimensionality reduction of networks and hierarchical schemes for dimensionality
reduction as well as prediction. Our methods are eminently suitable for parallel
computation, and we propose to further address the scalability problem by
developing parallel versions of our methods on modern multi-core
architectures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research will enable important
inference tasks, such as link prediction, collaborative filtering and semi-
supervised classification to be efficiently carried out on massive networks. We
expect the resulting algorithms to have the following properties: (1)
computationally faster than current state-of-the-art methods for dimensionality
reduction; (2) much more memory-efficient than the globally and rank-wise
optimal SVD method; (3) scalable to extremely large data sets, such as online
social networks, e.g., MySpace and Facebook, communication networks and virtual
networks; (4) flexible enough to integrate auxiliary information of various
types and different levels of uncertainty; and (5) effective enough to discover
the task-oriented low-dimensional structure of the network. The proposed project
will have broad impact on research in a variety of disciplines, including
applied mathematics, computer science and social sciences. We plan to share the
software developed under the project with the scientific community via a public
web site, as well as the data and results that arise from our studies. The
project will make a conscious effort to involve students in inter-disciplinary
research.