* 1117663
* III: Small: Collaborative Research: Shape Differences in the Biological Sciences
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2015
* Joel Hass, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 08/31/2015
* USD 437,223.00

Finding and quantifying differences between shapes is important in many areas of
the biological sciences. This methodological research will contribute to ongoing
research in two areas, neuroscience and paleontology. In neuroscience, the
interest is mainly in tracking the progress of Alzheimer's disease and normal
aging processes in the brain, and relating the 3D shape changes seen in MRI
scans to cognitive measurements and other variables. NIH studies provide access
to large amounts of such data. In paleontology, the only information on many
extinct species comes from fossils, and estimates of the relationships between
these fossil species and human ancestors is based largely on differences and
similarities of shape. The goal is to put fossil shape data into the context of
much larger sets of data collected from existing species, both morphological and
genomic data from earlier research. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This collaboration is
interested in defining and computing what it means for three-dimensional
biological shapes to resemble each other; as specific examples, they consider
the shapes of fossil primate bones and of regions in the brain such as the
hippocampus. Current practical measures of shape difference are based on sets of
corresponding point samples on the object surfaces. The team will add a surface
mesh connecting these corresponding points, and represent a shape by the vector
of the lengths of the edges in its copy of the mesh. The distance between two
shapes is then the Euclidean distance between their corresponding edge vectors.
This representation has some attractive mathematical properties. With a few
simple additional requirements on the mesh, the edge-length vectors form a high-
dimensional Euclidean space, within which standard statistical analyses can be
performed. Second, the measure is invariant to rotations and translations not
only of the entire object, but to a large extent to transformations of one part
of the object with respect to the rest. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research will
include experimental work to compare the proposed metric and&lt;br/&gt;current
methods in both neurobiology and in physical anthropology. They also intend to
work on methods to simplify finding and optimizing corresponding points and
meshes connecting them on input specimens, a perennial problem in three-
dimensional data analysis. Not only is this important to facilitate experiments,
but having a good practical shape metric will help improve techniques in this
area. Finally, the team plans work on interesting related mathematical problems,
specifically the convergence of the metric to property of smooth surfaces as the
sampling density is increased &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There are plans to release
both software for the use of practitioners and ensembles of data annotated with
corresponding meshes for the use of other researchers into the methodology of
shape differences. In this way the research should benefit many others who
analyze shape differences: our colleagues in paleontology and neuroscience,
people who study the anatomy of humans, other animals and even plants, forensic
scientists, and others.