* 1117985
* Computing without a Leader: Building Blocks for Internet-Scale, Robust Computing
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2016
* Jared Saia, University of New Mexico
* Standard Grant
* Rahul Shah
* 08/31/2016
* USD 381,499.00

How do ant colonies, bee hives, and markets function even when there is no
leader? A starting point for answering this question is the fundamental problem
of agreement in distributed computing: Byzantine agreement. The Byzantine
agreement problem is to devise a protocol so that a group of agents, each with a
private input can agree on a single common output that is equal to some agent's
input. The problem is complicated by the fact that an unknown subset of the
agents suffer Byzantine faults: they can engage in arbitrary deviations from the
protocol, including false messages and collusion. Byzantine agreement has found
applications in many areas, including peer-to-peer systems, database systems,
control systems, grid computing, cloud computing and game theory. Unfortunately,
continued application is hampered by a stark barrier: there is no practical,
scalable algorithm for Byzantine agreement. In particular, all current Byzantine
agreement algorithms require all-to-all communication: each agent must talk with
every other agent.

This research will directly address this barrier by designing scalable
algorithms for Byzantine agreement and other related problems. Our goal is to
design algorithms that are scalable in the sense that each agent sends a number
of bits that is O(sqrt(n) log n), and total latency is O(log n), where n is the
number of processors; and robust in the sense that they can tolerate up to a
constant fraction of Byzantine faults. In addition to Byzantine agreement, we
will design scalable and robust algorithms for the following three related
problems. First, Subcommittee Election: All processors agree on one or more
subcommittees of size O(log n), where the fraction of bad processors in each
subcommittee is within epsilon of the fraction of bad processors in the network,
for any positive epsilon. Second, MapReduce: Enable the MapReduce software
framework, even when there is no master. Finally, Robust Multiparty Computation:
Each processor starts with a private input and there is a publicly known
function F on n variables; the goal is for all users to learn the output of F at
the point given by the private inputs. The long-term vision is to develop a
technique, based on Byzantine agreement, that is on par with techniques like
cryptography and error-correcting codes by 1) being frequently used in practice
and applicable across a wide range of applications; and 2) having a clean
interface between theory and practice.