* 1117313
* RI: Small: Reinforcement Learning for Realistic Statistical Spoken Dialogue Systems - Beyond Slot-Filling Applications
* CSE,IIS
* 08/01/2011,07/31/2015
* David Traum, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Tatiana Korelsky
* 07/31/2015
* USD 449,988.00

Statistical spoken dialogue systems (SDSs) use reinforcement learning to learn a
dialogue policy that decides what to do based on the dialogue context (also
called dialogue state). Previous work on this problem has mainly addressed slot-
filling dialogue, in which the user presents a complex request (e.g. an
appointment booking), and the system tries to fill a set of slots (e.g. date and
time) to satisfy the user's request. This project significantly extends and
generalizes prior work by allowing automated dialogue policy creation for other
genres of dialogue including question-answering and negotiation. The following
open research issues are investigated: (1) the extent to which the three very
different genres of dialogue (slot-filling, question-answering, and negotiation)
can be represented using the same kind of dialogue policy representation; (2)
whether state-of-the-art learning techniques, that work well for small state
spaces and simple interactions, can scale to the needs of more complex dialogues
and larger state spaces; (3) methods for compactly representing the dialogue
state and for combining learned and hand-crafted policies; (4) development of
automated metrics for measuring the quality of simulated users and learned
policies; (5) validation of those metrics with respect to how well they
correlate with human evaluations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Statistical SDSs
facilitate easier creation of dialogue systems (less hand-crafting by dialogue
system experts) that are more tuned in to user behavior (learning policies from
data and simulation). This project broadens the types of systems that can be
developed with this kind of approach (not just slot-filling, but also simple
question-answering and more complex negotiation). The advances made in the
project are encoded in a toolkit (to be publicly distributed) specifically
designed for statistical dialogue management. This toolkit allows broader access
to this technology, by providing the potential to attract more researchers from
academia and industry to the field of SDS, and make the use of statistical
techniques available to non-experts; it can also be an excellent resource for
teaching statistical dialogue management to students.