* 1117913
* III: Small: Building Linked Open Services from Online Sources
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2011,05/31/2017
* Craig Knoblock, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Maria Zemankova
* 05/31/2017
* USD 532,000.00

Most of the work on the Semantic Web and more broadly Information Integration
assumes that accurate semantic models of sources exist. In practice, although
there is a tremendous amount of data available on the Web, there is rarely any
semantic description of the sources and the information provided by them. This
project will develop a new approach that addresses the problem of automatically
discovering and modeling sources by building on the recent development of Linked
Open Data within the Semantic Web. The resulting system will be able to learn
about any source where there is background knowledge in the Linked Open Data.
This work will be a significant advance over what was done previously since it
will allow an intelligent system to expand its knowledge to learn models of
sources that cover information for which the system has no known sources. The
system will start with all of the data and knowledge in the Linked Open Data as
well as semantic descriptions of some related services (through the work on
Linked Open Services). The system will then learn how a new source relates to
the known sources by exploiting the knowledge already available the the Linked
Open Data. The result will be a rich semantic description of the individual
sources that can be used in Semantic Web applications and information
integration systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The ability to automatically discover
and learn detailed semantic descriptions across a range of sources that go
beyond the current source descriptions will greatly expand the utility of
Semantic Web and information integration systems. This capability will allow
people and systems to better exploit the massive amount of data available today
on the Internet and provide a tool to keep up with its growth. Within the
bioinformatics world, for example, the amount of data continues to grow rapidly,
and the ability to find and structure this data will have a significant impact
on ability of researchers to fully exploit all of this information to solve
biomedical research questions, such as finding more effective treatments for
cancer. More information about the project can be found at
http://www.isi.edu/integration/people/knoblock/projects/prj_source_modeling.html