* 1117672
* AF: Small: Explorations of Theoretical Models of Self-Assembly
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2011,06/30/2015
* Robert Schweller, The University of Texas Rio Grande Valley
* Standard Grant
* Mitra Basu
* 06/30/2015
* USD 431,981.00

Project Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this proposal the PIs
present plans to investigate a number of fundamental problems within theoretical
models of self-assembly, as well as plans to directly engage a large number of
students in research activities. Self-assembly is the process by which simple
components autonomously come together by way of local interactions to form
complex structures. Self-assembling systems are abundant in nature and are the
key mechanisms for the formation of biological organisms. Further, self-assembly
technology is emerging as a powerful tool for manipulating matter at the
nanoscale. The development of a mature mathematical and computational
understanding of self-assembly theory is an important step towards harnessing
the power of self-assembly for the large scale fabrication of complex nanoscale
devices such as circuits, molecular motors, nanoscale computers, and nano-
biomedical devices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The focus of this project is
theoretical studies which involve mathematical analyses and also the development
of simulation software. Such theoretical work well complements ongoing
experimental research and a key portion of this project involves regular visits
to top experimental research labs such as Erik Winfree?s DNA and Natural
Algorithms Group at Caltech and Russell Deaton?s DNA and Biomolecular Computing
group at the University of Arkansas to engage in mutually beneficial discussions
regarding the development of self-assembling models and systems. Such
involvement can help to guide their long range experimental paths as well as
provide the PIs with invaluable insight into the laboratory
realities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this proposal the PIs present a diverse array
of projects which they will pursue with heavy student involvement. The following
are brief descriptions of a few: the PIs will study the ability of self-
assembling systems to self-replicate and evolve. These abilities are the
fundamental cornerstones of living systems, and such studies will provide
insights into how living systems originated and function. The PIs will extend,
along several directions, a powerful model of fault tolerance which they
recently introduced, fuzzy temperature fault tolerance. New fault tolerance
techniques are of extreme importance if substantial products are to be realized
from artificial self-assembling systems. The PIs will pursue studies in the
power of randomization techniques for reducing tile complexity while generating
close approximations of self-assembled shapes. The PIs will greatly extend the
self-assembly software available for both teachers and researchers. The PIs
simulator is currently used by several instructors and research groups and has
great promise to help draw more students into the field, and research in
general.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The emphasis on undergraduate research of this
project has broader impacts that are of particular interest to the NSF. The
University of Texas-Pan American (UTPA), located in the South Texas Rio Grande
Valley area, has more than 18,000 students, with an 89% Hispanic and 59% female
student population. A primary goal of this proposal is to increase the research
activity of UTPA Computer Science students by developing a large portion of the
research within the environment of student-centered research seminars. The PIs
plan to further develop current research seminars into full courses to involve a
larger number of students in original research. Because of the nature of the
UTPA student body, this plan will help broaden participation in post graduate
Computer Science among under-represented minority groups. The PIs also propose
to support the broader research community by providing much needed educational
and research software.