* 1117701
* Nets: Small: Optimal Design of Anonymous Network Systems under Resource Constraints
* CSE,CNS
* 08/15/2011,07/31/2015
* Parvathinathan Venkitasubramaniam, Lehigh University
* Standard Grant
* Darleen Fisher
* 07/31/2015
* USD 314,000.00

Privacy in networked systems goes beyond the secrecy of exchanged data; it is
equally critical to protect the identities of communicating parties and the
paths of data flow. Availability of such networking information is not only a
violation of user privacy, but also provides a convenient platform for a
malicious adversary to launch more powerful attacks. Anonymous network systems
are networks of special routers and proxy servers that provide protection using
cryptographic tools and covert relaying. Commonly deployed systems are, however,
vulnerable to timing analysis of packet transmissions and do not provide the
necessary protection under resource limitations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
principal investigators will investigate the provably optimal design of
anonymous network systems under constraints on resources and desired network
quality of service (QoS). They will develop a novel quantitative measure of
anonymity that takes into account the complete information available to an
adversary and the resource and topological constraints of a network. Using the
quantitative model, they will explore the following three critical problems in
network system design: optimal resource allocation, stochastic routing, and
topological design. If successful, the analysis will give rise to novel
networking algorithms to achieve anonymity in information exchange that cater to
modern paradigms of network design such as mobility and application
independence.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: The research will have a
significant impact in delivering provable privacy for networked systems. The
research promotes graduate and undergraduate education in network security and
provides access to recent advances in the field to community college students
and law enforcement personnel through distance learning programs. In addition,
awareness of security vulnerabilities in social networks will be broadened for
middle to high school students.