* 1117545
* CIF:  Small:  Robust Sparse Recovery for Highly Correlated Data
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2015
* Trac Tran, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* John Cozzens
* 08/31/2015
* USD 250,036.00

Most natural signals are inherently sparse in certain bases or dictionaries
where they can be approximately represented by only a few significant components
carrying the most relevant information. In other words, the intrinsic signal
information usually lies in a low-dimensional subspace and the semantic
information is often encoded in the sparse representation. Processing of such
signals in the sparsified domain is much faster, simpler, and more robust than
doing so in the original domain, making sparsity an extremely powerful tool in
many classical signal processing applications. Recently, with the emergence of
the Compressed Sensing (CS) framework, sparse representation and related
optimization problems involving sparsity as a prior called sparse recovery have
increasingly attracted the interest of researchers in various diverse
disciplines, from statistics, to information theory, applied mathematics, signal
processing, coding theory and theoretical computer science.

This research involves the analysis, development, and application of robust
sparsity-driven algorithms for already-collected highly-correlated data sets
where signals often exhibit a high level of joint-sparsity and rich correlation
structure. Examples of such data include natural video sequences, volumetric
medical images, huge image database, hyperspectral imagery (HSI), and raw
synthetic aperture radar (SAR) signals. The research develops a novel unifying
robust sparse-recovery framework based on context-aware and observable data-
adaptive dictionaries, focusing on two classes of practical applications of
sparse recovery: (i) Representative -- denoising, concealment, inpainting,
enhancement; and (ii) Discriminative -- clustering, detection, classification,
and recognition. Recovery/Discrimination accuracy is greatly improved by taking
into account inter-patch spatial correlation, inter-frame temporal correlation,
and by adapting algorithms dynamically based on local signal contents as well as
by maximizing the level of discrimination within the sparse recovery process.