* 1117032
* CSR: Small: Collaborative Research: SANE: Semantic-Aware Namespace in Exascale File Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2014
* Yifeng Zhu, University of Maine
* Standard Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 08/31/2014
* USD 190,947.00

Explosive growth in volume and complexity of data exacerbates the key challenge
facing the management of massive data in a way that fundamentally improves the
ease and efficacy of their usage. Exascale storage systems in general rely on
hierarchically structured namespace that leads to severe performance bottlenecks
and makes it hard to support real-time queries on multi-dimensional attributes.
Thus, existing storage systems, characterized by the hierarchical directory tree
structure, are not scalable in light of the explosive growth in both the volume
and the complexity of data. As a result, directory-tree based hierarchical
namespace has become restrictive, difficult to use, and limited in scalability
for today's large-scale file systems.

This project investigates a novel semantic-aware namespace scheme to provide
dynamic and adaptive namespace management and support typical file-based
operations in Exascale file systems. The project leverages semantic correlations
among files and exploits the evolution of metadata attributes to support
customized namespace management, with the end goal of efficiently facilitating
file identification and end users data lookup. This project provides significant
performance improvements for existing file systems in Exascale file systems.
Since Exascale file systems constitute one of the backbones of the high-
performance computing infrastructure, the semantic-aware techniques also
benefits a great number of scientific and engineering data-intensive
applications. This project strengthens the ongoing development of high
performance computing infrastructures at both UNL and UMaine. The project
enhances undergraduate and graduate education at both participating institutions
and outreach to K-12 in UMaine via an ongoing NSF-funded ITEST program.