* 1117764
* NeTS Small: Analysis and Design of Best-Effort Content-Caching Networks
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2015
* James Kurose, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Darleen Fisher
* 08/31/2015
* USD 300,000.00

Since the development of its earliest technical foundations more than 40 years
ago, the Internet?s dominant communication paradigm has been packet-based, host-
to-host communication. However, as the Internet has matured and increasingly
more applications have been developed on top of this communication abstraction,
there is a growing realization that many user applications are primarily
concerned with accessing content rather than communicating with a specific host.
In this content-centric view, emphasis is placed on what is obtained rather than
from where it is obtained, and content search, dissemination (routing), and
storage are consequently of increased importance. Indeed, several 'clean slate'
approaches towards Internet architecture have emphasized in-network content
naming, search, routing, and storage (including in-network caching ) as key
architectural components of a next-generation Internet
architecture.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit. This project undertakes
fundamental research on developing the modeling and performance evaluation
tools/methodologies, and on designing and evaluating approaches for a key
architectural element of these content-centric network architectures - dynamic,
demand-driven, in-network, content caching. This effort will develop bounding
deterministic performance models of caching networks based on a
-characterization of content request streams, probabilistic bounds performance
using stochastic bounding techniques, and approximate performance models for
networks of caches based on reduced-load approximation techniques. The research
will also investigate several simple best-effort algorithms for content-caching
and content-location; here, the focus will be on the underlying approaches
themselves rather than their embodiment in any particular content-centric
network architecture. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact. The modeling and
analysis of in-network caching - a component of many content-centric next
generation network architectures - will provide tools and techniques for
analyzing such networks in much the same way that network calculi and reduced-
load approximations have served as foundations for bounding and approximate
analyses of complex queueing and blocking networks that have been used to model
a wide range of packet-switched and circuit-switched networks and their
protocols. The project's investigation of specific simple, 'best effort'
content-caching and content-location algorithms is based on the belief that just
as a best-effort Internet service model has proven to be 'good enough' compared
with more sophisticated network architectures, best-effort caching may similarly
prove 'good enough' when compared to more stateful and more complex request
routing and cache-content management approaches. This would be a lesson with
far-reaching impact. Graduate research assistants and undergraduate REU students
will be mentored as part of this project, helping to educate the next generation
of networking researchers. Involvement of minority graduate students will be
coordinated through the Northeast Alliance for Graduate Education and the
Professoriate (NEAGEP). Research results will be adopted into a widely-
disseminated graduate networking course taught at the University of
Massachusetts.