* 1117229
* NeTS: Small: Design and Analysis of Spectrum-sliced Elastic Optical Path Networks
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2011,12/31/2015
* Xiaojun Cao, Georgia State University Research Foundation, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* John Brassil
* 12/31/2015
* USD 197,723.00

The last decade witnesses the explosive growth of the Internet traffic and
emerging applications such as IPTV, VoIP, VoD, P2P sharing and Cloud Computing.
The traffic growth demands an enormous amount of network bandwidth and power
consumption, which poses a huge challenge to current Internet infrastructure.
The focus of this project is to investigate a new switching paradigm called
spectrum-sliced elastic optical path (SLICE) network. Instead of allocating
fixed-size frequencies to each channel as traditional networks, SLICE employs
the Orthogonal Frequency Division Multiplexing (OFDM) technologies by splitting
the signal into multiple smaller sub-carriers that are then transmitted
simultaneously at different frequencies to the
receiver.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: The objective of this project
is to develop novel SLICE schemes to efficiently accommodate the traffic and
alleviate power consumption in the backbone networks. The study includes (i)
efficient and flexible bandwidth management through elastic sub-carriers
allocation; (ii) robust optical path establishment with a finer granularity to
best accommodate the traffic requests; (iii) joint optimization of RSA and
virtual network mapping to ease the ossification problem in current Internet;
and (iv) energy-efficient allocation of the constrained SLICE resources. This
work will result in theoretic analysis, practical algorithms, simulation tools
and performance modeling, which can serve as useful guidelines, and provide
insights for the design of next-generation
Internet.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: This research will advance the
state-of-the-art knowledge about optical and future networks. The modeling and
design techniques from this project are applicable to a wide range of networking
technologies such as resources allocation, network virtualization and
survivability. Some of the new protocols, algorithms, modeling and performance
results can be practically adopted by the industry. By involving both
undergraduate and graduate students in the research, incorporating research
agenda into both undergraduate and graduate courses and disseminating the
findings, the project will help train the future scientists and engineers in
high demand fields.