* 1117175
* TC: Small: Collaborative Research: Membership Inference in a Differentially Private World and Beyond
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2015
* Wei Yu, Towson University
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Clifton
* 08/31/2015
* USD 164,040.00

The objective of the proposed research is to systematically understand, evaluate
and contribute towards the problem of membership inference in aggregate data
publishing, a generic, novel, and dangerous privacy threat in a wide variety of
real-world applications. The main idea proposed to address the problem of
membership inference is an information-theoretic model of privacy disclosure as
a noisy communication channel. Based on the channel coding theory and the recent
advance in multi-input multi-output (MIMO) communication channels, the proposed
research studies novel techniques for membership inference and explores the
corresponding privacy-preserving mechanisms.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
Merit: The following salient features distinguish the proposed work from
existing studies: (1) the proposed research studies a novel problem of
membership inference in aggregate data publishing which stands in sharp contrast
to the traditional inference control problem. In particular, the sensitive
information in danger of disclosure in the proposed problem definition is the
selection attributes of an aggregate query instead of its measure attributes
which is the focus on traditional inference control. (2) This novel problem also
leads to a set of novel solutions based on information theory. In particular,
the propose research studies a model of membership inference attacks as
modulation techniques in time and frequency domains for various types of
communication channels, e.g., single-input single-output (SISO), multiple-input
and single-output (MISO), single-input and multiple-output (SIMO), and multiple-
input and multiple-output (MIMO) channels. This proposed channel model enables a
uniform evaluation of the effectiveness of both membership inference and
privacy-preserving techniques.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: The outcome
of this research has broader impacts on the nation?s higher education system and
high-tech industries. The prospect of sensitive membership information
disclosure techniques and privacy-preserving techniques can help the providers
of aggregated data publishing, including national health organizations, Internet
security service providers, etc., to secure their published data. The broader
impact of this project also extends to academia. Parts of this project is
carried out by students of George Washington University (GWU), Towson University
(TU), and University of Massachusetts, Lowell (UML) as part of advanced class
projects or individual research projects.