* 1117187
* SHB: Small: Facilitating Mentoring in Peer Health Communities through Social Matching
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2016
* Wanda Pratt, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Jie Yang
* 08/31/2016
* USD 529,999.00

Through the experience of serious illness, patients develop substantial
expertise about managing their personal health. When experienced patients
("mentors") share their expertise with individuals who are facing a health
situation for the first time, they find considerable value is this help. Peer
health communities offer a broad base of such "patient expertise", yet people
can miss out on this valuable resource because, all too often, peer mentoring is
difficult to obtain and yields advice that doesn't quite fit one's personal
situation or context.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The efforts within this project are
focused on overcoming this challenge by applying social matching as a technical
and intellectual framework for connecting peers for mentorship in online health
communities. In partnership with an online cancer community, the investigators
are conducting a series of three studies that: (1) Identifying critical
mentorship characteristics through a comparative study of automated text
extraction as contrasted with to direct user entry of data, (2) Developing tools
that connect peers for mentorship through rapid prototyping and usability
testing with cancer patients, and (3) Assessing the value of matching for peer
mentoring through an online community-based field
evaluation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The results from this research are expected to
significantly improve the way people obtain peer help when faced with a health
problem. Through a deeper understanding of patients' support needs, this project
will use rich online community data to provide tailored recommendations of
suitable peer mentors. This work advances knowledge of collaboration in online
communities broadly and will translate to other patient services, such as face-
to-face support groups. These contributions are significant because they offer
patients crucial support strategies in an increasingly burdened healthcare
system. Matchmaking among individuals with shared circumstances helps newcomers
glean tailored insights into "what to expect" and helps those with experience to
share their valuable expertise by "giving back". Thus, this work boosts our
current understanding of the underlying processes and informs future research
and development in technology that enhances the health and wellbeing of citizens
by empowering peer mentorship.