* 1117168
* SHF: Small :Digital Signal Processing with Biomolecular Reactions
* CSE,CCF
* 08/01/2011,07/31/2014
* Marc Riedel, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Mitra Basu
* 07/31/2014
* USD 400,000.00

Digital signal processing has been a cornerstone of the modern communications
and electronics revolution, transforming application areas such as wired and
wireless communications, storage, and biomedical signal processing. This project
will study digital signal processing in an entirely new domain: molecular
systems. In contrast to electronic systems, where signals are represented by
time-varying voltage values, in molecular systems signals are represented by
time-varying concentrations of different molecular types, such as proteins, RNA
and DNA. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will develop, implement, and
evaluate molecular-level designs for a variety of digital signal processing
operations such as filtering, equalization, and noise cancellation. These
operations will be synchronized by clock signals, created through sustained
chemical oscillations. Memory will be created by transferring signals between
different molecular types in alternating phases of the clock. The key idea
underpinning this research is that the computation should be essentially rate-
independent: it should only depend on coarse categories for the rates of the
chemical reactions (e.g., ?fast? vs. ?slow?). It should not matter how fast any
?fast? reaction is ? only that ?fast? reactions are fast relative to ?slow?
reactions. Designs with this property can be mapped to different chemical
substrates. They compute accurately in spite of variations in environmental
conditions such as temperature. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The impetus for this work
is not computation per se; chemical systems will never be useful for number
crunching. Rather the field of molecular computing aims for the design of
custom, embedded biological ?sensors? and ?controllers? ? viruses and bacteria
that are engineered to perform useful tasks in situ, such as cancer detection
and drug therapy. As an experimental chassis, this project will map designs for
digital signal processing operations to chemical reactions involving DNA
strands. These designs will be evaluated with computer simulations of the
chemical kinetics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Techniques for analyzing the dynamics of
biological systems are well established. However, synthesizing computation with
such mechanisms requires new techniques ? and an entirely new mindset. The
digital circuit design community has unique expertise that can be brought to
bear on the challenging design problems encountered in synthetic biology.
Applications in biology, in turn, offer a wealth of interesting problems in
algorithmic development. With its cross-disciplinary emphasis, this project will
bring new perspectives to both fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If successful, the
proposed research will transform disciplines such as genetic engineering of
drug-delivery systems. Currently, a costly, ineffective ad-hoc approach
prevails. With robust and rate-independent techniques for implementing
operations such as digital signal processing, much more effective systems will
be developed. An important goal of the project is to communicate the impetus for
interdisciplinary research to a wide audience. A new course will be developed,
titled "Circuits, Computation, and Biology" offered jointly through the
Electrical Engineering Department and the Biomedical Informatics and
Computational Biology Program at the University of Minnesota. Building upon
current recruitment efforts that have brought in female students, students from
underrepresented groups will be recruited into the project.