* 1117706
* SHB: Small: Use of Gaming Peripherals in Acute Rehabilitation of Balance Following Stroke
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2015
* Charles Crowell, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 08/31/2015
* USD 517,499.00

Balance disorders are a common problem following stroke, and the restoration of
balance represents a key return to normalcy that can make the critical
difference between returning home and remaining in long-term care. Current
balance rehabilitation practice in the acute phase of recovery, however, is
often driven by subjective feedback and experience, rather than by objective
observation/analysis because of cost and time constraints. This study plans to
investigate how gaming peripherals can be used as an inexpensive means to
enhance balance rehabilitation by providing real-time, quantitative visual
feedback to both the patient and the therapist. Specifically, the project is
planning to 1) develop a low-cost instrumentation and visualization platform
centered around the Nintendo Wii Balance Board, 2) use this platform to quantify
the effects of visual feedback on both patients and therapists during balance
retraining, and 3) develop the ability to predict patient functional outcomes in
real time from data collected during typical rehabilitation activities. The
effort includes the development of a clinically appropriate control interface
and quantification of the performance of a system consisting of multiple Wii
Balance Boards, multiple web cams, and other devices to provide real-time visual
feedback based on fused data from all of these sources.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Balance recovery is assessed between matched groups who
receive therapy with and without feedback. Comparisons of self-awareness in the
same groups is used to examine the role of feedback in developing a patient?s
metacognitive knowledge. Therapists? interaction styles and treatment plans are
compared between the groups to identify the effects of the feedback on their
work. Finally, the investigators plan to identify which instrumented activities
provide data that best predict a patient?s score on established functional
assessment tools. Ultimately, this project seeks to enhance quality of life
post-stroke by helping to optimize therapy during the acute phase, which is the
most critical stage of recovery. The results will also be directly applicable to
balance rehabilitation in chronic stroke and other neurotrauma and more broadly
applicable to amputees and sports medicine patients. Most critically, the low
cost of the instrumentation platform is designed to remove financial adoption
barriers, allowing virtually any rehabilitation facility to leverage the results
of the research.