* 1117693
* TC: Small: RUI: Trails of Trustworthiness, Understanding and Supporting Quality of Information in Real-Time Streams
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2015
* Eni Mustafaraj, Wellesley College
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 08/31/2015
* USD 492,055.00

The last decade has seen the tremendous growth of the so-called Social Web and
this trend is expected to continue in the years to come. As the distinction
between the Web and the Social Web disappears, more and more people turn to them
daily for information related to important medical, financial and political
decisions. Therefore, there is an indisputable need for reliable information in
the online world. In the years to come, there will be an increase in interaction
with real-time information channels (R-TICs), such as the instant interaction,
commenting and notification systems that every social network is developing .
R-TICs will put new stress to human abilities to act under time pressure in
making decisions and determine the quality of the information received.
Technology can assist acting with confidence, by maintaining a personalized
network of trusted sources and understanding the reasons for trust or distrust
of information. The overall aim of this research is to lay the foundation of a
comprehensive approach to support critical thinking and increase security while
maintaining privacy in a trusted cyber-world. It proposes the design and
implementation of an application that can maintain trails of trustworthiness for
information propagated through Twitter, but is applicable to other R-TICs. When
confronted with information that requires fast action, these applications will
enable its users to evaluate its provenance, its trustworthiness and the
independence of the multiple sources that provide this information. In addition
this proposal will develop an online course for undergraduates and high school
students that discuss the epistemological questions of knowledge and explains
what critical thinking means in our highly interconnected world, interacting
regularly with people we may never meet. In all of the phases of this proposal,
undergraduates, under-represented minorities and women will be actively
involved.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The core design envisions the testing of these
ideas by developing a personalized Twitter client that keeps privately the trust
values of its owner. Trustworthiness of a message received is calculated based
on implicit and explicit rules: the user may explicitly mark a message as
trustworthy or not, and her decisions affect the trust value of its sender in
her personal client; or the system will determine a trust value based on the
actions of those who have seen and propagated the message to the user, and whose
trust values are already known to the user. Message independence is computed
based on content search on Twitter and grouped by the inverse distance of the
original senders. Privacy of the client's trust values is enhanced by the
separation of the global R-TIC network (Twitter) and the user's trust network
(the client). Additional research questions can be answered through the use of
simulation and is expected that they will be adopted by the R-TIC operators once
they see the benefits of the proposed features.