* 1117470
* CSR: Small: Accelerated ParalleX (APX) for Enhanced Scaling AMR based Science
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2015
* Thomas Sterling, Louisiana State University
* Standard Grant
* Anita La Salle
* 08/31/2015
* USD 424,911.00

Intellectual Merit:&lt;br/&gt;This project addresses scalability of applications
on Exascale parallel computer architectures. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Among the
strategic challenges to scalability is identifying and exploiting new forms of
parallelism as well as reducing overhead for effective fine grained parallelism
execution. The project, "Accelerated ParalleX (APX) for Enhanced Scaling"
project investigates combining a new model of computation with FPGA hardware
support, in otherwise conventional multicore platforms, to realize significant
gains in scalability. This approach is particularly applicable to the important
class of adaptive mesh refinement based applications for colliding neutron stars
and gamma ray bursts. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Prior NSF funding supported the
development of an experimental ParalleX prototype. That model is employed in
this new research project. This framework extracts inherent parallelism implicit
in structure meta-data, eliminates most global barriers, and releases adaptive
control to overlap multiple phases of computation and intermediate communication
for latency hiding and circumvention of contention hot spots.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research investigates the use of FPGA based hardware
technology for accelerating system software to significantly reduce critical
time path overhead in execution and directly enhance scalability. The
experimental designs include synchronization atomics, thread scheduling and
queues, and active message driven operations. In addition, for this class of
science problems, higher precision floating-point arithmetic is becoming more
important for such science questions as resolving the smallest possible black
holes. FPGA technology will therefore accelerate multi-precision floating point
arithmetic. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research, if successful, will advance the
specific science domain of numerical relativity and, more broadly, those science
and engineering disciplines relying on both AMR and strong scaling. It will
advance near-term computer system science through an innovative application of
available FPGA technology to general computational science and long-term future
scalable system design. The performance model derived for this purpose may prove
valuable for extended preliminary exploratory investigation for establishing
bounds and sensitivities in a complex multi-faceted trade-off space.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: &lt;br/&gt;The APX research results and
resources will be applied to the distance-learning course distributed live to
other national and international campuses to expand its content and extend its
advanced topics section, in the short term, while motivating a new graduate
level seminar course next year around its topic areas. Summer internships for
under-represented undergraduate and high school students will be created at LSU
and the Beowulf Bootcamp will be expanded for more high school students.