* 1117127
* SHB: Small: Computing Robot Motions for Home Healthcare Assistance
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2015
* Dinesh Manocha, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 08/31/2015
* USD 350,000.00

Millions of Americans are unable to independently perform activities of daily
living (ADLs) such as dressing and grooming, and this number is rising rapidly
as America?s aging and disabled population increases. This research focuses on
designing and developing new algorithms and software systems that would help
enable personal robots to autonomously compute safe motions to assist disabled
and elderly individuals with ADLs. The proposed framework uses kinesthetic
demonstrations to teach the robot desirable motion trajectories to accomplish
several specific ADL assistance tasks. Based on these demonstrations, the
research focuses on developing new computational methods to extract task
constraints for desirable motion trajectories using learning methods based on
Gaussian mixture models in conjunction with machine learning and 3D registration
methods. A key element of this project involves investigation of methods to
deformably register and generalize the motion trajectories and task constraints
across individuals of different shapes and sizes. In order to generate safe
plans in dynamic real-world settings, the proposed research investigates new
highly parallel algorithms that effectively utilize the power of modern general
purpose graphics processing units (GPUs) for real-time planning in uncertain
environments. The framework is evaluated using articulated mannequin
testbeds.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project brings together an interdisciplinary
team with computer science, robotics, and occupational therapy expertise. The
project integrates research with education through community outreach
activities. In the long term, the methods developed in the proposed research
could have broad societal benefits by helping enable personal robots to assist
disabled and elderly individuals with ADLs, allowing them to safely stay in
their homes rather than moving to costly institutions.