* 1117132
* CGV: Small: Illustration Inspired Visualization: A Gateway to Interacting with High-Dimensional Data
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2015
* Klaus Mueller, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Maria Zemankova
* 08/31/2015
* USD 499,995.00

The goal of this research project is to devise new visualization tools to help
scientists gain insight from their high-dimensional data. High-dimensional data
are observations with many attributes, on the order of 100s and more. Today's
data are often inherently high-dimensional: DNA microarrays, financial tick-by-
tick data, hyper-spectral imagery, just to name a few. The challenge in
visualizing these data comes from the limited dimensionality of the screen.
Traditional data visualization paradigms have inherent inabilities to fully map
high-dimensional properties to a two-dimensional display without loss of
inherent semantics, patterns or structure. This can lead to ambiguous and even
misleading visualizations. To overcome this fundamental chasm, the display
system developed in this project uses methods gleaned from illustrative design
to communicate these elusive properties, derived from analysis in the high-
dimensional data space. A second important motivation of this research is that
this illustration-inspired approach are expected to produce visualizations that
are easier to interpret and manipulate. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall theme
of this work is to use information abstraction and illustrative mappings to
improve display comprehensibility, reduce unnecessary complexity, and
communicate high-dimensional data patterns more faithfully. The illustrative
framework is driven by a two-pronged data analysis suite that uses filtering to
create a data representation at multiple levels of scale and pattern
classification to identify suitable appearance illustrations. Both of these
analyses are performed in the native high-dimensional data space to preserve the
original structures. Various illustrative styles are linked to visual semantics
to provide an intuitive data display. The generality of our framework allows it
to readily map to the three most prominent high-dimensional visualization
platforms: space embeddings, parallel coordinates, and scatter plots.
Illustrative visualization design and validation is carried out in collaboration
with experts in Environmental Science and the Human Microbiome
Project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The system is designed to support domain
scientists in knowledge discovery, but also appeal to casual users by supporting
data analysis via illustrative design. The display looks more natural since it
uses familiar graphics design paradigms to construct the illustrative
visualizations. The project webpage
(http://www.cs.sunysb.edu/~mueller/IllustratorND) provides information on
ongoing progress, invites participation in user studies, and also provides some
data analysis capabilities within a web-enabled version of the software. The
project offers educational and research opportunities for students.