* 1117692
* TC: Small: Towards Customer-Centric Utility Computing
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2016
* Trent Jaeger, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Ralph Wachter
* 08/31/2016
* USD 488,024.00

In this project, we are exploring the association between computing tasks (jobs)
and the computing resources assigned to run those jobs to improve the ability to
deploy tasks to satisfy security requirements. Historically, the owners of the
computing tasks also owned their computing resources, so they configured their
resources to run their tasks efficiently and securely. However, configuring
tasks to run securely has become so complex that the key knowledge is now
distributed among several parties: cloud vendors configure host systems, OS
distributors configure cloud instances, customers configure their application
programs and network policies. The goal is to be able to collect this expertise
into a single model to reason about how to deploy computing tasks to satisfy
their security requirements. To do this, we are integrating the myriad of
integrity measurement mechanisms into a comprehensive integrity measurement
framework to enable reasoning about the satisfaction of a computing task's data
security from installation to completion. Using this model, we are building a
customer-centric utility computing service to choose an assignment of resources
for computing tasks that satisfies data security requirements. When a customer
deploys a computing task via such a service, the service will construct
integrity-verified channels to her running jobs, which are secure communication
channels that guarantee that the data sender adheres to a data security policy.
Using such services, customers will be able to deploy computing jobs among cloud
resources managed by several parties, while assuring that their data security
requirements are satisfied automatically.