* 1117755
* TC: Small: A Secure Trojan-Resistant Application-Specific Integrated Circuit Architecture
* CSE,CNS
* 08/01/2011,07/31/2014
* Kenneth Mai, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Nina Amla
* 07/31/2014
* USD 499,999.00

Globalization and horizontal stratification of the semiconductor industry has
exacerbated the threat of a compromise in the integrated circuit manufacturing
supply chain. Specifically, intellectual property theft, unauthorized
production, and hardware Trojan horse insertion are of significant concern.
Further, the proliferation of advanced semiconductor fabrication equipment and
expertise has enabled novel attacks against integrated circuits in the field.
Recently, side-channel attacks that bypass the theoretical strength of
cryptographic algorithms by exploiting inadvertent information leakage have
shown to be particularly effective while requiring only a modest budget and
expertise. Most extant countermeasures retrofit security features onto existing
design flows, rather than build-in security from the ground up.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project develops a novel application-specific
integrated circuit (ASIC) architecture designed from the ground up to resist
hardware Trojan horse insertion and have low side-channel information leakage,
while still achieving high performance, low power, compact area, and future
scalability. The architecture consists of an array of logic gates implemented as
read-only memory (ROM) look-up tables (LUTs) interconnected by a reconfigurable
network. The ROM LUTs achieve efficient operation with low side-channel
emissions and are highly scalable due to their regular structure. The
reconfigurable interconnect enables design obfuscation, metering of production,
and complete internal node observability and controllability in order to detect
hardware Trojans. The very nature of the architecture deters Trojan insertion
and enables non-destructive post-manufacturing Trojan detection. The
architecture has wide applicability across a range of ICs, from microprocessors
to ASICs, that require efficient designs capable of secure operation