* 1117635
* SHF: Small: Effectful Software Contracts
* CSE,CCF
* 08/01/2011,11/30/2011
* Amr Sabry, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* John Reppy
* 11/30/2011
* USD 440,760.00

The long-term goals of this project are to bring the technology
of&lt;br/&gt;software contracts to widely-used programming languages and,
through&lt;br/&gt;the use of manifest contracts, to provide software developers
with a&lt;br/&gt;migration path from simply typed code to fully functional
correctness.&lt;br/&gt;Since computational effects are notoriously hard to
reason about and&lt;br/&gt;pervade even the simplest realistic programs, the
proposed research&lt;br/&gt;should have significant impact on programmers'
ability to develop&lt;br/&gt;software that is more reliable and more secure.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Contracts in software establish clear interfaces between
program&lt;br/&gt;components. Like contracts in the legal realm, they delineate
each&lt;br/&gt;party's expectations and obligations. Such contracts are
becoming&lt;br/&gt;increasingly important for the regulation of modern software
systems,&lt;br/&gt;providing an expressive framework for verification and error
tracking.&lt;br/&gt;To be effective in a software environment, contracts must
have formal&lt;br/&gt;semantics and must be supported by a monitoring system
that precisely&lt;br/&gt;tracks the flow of values as they cross interfaces. To
date, however,&lt;br/&gt;the formal study of contracts has mostly been limited
to small&lt;br/&gt;idealized languages without computational effects, such as
reading&lt;br/&gt;data from or writing data to a display or file, managing
resources&lt;br/&gt;such as memory, and performing probabilistic or
speculative&lt;br/&gt;computation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research aims to
extend the semantic framework of software&lt;br/&gt;contracts to languages with
various computational effects: the&lt;br/&gt;extension is qualitative in nature
and will enable the use of&lt;br/&gt;contracts in new application domains.
Specifically, the PIs propose&lt;br/&gt;to add support for computational effects
to the two flavors of&lt;br/&gt;contracts studied to date: latent contracts,
which are runtime checks&lt;br/&gt;not reflected in the type system, and
manifest contracts, where a&lt;br/&gt;system of precise types records the most
recent runtime check applied&lt;br/&gt;to each value. The extension of latent
contracts will be done in the&lt;br/&gt;context of a monadic met language. The
extension of manifest&lt;br/&gt;contracts will make use of a variant of Hoare
Type Theory to precisely&lt;br/&gt;record computational effects. The PIs will
also implement prototype&lt;br/&gt;systems and use them to present novel
applications of software&lt;br/&gt;contracts.