* 1117279
* SHB: Small: Socially Assistive Human-Machine Interaction for Improved Compliance and Health Outcomes
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2016
* Maja MatariÄ‡, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 08/31/2016
* USD 448,527.00

The world's population is growing older; it is estimated that in 2050 there will
be three times more people over the age 85 than there are today. Many are
expected to need physical and cognitive assistance, and all will need additional
healthcare. Shortages in primary care physicians, nurses, and managed care
facility space and staff are already an issue today, creating a niche for
assistive technologies to fill the care gap. A growing body of research shows
that certain behavior patterns have a positive impact on longevity and wellness,
including regular physical exercise, social interaction, and cognitive
engagement. This project aims to develop and evaluate socially assistive human-
machine interaction techniques that influence the user to engage in and comply
with wellness-promoting behaviors in the home or nursing home in order to
enhance longevity and quality of life.&lt;br/&gt;This work is focused on
developing socially assistive systems (SAS) using peer-level human-machine
interaction in which the machine serves in the role of a knowledgeable embodied
agent capable of providing time-extended, sustained, and engaging interaction.
The research focuses on two types of wellness-promoting human-machine
interactions: 1) exercise sessions (cognitive and/or physical) and 2)
socializing sessions. For one-on-one exercise sessions, the project is
developing SAS capabilities that provide exercise monitoring, coaching, and
motivation. For socialization, the research is developing SAS capabilities that
provide social interaction and friendly reminders and encouragement to comply
with health regimens (taking medicine, being physically active) and healthy
habits (calling family, meeting friends). The two types of interactions share
the common goal of influencing human behavior, and the main contribution of the
research is the set of methods and algorithms for influencing behavior though
human-machine interaction. This is achieved through a novel two-fold approach:
1) adaptive interaction steering for short-term interactions, and 2) motivation
and coaching of behavior in longer-term interactions to maintain engagement and
enhance task performance. The embodiment of the SAS is leveraged to maximize
engagement and compliance; a key focus of the work is on developing a
comprehensive method for natural, persuasive and engaging embodied
communication. The methods and algorithms being developed are general, and will
be implemented and tested on both computer-based and robot-based agents. In this
way the work validates the developed methods on multiple technology platforms
and embodiments, and compares their relative effectiveness and acceptability by
the intended user population. The specifics of the implementation are informed
by an early focus group with elderly participants, the target user population.
The developed techniques are being implemented in both human-computer
interaction (HCI) and human-robot interaction (HRI) versions, and are being
evaluated with a large group of elderly users interacting with the SAS
implementations over a multi-week user study. The work is focused on generating
methods, algorithms, and a large corpus of multi-modal data (video, audio, and
questionnaires) for grounding continued research into health and wellness-
relevant HRI and HCI.&lt;br/&gt; This project aims to address a component of the
nationally recognized healthcare challenge of promoting wellness and longevity
in the aging population. Beyond basic algorithm and method development, the
project implements and tests real-world socially assistive systems, both
computer-based and robot-based, with a large population of elderly retirement
home residents. The project is expected to produce insights useful for both
research and healthcare product development for addressing this growing segment
of the population. In addition to the socially relevant research focus, the
project team is also engaged in a comprehensive program of K-12 outreach
activities, which use robotics to promote STEM topic learning using the health
theme of the proposal. The project involves inner city K-12 teachers and
students in annual open houses, assemblies, and workshops that provide hands-on
experiences with assistive systems for the elderly, as well as take-home
materials for continued learning. The project team includes PhD students,
undergraduates, and K-12 volunteers, and establishes a mentoring pipeline so
that university students are both mentored and serve as mentors and role models
for their younger peers.