* 1117684
* III:  Small:  Compression-Aware Algorithms for Massive Datasets
* CSE,IIS
* 07/01/2011,06/30/2016
* Abhi Shelat, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 06/30/2016
* USD 499,984.00

As many application domains continue to generate data at exponentially
increasing rates, much of the data that is gathered is stored in a compressed
format. However, very few classic data processing algorithms have been updated
to handle compressed data. This project aims to address this gap by developing
(i) algorithms for massive data sets that can directly operate on compressed
data; and (ii) compression schemes that are aware of the algorithms that would
operate on the data. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In many settings, algorithms that
manipulate very large composite objects while interacting only with their
succinct descriptions can substantially reduce the time and memory requirements
relative to their counterparts that have to work with uncompressed
representations of the same data. These performance gains are realized by
leveraging highly repetitive or parametrically specified input structures, to
enable algorithms to manipulate very large composite objects while interacting
only with their compressed descriptions. Anticipated results of the project
include new geometric algorithms that solve problems such as convex hull,
Voronoi diagrams, nearest points and earth-mover distances when the inputs are
in compressed format; new graph algorithms that compute minimum spanning trees,
shortest paths, and network flows on compressed input graphs; and new
compression-aware data structures that support efficient storing, querying and
processing of compressed data. All the algorithmic contributions will be
validated with experiments on real and synthetic massive data sets. The
resulting algorithms are likely to find application in many different domains
including networks, genomics, databases, computer graphics, artificial
intelligence, geographic information systems, integrated circuit design, and
computer-aided engineering. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: Compression-
aware data processing algorithms and algorithm-aware data compression schemes
have applications across a wide range of tasks that involve processing of
massive data sets consisting of large data objects (e.g., images, sequences,
graphs). The formulations, algorithms, codes, and theories &lt;br/&gt;that will
be developed and disseminated by this project are likely to contribute to the
development of efficient and practical algorithms and data structures that could
impact the way in which organizations collect, store, process, such data. The
project offers enhanced research based training opportunities for students in an
area of considerable theoretical as well as practical significance. Additional
information about the project can be found at: http://www.cs.virginia.edu/robins